
Valencia’s players had thought for a few weeks now that Neville might one day 
become their coach. What they didn’t expect was for it to be Gary. Phil Neville 
took charge of training this week afterNuno Espírito Santo announced his 
resignation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/29/nuno-valencia-resigns-sevilla>
 on Sunday night and wassacked on Monday afternoon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/nov/30/valencia-peter-lim-questions-nuno-exit>
; Gary will take charge after Saturday’s league fixture with Barcelona, having 
signed a contract until the end of the season. His first game is a huge one: 
the final Champions League group match against Lyon at Mestalla on Wednesday.

Gary Neville: five key players for the new Valencia coach
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/02/gary-neville-valencia-five-key-players>
The players’ relationship with Nuno had long broken down, but it remained good 
with his assistant Phil Neville, who has impressedsince arriving in the summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/28/phil-neville-assistant-manager-valencia>
 but does not yet have the coaching qualification necessary to take charge of a 
team in Spain. The club’s delegate, Salvador González “Voro”, who does, will 
officially be manager this weekend, the second time he has taken over. Last 
time, in 2008, it was for five games; this time it will be one. Then the 
Neville brothers begin, with Gary as coach and Phil as his assistant.

Or perhaps ‘begin’ is not really the word. There is a photo of Phil, Gary and 
the president, Layhoon Chan, strolling across the pitch at Paterna, the club’s 
training ground. It comes not from now but from back in the summer. Phil was 
already there, of course. He and Gary are business partners of Valencia’s 
owner, Peter Lim. The Singaporean isa half owner of Salford City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/sep/22/salford-city-peter-lim-class-of-92>
 and has invested in other projects undertaken by the Class of 92, of which 
Gary is the leader.

The contact between them was already there and communication was open, 
reflected in the speed with which this decision was taken. It is as difficult 
to imagine themnot talking about Valencia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/valencia> as it is easy to imagine Gary – 
intelligent, analytical, forthright – impressing in his assessment of their 
situation. At Mestalla it is said that Lim is more convinced by Gary Neville’s 
more British, Fergusonian view of how to run a football club than by the usual 
European approach. Now it can be put into practice. The sporting director was 
sacked in the summer and not replaced; Neville is likely to be manager, not 
just coach.

Neville does not come into this blind even if he does, for now, come into it 
partly mute and among the potential appointments will surely be a translator. 
His relationship with Lim and his brother means he arrives having a clear view 
of what awaits and probably having prepared for it. This is not a step into the 
unknown.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fgary-neville-valencia-challenge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb79aabf198f92079da2f6456c45e4f15d343a1f0%2F0_48_3256_1953%2F3256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gary%20Neville%20faces%20huge%20challenge%20at%20Valencia%2C%20a%20club%20with%20serious%20faultlines%20%7C%20Sid%20Lowe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fgary-neville-valencia-challenge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gary%20Neville%20faces%20huge%20challenge%20at%20Valencia%2C%20a%20club%20with%20serious%20faultlines%20%7C%20Sid%20Lowe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fgary-neville-valencia-challenge%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb79aabf198f92079da2f6456c45e4f15d343a1f0%2F0_48_3256_1953%2F3256.jpg>
 Gary Neville is admired in Spain, where he is viewed as a symbol of a 
successful Manchester United side. Photograph: Alex Livesey/Getty Images 
He has at his disposal a squad that returned to the Champions League after a 
three-season absence, a young squad that undoubtedly has talent but is ninth in 
La Liga. He has an assistant coach whom he can trust entirely, a guide and a 
useful bridge to the squad, someone who has made a notable effort to integrate 
and communicate and has been admired for it. He will have a handle on where 
Nuno went wrong and how he can be different; it was notable that Chan talked 
about his “leadership” qualities.

Gary Neville is admired in Spain. Manchester United made quite an impact and 
there is a kind of reverence towards a club that could keep a structure that 
strong for that long: one manager in a quarter of a century feels like an even 
more remarkable achievement here than it does in England. A captain, Neville is 
seen as a symbol of that side and if his tactical analyses don’t reach Spanish 
TV,his role with the national team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/14/roy-hodgson-england-gary-neville>
 provides a sense that he is prepared, coaching material.

Naturally, though, there are doubts about a man without experience taking his 
first job, halfway through a season, in a foreign country. There are other, 
more profound doubts too – doubts that are not really about Neville but will 
affect him – and he will surely be aware of them, not least as some concern 
precisely that model, the very structure of the club. Here too, he is at least 
forewarned, better briefed than any other incoming coach could hope to be.

Valencia out on a Lim with more questions than answers after Nuno exit | Sid 
Lowe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/nov/30/valencia-peter-lim-questions-nuno-exit>
Phil has watched the stadium turn on its manager, chanting for Nuno to leave, 
and while some of the nuance may have escaped him as he watched media and 
supporters react, he cannot help but grasp that this is a different environment 
to those he knew in Manchester and on Merseyside, one with a particular swirl 
of pressure and politics.

On Monday Nuno insisted the problems at Valencia were “social, not sporting”. 
On one level, he was right. There have been sporting problems –Valencia have 
performed far more poorly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/24/zenit-st-petersburg-valencia-champions-league-match-report>
 than they should have – but not only sporting problems. Results palliate 
everything, but without them significant fault lines are exposed.

Neville becomes the 14th coach in a decade of institutional instability at 
Valencia. This is a club with two stadiums: one they could not sell and one 
that they could not afford to finish building, long gripped by economic crisis 
and internecine battles, where presidents too have come and gone, a club that 
came to be effectively owned by a bailed-out bank.

Lim’s arrival last year was their salvation, supposed to bring economic and 
social stability 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/sep/29/peter-lim-salford-city-third-party-ownership-class-of-92>
 at last, and the return to the Champions League reinforced that idea.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fgary-neville-valencia-challenge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdae16df5fbe32530bc41d4c3416a382b330821b1%2F0_0_1764_1058%2F1764.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gary%20Neville%20faces%20huge%20challenge%20at%20Valencia%2C%20a%20club%20with%20serious%20faultlines%20%7C%20Sid%20Lowe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fgary-neville-valencia-challenge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gary%20Neville%20faces%20huge%20challenge%20at%20Valencia%2C%20a%20club%20with%20serious%20faultlines%20%7C%20Sid%20Lowe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fgary-neville-valencia-challenge%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdae16df5fbe32530bc41d4c3416a382b330821b1%2F0_0_1764_1058%2F1764.jpg>
 The Singaporean billionaire Peter Lim is Valencia’s owner but rarely attends 
matches. Photograph: Stephen Morrison/EPA 
But in the summer the former president Amadeo Salvo, who had helped bring Lim 
to the club, and the sporting director, Rufete, were forced out. Both were 
popular with supporters.

The questions being asked since may or may not be fair but they are 
fundamental ones that predate Neville’s appointment and are not washed away 
with his arrival; in fact, while they are reformulated, they may even be 
reinforced. What, supporters want to know, is the plan? What are the real 
motives of Meriton, Lim’s company? And what is the agent Jorge Mendes’s 
relationship with the club? “Nuno go now!” has been the soundtrack to this 
season. Supporters did not want Nuno to continue, but that was not only because 
his team was playing badly, but because of what he had come to represent.

Mendes, who is close to Lim, had brokered the takeover in 2014 and he had 
helped to stock up the squad since, with players of varying quality. Nuno was 
the first player he had ever represented; when Salvo and Rufete, theoretically 
Nuno’s bosses, were forced out Nuno appeared to accumulate power as Mendes’s 
man. “Fans didn’t always support the team,” Nuno said. He was right, and they 
are indeed demanding, but he did not often engage with the reasons why. In the 
absence of Lim and Mendes, rarely there on match days, he became a target for 
deeper misgivings than just those related to the way the team played, the 
visible head of Valencia.

Every decision, every move, came to be seen through the prism of Lim/Mendes, 
treated as suspicious by definition. That may not always have been justified, 
but some decisions were certainly questionable. The doubts started to overwhelm 
all else; there was no normality. On Monday Chan said that she was sick of 
hearing the name Mendes and that the new manager would not be represented by 
him. Here was an attempt to break out from that spiral, to restructure Valencia 
and reassure the fans. Nuno had gone, Neville had come. But while Neville is 
not Mendes’s client, he is Lim’s partner, and similar questions will be asked 
if results do not follow.
 