
Mike Haley showed those who were surprised at his inclusion in the England 
squad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/30/england-sam-jones-training-squad-autumn-internationals>
 why he is seen as a full‑back of international potential, twice streaking away 
to help Sale secure a try bonus point and climb into the top half of the 
Premiership table on a day that may turn out to be Gavin Henson’s last as a 
professional player.

Henson, making his first appearance since sustaining a dead leg 29 minutes 
into Bristol’s opening match of the season against Harlequins, left the field 
clutching his right shoulder 11 minutes in. He fell awkwardly after running 
into Sam Bedlow, who had just come on to the field after replacing Will 
Addison, a head injury victim, like Magnus Lund moments before.

Semesa Rokoduguni strikes late to give Bath derby victory over Exeter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/30/exeter-bath-premiership-match-report>
Three months shy of his 35th birthday, there will not be many more comebacks 
for Henson who faces surgery. “It is a serious injury for Gavin and I really 
feel for him,” Andy Robinson, theBristol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bristolrugby> director of rugby, said.

Henson, playing outside Shane Geraghty for the first time, barely had time to 
leave his imprint on the match. As he was trudging off, David Lemi wasted his 
break by throwing a forward pass to Will Cliff andSale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/salesharks> gradually took charge.

It was a match Bristol had targeted against opponents who had not won on the 
road since last season but they again found that a lack of precision costs 
against all opponents in thePremiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership>. Haley apart, Sale had no one 
who stood out, but they were more of a whole, strong up front and efficient at 
the breakdown where Peter Stringer used his experience to get the ball away 
quickly and manoeuvre his forwards around the field..

Sale’s first try came after 17 minutes when they opted to kick a penalty to 
touch rather than go for the posts. The driving maul was repelled but the wing 
Paolo Odogwu opened the scoring after Sam Jones andJohnny Leota’s passes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/oct/19/sale-sharks-players-get-stuck-in-hotel-lift-after-exceeding-weight-limit-video>
 stretched the defence. Seven minutes later, Haley received the ball on the 
Bristol 10-metre line and stepped away from Chris Brooker before outpacing the 
cover defence.

“He is an ungainly sod but he has the x-factor,” the Sale director of rugby, 
Steve Diamond, said. While Bristol laboured, and the efforts of Will Hurrell 
and Jack Tovey deserved more than another heavy defeat, Haley glided. Sale’s 
interval lead would have been greater had not Byron McGuigan dropped two 
try-scoring passes, although the wing was forgiven by Diamond having driven 
south on the morning of the match after his wife had given birth.

McGuigan did hold on three minutes after the break after Sam James had drifted 
through a defence that kept finding difficulty where none should have existed. 
Bristol’s cause looked lost but two Shane Geraghty penalties, the first 
accounting for their first league points here in 137 minutes of rugby, stirred 
the crowd. Sale were a man short with Neil Briggs in the sin-bin for collapsing 
a maul, but even then the Sharks shoved their opponents off the ball and 
secured their bonus point when the replacement prop Eifion Lewis-Roberts barged 
his way over.

Bristol’s perseverance was rewarded in the final minute when Lemi weaved his 
way out of tackles and held on to the ball, but Sale had by then scored their 
fifth try. The Bristol crowd had come to boo every kick downfield by their side 
with Geraghty the main culprit. When the fly-half chipped from his own 22, the 
wing Ryan Edwards looked like being the first to the bounce but Bryn Evans 
flicked the ball back for Haley who skipped away from Hurrell and got round Jon 
Fisher to supply Tom Curry with the scoring pass.

Josh Beaumont drafted into England squad as Courtney Lawes awaits scan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/29/courtney-lawes-injury-england-south-africa>
Bristol are adrift at the bottom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/03/bristol-rugby-premiership-survival>
 with a trip to Robinson’s former club Bath next. “There is anger, frustration 
and huge disappointment, but this can be turned around,” Robinson said. They 
lack players who make a real difference, unlike Sale, who had Haley.

Bristol J Williams; Edwards, Hurrell, Henson (Tovey, 11), Lemi; Geraghty, 
Cliff (R Williams, 71); Traynor (Tonga’uiha, 68), Brooker (Hawkins, 61), 
Perenise (Cortes 55), Phillips (Evans, ht), Sorenson, Eadie, Fisher, Crane 
(capt; Lam, 67; Nemsadze, 77).

Try Lemi. Con Geraghty. Pens Geraghty 2.

Sale Haley; McGuigan, Addison (Bedlow, 10), Leota, Odogwu; James (Mugford, 
71), Stringer (Phillips, 69); Harrison (Lewis‑Roberts, 53-77), Briggs, Aulika 
(Mujati, 53), Evans, Ostrikov (Mills, 59), Neild (Curry, 68), Lund (Seymour, 
8), Beaumont (capt).

Tries Odogwu, Haley, McGuigan, Lewis-Roberts, Curry. Cons McGuigan 2, Mugford.

Sin-bin Briggs 50.

Referee J P Doyle. Attendance 14,025.
 