
Lawyers acting for a prominent Libyan dissident who was tortured after he was 
seized in a joint British and US operation have said they believe their 
communications are being intercepted byGCHQ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/gchq>, the government's electronic 
eavesdropping agency.

They are seeking an urgent injunction from the investigatory powers tribunal, 
which hears complaints about the activities of the security and intelligence 
agencies. They lodged a complaint after revelations about GCHQ's mass 
surveillance programmes, leaked by Edward Snowden, were published in the 
Guardian.

Their suspicions were further aroused when, after a long delay, lawyers acting 
for Britain's intelligence agencies demanded that part of the tribunal hearings 
should be held behind closed doors, without the presence of lawyers 
representing the Libyan,Abdel Hakim Belhaj 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdel-hakim-belhaj>.

Lawyers acting for GCHQ and other UK agencies told the tribunal that after 
"undertaking searches" they had come to the conclusion that part of the 
hearings should be closed.

In response, Leigh Day, lawyers for Belhaj and his family, said it was 
"obvious that our clients have been subject to interception, and that 
interception has included their privileged communications".

The government's lawyers have declined to give written assurances that 
communications between Belhaj and his lawyers have not been intercepted.

Speaking from Tripoli, Belhaj said on Wednesday: "When I was in Gaddafi's 
prisons I used to find all kinds of bugging devices in my cell, and I expected 
it. But I find it surprising that the UK government insists on listening in 
when my wife and I talk to our lawyers about our torture case. Both of us still 
have faith in the British justice system, but that doesn't sound like fair play 
from the UK government to us."

Cori Crider of the legal charity Reprieve, which is also acting for Belhaj, 
said: "Anybody who still imagines the Guardian's mass spying revelations are 
just about our Facebook selfies needs to take a hard look at this case. First 
MI6 (with the CIA) kidnaps Belhaj and his pregnant wife and sends them to 
Gaddafi's torture chambers in 2004. Then the government refuses the family's 
offer to settle for Â£3 and an apology. Now it won't even promise to let the 
couple talk to us, their lawyers, without listening in."

Belhaj is suing Britain's intelligence agencies and Jack Straw, who was 
foreign secretary at the time of the rendition operation, in the British 
courts. The government argues that courts here cannot hear the case since any 
rendition operation and flights in 2004 took place abroad, not in the UK.
 