
1. Echoes <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EofnxCTy8Ms>

Having midwifed the more exhilarating variety of psychedelia as the co-writer 
of Eight Miles High, Gene Clark left the Byrds in early 1966 – a move 
triggered, in a much noted irony, by a fear of flying. The following year came 
Gene Clark with the Gosdin Brothers, a glorious countrified psych-pop album, 
and more than distinctive and original enough to establish him as a major act 
in his own right. In a decision probably more clumsy than malicious, but one 
that prefigured the misfortunes of Clark’s entire subsequent career, Columbia 
records timed its release in direct competition with his old band’s Younger 
Than Yesterday, on the same label, and it tanked. Its lambent, artfully scored 
opening track, taking a stately stroll through the twisting paths of inner 
space, was perfect for its moment. Alas, its moment never got to hear it.


2. So You Say You Lost Your Baby <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fO57oiYgQkk>

Lost love was Clark’s creative engine; his former bandmates had always looked 
forward to his turbulent personal life going awry, because of the songs they’d 
get out of it. This hallucinatory stormer, also from his debut LP, is an 
urgent, pounding, organ-driven (in several senses) account of the tripped-out 
mind as much as the cracked-open heart. Clarke was a superb vocalist, one who 
merits consideration alongside Scott Walker andNina Simone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/mar/02/nina-simone-10-of-the-best>
. As a lyricist, he needed to be heard rather than read; his ornate, often 
mystical and sometimes overwrought writing can fall flat on the page, but it 
soars on record.


3. Polly <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YjNA0q5YY2A>

Ever ahead of a game he somehow always ended up losing, Clark had included 
country and bluegrass on his first album, well before the Byrds recruited Gram 
Parsons and recordedSweetheart of the Rodeo 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f_Dc4by2zw0>. Two years on, he teamed up with 
bluegrass banjo maestro Doug Dillard, and a band including future Eagle Bernie 
Leadon plus other leading sidemen of the new country-rock movement, for a 
splendid pair of rootsy albums, The Fantastic Expedition of Dillard & Clark and 
Through the Morning, Through the Night. Their quality and influence would later 
be acknowledged with the inclusion of two songs from the latter onRobert Plant 
and Alison Krauss’s 2007 Americana hit, Raising Sand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2007/oct/14/folk.shopping>. One was the 
title track, the other, this. Dillard and Clark’s haunted, gorgeous original is 
slow, clear, stark and heavy with longing – country music’s primary emotion, 
for which Clark, with his rich, tempered vibrato and yearning lyricism, had a 
particular affinity.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fgene-clark-10-of-the-best%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb98f5b7906a16aa7db7e5be205ab7e2b4d1792c7%2F0_3_3852_2312%2F3852.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gene%20Clark%20%E2%80%93%2010%20of%20the%20best&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fgene-clark-10-of-the-best%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gene%20Clark%20%E2%80%93%2010%20of%20the%20best&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fgene-clark-10-of-the-best%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb98f5b7906a16aa7db7e5be205ab7e2b4d1792c7%2F0_3_3852_2312%2F3852.jpg>
 Byrds of a feather … Gene Clark (second right) with the Byrds in an 
overliteral London photoshoot in August 1965. Photograph: Victor Blackman/Getty 
Images 
4. The Virgin <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rJ5qwIqLGkM>

In 1971, Bob Dylan was the elephant in every singer-songwriter’s room, and he 
was bound to loom particularly large when the room belonged to a former Byrd. 
Clark was always too singular, too idiosyncratic, to be a straight-up Dylan 
imitator, which is perhaps why Dylan, who unjustly scoffed at Donovan, held him 
in such high regard. The plain, folky, largely acoustic album White Light was 
as close as Clark ever came to sincere flattery of Dylan – and while it wasn’t 
all that close, it stands among the finest of that era’s many records 
unmistakably beholden to the master. On opening track The Virgin, the measured, 
honeyed, philosophical tale of a girl in the big city, his inflection veers 
towards Dylan’s – but he never gives himself over to pastiche. Nor would he 
ever, even when it might have benefited him. Perhaps he genuinely didn’t know 
how.


5. She Don’t Care About Time <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BB6y1bkCQow>

Clark often reworked his own songs. His later versions of Feel a Whole Lot 
Better andTrain Leaves Here This Morning 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gamTAp1W4Mc> are wonderful, but this is the ne 
plus ultra of his revisions. Still feeling his way around country rock on the 
recordings that would be collected on the Roadmaster album, in 1972 he turned to
a classic he wrote for the Byrds <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iTlS2JhaBJM>, 
the epitome of all things jangly, and rendered it something else entirely. 
Baroque and suffused with tenderness and wonder, it is one of those 
overwhelming tracks devotional not only in a romantic but in a quasi-religious 
sense. The best known such number is, perhaps, the Beach Boys’God Only Knows 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AOMyS78o5YI> – and you wouldn’t want to live 
on the difference between that and this. It was also a foretaste of what Clark 
would do next.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPLNVnmq9Tpv3oDBaiq6Qh_dHztrzy67MmV&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPLNVnmq9Tpv3oDBaiq6Qh_dHztrzy67MmV>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPLNVnmq9Tpv3oDBaiq6Qh_dHztrzy67MmV&media=>
 10 of the Best by Gene Clark – a YouTube playlist 
6. Life’s Greatest Fool <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VzvKS5QD2nU>

What Clark did next was produce one of the greatest albums ever made. No Other 
(1974) eventually became synonymous with the phrase “lost masterpiece”. 
Initially celebrated for its obscurity – it was deleted by Asylum in 1976, 
reissued in 1991, then given the bells-and-whistles treatment in 2003 – it is 
now celebrated for its magnificence. It was in every way a magnum opus: epic, 
sprawling, poetic, choral, rococo. It cost a small fortune to record, and the 
already erratic Clark never got over its commercial failure. Its opening song 
is an exuberant, foot-tapping country-gospel anthem stuffed with counterculture 
folk wisdom, its downbeat lyric defied by its pure joie de vivre.


7. No Other <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GilrLIwBJE8>

Gram Parsons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/jul/29/gram-parsons-10-of-the-best>
, in some ways a parallel figure to Clark, had a vision of a cosmic American 
music; Clark lived to fashion one of his own. The title track of his masterwork 
pulses, glows and rattles in a thrilling meld of country and funk, gospel and 
rock, with echoes of the Family Stone, Staple Singers, Gimme Shelter and Abbey 
Road (Anglophilia being a strain unacknowledged in Americana, but not by 
Clark). It’s unique not only in his own catalogue but perhaps in all of pop 
music.


Gram Parsons – 10 of the best
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/jul/29/gram-parsons-10-of-the-best>
8. Some Misunderstanding <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f2ViQXg_0bw>

Here it is: the centrepiece of the No Other album and indeed of Clark’s 
career: a slow, eight-minute cry from the heart, reflecting on the perils and 
pleasures of a life lived too extravagantly. For Clark, who would surely have 
recognised William Blake as a spiritual progenitor, the road of excess had at 
last brought him to the palace of wisdom – and what a palace his is. It is a 
song to be dwelt in, to walk about within, exploring its chambers, curlicues 
and turrets. It is in most ways the antithesis of his sharp, concise writing of 
a decade previously, yet what stayed with Clark throughout was soul and 
soulfulness.


9. All I Want <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Jc-Po3KAqE4>

Come the 80s, Tom Petty and REM were making the Byrds’ 60s sound fashionable 
again. In 1982 Clark recorded what would be released two years later as the 
Firebyrd album (later expanded and issued in the UK as This Byrd Has Flown). 
Again, circumstances (and perhaps self-sabotage) conspired against him; even 
when blatantly courting the main chance and invoking his past at every turn, he 
couldn’t catch a break. All I Want sounds like a prototype for later, poppy 
hits by the Traveling Wilburys and former bandmate Roger McGuinn; an updated, 
80s-style Byrds. It is, by Clark’s standards, facile, a plaintive courtship of 
radio play. Yet it illustrates how he was quite incapable of divesting what he 
did of resonance and beauty.

10. Gypsy Rider <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jqhQ7T92Wu4>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dj5ruo6h6AG&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dj5ruo6h6AG>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dj5ruo6h6AG&media=>
In 1986, five years before his drug- and alcohol-hastened death at 46, Clark 
recorded his final studio album, So Rebellious a Lover, with the roots singer 
Carla Olson. It includes this lovely piece, in the traditions both of biker and 
rambling-man’s-gotta-be-free songs. Yet it’s a world away in spirit fromBorn to 
Be Wild <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xm5DPlNCmtk>or Free Bird 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D0W1v0kOELA>. It is as sorrowful a motorcycle 
tune as you’ll ever hear, and it invokes an almost unbearable sadness at the 
prospect of leaving yet another love. “She should have known by now / You’re 
just a vagabond,” laments Clark. “You may never pass this way again.” It is 
easy to read too much into words in hindsight, but it truly does sound as if he 
is performing his own elegy.

 