
At 1.54pm on 11 December 1972, Gene Cernan piloted Challenger, Apollo 17’s 
lunar module, into the Taurus-Littrow valley, near the Sea of Serenity, on the 
surface of the moon. In later years Cernan, who has died aged 82, would 
describe the valley where he had landed accompanied by the geologistJack Schmitt
 <http://www.space.com/20789-harrison-schmitt-astronaut-biography.html> as “our 
own private little Camelot”.

Three days later, having travelled to such locations as the Sculptured Hills 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p011y1bc/p0122xnf>, and the Van Serg and 
Sherlock craters, the astronauts prepared to leave. Cernan marked out his 
daughter Teresa’s initials in the dust, where they remain. Before climbing back 
into the lunar module, he paused and spoke to Mission Control back in Houston: 
“As we leave the moon at Taurus-Littrow, we leave as we came, and, God willing, 
as we shall return, with peace and hope for all mankind.”

In the intervening years, God, or at least the US government, has been 
decidedly unwilling. To the dismay of astronauts such as Cernan, who labelled 
it a “slide to mediocrity”, and the first man on the moon,Neil Armstrong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2012/aug/26/neil-armstrong>, who jointly 
appealed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/cifamerica/2010/apr/15/obama-nasa-space-neil-armstrong>
 to President Barack Obama in 2010, Cernan remains the last human being to have 
trodden on the surface of the moon. “It was perhaps the brightest moment of my 
life, and I can’t go back,”he said <http://egger1.com/apollo-xvii/>. “I am one 
of only 12 human beings to have stood on the moon. I have come to accept that, 
and the enormous responsibility it carries, but as for finding a suitable 
encore, nothing has ever come close.”
 Gene Cernan, right, with Neil Armstrong , left, and Buzz Aldrin, answering 
media questions in 1999. Photograph: Bruce Weaver/AFP/Getty Images 
By the time he made the moon landing, Cernan was already a seasoned space 
explorer. In May 1969 he had been a crew member, flying low over the lunar 
surface in the LMlunar module, when Apollo 10 conducted thedress rehearsal 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/onthisday/hi/dates/stories/may/22/newsid_3034000/3034569.stm>
 for Armstrong and thefirst moon landing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/from-the-archive-blog/2011/jun/01/newspapers-national-newspapers>
.

In May 1966 he accompanied Tom Stafford on the Gemini 9 mission, which 
entailed an extraordinarily hazardous space walk with Cernan, 185 miles above 
the Earth’s surface, entangled in his equipment. Back on Earth, Stafford 
recounted that Cernan had asked him if he would have left him marooned in 
space. Stafford told him: “How could you give a shit? You’re already dead.”

Cernan’s roots were in central Europe. His mother, Rose (nee Cihlar), was of 
Czech ancestry and the family of his father, Andrew, a supervisor at a naval 
installation, were Slovak. Gene was born in Chicago, Illinois, and raised in 
the towns of Maywood and Bellwood, west of Chicago. He left Proviso East high 
school, Maywood, in 1952 and studied electrical engineering atPurdue 
<http://www.purdue.edu/> University, Indiana. Coincidentally, both Cernan and 
Armstrong were Purdue graduates.

While at university, Cernan had joined the US navy’s officer training corps, 
aiming for a commission in the naval reserves, which he got in 1956. By 1958 he 
was a naval flier, posted to Miramar, California – later to be known as the 
“Topgun” air station – and piloted FJ4 Fury and A4 Skyhawk subsonic fighters. 
Then, in 1963, he completed his training with a master’s in aeronautical 
engineering from the naval postgraduate school in Monterey, California. It was 
a CV that made him an obvious candidate for the space programme.

The military and civil competition between the US and the Soviet Union, which 
had seen the latter put the first satellite into space, and in 1961 the first 
man, Yuri Gagarin, into orbit, crystallised when, on 25 May that year, 
President John F Kennedypledged <https://history.nasa.gov/moondec.html> that 
the US would conduct a successful moon landing by 1970. The Mercury programme 
was about getting an astronaut into orbit – a task first accomplished byJohn 
Glenn <https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/dec/08/john-glenn-obituary> in 
early 1962. The second stage was Gemini – developing the technology to prepare 
for a moon landing. The third, Apollo, was about going to the moon. In 1959 the 
“Mercury Seven” became the first US astronaut team, and Cernan was subsequently 
inspired byAlan Shepard 
<http://www.nytimes.com/learning/general/onthisday/bday/1118.html>, the first 
American in space – albeit for a mere 15 minutes. In October 1963 Nasa accepted 
Cernan as a trainee astronaut.

After the Apollo 17 mission, Cernan was part of the team on the Apollo-Soyuz 
<https://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/apollo-soyuz/astp_mission.html> project 
that brought the cold war rivals together in space. In 1976 he quit Nasa and 
became an oil executive in Houston, Texas. Later he founded a consultancy 
specialising in energy and aerospace and chaired the Johnson Engineering 
Corporation (1994-2000). Cernan never severed his links with science and space, 
and was employed by ABC-TV as a commentator on issues around the space 
programme.

In 1999 he published, with Don Davis, his autobiography, The Last Man on the 
Moon, and last yeara documentary of the same name 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/31/the-last-man-on-the-moon-eugene-cernan-interview>
 went on general release.

Cernan is survived by his second wife, Jan Nanna, and by his daughter, Teresa, 
from his first marriage, to Barbara (nee Atchley), which ended in divorce.

• Eugene Andrew Cernan, astronaut, engineer and pilot, born 14 March 1934; 
died 16 January 2017
 