
First come the artists, then the cranes. As the kamikaze pilots of urban 
renewal,wherever the creatives go, developers will follow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/13/hipsters-artists-gentrifying-capitalism>
, rents will rise, the artists will move on, and the pre-existing community 
will be kicked out with them.

Such is the accepted narrative of gentrification, a term first coined more 
than 50 years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/feb/27/ruth-glass-spike-lee-gentrification-50-years>
 by the German-born British sociologistRuth Glass 
<http://www.ucl.ac.uk/urbanlab/news/ruth-glass-seminar> to describe changes she 
observed in north London – but it is a phenomenon that has been at the heart of 
how cities evolve for centuries.

Gentrification is a slippery and divisive word, vilified by many for the 
displacement of the poor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/21/oakland-housing-crisis-rising-rents-evictions>
, the influx of speculative investors, the proliferation of chain stores, the
destruction of neighbourhood authenticity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/sep/08/edinburgh-endarkenment-public-land-luxury-hotel-india-buildings>
; praised by others for the improvement in school standards and public safety, 
the fall in crime rates, and thearrival of bike lanes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/jun/21/minneapolis-portland-america-cycle-city>
, street markets andbetter parks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/green-spaces-urban-cities>.

Your opinion might depend on which side of the property-owning chasm you are 
on, and the respective consequences: an uplift in the value of your assets, or 
an increase in the rent you must pay to stay. In all cases, the winners are the 
landowners, who profit handsomely from the unearned income of neighbourhood 
improvement.

For years, gentrification boosters such as Richard Florida 
<http://scholar.harvard.edu/files/glaeser/files/book_review_of_richard_floridas_the_rise_of_the_creative_class.pdf>
 have argued it is the surefire formula for urban regeneration, proselytising 
their magic recipe to rapt mayors around the world. Blighted neighbourhoods 
could be miraculously transformed by incentivising the arrival of the “creative 
class” of artists,gay couples 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/jan/13/end-of-gaytrification-cities-lgbt-communities-gentrification-gay-villages>
 and brave bohemians: those frontline pioneers who would take on rundown 
buildings and seed the pop-up micro-breweries, artisanal bakeries and farmers’ 
markets that would encourage the more timid middle classes to follow. Houses 
are done up, community gardens appear, and investors flock to reap the rewards.

The “urban renaissance” of the past two decades, masterminded in the UK by 
Richard Rogers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2002/jul/21/regeneration.comment> in the 
form of New Labour’s urban taskforce, set out to revitalise decaying inner city 
cores, breathe fresh life into post-industrial “brownfield” land, andmake 
cities happier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/dec/08/jan-gehl-make-cities-liveable-urban-rethinker>
, healthier, safer places to live and work. Rather than escaping to the 
suburbs, successful young professionals would be lured back into the city, 
bringing an upwardly mobile, cappuccino-supping class to activate a whole new 
generation of urban public spaces.

There have been many upsides. But the consequences of the rate and scale of 
change, the displacement of poor by rich, the loss of workspace and the 
hollowing out of neighbourhoods by buy-to-leave investors, is now frightening 
even the most ardent promoters of trickle-down regeneration.

Brownfield developments have too often resulted in lifeless dormitory blocks: 
clone-town apartments built without the social infrastructure of the corner 
shops, doctors’ surgeries, pubs and primary schools needed to make viable 
places to live. Projects that were planned as mixed-tenure neighbourhoods have 
seen their “affordable” housing quotasrelentlessly squeezed out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/sep/17/truth-property-developers-builders-exploit-planning-cities>
, thanks to the clever accounting ofviability consultants and well-paid 
planning lawyers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jun/25/london-developers-viability-planning-affordable-social-housing-regeneration-oliver-wainwright>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fgentrification-global-problem-better-solution-oliver-wainwright%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc83f71f35c132b1aa366f864895716ef42741dae%2F0_0_4500_3000%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gentrification%20is%20a%20global%20problem.%20It's%20time%20we%20found%20a%20better%20solution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fgentrification-global-problem-better-solution-oliver-wainwright%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gentrification%20is%20a%20global%20problem.%20It%27s%20time%20we%20found%20a%20better%20solution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fgentrification-global-problem-better-solution-oliver-wainwright%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc83f71f35c132b1aa366f864895716ef42741dae%2F0_0_4500_3000%2F4500.jpg>
 Jason Burke will be reporting on the tensions of gentrification in 
Johannesburg, South Africa. Photograph: James Oatway for the Guardian 
Starting today, this Guardian Cities series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/series/gentrified-world> will examine the 
consequences of gentrification around the world, and interrogate what is being 
done to tackle it. FromVancouver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/jul/07/vancouver-chinese-city-racism-meets-real-estate-british-columbia>
’s pioneering gentrification tax to the efforts of a tenants’ cooperative in 
Brooklyn, from housing evictions inJohannesburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/apr/27/the-insiders-guide-to-johannesburg-gold-blood-work-dance-faster>
 to the impact of Airbnb inAmsterdam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/aug/11/cycling-amsterdam-bike-jams-bicycle-mayor-anna-luten>
, we will hear from groups on both sides of the regeneration machine about the 
impacts, challenges and tactics being deployed on this ever-shifting 
battleground.

My own view is that the best solution to mitigate the impact of the almost 
inevitable tide of urban gentrification is a tax on the value of land, which 
would capture the value of improvements for the local community, rather than 
lining the pockets of investors.

This is an idea that has enjoyed the support of economists throughout the 
ages, fromAdam Smith 
<http://www.economist.com/blogs/freeexchange/2013/11/economic-history> (who 
said “nothing could be more reasonable”) toMilton Friedman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2006/nov/17/guardianobituaries.politics> (who 
called it “the least bad tax”), but it is most closely associated with Henry 
George, whose 1879 bookProgress and Poverty 
<http://www.wealthandwant.com/HG/PP/Katzenberger_synopsis.html> argued that 
land-value levies should replace all other taxes, leaving labour and capital to 
flourish freely, thus ending poverty, unemployment, inflation and inequality.

At present, when gentrification increases the value of an area, the windfall 
is to the landowners. The community group that gets together to revive a street 
market or establish an urban garden, or the penniless artists who turn a leaky 
warehouse into a gallery, are indirectly responsible for catalysing the very 
forces they are usually determined to prevent.

The bubble that turned into a tide: how London got hooked on gentrification
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/sep/24/the-bubble-that-turned-into-a-tide-how-london-got-hooked-on-gentrification>
Such amenities increase the “locational value” of properties in the area, 
attracting buy-to-let investors, land speculators and estate agents who feature 
these very community assets in their glossy brochures. The arrival of the 
allotment and the “makerspace <http://www.nesta.org.uk/uk-makerspaces-data>” 
puts into motion a sequence of events that will ultimately drive them out: the 
cast-iron rule of gentrification is that the things that make an area 
attractive will be displaced or destroyed.

A land value tax shifts this dynamic. Rather than taxing property, it taxes 
the value of the land itself – determined by its location, not what is built on 
it. The rise in value that results from neighbourhood improvements is therefore 
captured and returned to the community, to be reinvested in the area.

Such a tax also penalises those who hoard vacant plots of land with no 
intention to build, while driving inflated land values down by taking into 
account the value of future levies that will be applied.

In short, it would mean the next time you see a bearded hipster wheeling his 
sourdough trolley to the local festival of sustainable street art, you could 
take solace in the fact that the perceived value he is creating will not be 
siphoned off by a developer, or lead to an increase in your rent, but 
ultimately generate more revenue to make your neighbourhood a better place to 
live.

Are you experiencing or resisting gentrification in your city? Share your 
stories in the comments below, through ourdedicated callout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/sep/19/city-resist-gentrification-displacement>
, or on Twitter using #GlobalGentrification.

Producing in-depth, thoughtful, well-reported journalism is difficult and 
expensive – but supporting us isn’t. If you value the the Guardian’s coverage 
of the global housing crisis,please help to fund our journalism by becoming a 
supporter 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/uk/supporter?INTCMP=gdnwb_copts_editorial_mem_ollygentrification_footer>
 