
There was supposed to be a third act; a new album, a tour — both rumoured for 
2017. There was meant to be a point at whichGeorge Michael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/georgemichael> was reclaimed from the 
tiresome reputation of high-living, glamorous, homosexual recluse to be 
recognised as one of our most consummate artists; a moment when the cruder 
memories of Swiss rehab centres, entanglements on Hampstead Heath and crashing 
into branches of Snappy Snaps faded into the sound of Faith or Freedom or Club 
Tropicana.

Five great George Michael performances, from Young Guns to Jesus to a Child
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/dec/26/george-michael-five-great-performances-from-young-guns-to-jesus-to-a-child>
This year has not been kind – Bowie, Prince, Leonard, stand among our many 
musical losses. But the sadness of Michael’s death feels particularly 
discombobulating; while it had been evident for some time that Michael had been 
unwell, and that his willingness to be a recording artist had waned, it seemed 
inevitable that at any moment soon he might resurface – as red-blooded and 
vibrant as ever.

George Michael was a rare star – an artist who succeeded in transforming what 
might’ve been a fleeting pop flirtation into a serious music career. In the 
1980s he was a pretty boy pin-up, permatanned and highlighted. In a remarkably 
short time he was duetting with Elton John and Aretha Franklin, adopted, 
somehow, by the upper echelons of the music industry.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgwZAYdHcDtU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgwZAYdHcDtU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgwZAYdHcDtU&media=>
For many who followed he suggested a route: a way to graduate from boyband pop 
hits to respected musicianship. The interesting element to Michael’s rise was 
how for all the more mature material he retained a pop sensibility, as if his 
songs grew out of sensation, were proved on the pulses, rather than the 
contained logic of professional musician.

Much of the sorrow of Michael’s passing lies in the fact he wrote and sang so 
exquisitely about the marrow of life, about the vital, corporeal things: he was 
the pop star who wrote about lust — in all its extraordinary, variegated, 
beautiful forms, long before it became fashionable to be risque. He gave us the 
liberating thrill of I Want Your Sex, the sweet hedonism of Outside, all those 
songs that pushed popular music’s boundaries to a place where it was acceptable 
to publicly discuss our particular mores and desires. But Michael’s often 
sexually charged songs were more than simple tales of lust and longing; long 
after he had abandoned the heterosexual frisson of his early pop years Michael 
pushed public boundaries too. In song, he discussed not only his own sexuality, 
and his personal predilections, but, notably, in his cover of Queen’s Somebody 
to Love at the 1992 Freddie Mercury Tribute Concert, he began a normalisation 
of homosexuality, a feeling that at this low point we should at long last and 
for heaven’s sake just accept love in all its forms.

Encounters with George Michael – 'His publicist thought I was tabloid scum'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/dec/26/george-michael-press-encounters-publicist-tabloids>
To celebrate George Michael now is to recognise the pure heart-pulse of the 
perfect pop tune — of Freedom, or Faith, or Club Tropicana, the impeccable 
smooch of Careless Whisper, A Different Corner or Jesus to a Child, but also to 
recognise that he was never quite playing by the rules, that he was in so many 
areas of his life questioning the limits.

If we want to pay tribute to George Michael today I think our response should 
be visceral, heartfelt, rebellious: let’s congregate outside Hampstead Snappy 
Snaps. Let’s perform lewd acts in Beverly Hills parks, cavort on Hampstead 
Heath, stuff shuttlecocks down our shorts. And if all of that fails let us do 
this: grab the person you love and tell them how much you relish them, love 
them, desire them.

In that small way, make the world a better place.
 