
George Michael <https://www.theguardian.com/music/georgemichael>, who has died 
aged 53 of heart failure, was Britain’s biggest pop star of the 1980s, first 
with the pop duo Wham! and then as a solo artist. After Wham! made their 
initial chart breakthrough with the single Young Guns (Go for It) in 1982, 
Michael’s songwriting gift brought them giant hits including Wake Me Up Before 
You Go-Go and I’m Your Man, and they became leading lights of the 80s boom in 
British pop music, alongside Culture Club and Duran Duran. His first solo 
album, Faith (1987), sold 25m copies, and Michael sold more than 100m albums 
worldwide with Wham! and under his own name.


Michael remained a major figure in the music industry even when his record 
releases slowed to a trickle in the later part of his career, and a loyal fan 
base ensured that his concert tours always sold out. However, from the late 
1990s onwards he was beset by a string of personal crises and clashes with the 
law caused by drug use. He had always felt ambivalent about the demands of 
stardom, and found it difficult to balance his celebrity status with his 
private life. After years of concealing his homosexuality, he eventually came 
out in 1998, after being arrested for engaging in a “lewd act” in a public 
lavatory in Beverly Hills, California.


He was born Georgios Kyriacos Panayiotou in Finchley, north London. His father 
was a Greek Cypriot restaurateur, Kyriacos Panayiotou, who had married Lesley 
Angold, an English dancer. The family moved to Radlett in Hertfordshire, and 
George attended Bushey Meads school, where he became close friends with Andrew 
Ridgeley. The pair formed a ska-influenced quintet, the Executive, in 1979, 
then in 1981 re-emerged as a duo, Wham!. They recorded some demos of their 
songs (written by Michael), and were promptly signed by the independent label 
Innervision.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fgeorge-michael-obituary-wham-pop-star%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb00e10b655709068bbdd27eaf8417adb52bf365f%2F0_649_4528_2716%2F4528.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=George%20Michael%C2%A0obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fgeorge-michael-obituary-wham-pop-star%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=George%20Michael%C2%A0obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fgeorge-michael-obituary-wham-pop-star%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb00e10b655709068bbdd27eaf8417adb52bf365f%2F0_649_4528_2716%2F4528.jpg>
 George Michael and Andrew Ridgeley in Wham! days, on TV show The Tube. 
Photograph: ITV/Rex/Shutterstock 
Their debut release was the single Wham Rap! in June 1982, one of the first 
singles by a British group to include rapping. It didn’t chart, but the 
follow-up, Young Guns (Go for It), in October 1982 reached No 3, thanks to a 
timely appearance on Top of the Pops featuring a nightclub-style dance routine 
by the Wham! duo and backing singers Shirlie Holliman and Dee C Lee. Wham Rap! 
was reissued as Wham Rap! (Enjoy What You Do) and shot into the top 10, where 
it was followed by Bad Boys and Club Tropicana in 1983.


With Wham! blossoming into a full-scale phenomenon, their debut album 
Fantastic (1983) charged to the top of the charts. Wham! were now battling with 
Culture Club to be top act in Britain’s so-called “new pop” boom.

Michael and Ridgeley had become aware that their Innervision contract was 
bringing them a very poor return on their efforts, and having signed a deal 
with the Sony subsidiary Columbia Records for America, they chose to forfeit 
royalties from their debut album to sign with CBS (later bought by Sony) 
worldwide.


The decision proved wise, as their second album, Make It Big (1984), turned 
them into a global success story, spinning off singles such as Wake Me Up 
Before You Go-Go, Careless Whisper, Freedom and Everything She Wants. In 1985, 
Wham! achieved a massive publicity coup by becoming the first western pop group 
to visit the People’s Republic of China. The visit was filmed by the director 
Lindsay Anderson as Foreign Skies: Wham! In China (1986).

However, Michael was already eyeing up a solo future. Despite being included 
on Make It Big, Careless Whisper was credited to “Wham! featuring George 
Michael” in the US and was issued as a Michael solo single in other 
territories. By the time Wham! called it a day with a spectacular final concert 
at Wembley Stadium in June 1986, Michael had already released his first solo 
single, the chart-topping A Different Corner. Music from the Edge of Heaven 
(1986) was the final Wham! album, and The Edge of Heaven their farewell single.


Michael topped the charts again in early 1987 with a duet with Aretha 
Franklin, I Knew You Were Waiting (For Me), and that autumn released his first 
solo album, Faith, to critical and commercial acclaim. Produced, written and 
arranged by Michael, it spawned hits including I Want Your Sex (considered too 
explicit by some radio stations), Faith, Father Figure and Kissing a Fool. In 
1988 Michael set out on a world tour, which was a major commercial success but 
left him feeling exhausted, isolated and dubious about the entire rigmarole of 
superstardom.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fgeorge-michael-obituary-wham-pop-star%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbfc6ec0cd1a04102a915744995e012d4c37e12d7%2F154_460_1694_1016%2F1694.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=George%20Michael%C2%A0obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fgeorge-michael-obituary-wham-pop-star%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=George%20Michael%C2%A0obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fgeorge-michael-obituary-wham-pop-star%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbfc6ec0cd1a04102a915744995e012d4c37e12d7%2F154_460_1694_1016%2F1694.jpg>
 With Sting at Carnegie Hall, New York in 1993. Photograph: Rex/Shutterstock 
His follow-up disc, Listen Without Prejudice Vol 1, did not appear until 1990, 
and signalled Michael’s preoccupation with becoming recognised as a serious 
adult artist. Though Praying for Time brought him a chart-topping single in the 
US and the album reached No 1 in the UK, the level of sales was substantially 
lower than for Faith. He hardly helped his case by refusing to appear in any of 
the videos for the album’s singles. For the video for Freedom ’90, he recruited 
a batch of supermodels, including Naomi Campbell and Cindy Crawford, to lip 
sync the lyrics in his place.

In 1991 Michael and Elton John enjoyed a mutual triumph with their duet 
version of John’s Don’t Let the Sun Go Down on Me, a song they had performed 
together at the 1985 Live Aid concert and which they now recorded live at a 
Michael concert at Wembley Arena. It topped both the US and British charts. 
Michael was growing unhappy with his relationship with his record company, 
however, and in 1992 he began legal proceedings against Sony, claiming he was 
bound in artistic servitude to a company that “appears to see artists as little 
more than software” and claiming that Sony had failed to promote Listen Without 
Prejudice properly (it sold “only” 8m copies).


Panayiotou and others v Sony Music Entertainment (UK) Ltd came to the high 
court in October 1993, and was seen as a test case that could have dramatic 
repercussions across the music industry should Michael win. Although the legal 
proceeedings shed light on various restrictive practices in the business, he 
did not, since Justice Jonathan Parker found that Michael’s contract was 
“reasonable and fair”. One casualty of the lawsuit was Listen Without Prejudice 
Vol 2, which Michael scrapped, donating some of its songs to the Red Hot + 
Dance charity project to raise money for Aids awareness.

In 1993, the Five Live EP (released on Parlophone in the UK and Hollywood 
Records in the US) included tracks from the 1992 Freddie Mercury tribute 
concert at Wembley Stadium at which Michael sang with Queen, along with some 
live tracks from Michael’s 1991 Cover to Cover tour. Proceeds from the EP went 
to the Mercury Phoenix Trust to help combat Aids.


The following year, Michael premiered a new song, Jesus to a Child, at the 
inaugural MTV Europe music awards. The long, melancholy piece was written after 
the death of his lover, Anselmo Feleppa, who had died of an Aids-related brain 
haemorrhage in 1993, and when it was released in January 1996 became his first 
solo single to enter the UK charts at No 1. Another single, Fastlove, emerged 
in April 1996, followed a month later by his third solo album, Older, which was 
dedicated to Feleppa. It was on Virgin in the UK and David Geffen’s DreamWorks 
label in the US, where it went platinum. The album set a record in the UK by 
becoming the first ever to produce six Top 3 singles. That year Michael was 
voted best British male artist at the Brit awards, and received his third Ivor 
Novello award as songwriter of the year.

Intervals between releases of new material were growing ever longer, though 
Michael retained a powerful popular appeal. In 1998 came Ladies & Gentlemen: 
The Best of George Michael, a compilation containing his best-known songs as 
well as duets and tracks from compilations not previously featured on his own 
albums. The album would become one of his biggest, going on to sell 15m copies. 
Nor was it entirely retrospective. The first single from it, Outside, was a new 
song, about Michael’s arrest by an undercover policeman in a public lavatory in 
Beverly Hills a few months earlier. The policeman in question, Marcelo 
Rodriguez, tried unsuccessfully to sue Michael for emotional distress caused by 
the video for Outside, which depicted policemen kissing. Michael now let it be 
known that he had been in a relationship since 1996 with the businessman Kenny 
Goss; they remained together until 2009.

In 1999 came Songs from the Last Century, a collection of cover versions 
spanning such disparate pieces as Brother, Can You Spare a Dime?, My Baby Just 
Cares for Me and Wild is the Wind. It was his lowest-performing solo release, 
not even breaching the top 150 on the American Billboard chart, though it 
reached No 2 in Britain. He now embarked on a lengthy period of recording 
material for a planned album of new material, the first fruit of which was the 
2002 single Freeek!. He followed this with Shoot the Dog, a political piece 
attacking Tony Blair and George W Bush for their warlike posturing in the 
run-up to the 2003 invasion of Iraq.

Perhaps even more surprising was the news, in 2003, that Michael had re-signed 
with Sony. The studio released his fifth studio album, Patience (2004), and it 
jumped to the top of the UK chart, and, although it would not climb higher than 
12 on the US charts, it was a hit throughout Europe. It also generated a batch 
of singles, including Amazing and Flawless (Go to the City). Although Michael 
announced that Patience would be his last disc to be given a physical release 
(as opposed to digital download), this apparently did not apply to 
compilations, since 2006 brought a chart-topping greatest hits album, 25, as 
well as the 25 Live tour, his first in 15 years.


After several arrests for drugs offences, in 2010 Michael was fined and given 
a five-year driving ban and a prison sentence after admitting driving under the 
influence of drugs, having crashed his Range Rover into a Snappy Snaps photo 
store in Hampstead.

Nonetheless, he had evidently rediscovered his appetite for performing and 
recording. In 2011 he made a cover version of New Order’s hit True Faith for 
the Comic Relief charity, and recorded an MP3 version of Stevie Wonder’s You 
and I as a wedding gift for Prince William and Kate Middleton.

He launched his Symphonica Tour in Prague in August 2011. However, it was cut 
short when he fell ill with severe pneumonia in November, after the tour had 
reached Frankfurt, and he was admitted to hospital in Vienna.

He spent a week in intensive care and was not discharged from hospital until 
21 December. Two days later he made a public speech outside his home in 
Highgate, north London, saying that the staff at the Vienna general hospital 
had saved his life. He suffered a further medical emergency in May 2013, when 
he had to be airlifted to hospital after he fell out of a car travelling on the 
M1.

In June 2012 Michael released the single White Light to mark the 30th 
anniversary of Wham Rap!. In March 2014 he released Symphonica, which became 
his seventh solo album to top the UK chart. This month, it was announced that 
he was working on a new album with producer and songwriter Naughty Boy. Also in 
the pipeline was a film, provisionally titled Freedom: George Michael, due to 
accompany the reissue of his 1990 album Listen Without Prejudice Vol 1. With 
Michael as narrator, the film would feature stars including Stevie Wonder, 
Elton John, Liam Gallagher and Mary J Blige as well as the supermodels who had 
appeared in his Freedom! ’90 video.

His mother, Lesley, died in 1997. He is survived by his father and his two 
sisters, Melanie and Yioda.

• George Michael (Georgios Kyriacos Panayiotou), singer and songwriter, born 
25 June 1963; died 25 December 2016
 