
A long time ago, in a galaxy far, far away, George Lucas was a gifted film 
director.The release of Star Wars in 1977 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/21/star-wars-lucas-science-fiction> 
– long before we had to call it Part IV or A New Hope – was a seismic event in 
modern culture that abolished the difference between art and entertainment.

LA wins battle to host Star Wars creator George Lucas's $1bn museum
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/10/george-lucas-star-wars-museum-la-san-francisco>
It was not a metaphysical allegory of the future but simply a good story. The 
point of setting it in the past in a remote part of the universe is that it has 
no relevance to reality here on Earth. It’s a tale, a legend, a myth. Lucas put 
aside every value except narrative excitement and identification with his 
characters. This was an epic yarn, pure and simple.

Now Lucas is to create, at his own huge expense, a museum in Los Angeles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/10/george-lucas-star-wars-museum-la-san-francisco>
 that not only shows off his collection of art along with relics from his films 
but makes an argument about art’s purpose.

It is to be called the Lucas Museum of Narrative Art <http://lucasmuseum.org/>
. In its very name it thus restates the most original thing about Star Wars, 
that Lucas brought storytelling back to cinema. Can he restore the narrative 
impulse to modern art – and would that be a good thing?
 Treasures … work by Robert Crumb, who features in George Lucas’s extensive 
art collection. Photograph: Robert Crumb 
When he praises narrative in art, Lucas clearly doesn’t mean a cathartic 
performance byMarina Abramović 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/oct/22/marina-abramovic-artist-face-jealousy-simon-hattenstone>
 or a historically evocative film byWilliam Kentridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/10/out-of-south-africa-how-politics-animated-the-art-of-william-kentridge>
. His collection of over 10,000 items stresses painters and graphic artists 
whose work is highly accessible. That master of folksy American scenes Norman 
Rockwell features among his treasures, as does the brilliant comic book art of
Robert Crumb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/24/robert-crumb-interview-art-and-beauty-exhibition>
. Lucas also collects the work ofNC Wyeth 
<https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/N._C._Wyeth#/media/File%3AOne_More_Step%2C_Mr._Hands.jpg>
, who illustrated boy’s adventure books with exciting images of derring-do.

Put all this together with his Star Wars memorabilia and you have a museum 
that is likely to elicit scorn from art world snobs. Tate Modern or MoMA it 
ain’t. Instead, it’s an honest personal vision of what art should be like – and 
Lucas may be vindicated, just as he was whenStar Wars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars> entranced the world four decades 
ago.

George Lucas is right. Art has forgotten the power of popular storytelling 
that was once its main reason to exist

He is right. Art has forgotten the power of popular storytelling that was once 
its main reason to exist. In previous ages the most important job of visual art 
was to tell tales. Painters and sculptors were commissioned to create 
compelling narrative art that was put in churches to move and harrow the whole 
community. A painting like Piero della Francesca’sBaptism of Christ 
<https://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/paintings/piero-della-francesca-the-baptism-of-christ>
 (1450s) is a masterpiece of concentrated storytelling that beautifully distils 
an episode from the New Testament and makes it easy to identify with – Piero 
has even set the scene in his local countryside with his home town San Sepolcro 
visible in the background.

Popular religious storytelling evolved from dense medieval comic-strip art 
<http://collections.vam.ac.uk/item/O17807/altarpiece-of-st-george-oil-painting-master-of-the/>
 to Renaissance miracles of human drama like Piero’s Baptism or Leonardo da 
Vinci’sThe Last Supper 
<https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Last_Supper_(Leonardo_da_Vinci)#/media/File%3AÚltima_Cena_-_Da_Vinci_5.jpg>
. As art became more secular in the 18th century it did not lose its passion 
for storytelling. The same techniques artists had perfected to narrate the 
Bible allowed them to tell powerful stories from history, novels or modern life 
like John Singleton Copley’sWatson and the Shark 
<https://www.nga.gov/feature/watson/watsonbig.jpg> (1778) – more Jaws than Star 
Wars, I suppose – and Hogarth’sThe Rake’s Progress 
<http://www.soane.org/collections-research/key-stories/rakes-progress>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fgeorge-lucas-star-wars-museum-of-narrative-art-storytelling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05dd8d7494290549020cf2aada9f3e18f35eb4b6%2F0_0_3588_2626%2F3588.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=George%20Lucas's%20LA%20museum%20brings%20new%20hope%20to%20art's%20storytellers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fgeorge-lucas-star-wars-museum-of-narrative-art-storytelling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=George%20Lucas%27s%20LA%20museum%20brings%20new%20hope%20to%20art%27s%20storytellers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fgeorge-lucas-star-wars-museum-of-narrative-art-storytelling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05dd8d7494290549020cf2aada9f3e18f35eb4b6%2F0_0_3588_2626%2F3588.jpg>
 Narrators to society … a painting from The Rake’s Progress series by William 
Hogarth. Photograph: Martin Argles for the Guardian 
Paintings that told stories provided the cinema of the Romantic age. People 
queued up to see paintings like Géricault’sThe Raft of the Medusa 
<http://www.louvre.fr/en/oeuvre-notices/raft-medusa> or The Execution of Lady 
Jane Grey 
<https://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/paintings/paul-delaroche-the-execution-of-lady-jane-grey>
 by Delaroche. Today this instinct for gutsy, popular storytelling is exiled 
from the art world. Culturally respected art tends to be abstract or 
conceptual. Painters who tell stories, likeNorman Rockwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/oct/12/norman-rockwell-american-patriot>
, get faint praise at best.

A lot has been lost. The passion for narrative is universal. Why can’t visual 
art address the same need for a good story that is satisfied byGame of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/shortcuts/2016/sep/19/battle-of-the-bastards-game-of-thrones-episode-record-seven-emmys>
? Forty years ago George Lucas changed cinema. Perhaps now he can save art.
 