
George North has offered Wales strong encouragement he will be fit for the 
World Cup. The Northampton wing played a full part in a contact session as 
Wales trained in public in Colwyn Bay on Tuesday as part of their preparations 
for the tournament.

Uncertainty has surrounded the 23-year-old’s availability after he suffered 
three concussions in five months 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/apr/14/george-north-wait-neurologists-resuming-career-concussion>
 andmissed the final 10 weeks of last season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/28/wales-george-north-specialist-knocked-out>
. He was not risked inthe warmup defeat by Ireland in Cardiff on Saturday  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/08/wales-ireland-rugby-union-match-report>
and is being continually assessed.

The forwards coach, Robin McBryde, said: “We haven’t risked the boys who we 
didn’t need to risk but George was out there playing. Someone of George’s 
ability is going to be an addition to any squad in world rugby. To have him 
back fit, that has given everybody a boost.”

Sam Warburton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sam-warburton> was also 
pleased to see North playing such an active part. The captain said: “He has 
been training really well from day one. Physically he is a freak and I never 
thought he was going to miss the World Cup. He is one of our players with 
x-factor and, in my opinion, one of the best players in the world. Athletically 
he is in fantastic shape now and I am sure we will see the best of George over 
the next few months.”

A crowd of around 4,000 attended the session at Parc Eirias, which was part of 
a three-day training camp in north Wales. They were able to watch regular 
training drills and a practice match of reasonable intensity.

With the 46-man squad set to be reduced by up to 10 later this week, the game 
provided a last big chance for a number of fringe players to state their case 
for the World Cup.

Wales, who play further warm-up games against Ireland and Italy before their 
tournament opener against Uruguay on September 20, have to name a final 31-man 
squad by August 31.

McBryde said: “The (first) team was much the same as the weekend. We tried to 
recreate that intensity and the crowd played their part.

“It was a great opportunity to give everyone another chance before we cut down 
the squad.

“It has been good to come away to a different environment. There was 100 per 
cent support for both teams and the welcome has been fantastic. The turnout 
shows how important it is we remember north Wales.”

McBryde also delivered a positive update on two players not with the party due 
to injury in back Liam Williams and prop Samson Lee. Williams has been troubled 
by a foot injury while Lee underwent Achilles surgery four months ago.

He said: “They are both on schedule. Samson has been taking part in 
scrummaging sessions, not full, but front-row wise. Liam is back on track. He 
has done some running on the machine and some weights.”
 