
“We had it in our hands,” Bruno Soriano said at the end of his team’s 1‑1 draw 
with Barcelona on Sunday, to which the most appropriate response,as it so often 
is with Villarreal’s captain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/nov/11/bruno-yellow-submarine-villarreal-atletico-madrid>
, as it had been virtually all game, was probably:well played, sir. He’d 
delivered his line deadpan, like he delivers his passes, as if it didn’t matter 
but it did: calm, controlled, and accurate. You almost expected a wink but all 
you got was a smile, a glimmer of cheek, and that was coaxed from him.

It had been in their hands, all right; his, particularly. The night the 
Madrigalbecame the Estadio de la Cerámica; the Ceramic Stadium. 
<http://www.marca.com/en/football/spanish-football/2017/01/08/58728a4b268e3e30028b4586.html>
 Villarreal led from the 50th minute, heading for a first home win over 
Barcelona in 11 years, but an 89th-minute Leo Messi free kickprevented them 
marking the occasion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/08/barcelona-villarreal-lionel-messi-la-liga>
 with victory and maintaining their spot in the Champions League places.

A moment’s “genius”, Bruno called it; Messi’s free kick was ludicrously 
accurate, ridiculously fast, clearing the cobwebs off post and bar as it ripped 
into the net. Two goalkeepers would not have stopped it. Not Sergio Asenjo, and 
not Bruno either, even though he had stopped another Messi shot 18 minutes 
earlier. Now he stood by the touchline, explaining himself.

“My arm was there and the ball hit it,” Bruno said. Which was one way of 
putting it; another would be that Messi was there, shooting from just inside 
the area, and Bruno dived to block it with his right hand – a superb save 
Asenjo would have been proud of, andBarcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> were furious about. As Bruno 
spoke, the hint of a smile as he was told what replays showed, Gerard Piqué was 
striding across the pitch behind him, eyes fixed, staring up at the stand like 
nothing around him mattered, just what lay ahead.

What? Who.

When he got to the touchline, Piqué stopped. He stood there and pointed 
upwards, singling someone out. He gestured to his eye and pointed some more. 
“You saw that,” he seemed to say. “You’ll be happy now,” he added, according to 
some reports, before heading down the tunnel.

“Who were you talking to?” he was asked. “He knows,” Piqué said. Most thought 
they knew too: in the stands, grinning, was the league president Javier Tebas, 
there to promote the unveiling of the stadium’s new name and new, lit-up lemon 
facade.

Tebas is the man who criticised Barcelona’s players’ behaviour at the Mestalla 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/24/valencia-barcelona-fireworks-la-liga>
, who the club had formally complained about, and who Piqué says is against 
them – even though it is the federation, not the league, that is in charge of 
the referees, and no one hates Tebas like Ángel María Villar, the federation 
president, hates Tebas.

After the midweek Copa del Rey defeat to Athletic in Bilbao, during which 
Barcelona were denied a penalty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/05/athletic-bilbao-barcelona-copa-del-rey-last-16-first-leg-match-report>
, Piqué insisted that Barcelona “know” what they’re up against. He was asked 
again on Sunday night. “I believe in what I said, and every week proves me 
right,” he replied, forgetting all those weeks that don’t. And so it began 
again, exclamation marks and paranoia littering the place like a Donald Trump 
tweet. “Hands up!” railed the front of El Mundo Deportivo. “The referee robbed 
another penalty!”

“Piqué challenged Tebas!” the cover of Sport shouted. Above it, in giant 
capital letters, the headline ran: “They deserved much more!” Maybe, but.

“It hurts when you’re so close to the shore,” Villarreal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/villarreal> manager Fran Escribá said; 
his team could almost reach out and touch victory. “But,” he admitted, “it is 
true that they dominated, that they had chances, and that we would have liked 
to have had the ball more, rather than having to play on the break.”

In the second half there had been just one Villarreal shot and that was the 
goal – a superb swift, incisive counter, finished off by Nicola Sansone. By the 
full-time whistle, the shot count read Villarreal 6, Barcelona 20 and Luis 
Enrique was entitled to insist “we’re in that daft moment when we have to 
generate so much to win.” Had Bruno’s stop been seen, things might have been 
different, true; and Piqué had a point when he replied to a question about “the 
handball” by saying “two handballs”. Bruno handled again four minutes after his 
first one, although this time it was a slip, not a save.

Yet in between those handballs there was a third, at the other end, when the 
ball hit Javier Mascherano’s outstretched arm. A handball that Santi Nolla, the 
editor of El Mundo Deportivo, tried to claim mattered less because it happened 
“after”. As for Mascherano himself, the centre-back claimed that “the two 
handballs cannot be compared”. He was right, they were indeed very different, 
but in one fundamental way they certainly can be compared: both are handballs. 
Besides, if decisions can be decisive at times, there is something deeper, more 
concerning for Barcelona. Like the fact that Villarreal too could feel 
disappointed at this.

Villarreal are an impressive side 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/19/villarreal- 
liberated-under-fran-escriba-as-yellow-submarine-enjoys-calmer-waters?CMP=> who 
counter wonderfully, Bruno and Manu Trigueros forming as good a 
central-midfield partnership as there is. They began the weekend in the top 
four, have been beaten just once at home and have not lost to any of the top 
six – they drew with Madrid, Sevilla and Barcelona, beat Atlético 3-0 and 
defeated Real Sociedad 2-1. They beat Celta 5-0 the week after Celta beat 
Barcelona. This was not a terrible performance, and a draw at the Ceramic 
Stadium is no crisis.

That Barcelona needed a late equaliser is not necessarily a problem, that they 
were rescued by Messi isn’t either, except that it is more familiar than they 
would like. It happenedat the Sánchez Pizjuán 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/07/sevilla-lionel-messi- 
barcelona-la-liga>, for a start. “Where there’s Messi, there’s hope,” Santi 
Giménez wrote in AS, but that dependence is troubling, his brilliance hiding 
flaws.

“It’s frightening to think what this team would be without him,” Giménez 
added, and if that may be overly pessimistic, it’s a reality that Barcelona 
seem a step slower; that Sergio Busquets’ form has slipped and with it the 
collective functioning of the midfield - cause or effect or both? It is also 
unclear who their third midfielder is, none of them entirely convincing or 
given continuity. André Gomes is not so much bad as absent, Luis Suárez is not 
playing well, and it is comical now to look back on polls in which 92.56% had
happily forgotten Dani Alves 
<https://twitter.com/sidlowe/status/818218196381630466>.

It is a reality that the strength in depth summer supposedly brought hasn’t 
happened yet; that Neymar’s willingness to go at people is not producing 
results as good as his performances; that it takes little for them to concede 
and a lot for them to score; that they are not controlling like they did. And 
then there’s the other thing, always there when it comes to Barcelona:Real 
Madrid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid>.

Under normal circumstances, Messi’s equaliser might have been seen as the goal 
that rescued the title for Barcelona, but few were looking at it like that this 
time round. These are not normal circumstances. This weekend, Real Madrid
matched Barcelona’s Spanish record 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/real-madrid-crush-granada-to-equal-spanish-record-unbeaten-run>
 with their 39th game unbeaten in a row; it increasingly feels like they might 
take their title too, a first league in five seasons. Win at Sevilla next 
weekend, and that feeling will increase further. Lose and it will be all‘Hay 
Liga!’ again, of course.

It’s not just the stats, it’s the sensation – Madrid have added playing well 
to their winning – but the stats are stark. Barcelona are third now, not 
second; they trail Sevilla by a point and Real Madrid by five. The leaders have 
a game in hand to play, against Valencia next month. It’s not in Barcelona’s 
hands.

“We’re convinced we can win the league,” Piqué said.

“We’re still in the first half of the season, so of course there’s still a 
chance to win the league,” Luis Enrique agreed. “I’m sure we’ll have the 
opportunity to fight for the title, but it doesn’t depend on us: we depend on 
Real Madrid.”

Talking points

• Previously, on La Liga: over Christmas, three managers went: Joaquín 
Caparrós,Valencia’s Cesare Prandelli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/30/valencia-cesare-prandelli-resigns-la-liga-football>
 and Málaga’s Juande Ramos. Tonight, two of the new men face each other: 
Osasuna, whose sporting director has made himself the manager, play Valencia, 
whose crisisgets worse and worse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/12/valencia-sinking-la-liga-sid-lowe>
, and whose matchday delegate has just been made their manager for the fifth 
time – just over three months since he last left, saying he never, ever wanted 
to be back again.

• This week, Valencia’s sporting director, Richard Madeley-alike Suso García 
Pitarch resigned too, nine days after he threatened to resign, then decided 
that his late father would be ashamed if he did. Good job they’re not in a 
transfer window or anything. Oh. So, in summary: Valencia’s matchday delegate 
is their manager, their youth academy director is the sporting director, their 
captain ispersona non grata, their owner is absent, and their president is 
their owner, or at least says she is.

• Málaga’s new manager is their former assistant coach, Clever Marcelo Romero 
Silva. And yes, Clever really is his name. Only he goes by the nickname Gato 
(the cat). That’s Gato Romero to you and me, and everyone else. Well, almost 
everyone else. The club’s president, Sheik Al-Thani, announced that he had full 
faith in “Mr Cat”. He then linked to a Wikipedia page, in case anyone wanted to 
know who the manager was, which suggested that he had been having a look there 
himself. Clever. Gato lost his first game to Celta, the opening goal scored by 
Iago Aspas, Spain’s most in-form player (after Messi).

• Another day, another win for Zinédine Zidane, and another decision 
vindicated. Isco comes in, Isco scores two. Real Madrid beat Granada 5-0. 
Casemiro scored, meaning that every single outfield player has now scored this 
season, if you don’t count Fabio Coentrão. Which, let’s face it, you don’t – 
although he did get on here for his first 22 minutes of the season and managed 
to do nothing wrong. His is a very curious case. The man he replaced was 
brilliant; a decade on and Marcelo might finally be getting recognised.

• Before the game, Ronaldo was handed the Ballon d’Or, alongside the club’s 
other surviving winners of the award. Kaká and Fabio Cannavaro sent video 
messages, while Raymond Kopa, Luis Figo, Michael Owen and the original Ronaldo 
joined him on the pitch. “I thought I was piling on the pounds until I saw my 
old mate Ronnie,”Owen tweeted later 
<https://twitter.com/themichaelowen/status/817741394529939458>. Around the 
stadium, fans held up golden cards, as (Cristiano) Ronaldo stood behind a table 
with his four trophies on it; quite the achievement. “It’s nice; none of us 
there have four,” Zidane said. “We only have one; maybe Ronnie has two.” He 
does: 1997 and 2002.

• Abelardo once described Sporting Gijón 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/aug/24/sportin 
g-gijon-real-madrid-miraculous-la-liga-return> as “revolutionary”. At the 
weekend, they were defeated by El Zhar (and he was assisted by Prince). 
Sporting currently look more likely to end the season relegated than 
revolutionary. It was only 1-0, but it could have been many more. And while Las 
Palmas are very, very good, andalways worth watching 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/31/rolling-stone- 
quique-setien-shows-theres-glory-in-every-game>, Sporting are pretty dreadful. 
They have won just one match in 14, picking up five points from the last 42. 
Every time he speaks now, Abelardo seems to be begging to get sacked, too. “I 
must have some special contacts; I’m still here,” he said this time.

• Sevilla were a cyclone, blowing la Real away in San Sebastián. They scored 
four, and in the week in which everyone has been talking about the desperate 
need for a striker, Wissam Ben Yedder got three of them. That’s 15 in all 
competitions for him this season, as Sevilla climbed to second. They have not 
been as well-placed as this for 10 years, when they came agonisingly close to 
winning the league, and really should have done. Next up, they host Real Madrid 
twice in four days – once in the league, once in the Cup.

• Well, everyone else has cracked this joke, so why not here too? There were 
no celebrations for Leganés against Betis (still unbeaten at home under Víctor, 
who took over from Gus Poyet), despite them signing a new goalkeeper in the 
winter window. Nereo Champagne let in two at the Villarmarín.

• “We went back to being Atlético again,” Antoine Griezmann said after they 
had beaten Eibar 2-0, the Frenchman scoring his first goal since October. 
“Eleven defending and up front hoping to take the few chances we get.” It was 
effective, but that other version was more fun.

• Pity they didn’t go the whole way at Villarreal and replace ‘stadium’ with 
‘bowl’, too.

Results: Espanyol 1-1 Deportivo, Real Madrid 5-0 Granada, Eibar 0-2 Atlético, 
Las Palmas 1-0 Sporting, Real Sociedad 0-4 Sevilla, Athletic 0-0 Alavés, Betis 
2-0 Leganés, Celta 3-1 Málaga, Villarreal 1-1 Barcelona.

Monday: Osasuna-Valencia.
 