
Germany’s constitutional court has said the far-right National Democratic 
party resembles Adolf Hitler’s Nazi party, but ruled against banning it because 
it presents no threat to democracy.

The country’s 16 federal states had pressed for the ban amid rising support 
for rightwing groups that has been stoked by popular resentment overthe influx 
of large numbers of migrants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/16/germany-hits-back-at-trump-criticism-of-refugee-policy-and-bmw-tariff-threat>
.

Critics, including Jewish groups, condemned the court ruling, saying it sent a 
signal that legitimised the spread of hatred.


 While the court said the party’s aims – described by Germany’s intelligence 
agency as racist and antisemitic and revisionist – violated the constitution, 
it ruled that there was insufficient evidence it would wield power. Under 
German law, there must be hard proof that a party puts democracy at risk for it 
to be banned.

 “The NPD intends to replace the existing constitutional system with an 
authoritarian national state that adheres to the idea of an ethnically defined 
‘people’s community’,” the court said in its ruling.

Related: Germany wants to ban the neo-Nazis of the NPD again, but why now? | 
Cas Mudde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/commentisfree/2016/mar/04/germany-ban--neo-nazi-npd-refugees-far-right>

 “However, currently there is a lack of specific and weighty indications 
suggesting that this endeavour will be successful.”

The tough conditions for banning a political party are in part a legacy of the 
crushing of dissent in the Nazi era and in communist EastGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>.

 The NPD has been largely overshadowed by the anti-immigrant Alternative for 
Germany (AfD), whose support has soared to 15% in polls, and it has failed to 
capitalise on the refugee crisis.

 The NPD has never won enough support to win seats in the federal parliament 
and in elections in September lost its last seat in a regional assembly. 
However, it is represented on local councils and in 2014 won a seat in the 
European parliament.

 “It appears to be entirely impossible that the NPD will succeed in achieving 
its aims by parliamentary or extra-parliamentary democratic means,” said the 
court.

 Germany’s domestic intelligence agency said the NPD, established in 1964, had 
about 5,000 members in a country of 82 million, and was linked to violent 
neo-Nazis.

 Several senior NPD figures have been convicted of Holocaust denial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/17/holocaust-deniers-google-search-top-spot>
 or incitement, but the party denies any involvement in violence.

 “Identification with leading personalities of the [Nazi] party, the use of 
selected National Socialist vocabulary, texts, songs and symbols, as well as 
revisionist statements with regard to history, demonstrate an affinity … with 
the mindset of National Socialism,” said the court.

Welcoming Tuesday’s ruling, the NPD said it would now rebuild. “The stain has 
gone, the party is not banned. Now we can start again politically,” said the 
NPD leader, Frank Franz.

 Some politicians have argued that allowing the fringe NPD to exist would 
legitimise it and send a signal that its rightwing views are acceptable. Others 
say a ban could be counterproductive and push its members underground.

 Only two parties have been banned since the second world war – the Socialist 
Reich party, a successor to Hitler’s Nazis, in 1952, and the Communist party in 
1956 in West Germany.

The International Auschwitz Committee said the ruling sent a “fatal signal to 
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, where rightwing 
extremism overlaps with rightwing populists and tries to turn people’s fears 
and insecurities into hatred and aggression”.

The former head of Germany’s Central Council of Jews, Charlotte Knobloch, said 
the country’s history and current strength of rightwing populism had made it 
crucial to outlaw the NPD.

Others argued a ban would not change people’s minds. 

“Now we must concertedly fight rightwing extremism ... in people’s heads. The 
discussion about a ban will no longer distract us,” said the Greens MP Volker 
Beck.

 An attempt to ban the NPD in 2003 collapsed because some of the party 
officials used as witnesses turned out to be government-paid informants.
 