
Delegates from Germany’s anti-immigration party Alternative für Deutschland 
(AfD) backed an election manifesto on Sunday that says Islam is not compatible 
with the country’s constitution and calls for a ban on minarets and the burqa.

The AfD was set up three years ago and has been buoyed by Europe’s migration 
crisis and the arrival of more than a million mostly Muslim migrants in Germany 
last year. The party has no presence in the federal parliament in Berlin but has
members in half of Germany’s 16 regional state assemblies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/13/anti-refugee-party-makes-big-gains-in-german-state-elections>
.

Opinion polls give AfD support of up to 14%, presenting a serious challenge to 
Angela Merkel’s conservatives and other established parties in the run-up to 
the 2017 federal election. Other parties have ruled out a coalition with the 
AfD.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fgerman-riot-police-arrest-protesters-outside-far-right-party-conference-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=German%20riot%20police%20arrest%20protesters%20outside%20far-right%20party%20conference%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fgerman-riot-police-arrest-protesters-outside-far-right-party-conference-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=German%20riot%20police%20arrest%20protesters%20outside%20far-right%20party%20conference%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fgerman-riot-police-arrest-protesters-outside-far-right-party-conference-video&media=>
German riot police arrest protesters outside far-right party conference – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/apr/30/german-riot-police-arrest-protesters-outside-far-right-party-conference-video>
In a raucous and highly emotional debate on the second day of a party 
congress, many of the 2,000 delegates cheered calls from the podium for 
measures against “Islamic symbols of power” and jeered a plea for dialogue with 
Germany’s Muslims.

“Islam is foreign to us and for that reason it cannot invoke the principle of 
religious freedom to the same degree as Christianity,”Hans-Thomas 
Tillschneider, an AfD politician from the state of Saxony-Anhalt, said to loud 
applause.

Merkel has said on many occasions that freedom of religion is guaranteed by 
Germany’s constitution and that Islam is welcome in the country.

As many as 2,000 leftwing demonstrators clashed with police on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/30/german-police-arrest-400-protesters-outside-far-right-party-meeting>
 as they tried to disrupt the AfD conference. About 500 people were briefly 
detained and 10 police officers were slightly injured, a police spokesman said.

The chapter of the AfD manifesto concerning Muslims is titled “Islam is not a 
part of Germany”.

In Sunday’s debate, one delegate’s call for greater understanding drew jeers 
and loud whistles.

Frauke Petry: smiling face of Germany’s resurgent right
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/07/frauke-petry-smiling-face-resurgent-right>
“I call for a differentiation and urge everybody to visit their local Muslim 
communities and initiate a dialogue,” said Ernst-August Roettger, a delegate 
from the northern city of Lüneburg.

He was speaking in support of an amendment that called for acceptance of 
everybody’s religious freedom and for the party not to regard all Muslims as 
extremists. Delegates rejected the amendment.

Germany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> is home to nearly four 
million Muslims, who make up about 5% of the population. Many of the longer 
established communities came from Turkey to find work, but those who have 
arrived over the past year have mostly been fleeing conflicts in Syria, Iraq 
and Afghanistan.

Last month the head of Germany’s Central Council of Muslims likened the AfD’s 
attitude towards his community to that of Adolf Hitler’s Nazis towards the Jews.
 