
A German trade expert has been appointed to a senior role in the European 
commission’s Brexit team.


The appointment means that nationals from the EU’s largest founding member 
states, France and Germany, will be at the heart of negotiating the small print 
of the UK’s departure from the EU.


Sabine Weyand, a deputy director general at the commission’s trade department, 
will take up the post of deputy chief negotiator of the Brexit taskforce from 1 
October. The taskforce will be led by the veteran French politician and 
Brussels insider Michel Barnier, who wasappointed in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/27/jean-claude-juncker-puts-michel-barnier-in-charge-brexit-talks>
.


The taskforce “will coordinate the commission’s work on all strategic, 
operational, legal and financial issues related to these negotiations,” the 
commission said in a statement.

Weyand, who speaks English and French, has risen through the ranks of the 
European commission since joining in 1994, after studying for a PhD in European 
integration. She graduated in political science, English literature and 
economics, spent a year at Cambridge University and has studied at the College 
ofEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, the elite training 
ground for EU civil servants.


Commission officials have stressed that although the taskforce is in place, 
this does not mean that formal negotiations with the UK will begin soon. 
Jean-Claude Juncker, the European commission president, has insisted there will 
be “no negotiations without notification” of article 50, theEU exit clause 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/26/who-will-dare-pull-trigger-article-50-eu>
.


Speaking earlier on Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/14/juncker-european-unity-brexit-vote-eu>
, Juncker said Brexit would not destroy the EU and repeated his previous 
warnings that Britaincould not have 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/29/eu-leaders-begin-summit-talks-without-uk-for-first-time>
 “à la carte access” to the single market.


In a statement announcing Weyand’s appointment, Juncker said the taskforce 
would be composed of the EU executive’s “best and brightest” and would help 
Michel Barnier conduct negotiations with the UK effectively, “benefiting from 
the deep knowledge and rich experience available across the whole commission”.
 