
This week, after some five years of preparation, the German Bundesrat finally 
asked the Federal constitutional court in Karlsruhe to ban the National 
Democratic party ofGermany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> (NPD). 
Parliament’s upper house argues that the party is racist and antisemitic, and 
constitutes a threat to Germany’s democratic order.

The previous attempt to have the party banned, which lasted from 2001 until 
2003, ended withthe case being thrown out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2003/mar/19/thefarright.germany> because the 
NPD was so infiltrated by intelligence service informers that the court could 
not distinguish between the party and the state. This leads to three questions. 
Why is Germany so intent on banning the NPD? Why do it now? And why does it 
expect a better outcome this time around?

We can't allow refugee crisis to plunge Greece into chaos, says Merkel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/29/we-cant-allow-refugee-crisis-to-plunge-greece-into-chaos-says-merkel>
The answer to the first question is to be found, as so often in Germany, in 
the country’s dark past. The main lesson the postwar German elite took from the 
rise of Adolf Hitler during the Weimar Republic was that a (German) democracy 
should protect itself from anti-democrats. So, to ensure that no new Hitler 
could rise and destroy democracy, the new Federal Republic of Germany defined 
itself as a militant democracy (in Germanwehrhafte or streitbare Demokratie), 
in which anti-democratic politics are illegal.

While most anti-democratic groups can be simply outlawed by the minister of 
the interior – and many have been, including the notorious Action Front of 
National Socialists/National Activists in 1983 and the Viking Youth in 1994 – 
political parties (the distinction is crucial but complex) can only be banned 
by the federal constitutional court. It is important to emphasise that the 
state can take action against anti-democratic organisations, but does not have 
an obligation to do so.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Fgermany-ban--neo-nazi-npd-refugees-far-right%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff230dbc7774dc2acf84d468b08e1c8488e2e3701%2F0_152_4033_2419%2F4033.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Germany%20wants%20to%20ban%20the%20neo-Nazis%20of%20the%20NPD%20again%2C%20but%20why%20now%3F%20%7C%20Cas%20Mudde&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Fgermany-ban--neo-nazi-npd-refugees-far-right%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Germany%20wants%20to%20ban%20the%20neo-Nazis%20of%20the%20NPD%20again%2C%20but%20why%20now%3F%20%7C%20Cas%20Mudde&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Fgermany-ban--neo-nazi-npd-refugees-far-right%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff230dbc7774dc2acf84d468b08e1c8488e2e3701%2F0_152_4033_2419%2F4033.jpg>
 NPD leader Frank Franz at the German constitutional court in Karlsruhe. 
Photograph: Marijan Murat/EPA 
Which leads us to the second question: why now? The NPD has been around since 
1964 and, while it has been threatened with a ban throughout its existence, the 
one previous attempt was more than a decade ago. Since 2003 a new procedure has 
never been far from the political agenda, with debates flaring up whenever 
there is an increase in eitherNPD support or far-right violence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/11/not-all-germans-welcome-refugees-eisenhuettenstadt-east-germany>
. The past couple of years have seen both. The NPD has won a couple of seats in 
a few states – most notably in Saxony in 2009 and in Mecklenburg-West Pomerania 
in 2006 and 2011 – as well as one seat in the European parliament, although 
that was a consequence of a legal technicality rather than an increase in 
support.

The main argument is that the NPD has radicalised even further since 2003

More importantly, Germany was shocked in 2011 when it learned that a small 
terrorist cell, under the grandiose name ofNational Socialist Underground 
<http://www.spiegel.de/international/topic/national_socialist_underground/> 
(NSU), had been responsible for a string of killings over almost a decade. Most 
of the 10 victims were of Turkish origin, which had led law enforcement 
agencies to treat the killings as related to Turkish organised crime rather 
than German far-right terrorism. (Some parts of the media even referred to them 
by the dismissive and racist term “kebab killings”.) A state parliamentary 
committee hascalled the investigation into the NSU “a fiasco” 
<http://www.dw.com/en/neo-nazi-investigation-was-a-fiasco-report-says/a-17869382>
, noting (again) the murky entanglement of group members and state informers, 
and leading to allegations that Germany wasturning a blind eye to far-right 
terror <http://www.dw.com/en/a-blind-eye-turned-to-right-wing-terror/a-15532790>
.

Finally, while the procedure was started much earlier, recent developments 
undoubtedly have further increased the urgency and will of the political 
establishment. The country’s wealth andWillkommenskultur (welcome culture) have 
attracted more than a million refugees to Germany in the past months. This has 
led to a backlash among part of the population, which has been expressed in 
growing support for far-right parties – most notably the newAlternative for 
Germany 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/germanys-right-wing-afd-party-surges-to-new-high-as-concern-of-refugee-rises-a6810726.html>
, but also the old NPD – as well as in street protests (most notably by the
Pegida 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/newsbeat/article/30694252/why-are-thousands-of-germans-protesting-and-who-are-pegida>
 movement), and inviolent attacks on refugee homes 
<http://www.dw.com/en/report-five-times-more-attacks-on-refugee-homes-in-germany-in-2015/a-19011109>
.

The problem with populism | Cas Mudde
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/feb/17/problem-populism-syriza-podemos-dark-side-europe>
Banning the NPD would be seen as a powerful signal to all anti-immigrant 
groups and individuals within the country, as well as to concerned businesses 
and governments abroad, that Germany is still a militant democracy and is not 
“blind in the right eye”.

Which leaves the question: why does the political establishment think it will 
be successful now? Undoubtedly it hopes that the shock over the NSU will help, 
even if the link with the NPD is tenuous at best (ie,“personal connections” 
<http://www.dw.com/en/neo-nazi-murders-more-questions-than-answers/a-16354018> 
between members of the NPD and NSU). It will also hope that the judges will be 
influenced by the current political climate. But the main argument is that the 
NPD has radicalised even further since 2003: the German mediahas reported 
<http://www.spiegel.de/spiegel/print/d-83977212.html> for years that the party 
leadership is full of people with a neo-Nazi past. Even if this proves to be 
true, the main question of this court case, which undoubtedly will take several 
years, will be the same one that undermined its predecessor: will the court be 
able to clearly distinguish between party and state? Given the recent findings 
with regard to the NSU, that seems far from certain.

• This article has been corrected to make clear that the Bundesrat, rather 
than the Bundestag, finally asked the Federal constitutional court to ban the 
NPD, and Parliament’s upper, rather than lower house, argues that the party is 
antisemitic.

• The photograph and caption on this article were changed on 11 November 2016.

 