
Facebook COO Sheryl Sandberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/sheryl-sandberg> made some pretty bold 
statements at Davos about how social media could lead the fight against 
terrorism. By giving a platform to “counterspeech to the speech that is 
perpetuating hate,” she argued, Facebook could be an instrument for peace.

Facebook's Sheryl Sandberg: 'likes' can help stop Isis recruiters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/20/facebook-davos-isis-sheryl-sandberg>
The panel session was reported, across much of the internet, as “It’s snowy 
and cold in Switzerland, but Sheryl Sandberg wore a lightweight burgundy dress 
and matching high heels, with no tights.” The inference in some accounts seemed 
to be that Sandberg must be a bit dizzy, and didn’t realise that a conference 
held at 1,560m above sea level in the Swiss Alps in January might be chilly.

I can’t help thinking this an unlikely analysis of how a 46-year-old 
billionaire and global power player operates. In fact, Sandberg dressed with 
pure pragmatism.Davos <https://www.theguardian.com/business/davos> is the 
world’s power-dressing catwalk. It is to CEOs what the Paris haute couture 
shows are to Hollywood actresses. It is a conference from which images are 
beamed across the world, which is a clear business case for bringing your 
A-game to what you wear. Also, it’s not often you get dressed for work knowing 
that a selfie with Leonardo DiCaprio or Emma Watson is on the cards, and no one 
wants to mess that one up.

There is a maddening can’t-win-either-way unfairness in criticising Sandberg 
for not wearing warmer clothes – I am pretty sure that if she’d worn salopettes 
and moon boots, that would have grabbed the headlines even more firmly. (There 
is also frustrating ignorance about how women run their daily lives. The 
concept of having both heels for the office and a practical pair of shoes for 
travelling is par for the course in many offices but – because men don’t do the 
overflow bag thing – still not factored in to how we read a woman’s outfit.)

Sandberg, like all the men around her, power-dressed. She chose clothes to 
project competence, seniority, excellence. For a man, that means a suit and 
sturdy shoes; for a woman, it means a dress and heels. What Davos flags in 
stark relief is how unequal this power-dressing playing field is, and how that 
issue reflects more important ones. Just as the proportion of women in 
attendance flags up the too-slow progress of women’s representation at the top 
levels of industry – 18% of those at Davos this year were women, compared with 
17% last year and 16% the year before that, a glacial rate of change which does 
not suggest these self-proclaimed dynamos are throwing their full weight behind 
a movement towards equality – so the physical setting of Davos, its harsh 
climate and treacherously iced streets and general air of rugged, 
Revenant-esque manliness emphasises both how practical men’s trouser suits are 
in challenging conditions, and how impractical the women’s equivalent look is.

Sheryl Sandberg has a clear formula for what she wears: fitted dresses, 
medium-height heels, block colours in the blue-red-purple arc. Not yellow, not 
pink, no print. No jewellery apart from earrings. It is remarkably consistent. 
Interestingly, there is not a single sentence in her book, Lean In: Women, 
Work, and the Will to Lead, about what to wear. Her strategy is to neutralise 
this conversation with a consistent look which is easily recognisable as the 
uniform of the 21st century female in the public eye. It is a kind of bland, 
business-lounge glamour: the fitted dress, the court shoes, the colour palette, 
the clean lines and sleek polish are recognisable in women from the Duchess of 
Cambridge to Julia Louis-Dreyfus as Selina Meyer in Veep.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Fdavos-sheryl-sandberg-power-dressing-facebook-coo-swiss-winter-conference-high-heels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F316e39b5a7536617d0ad99ac44891c88ed4994a1%2F0_212_1784_1072%2F1784.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Get%20the%20Davos%20look%3A%20what%20Sheryl%20Sandberg%20teaches%20us%20about%20power%20dressing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Fdavos-sheryl-sandberg-power-dressing-facebook-coo-swiss-winter-conference-high-heels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Get%20the%20Davos%20look%3A%20what%20Sheryl%20Sandberg%20teaches%20us%20about%20power%20dressing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Fdavos-sheryl-sandberg-power-dressing-facebook-coo-swiss-winter-conference-high-heels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F316e39b5a7536617d0ad99ac44891c88ed4994a1%2F0_212_1784_1072%2F1784.jpg>
 Hillary Clinton at the Rochester Opera House on 22 January 2016. Photograph: 
Faith Ninivaggi/Reuters 
Women have good reason to stick to this formula. Sticking your head above the 
tailored-dress parapet is a risky business. Note how, as her campaign has 
gathered intensity,Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> has changed her sartorial 
tactics. A wardrobe once noted for its theatrically bright colours – trouser 
suits in mustard yellow, or kingfisher blue – has lost its flourish. Her suits 
now are usually navy, grey or black. The earrings and bold necklaces are 
absent. Fashion is a powerful communication tool but it is also a nuanced and 
interpretative one, and it seems Senator Clinton has ruled that the risks of 
being misinterpreted make fashion a game not worth playing.

Sandberg looks to me like a woman who can handle herself. (Anyway, she – along 
with all her male colleagues – is no doubt limo-ed from door to door.) If she 
can keep her footing so surely on the uneven playing field of business power 
dressing, the icy streets of Davos will have been a doddle.
 