
Comedy <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/comedy>

Rose Matafeo

With an appearance on Have I Got News for You?, and a forthcoming Soho theatre 
run, 24-year-old Kiwi Rose Matafeo’s star is in the ascendant. That won’t 
surprise anyone who witnessed her Edinburgh fringe debut last summer:her show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/21/rose-matafeo-review-pleasance-courtyard-edinburgh-fringe>
 wasn’t the finished article, but Matafeo’s talent hit you like a force-10 
gale. Excitable, chaotic and yet supremely in control; great voices, great 
jokes, both serious and silly; rocket-fuelled forward momentum – the woman has 
charisma to burn and we should see plenty more of her in 2017.

Al Porter
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fnew-talents-2017-stage-film-books-art-design-music-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa6d0abe37c3e29560060f8c0affd2ffee027275%2F2110_497_1026_1283%2F1026.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Get%20ready%2C%20%20here%20I%20come%3A%2020%20talents%20set%20to%20take%202017%20by%20storm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fnew-talents-2017-stage-film-books-art-design-music-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Get%20ready%2C%20%20here%20I%20come%3A%2020%20talents%20set%20to%20take%202017%20by%20storm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fnew-talents-2017-stage-film-books-art-design-music-tv%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa6d0abe37c3e29560060f8c0affd2ffee027275%2F2110_497_1026_1283%2F1026.jpg>
 Carrying on … Al Porter. Photograph: Murdo MacLeod for the Guardian 
You’d be forgiven for thinking we’d moved on from high-camp gay comics 
cracking double entendres, saying “Suit yourself!” and punctuating their jokes 
with “fabulous” skips in mid-air. That is until you clap eyes on 23-year-old 
Irish standupAl Porter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/26/al-porter-review-edinburgh-festival>
. Porter can’t quite make the old archetype feel fresh, but he certainly gives 
it vivacious – and seemingly authentic – life, as great gags, tales of 
working-class south Dublin, and fey renditions of Irish rebel songs combine to 
crowd-slaying effect. His life, by his own admission, comes across like a Carry 
On film, but Porter is skilled enough to remind you why we all (go on, admit 
it!) loved Carry On films the first time around.

Dance <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/dance>

Julie Cunningham

Julie Cunningham has long been one of the great interpreters of contemporary 
dance. Performing with the Merce Cunningham (no relation) andMichael Clark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/michael-clark> companies, she brought a 
preternatural clarity and intelligence to everything she danced. Now, as 
Cunningham turns choreographer, she brings that same clarity and craft to her 
work, but it’s at the service of her own distinctive and unexpectedly raw 
passions. In her forthcoming work To Be Me, which will be atthe Barbican in 
London <https://www.barbican.org.uk/theatre/event-detail.asp?ID=20252> in 
March, she immerses herself in the hip-hop furnace ofKate Tempest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/kate-tempest> poetry, exploring images of 
gender and identity through the myth of the blind prophet Tiresias while the 
companion piece of that programme is set to the music ofAnohni 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/anohni>. 

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fnew-talents-2017-stage-film-books-art-design-music-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F615dc20d0ac339e76c4b01dcb3175a7a0d2447e4%2F0_163_3550_2130%2F3550.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Get%20ready%2C%20%20here%20I%20come%3A%2020%20talents%20set%20to%20take%202017%20by%20storm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fnew-talents-2017-stage-film-books-art-design-music-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Get%20ready%2C%20%20here%20I%20come%3A%2020%20talents%20set%20to%20take%202017%20by%20storm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fnew-talents-2017-stage-film-books-art-design-music-tv%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F615dc20d0ac339e76c4b01dcb3175a7a0d2447e4%2F0_163_3550_2130%2F3550.jpg>
 Shapeshifter … Julie Cunningham, left, is turning choreographer for a show at 
the Barbican in March. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Theatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre>

Tamara Lawrance

When Tamara Lawrance plays Viola in Twelfth Night in February, it will mark 
her second appearance at the NT. Not bad for someone who graduated from Rada in 
2015. Since then it’s been quality all the way. At the NT she was eye-catching 
as the shimmying, minxy Dussie Mae in Dominic Cooke’s revival ofMa Rainey’s 
Black Bottom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/03/ma-raineys-black-bottom-review-august-wilson-national-theatre-electrifying-revival>
, while inUnreachable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jul/10/unreachable-review-matt-smith-anthony-neilson-royal-court>
 at the Royal Court she bought an unforgettable matter of fact directness to 
Natasha, a character capable of summoning the deepest emotion while feeling 
absolutely nothing at all. If you know the face, it’s probably from Peter 
Moffat’s BBC thrillerUndercover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/undercover-episode-by-episode>, in 
which she played the eldest daughter. If you don’t, you will soon.

Ellen McDougall

British theatre is full of bright young directors but few who have made their 
mark quite as distinctively asEllen McDougall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/sep/16/ellen-mcdougall-the-glass-menagerie-tennessee-williams>
 or with such broad, bold appeal, eye for detail or strong European aesthetic. 
Reviving Othello at the Sam Wanamaker in February before taking over as 
artistic director at the often career defining tiny Gate in London in March 
(Stephen Daldry and Erica Whyman are two previous incumbents), the 
self-effacing McDougall has applied what she’s learned about audience 
engagement fromdirecting panto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/nov/24/directors-panto-magic-sleeping-beauty-hackney-empire-cinderella-lyric>
 at the Lyric (Aladdin this year) or for kids at the Unicorn, with an 
impressive roster of contemporary productions that playfully marry content and 
form.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fnew-talents-2017-stage-film-books-art-design-music-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ad5be8ac5552a8cde28f22bbae394deb9969788%2F0_593_6123_2786%2F6123.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Get%20ready%2C%20%20here%20I%20come%3A%2020%20talents%20set%20to%20take%202017%20by%20storm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fnew-talents-2017-stage-film-books-art-design-music-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Get%20ready%2C%20%20here%20I%20come%3A%2020%20talents%20set%20to%20take%202017%20by%20storm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fnew-talents-2017-stage-film-books-art-design-music-tv%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ad5be8ac5552a8cde28f22bbae394deb9969788%2F0_593_6123_2786%2F6123.jpg>
 Playful … Aladdin, directed by Ellen McDougall. Photograph: Tristram Kenton 
for the Guardian 
Pop <https://www.theguardian.com/music/popandrock>

HMLTD

The London-based five-piece’s debut single and video Stained 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=syfZU4kGiSE> suggested a dissolute shock-rock 
troupe in the mould of Fat White Family, but that’s only part of what they do. 
Their gift is for mixing together different eras of rock history, from points 
when the underground was pushing towards the overground – glam-era Bowie, punk, 
the new romantics – into something that feels their own. Which means that when 
you see them live (which you really should) every song sounds as if it’s being 
performed by a different band. There’s a compelling, theatrical brilliance 
about them: no matter that something this artful is only developed by 
contrivance, they feel beautifully natural. Not so much born to run as born to 
strut.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsyfZU4kGiSE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsyfZU4kGiSE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsyfZU4kGiSE&media=>
Watch HMLTD’s Stained on the group’s YouTube channel 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=syfZU4kGiSE> 
Maggie Rogers

Maggie Rogers came to notice last summer when a video surfaced 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TyimCGEkiUc> of Pharrell Williams joining her 
in a university masterclass, as her trackAlaska 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PNWsW6c6t8g> played. She gets into a slightly 
awkward seated groove, while he looks faintly astonished. “Wow,” he says at the 
end. “I have no notes for that, because it’s singular.” He may be overstating 
things a little, but Alaska didn’t sound like something knocked up for an 
undergraduate project. It turned out she had form – she released two folk 
albums while in high school in Maryland, but now she’s poised for the next 
level. She plays her first UK gigs in February, at which we’ll be able to tell 
if the oddly vulnerable yetfreakishly confident songs 
<https://soundcloud.com/maggierogers/dog-years> she’s put out so far are 
flukes, or whether she’s the real deal.
 ‘Wow’ … Maggie Rogers and Pharrell Williams. Photograph: 
vimeo.com/netandpaperaustria 
Opera <https://www.theguardian.com/music/classicalmusicandopera>

Polly Graham

The young director been catching eyes for several years with productions for 
Barefoot Opera <http://www.barefootopera.com/> (which she co-founded), Welsh 
National Youth Opera <https://www.wno.org.uk/wno-youth-opera> and Independent 
Opera <http://www.independentopera.com/>. Last summer’s take on Peter Maxwell 
Davies’sKommilitonen! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/31/kommilitonen-review-wno-youth-opera-peter-maxwell-davies-memo-arts-barry>
 was hailed as brilliant and bold, November’s powerful production of Hartmann’s 
tricky anti-war raritySimplicius Simplicissimus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/15/simplicius-simplicissimus-review-lilian-baylis-studio-london-independent-opera>
 for Independent Opera showcased her imagination and confidence. After studying 
directing at Rada she was mentored by David Pountney as the Genesis assistant 
director at Welsh National Opera; her final project in that role was an 
informal performance piece celebrating the unsung heroes of the opera world – 
the stage crew. Next spring the 32-year-old reaches a wider audience with her 
debut production for the WNO main stage. She’s directing another rarity, Swiss 
composer Frank Martin’sLe Vin Herbé 
<https://www.wno.org.uk/event/le-vin-herb%C3%A9>, an intimate version of the 
Tristan and Isolde story that offers a very different take on the legendary 
lovers to that of Wagner. 
• Wales Millennium Centre, Cardiff, and touring 
<https://www.wno.org.uk/event/le-vin-herb%C3%A9>, 16 Feb-25 April. 

TV <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/tv-and-radio>

Nathaniel Martello-White 

In Guerrilla 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/20/idris-elba-sky-drama-guerilla-luther>
, a Showtime-Sky Atlantic four-parter about revolutionary politics in London in 
the 1970s, Nathaniel Martello-White is again alongside Denise Gough, after both 
had career-breakthrough roles as rehab patients in Duncan Macmillan’s play
People, Places and Things 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/sep/02/people-places-and-things-review-acting-addiction-denise-gough>
, a National Theatre and West End hit in 2015-16. That role was the 
highest-profile stage work so far for a south Londoner who, since graduating 
from Rada in 2006, has built up a varied CV that also includes acting on TV 
(Silk), movies (Red Tails) and playwriting (Torn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/sep/16/torn-review-royal-court-london> 
was well-received this year at London’s Royal Court).

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fnew-talents-2017-stage-film-books-art-design-music-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe6d5c2956bceabc53a1ec6501bee74ac3f5ed0b3%2F0_23_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Get%20ready%2C%20%20here%20I%20come%3A%2020%20talents%20set%20to%20take%202017%20by%20storm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fnew-talents-2017-stage-film-books-art-design-music-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Get%20ready%2C%20%20here%20I%20come%3A%2020%20talents%20set%20to%20take%202017%20by%20storm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fnew-talents-2017-stage-film-books-art-design-music-tv%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe6d5c2956bceabc53a1ec6501bee74ac3f5ed0b3%2F0_23_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
 Revolutionary … Nathaniel Martello-White with Denise Dough in People, Places 
and Things. Photograph: Johan Persson 
Jess Brittain 

A six-part drama for streaming on BBC3, Clique is a psychological thriller set 
on a university campus, a setting that TV has generally used for comedy-drama 
(A Very Peculiar Practice; Fresh Meat). The 28-year-old Jess Brittain created 
the show and leads an all-female writing team that also includes Kirstie Swain 
and Milly Thomas. Jess is the latest product of a TV scriptwriting dynasty, 
having started on the teen dramaSkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2012/mar/08/skins-tv-sorely-missed>
 in a writers’ room led by her father, Bryan Elsley, that also included her 
brother, Jamie Brittain. Her first professional writing was Skins scripts and a 
novelisation.


Molly Windsor 

Child stars more often than not disappear from showbiz, and this seemed to 
have happened to the Nottinghamshire schoolgirl who made a significant impact 
as a troubled 11-year-old foster child in Samantha Morton’s 2009 movieThe 
Unloved <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/feb/18/the-unloved-film-review>. 
After a few more roles, including in the filmOranges and Sunshine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/mar/31/oranges-and-sunshine-review>, 
Windsor took time out for academic and acting studies, but is now back on 
screen in a high-profile role as one of the victims in a BBC docudrama about 
the nine men who were imprisoned for a combined 77 years for running a 
paedophile ring in Rochdale between 2008-12.


Film <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/film>

Angourie Rice

There’s a quiet tradition of Australian actors masking their accents and 
making a seamless switch to Hollywood: recent examples include Chris Hemsworth, 
Mia Wasikowska and Margot Robbie. Angourie Rice is the next one coming down the 
pipe, and she hasn’t even done a single episode of Neighbours. Instead, Rice, 
who turned 16 on 1 January, jumped straight to the big league by playing Ryan 
Gosling’s feisty daughter inThe Nice Guys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/15/the-nice-guys-review-russell-crowe-and-ryan-gosling-cannes>
, Shane Black’s attempt to conjure up the sleazy, louche atmosphere of the 70s 
detective pic. She clearly aced the assignment, so has since been handed a role 
(as yet unspecified) in the new Spider-Man film; of equal import is a key role 
in Sofia Coppola’sThe Beguiled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/15/colin-farrell-sofia-coppola-remake-the-beguiled-clint-eastwood>
, where she will play the 12-year-old girl who rescues Union soldier Colin 
Farrell.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fnew-talents-2017-stage-film-books-art-design-music-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb210224e98c4eab8d927550e4ebc7567fe86c86%2F0_0_4256_2553%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Get%20ready%2C%20%20here%20I%20come%3A%2020%20talents%20set%20to%20take%202017%20by%20storm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fnew-talents-2017-stage-film-books-art-design-music-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Get%20ready%2C%20%20here%20I%20come%3A%2020%20talents%20set%20to%20take%202017%20by%20storm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fnew-talents-2017-stage-film-books-art-design-music-tv%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb210224e98c4eab8d927550e4ebc7567fe86c86%2F0_0_4256_2553%2F4256.jpg>
 To the rescue … Angourie Rice, here with Nathan Phillips in the film These 
Final Hours. Photograph: David Dare Parker 
Ali Fazal

An Indian actor with a middlingly successful background in Bollywood (a 
sideman role in smash hit3 Idiots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/jan/07/bollywood-global-influence>, 
leads in smaller scale stuff such as Khamoshiyan, Fukrey and Always Kabhi 
Kabhi), Ali Fazal is shortly to get a career rocket boost from his role 
opposite Judi Dench in the forthcomingVictoria and Abdul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/17/judi-dench-queen-victoria-and-abdul-stephen-frears-film>
. Directed by Stephen Frears, it’s about the real-life friendship between an 
elderly Queen Victoria and Abdul Karim, the attendant and clerk she became fond 
of after he joined her staff in 1887. With Frears’s track record of extracting 
brilliant performances, Fazal couldn’t be in better hands to show off his 
range; not something you might have said after his brief appearance in Fast and 
Furious 7. Expect him to become a major crossover figure in the near future.


Architecture <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture>

Apparata

Having only returned to London to formally set up their practice last year, 
after a period working and teaching in Switzerland, Nicholas Lobo Brennan and 
Astrid Smitham ofApparata <http://apparata.ch/> have already made their mark as 
one of the most interesting young architecture firms in the capital. Recent 
projects include the elegance-on-a-budget conversion of theOld Manor Park 
Library <http://bowarts.org/studios/old-manor-park-library> in Newham into 
artists’ studios and a community space, as well as the equally sensitive 
transformation of a derelict farmhouse on theBecontree Estate in Dagenham 
<http://createlondon.org/event/the-white-house/> into a public arts space. They 
are now working on their first new-build project, with the east London arts 
agency Create, for a bold new artists’ housing block in Barking, bringing a 
refreshing Swiss rigour to the plans and a quirky approach to structure and 
materials.

Graphic novels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/series/graphic-novel-of-the-month>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fnew-talents-2017-stage-film-books-art-design-music-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6441e14ded2de41cdbeb9887bd803e42f9a92c9e%2F0_58_3407_4547%2F3407.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Get%20ready%2C%20%20here%20I%20come%3A%2020%20talents%20set%20to%20take%202017%20by%20storm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fnew-talents-2017-stage-film-books-art-design-music-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Get%20ready%2C%20%20here%20I%20come%3A%2020%20talents%20set%20to%20take%202017%20by%20storm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fnew-talents-2017-stage-film-books-art-design-music-tv%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6441e14ded2de41cdbeb9887bd803e42f9a92c9e%2F0_58_3407_4547%2F3407.jpg>
 On solid ice … a scene from Tillie Walden’s forthcoming graphic novel Spinning 
Tillie Walden

Often, the strength of Tillie Walden <http://tilliewalden.tumblr.com/>’s 
comics comes from what is left unsaid (or undrawn); the 20-year-old Texan’s 
clean, sparse yet detailed illustrations are reminiscent of Astro Boy creator 
Osama Tezuka (and she is a fan). Her first book, The End of Summer, followed an 
ill boy and his giant cat as they weather a family drama in their castle. Her 
second, I Love This Part, was an autobiographical love story between two girls. 
And coming out in 2017, her third book, Spinning, is a memoir about her teenage 
years as a figure skater. In another writer, the sheer variety of stories might 
suggest a creator still finding their voice; with Walden, no matter the story, 
you’re in safe hands.


Books <https://www.theguardian.com/books>

Nathan Hill

Nathan Hill’s alarmingly good debut The Nix 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/nix.html> is both a Great American Novel as 
well as a great American novel: his 600-page burglar-thumper deftly teams the 
life of a bored college teacher and his relationship with his mother with a 
panoramic, astute commentary on America’s media and the failures of capitalism. 
Hill is already being compared toThomas Pynchon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/thomaspynchon>, David Foster Wallace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/sep/12/david-foster-wallace-my-teacher>
 andJohn Irving 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/03/john-irving-interview-avenue-of-mysteries-politics-wrestling-great-american-novel>
; Irving himself compares Hill to Dickens. The Nix came out in the US in 2016, 
and is out in the UK in 2017; reading it when Trump is at the helm will 
undoubtedly make the novel ache with all-new relevance.

Art <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign>

Paul Kindersley
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLOnJYku22uw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLOnJYku22uw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLOnJYku22uw&media=>
A typically saucy video from Paul Kindersley’s YouTube channel, 
thebritisharecumming <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LOnJYku22uw> 
“Artist, stalker, drawer, makeup enthusiast, pervert and video broadcaster,” 
reads Paul Kindersley’sonline profile 
<https://www.instagram.com/paulkindersley/>. His preferred medium is his own 
body, having posted hundreds of images of himself in innumerable poses, guises 
and situations (most of which he concocts at home) on Twitter, Facebook and 
Instagram. Using paint, make-up and costumes Kindersley’s work is a kind of 
free-access public sketchbook. HisYouTube channel 
<https://www.youtube.com/user/thebritisharecumming> is also full of alarming 
and often hilarious and impromptu videos. He is the son of a family of 
traditional and much respected stone-carvers, but his work is an irreverent 
queering of British modernist tradition. Whenever he deals with reclining 
figures, he finds it hard not to think of Henry Moore. Moore in drag, now 
there’s a thought.

Folk music <https://www.theguardian.com/music/folk>

Lisa O’Neill

Lisa O’Neill’s distinctive voice first came to wider attention on 
Yorkston/Thorne/Khan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/14/yorkston-thorne-khan-everything-sacred-review-bravely-original-indian-folk-jazz>
’s 2016 album Something Sacred with her guest spot on their delicious cover of 
Ivor Cutler’s Little Black Buzzer; then, in May, she was a memorable part of 
the Imagining Ireland tour. She’s already a star in her native Ireland, where 
her third album,Pothole in the Sky 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/culture/music/album-of-the-week-lisa-o-neill-pothole-in-the-sky-1.2618991>
, won rave reviews. It’s a quiet gem, its simplicity complements the rich 
poetry of her narratives – songs of love, loss and longing that feel rooted in 
the myths and magic of rural Ireland. There’s a fragility and directness to her 
delivery that means her intimate songs lodge directly in your heart. Catch her 
opening for the Divine Comedy touring Europe in January and February, or solo 
at London’s Slaughtered Lamb on 24 February.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DY8Y1M0PWAvA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DY8Y1M0PWAvA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DY8Y1M0PWAvA&media=>
Listen to Lisa O’Neill’s Pothole in the Sky on her YouTube channel 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y8Y1M0PWAvA> 
Jazz <https://www.theguardian.com/music/jazz>

Binker and Moses

They won three breakout act prizes in 2016, but though the gritty 
sax-and-drums music of LondonersBinker Golding and Moses Boyd 
<http://www.londonjazznews.com/2015/07/lp-review-binker-and-moses-dem-ones.html>
 has been bubbling under since they started jamming together during downtimes 
in singer Zara McFarlane’s band, next year they look like rising from best 
newcomers to the real creative deal. Part of a jazz generation that absorbed 
hip-hop grooves by osmosis, they also owe plenty to jazz’s classic sax/drums 
partnerships, notably that of John Coltrane and Elvin Jones. The pair’s 
upcoming album takes the story further, featuring guests as prestigious as the 
indefatigable saxophone innovator Evan Parker.

World music <https://www.theguardian.com/music/worldmusic>

Bargou 08

The Bargou valley is an isolated area of north-west Tunisia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/tunisia>, hidden away between the mountains 
and the Algerian border, with its own culture and music. Singer Nidhal Yahyaoui 
grew up here, listening to the local songs which now provide the music for an 
intriguing and originalnorth African folk-rock 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J6_jnkhD0u8> album in which he matches local 
instruments including the oud-likewtar and gasba flute against synthesisers and 
percussion. Recorded in his family home in the region, it’s a no-nonsense set 
dominated by his rousing vocal work. Bargou 08’s debut album, Targ, is released 
on Glitterbeat on 17 February with live UK dates to follow.
 