
Speed limits of 20mph are being seen increasingly on residential streets, and 
they’re popular:recent Department of Transport research 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/481877/british-social-attitudes-survey-2014.pdf>
 showed 73% of people are in favour. Campaigning from groups like20’s Plenty 
for Us <http://www.20splenty.org/> and Living Streets 
<http://www.livingstreets.org.uk/> has paid off, with support growing 
significantly.

Slower speeds are necessary to reduce injuries 
<http://content.tfl.gov.uk/20-mph-zones-and-road-safety-in-london.pdf>. But 
even if 20mph limits can be properly enforced – a big question – would this be 
enough? Do they, alone, create pleasant, liveable neighbourhoods, where lots of 
people will choose to walk or cycle? Do we want to see a steady stream of 
traffic in residential streets, even travelling at 20mph, or should our goals 
be more radical?

 Recent guidance from Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents (Rospa) 
and Public Health England 
<http://www.rospa.com/rospaweb/docs/advice-services/public-health/rs1-research.pdf>
 states: “There is a road safety argument for reducing [motor] traffic volume, 
and there is also the potential to do so.” Slow-moving, large vehicles like 
lorries and buses can still kill because of their sheer weight.

 And it’s not just large vehicles that are the problem. As Rospa points out, 
each car journey creates additional risk to others, even if lower speeds reduce 
that risk.

 More cars on residential streets also means places which are less 
human-friendly 
<http://eprints.uwe.ac.uk/15513/1/WTPP_Hart_ParkhurstJan2011prepub.pdf>, 
particularly for the old and the young, who struggle to navigate busy streets 
on foot and often have lower access to cars.

 A recent study 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1353829202000692> found the 
dominance of cars on residential roads has substantially damaged young people’s 
quality of life in urban and rural areas.

My colleagues at the Policy Studies Institute 
<http://www.psi.org.uk/children_mobility> have studied the long-term decline in 
children’s independent mobility, including through cycling. They concluded that 
improving road safety and reducing car dependency is key to winning back 
children’s freedom to roam.

My own research 
<http://www.tlo.tbm.tudelft.nl/fileadmin/Faculteit/TBM/Onderzoek/EJTIR/Back_issues/15.2/2015_02_00.pdf>
 found many parents might trust their children to cycle, but don’t trust 
drivers to take care around them. This is backed up by experience. Often 
parents have suffered scary incidents on routes which were chosen because they 
should be more quiet than main roads but are too often used as rat runs.

As one parent explained:

I had to push my child off her bike between parked cars in order to stop us 
both being run over by a driver coming at speed in the opposite direction.

 Increasingly, research into such ‘near miss’ incidents 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2214140515002236> show they 
can have a substantial impact on the choices people make.

 They are common: 1%-2% of all overtakes give a cyclist under 50cm of 
clearance, according toa recent study 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0001457513004636>. In 
residential streets carrying thousands of vehicles per day, that means regular 
cyclists experiencing terrifying close passes on a weekly basis. No wonder 
people don’t want to let their children ride bikes – or even walk across the 
road – in such conditions.

And if there was no rat running, many local streets could be extremely quiet. 
DfT trip rate statistics 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/statistical-data-sets/nts99-travel-by-region-and-area-type-of-residence>
 allow us to estimate how much traffic there might be on residential roads 
without people using them as short cuts. Even including deliveries and visitors 
we’re generally talking about a few hundred cars a day or fewer. Such streets 
could be places where cars really are guests, and children again walk and cycle 
freely.

 Controlling this by putting gates to prevent through traffic, can be 
controversial 
<http://lovingdalston.co.uk/2016/01/london-fields-road-closure-row-rumbles-on/>.

 One reason is that we’ve got used to being able to drive wherever we please, 
even if it means our children can no longer leave the house alone. But there’s 
also concern that cutting traffic volumes in residential streets will displace 
the problem elsewhere, maybe increase safety issues overall.

 New analysis of road injury data 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/road-accidents-and-safety-statistics>
 helps allay some fears, suggesting that moving traffic from minor to major 
roads can reduce pedestrian injuries. In urban areas, driving along a minor 
road causes around 50% more risk to pedestrians than driving the same distance 
along an A road.

 In 2014, motor vehicles injured 7,179 pedestrians on urban A roads and 14,168 
pedestrians on minor urban roads. The distances driven on the two road types 
are 49.3bn and 64.8bn vehicle miles respectively.

 So, stopping rat-running can reduce pedestrian injuries. Making motorists use 
major roads won’t even necessarily mean more miles driven, because rat runs are 
generallychosen to avoid congestion rather than reduce mileage 
<http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s13177-013-0075-7#page-1>. Often that 
doesn’t even cut a journey time 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2646812/Why-shortcuts-dont-save-time-Using-rat-runs-bypass-gridlock-makes-commute-LONGER-claims-research.html>
.

 What about air pollution? Air quality and active travel expert Dr Audrey de 
Nazelle <http://www.imperial.ac.uk/people/anazelle> said:

Giving active travellers a network of streets away from motor traffic helps 
them minimise exposure to air pollution, important because their inhalation 
rate is higher than for passive modes.

Cutting traffic on the residential roads will improve air quality on these 
streets. Will it increase traffic and hence air pollution on major roads in the 
surrounding areas? Probably a little – but if the programme is ambitious and 
many residential streets reduce vehicular access, there will be overall less 
motor traffic in the area, so improvements in air quality overall.

 Encouragingly, research has found that reducing space for traffic often 
reduces traffic volumes 
<http://nacto.org/docs/usdg/traffic_impact_highway_capacity_cairns.pdf> overall 
in an area, partly because creating more pleasant streets means people are more 
likely to walk and cycle for shorter trips.

 On the main roads, there’s more we should be doing to improve safety and 
quality of life: from wider pavements, more pedestrian crossings, cycle tracks 
and tree planting, to 20mph limits andair quality management areas 
<http://uk-air.defra.gov.uk/aqma/>, and broader policy measures to cut the use 
of diesel engines. Many of these policies will be popular: there ishigh support 
<https://www.britishcycling.org.uk/campaigning/article/20160301-campaigning-news-New-poll-reveals-overwhelming-public-support-for-new-cycling-infrastructure-0>
 for cycle tracks on main roads, for example. Along with this could and should 
involve ways to return residential streets to their residents, walking or 
cycling if they choose.

Dr Rachel Aldred is senior lecturer in transport at Westminster University, 
specialising in sustainable travel.
 