
Had you arrived at St Andrew’s on Saturday having not read any news in the 
previous week, you would not have known Birmingham had a new manager. As 
Gianfranco Zola walked towards the dugout there was no fanfare, no 
introduction, no real hearty welcome from the home supporters. Some handshakes, 
a couple of autographs, a few more photographers than usual, but the fans of 
Birmingham did not greet theirnew leader 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/birmingham-city-sack-manager-gary-rowett>
 like a new hero, arriving in town to save the day.

That is at least partly because not many of them can really work out why Zola 
is there. Gary Rowett, the manager whotook over two days after an 8-0 defeat 
left them second bottom of the Championship in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/oct/27/gary-rowett-birmingham-new-manager>
, but departed with Birmingham as promotion contenders, was sacked last week, 
to the surprise of most. Much of Rowett’s time coincided with the club going 
throughone of the most protracted takeover processes in recent memory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/17/birmingham-city-championship-takeover-trillion-trophy-asia>
, so when the new owner, Trillion Trophy Asia, finally gained control this 
year, Birmingham might have expected a little more stability. Perhaps not.

Brighton deny Gianfranco Zola a warming start for Birmingham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/17/birmingham-city-brighton-hove-albion-championship-match-report>
Rowett’s success may ultimately have been his undoing. Reportedly one of the 
main reasons for his sacking was that he was making eyes at other clubs, and 
those eyes were mutual. His performance was such that he probably would not 
have been at St Andrew’s for very long anyway, and to an extent there is a 
logic to getting ahead of the game, that if you think a manager is going to 
leave soon, you might as well be proactive and bring in a replacement at your 
own convenience. Yet it also smacks of a new owner which did not know what it 
had and thought it could do much better.

Rowett was not perfect. His signings erred on the iffy side of ‘mixed’, his 
football could be functional and he was sometimes quite cautious. But the key 
to any change of management is that you need to be pretty sure the new guy is 
better than the old guy. Zola’s last two managerial jobs have been at Cagliari, 
where he lasted three months, and at Al-Arabi in Qatar, who sacked him after a 
season in which they lost nearly half their games.

Quite apart from that, changing managers during a Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> season is quite a risky 
business: of the last 30 teams to win promotion, only four have done so with a 
different manager from the one they began the campaign with, and one of those 
was Sunderland in 2006-7, for whom Niall Quinn managed only the first six games.

Few conclusions can be drawn from Zola’s first game, a 2-1 defeat by Brighton, 
the second-best team in the division who snatched a stoppage-time winner, but 
it was notable that afterwards Zola spoke a lot about his side sitting too deep 
in the closing stages, yet he did not do a great deal about it, as it happened. 
The concern with Zola, a man who brought out tea and coffee to the reporters 
camped outside his home after West Ham sacked him in 2010, is that he is a nice 
guy who does not quite have the managerial nous.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fgianfranco-zola-brave-face-losing-start-birmingham-city-brighton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbddcc8fdc1f8dd04e2ce46172d60066403d13773%2F0_26_5514_3399%2F5514.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gianfranco%20Zola%20puts%20on%20brave%20face%20after%20hospital%20pass%20at%20Birmingham%20%7C%20Nick%20Miller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fgianfranco-zola-brave-face-losing-start-birmingham-city-brighton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gianfranco%20Zola%20puts%20on%20brave%20face%20after%20hospital%20pass%20at%20Birmingham%20%7C%20Nick%20Miller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fgianfranco-zola-brave-face-losing-start-birmingham-city-brighton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbddcc8fdc1f8dd04e2ce46172d60066403d13773%2F0_26_5514_3399%2F5514.jpg>
 Brighton players celebrate after Glenn Murray’s last-gasp winner. Photograph: 
Richard Calver/Rex/Shutterstock 
After the game on Saturday Zola had the faint look of Gil, the downtrodden 
character from the Simpsons on whom misfortune constantly falls and he cannot 
catch a break. It was impossible not to feel sorry for him as he thanked the 
fans for their welcome (while the red carpet was not rolled out, they did at 
least sing his name), and vowed that things will get better than the fairly 
stale performance and late concession of a lead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/17/birmingham-city-championship-takeover-trillion-trophy-asia>
.

“I promise we’re going to work very hard,” Zola said. “I know the 
circumstances are not easy but we are professional and we have to do the best 
for this club. With that attitude and type of performance, we’re not going to 
lose many games.” His optimism was endearing, as most things Zola does are. But 
it was impossible not to think that he has been given a serious hospital pass.

The problem Birmingham have created for themselves is that before Rowett’s 
dismissal, nobody would have been excessively irked had they not won promotion 
this season. Now they might be. Not only have the club spuriously dismissed a 
talented young manager; they have also appointed an inferior replacement and 
subsequently put extra pressure on him to prove the decision correct and upset 
a big chunk of the club’s support.

As first big decisions go, for Trillion Trophy Asia this could be a whopper of 
a mistake.

Talking points

• Away from the Zola issue, there was something entirely more unpleasant in 
the St Andrew’s stands on Saturday. A small but vocal (vocal enough to be 
clearly heard in the press box, 70-odd yards away) section of the Birmingham 
support broke into a homophobic chant midway through the second-half, singing 
“It’s all gone queer over there,” at the travelling support. Brighton fans will 
presumably be used to such honking cretins by now, but they shouldn’t have to 
be. The FA recently backed an anti-homophobia campaign which encouraged players 
and fans to wear rainbow laces in their boots, which is grand and a start, but 
that’s all. The next step is actual action, and while of course it’s tricky to 
pick out individuals in cases like this, it’s not impossible. The sooner 
banning orders are given to these witless fractions of people, and it’s made 
clear they and their poisonous abuse are not welcome in football grounds, the 
better.

• Which is the bigger surprise in the top six of the Championship: Leeds, or 
Reading? Garry Monk deserves a big stack of Christmas presents for simply 
surviving this long under Massimo Cellino, not least to be the first man to 
make Leeds serious promotion challengers since Cellino arrived. The only team 
they have lost to in the last two months have been Newcastle and Brighton, the 
current top two, and their victory over Brentford on Saturday meant they have 
only two fewer victories than in the whole of last season. Jaap Stam arrived at 
Reading with no previous managerial experience but has them in third place, a 
position they held briefly at the start of last season but quickly slid down 
the table. Both they and Leeds look likely to stick around near the top a 
little longer this time.

• Southend giving Nile Ranger a three-and-half-year contract always looked 
like one of the more maverick moves in League One, and so it proved when the 
striker was charged with‘conspiracy to defraud and conspiracy to commit money 
laundering’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/nile-ranger-southend-united-charged-fraud-money-laundering>
 last week, something he apparently forgot to inform his employers about when 
he signed that deal. Even for Ranger, this was a flamboyant addition to his 
off-pitch CV, but such is the way with these things, few will care if he scores 
goals on it. Which he did at the weekend, bagging the opener in Southend’s 2-0 
win over Oldham. Weird old world.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fgianfranco-zola-brave-face-losing-start-birmingham-city-brighton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52fc4b33169fbfaca0d4016317f8e5b92cbef0d2%2F0_169_2784_1671%2F2784.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gianfranco%20Zola%20puts%20on%20brave%20face%20after%20hospital%20pass%20at%20Birmingham%20%7C%20Nick%20Miller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fgianfranco-zola-brave-face-losing-start-birmingham-city-brighton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gianfranco%20Zola%20puts%20on%20brave%20face%20after%20hospital%20pass%20at%20Birmingham%20%7C%20Nick%20Miller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fgianfranco-zola-brave-face-losing-start-birmingham-city-brighton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52fc4b33169fbfaca0d4016317f8e5b92cbef0d2%2F0_169_2784_1671%2F2784.jpg>
 Nile Ranger and Southend players after his goal at Oldham. Photograph: 
Brady/ProSports/Rex/Shutterstock 
• 10,084 fans were at Saturday’s clash between Doncaster and Grimsby. 4,012 of 
those were from Grimsby. That is for a mid-table League Two side. Impressive. 
Most impressive. Alas for the travelling fans, they lost 1-0 … but they did 
have a nice day out in Doncaster.

• In similar news, the hearty band of 96 
<https://twitter.com/YTFC/status/810441942362374144> who followed Yeovil to 
Carlisle, a 660-mile round trip, were offered some nourishment when they made 
it to Brunton Park, enjoying a free pint and a pie thanks to the £300 that 
their manager Darren Way, assistant Terry Skiverton and the squad put behind 
the bar. “It’s important we give something back,” said Way. “I know the players 
and myself felt it important to show our appreciation with them travelling 
virtually the length of the country to follow us.” Again, it was not the most 
rewarding trip, as Carlisle won 2-1 and remain in second place.
 