
The supreme court judges who will decide whether the government has the right 
to trigger article 50 without a parliamentary vote have been disgracefully 
vilified, according to the lead claimant in the case.


Gina Miller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/gina-miller-the-woman-behind-the-article-50-legal-challenge>
, whosedramatic victory in the high court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/parliament-must-trigger-brexit-high-court-rules>
 led to accusations that she and the judiciary were trying to thwart the will 
of the people, also claimed newspaper coverage had incited violence against her.

Speaking to the Guardian before the first day of the government’s appeal 
against the decision, she said she could no longer travel on public transport, 
work in her office, or even spend a normal weekend with her family.

But she was most exercised about fresh attacks on the judges before the trial 
has begun.

“I think it is such a dangerous road to be going down to be attacking the 
judges and their integrity and their independence,” she added, arguing that 
they had a right and duty to operate independently of politicians and the 
media. “They are being vilified and it is totally disgraceful.”

Miller’s comments come as the attorney general, Jeremy Wright QC, prepares to 
assert the government’s authority to trigger Brexit and its supremacy over 
parliament in international affairs.

One of the most significant constitutional cases ever to be heard at the 
supreme court, starting on Monday, could also strain the UK’s devolution 
settlement as theScottish and Welsh governments weigh in behind Miller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/01/government-lawyers-dismiss-scotland-wales-article-50-devolution-supreme-court>
.
Article 50 explainer 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=2f00ae48-ade6-4d35-ace1-1024cc0ac8d8>
With the most senior law officers in England, Wales, Scotland and Northern 
Ireland all taking part in proceedings, the government’s ability to push 
through far-reaching political changes that affect the rights of UK citizens in 
the devolved administrations without consulting parliament will also be 
challenged.

Miller criticised the coverage leading up to the case, which has included an 
article from theDaily Mail <https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailymail> naming 
each of the judges and outlining their views, marital status, incomes and the 
cost of their family homes.

The article was headed: “11 unaccountable individuals will consider a case 
that could thwart the will of the majority on Brexit. The Mail makes no apology 
for revealing their views – and many have links to Europe.”

The coverage follows the newspaper’s controversial front page after the high 
court ruling in which itbranded the three judges who made the decision “enemies 
of the people” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/04/enemies-of-the-people-british-newspapers-react-judges-brexit-ruling>
.

Miller said she had received a letter from a man who said his elderly German 
mother, who had fled the Nazis, had told him the article had sent “shivers down 
her back” because it was so reminiscent of an Adolf Hitler claim in the 1930s.

Miller said she had been taken aback by the personal threats she had received 
as a result of taking the case.

“I don’t go anywhere – it has been a complete poisoned chalice,” she said, 
adding that she had made formal complaints about articles and comments attached 
to them.

“It is a crime to incite violence against someone,” she said, adding that 
politicians were also slow to criticise the attacks.


She said that newspaper guidelines did not allow journalists to write about 
people being “foreign-born” as they did about her, adding that she was a UK 
citizen from birth.

“You don’t see ‘foreign-born Boris Johnson’,” she added, calling it 
“disgraceful”.

But Miller said she had no regrets because of the scale of support she had 
received including hundreds of messages from people who had experienced hate 
crime on the street.

“I’ve had stories of people speaking another language at a bus stop and being 
spat on and kicked – it’s horrifying.”

Miller argued that the case was not about stopping Brexit, but simply ensuring 
that a precedent was not set under which the government could bypass parliament 
on any issue it chose.

She also said she was baffled that the government had taken the case to the 
supreme court, because that had allowed the Scottish and Welsh governments to 
raise the devolution settlement. They had added unnecessary “twists and turns”, 
she said.

Miller said the key was that Britain did not have a written constitution so 
triggering article 50 without a parliamentary vote would set a dangerous 
precedent. “We would be undoing 400 years of democracy and sovereignty if the 
government were allowed to use this royal prerogative,” she said.

It came as a lawyer representing the second claimant, Deir Dos Santos – who 
voted for Brexit, called for calm ahead of the hearing, warning that security 
guards had been called in because of the threat.

David Greene, a solicitor with Edwin Coe LLP, who represents Dos Santos, said: 
“It is a sad day when space needs to be made at the highest civil court for 
security guards for parties and party anonymity is required to protect 
litigants seeking their legitimate right to bring this matter to court.

“The Santos and Miller claim is and has always been about the process for exit 
from the EU. No more no less. Many see it as an attempt to forestall the exit 
but Mr Santos voted for Brexit and supports that goal.


“He and we call for calm ahead of the hearing and the decision ... Neither the 
parties, including my client, nor judges, are the enemies of the people. The 
court process and an independent judiciary are the hallmark of a democracy. It 
would be a sad day indeed when an executive can ride roughshod over the 
judiciary, portrayed as anti-democratic. To the contrary, we should be 
celebrating the court process and the rule of law.”


A senior government legal source said their approach would be to stress the 
wider constitutional importance of the case, which could have an impact on the 
use of the royal prerogative in future matters of foreign affairs and defence.


It is understood ministers felt the first hearings had been framed too much by 
the claimants going first, but the order will be reversed in the appeal, giving 
the government the opportunity to shape its case in a different way while 
making essentially the same argument.

The legal source said the government would have been unlikely to defend the 
case so vigorously if it was just about one parliamentary vote on triggering 
article 50, which ministers are confident they would win.

However, there is a strong feeling about the point of principle that the royal 
prerogative should be preserved for such decisions to prevent future 
parliamentary votes about every single change involving international treaties.

Ministers are already considering the possibilities for legislation to 
preserve the royal prerogative if the ruling goes against the government, 
meaning the executive would much more frequently have to consult parliament on 
international affairs.

Both the Welsh and Scottish governments will argue that the earlier high court 
judgment, which said that only parliament had the power to trigger article 50, 
should be upheld.


The counsel general for Wales, Mick Antoniw, said: “While Brexit will happen, 
the UK government cannot trigger it by overriding the British constitution. We 
heard a lot about ‘taking back control’ during the referendum campaign. 
Ignoring the governance arrangements of the UK is not a good start to that 
process.

“Leaving the EU will lead to significant changes to the devolution settlement 
in Wales. Only the UK parliament can make those changes, which should be with 
the agreement of the national assembly for Wales. The UK government does not 
have the power to short-circuit this important mechanism for dialogue between 
the democratically elected national assembly for Wales and the UK parliament by 
using the prerogative in this way.”

Most legal opinion is convinced that since the government has not changed its 
main line of reasoning, it will lose in the supreme court, where 11 justices 
will consider the case. Prof Michael Zander QC said last week that ministers 
could be defeated 11-0.

However, Trevor Tayleur, associate professor at the University of Law, argued 
that the government would be much better placed to make its arguments this time 
around.

He said the key argument would be that the 1972 European Communities Act had 
not created new laws but simply acted as a channel to bring European rights 
into the UK.

He said the government losing would only delay article 50, rather than stop 
it, but argued that it would show “that the courts are willing to become more 
assertive in their relationship with the executive”.
 