
Ginger Baker is 31 years old and you don’t ignore him. You can’t. He has 
accumulated a monstrous reputation over the past 10 years that makes him the 
wildest, most uncontrollable musician around. It goes before him into any room 
so that people, rather unjustly, tend to recoil with horror directly as he 
looms on the horizon.

He says he’s actually calmed down a lot: “I used to be mean – I’d deliberately 
mess up recording sessions with my temper and go mad at the slightest thing. 
Then one day some friends took me to one side and pointed out that it might be 
wiser if I calmed down. I respected them enough to listen – and not throw 
anything.”

Certainly Baker’s physical makeup doesn’t really help to contradict most 
people’s image that he’s a direct descendant of King Kong or the Wild Man of 
Borneo. He has a huge shaggy head of red hair and a beard to match. Mere 
mortals have been known to quail before his glowering, rolling eyes. His teeth 
are chipped, his grin evil. He wears a mass of heavy silver rings on his left 
hand, and his fingernails are thick with dirt.

People have said that he’s so rude he’ll meet you one day and totally ignore 
you the next. His new band, Airforce, says that at rehearsals he’ll more than 
likely fling his drumsticks at their heads to make a point.

Meeting Ginger Baker: an experience to forget
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2013/may/15/ginger-baker-beware-mr-baker-interview>
To which statement he growls that with 12 people to play “father” to, he no 
sooner has one side of the room under control than he has to rush across to the 
other and make sure they’re all right. Which is an exhausting way to rehearse.

As with most people whose image gets out of hand, Baker’s reputation for 
aggression and discourtesy turns out to be slightly exaggerated. He puts up a 
bluff exterior and has a lot of blustering warmth. He’s a bundle of nerves and 
smokes over 50 cigarettes a day. He’s also a perfectionist where music is 
concerned. He’s worked his band seven hours a day, every day, for a month, and 
he says he’ll only hit the roof now if something goes wrong musically – and 
even then he calms down after five minutes.

I have reason to be very grateful to this big shaggy bear of man. He once 
gallantly fought his way through 200 people to get me a cup of tea – what’s 
more, he returned successfully, having surprisingly absolutely charmed the lady 
behind the bar.

Ginger Baker is married with three children – two girls aged nine and two and 
a boy aged one – and he and his family live in a huge house that he owns in 
Harrow. He also has a £7,000 custom-built Jensen car. He won’t tell you exactly 
how much he’s worth, but says with a wry smile: “Well, they say Eric and Jack 
are millionaires by now – so you can work it out from there. I’ve always been 
careful with money. For the first 10 years of my career I was very hard up – 
now I’m a walking accountant.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Faug%2F19%2Fginger-baker-cream-blind-faith-interview-rocks-backpages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F19%2F1439980369844%2Fa7cc8b8f-97bb-49df-9782-6572b9cdf162-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ginger%20Baker%3A%20'I%E2%80%99m%20not%20an%20easy%20person%20to%20get%20on%20with'%20%E2%80%93%20%20a%20classic%20interview%20from%20the%20vaults&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Faug%2F19%2Fginger-baker-cream-blind-faith-interview-rocks-backpages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ginger%20Baker%3A%20%27I%E2%80%99m%20not%20an%20easy%20person%20to%20get%20on%20with%27%20%E2%80%93%20%20a%20classic%20interview%20from%20the%20vaults&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Faug%2F19%2Fginger-baker-cream-blind-faith-interview-rocks-backpages%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F19%2F1439980369844%2Fa7cc8b8f-97bb-49df-9782-6572b9cdf162-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Ginger Baker onstage at the Star Club in Hamburg. Photograph: Jan 
Persson/Redferns 
Ginger Baker hardly looks like anyone’s impression of a millionaire. His 
leather jacket looks like it’s been repeatedly jumped on, his trousers are 
nondescript and his shirts slightly baggy and not exactly sparkling white.

He is certainly the most ferocious, animalistic and competent drummer pop 
music has ever received under its wing. Via Cream, Blind Faith and now 
Airforce, he is a thunderous force in his own right. He is also one of those 
rare musicians whom people will trudge to see, not just for his musical worth 
but because he is a personality. And they’re hard to find these days.

It is a rank that took a hard passage to achieve.

“I’m not a very sociable person any more. I was at one time – when I was a 
young and green lad. I always trusted and thought good of everyone. It took a 
few years and a few unhappy experiences to learn that really it’s better to 
only trust yourself and not other human beings.”

Ginger Baker was born in Lewisham. He had one sister, and his father was 
killed when he was five. At school he never seemed to be good at anything.

“People didn’t like me. I suppose I was a strange fish. They couldn’t make me 
out. I’d walk around as though I was very good at something and knew it – the 
trouble was nobody could actually work out what the hell it was I was good at. 
And that included me.”

During his last year at school two things happened. He took up cycling and won 
some medals – and a friend lugged a side drum into the classroom. The cycling 
never developed because he got his bike “caught up” with a taxi. But the 
drumming did.

“Before that I’d just driven everyone mad by drumming my fingers against the 
desk all day. Then this guy turned up with the drum. He was very proud. I got 
hold of it and beat hell out of the thing. I’d already seen a set of drums I 
wanted, but they cost £12, which I didn’t have – and anyway my mother had put 
me off the idea.”

A few weeks later he saw another set for £3 and bought them. He took them 
along to a party one night and, at 14 years of age, amazed everyone with his 
prowess. For the first time in his life, he says, he saw people look at him 
with admiration.

“I thought – good God, at last there’s something I can do.”

As it happened, this didn’t turn out to be the immediate start of a brilliant 
career. At 15, Baker worked as a signwriter and then went on to the studios of 
a large advertising agency. But after work he did a few gigs, and on one he 
earned £12 playing with the Storeyville Jazz Band.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Doe9DA8pO8aQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Doe9DA8pO8aQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Doe9DA8pO8aQ&media=>
He went home that evening and said he was leaving work and leaving home. He 
then moved out to Ladbroke Grove and nearly starved to death. There followed a 
series of engagements with bands that even older men would have probably been 
in fear of joining.

Terry Lightfoot <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/mar/19/terry-lightfoot>
’s band lasted six months with Baker in its ranks. He had a punch-up: “They 
didn’t like me,” he says, “because I would play independently and not conform.”

At 18 he joined Diz Disley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/apr/15/diz-disley-obituary> and played 
in Germany and Denmark. He calls that band “an assorted bunch of monsters,” and 
says that they got turned out of eight hotels and set fire to one on that 
particular tour. It was the kind of situation that almost set a pattern for 
Baker’s future.

After finding that two days a week he couldn’t afford to eat or buy 
cigarettes, he left and went back home. For three months he worked in a 
factory, gigging in his spare time, and in a dance hall one night he joined a 
local Irish band.

“They said they’d give me two weeks to learn to read music – I did it in 10 
days. I stayed with them for nearly a year playing dance music and Ceilidh 
music.”

In quick succession Baker joined Ronnie Scott and Harold McNair, and worked 
with Alexis Korner, Jack Bruce, Graham Bond,Dick Heckstall-Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2004/dec/22/guardianobituaries.arts> – then 
came Cream. It was with Cream that he made his mark and with Cream he learned 
that co-operative bands, as he calls them, won’t work.

“I’ve always had an ego about my playing but I’ve never been a selfish person, 
I’ve always believed in co-op bands and worked on that scene for years. But I’m 
afraid it doesn’t work. People’s personalities always get in the way. Cream was 
successful, as I knew it would be. Blind Faith was simply a logical progression 
from that.”

He seems to have nurtured resentment about both bands. Somehow, one feels, he 
is like a father whose babies were taken away too young.

“At the start, Cream was mine. I took a drop in salary to start Cream, whereas 
Jack and Eric took a step up. Cream was always my baby.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Faug%2F19%2Fginger-baker-cream-blind-faith-interview-rocks-backpages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F19%2F1439980259514%2Fb26a9b2c-a102-4d2d-b99c-560c4f4ac669-2060x1896.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ginger%20Baker%3A%20'I%E2%80%99m%20not%20an%20easy%20person%20to%20get%20on%20with'%20%E2%80%93%20%20a%20classic%20interview%20from%20the%20vaults&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Faug%2F19%2Fginger-baker-cream-blind-faith-interview-rocks-backpages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ginger%20Baker%3A%20%27I%E2%80%99m%20not%20an%20easy%20person%20to%20get%20on%20with%27%20%E2%80%93%20%20a%20classic%20interview%20from%20the%20vaults&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Faug%2F19%2Fginger-baker-cream-blind-faith-interview-rocks-backpages%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F19%2F1439980259514%2Fb26a9b2c-a102-4d2d-b99c-560c4f4ac669-2060x1896.jpeg>
 Ginger Baker (centre) with Jack Bruce and Eric Clapton in Cream. Photograph: 
Susie Macdonald/Redferns 
“I was very bitter after the US tour with Blind Faith. You know, I was so 
shattered I had to go away for two months’ rest. When I came back I had been 
led to expect that we’d tour Britain with Delaney and Bonnie second on the bill 
– which is where they belong. I’m afraid I have no respect for a band that has 
to resort to good old rock’n’roll to get an audience interested. Anyway, 
instead of that, I came back to find that Eric had got into the D&B thing and 
there was no tour and no Blind Faith.

“I’m not an easy person to get on with, I know, but I don’t bear people 
grudges and, as I’d been talking about getting a big band together one day, I 
thought I might as well go ahead.”

If Cream and Blind Faith were Ginger’s pets, then certainly Airforce is his 
current prodigy. He talks about them all night if allowed. He looks very 
pleased – for the first time in an hour – and his voice warms when talking 
about their attitude.

“Nobody’s ever said, ‘We all love it so much we’ll stay together for ever,’ 
and I’m pleased, because statements like that seem to put the kiss of death on 
bands.”

The thing that chuffed him most is that although Airforce was originally 
formed as a tentative and short-lived operation, it is going to last much 
longer than anyone – most of all Baker himself – thought.

“Like everyone else, I thought Airforce would be a two-concert set-up. But 
we’d spent so much time rehearsing and we all had such a ball at the Albert 
Hall that everyone except Stevie Winwood and Chris Wood decided to carry on.

“It was a great surprise to me and a tremendous compliment. In fact, I think 
it’s the nicest thing that’s ever happened. They’re all friends of mine, but I 
knew they had their own things going for them, and I didn’t think they’d want 
to stick. Their decision has given me an enormous amount of confidence – just 
at the time I needed it most.”

Before Airforce, Baker says he was going to pack up and disappear. Despite 
this statement, you get the feeling that it might have been a harder decision 
than that. Baker needs the limelight and the audience before him. He admits 
that half the time, on a good night, the audience will play for him. He says 
when the band played at the Albert Hall, it was so marvellous that none of them 
could remember playing the last number.

“I automatically play better when the crowd’s digging something. I am very 
critical but I know what this band’s got. I knew people would like it and that 
it would be both new and understandable to people. So little is either these 
days.”

Baker is a difficult person to impress. There isn’t another drummer in the 
world he’d say was his idol, and when he does have time to listen to music, his 
tastes veer well away from his own instrument to people like Otis Redding, Ray 
Charles and Aretha Franklin. He puts Phil Seamen down as the drummer he most 
respects, but a lot of that stems from a personal tie, as it was Seamen who 
gave him the strength to carry on playing when he wanted to give up.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNrN6zwL2lfs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNrN6zwL2lfs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNrN6zwL2lfs&media=>
Despite his incredible and unshakeable confidence in himself as a musician, he 
admits that he can’t quite understand how he obtained this strange aura as a 
musician and personality.

“Drummers are really nothing more than time-keepers. They’re the time of the 
band. I don’t consider I should have as much recognition as say a brilliant 
guitar player. I think the best thing a drummer can have is restraint when he’s 
playing – and so few have today. They think playing loud is playing best. Of 
course I don’t think I’ve reached my best yet. The day I don’t move on I stop 
playing. I don’t practice ever. I can only play with other people, I need to 
feel them around me.”

Baker gives himself only another five years as a drummer. Then he thinks he’ll 
quit totally and retire.

“I’ll have nothing left to give physically after that. I use both feet the way 
I play and to be honest it’s shattering. After 35 or so I won’t he able to keep 
it up even if I want to.”

His plans are simple. He’ll retire to an island in the Hebrides he’s had his 
eye on, build a house, transport his family up there and continue with his 
artistic pursuits.

Baker, the bombastic Baker, has a secret hobby of wood-carving and sculpture. 
He has done only two carvings and one sculpture in the past 15 years.

“But after all,” he says adamantly, “my work in that direction doesn’t worry 
me. Some of the most famous artists in the world never really started their 
careers until their late 30s, did they?”
 