
If you ask Diego Simeone <https://www.theguardian.com/football/diego-simeone>, 
he will tell you that he does not often talk about football with his son. The 
Atlético Madrid manager is immensely proud of the success Giovanni has had in 
carving out a career in the sport but also anxious to avoid adding to the 
pressure that comes with following in his footsteps. “I’ve never liked to give 
him pointers about specific aspects of his game,” said Diego during a 
television interview two months back. He visits his son whenever he can during 
international breaks and the pair speak frequently by phone, “[But] we talk 
about life, which is very important.”

A worthy sentiment. And yet, one wonders how easy it can be to pick apart life 
from football when you have dedicated one so absolutely to the other. After the 
younger Simeone joined Genoa from River Plate in the summer, he painted a 
rather different picture – explaining at his introductory press conference that 
Diego “lives football all day, from the pitch to the dinner table”. So when his 
dad’s number flashed up on his phone screen last week, Giovanni knew they would 
wind up discussing his upcoming home match againstJuventus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus>. With Genoa’s first-choice 
centre-forward, Leonardo Pavoletti, sidelined by injury, the 21-year-old was in 
line to start up front.

Sixteen-and-a-half years earlier, Diego had scored one of the most famous 
goals of his career against theBianconeri. El Cholo’s towering header on 1 
April 2000 earned Lazioa 1-0 win <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-J1QZUOSuqs> 
at the Stadio delle Alpi and allowed them to close to within three points of 
their first-placed opponents. They went on to win the title by one. Now Diego 
informed Giovanni that history was about to repeat itself. He told his son that 
he would score on Sunday and teach the world about the power of the blood that 
they share.

That should have sounded like a tall order. Juventus were returning to 
domestic action after a famous night in Europe – beating Sevilla 3-1 at the 
Sánchez Pizjuán. Serie A’s reigning champions were already seven points clear 
of their closest competition domestically, the biggest lead they had ever held 
13 games into a new season.

Close observers could see that those raw facts were misleading. Juventus’s 
recent performances had been uneven, with an overreliance on individual acts of 
brilliance rather than any great coherence to their play. They began dreadfully 
against Sevilla, falling behind early on, and turned things around only after 
their opponents imploded – having a man sent off and giving away a penalty 
before half-time.

Even so, Juventus hardly looked vulnerable. They were doing what champions do: 
grinding out results on their worst days. Injuries would deprive them of Paulo 
Dybala, Giorgio Chiellini and Andrea Barzagli againstGenoa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/genoa>, while Gonzalo Higuaín was deemed 
fit enough only for the bench, but their starting XI still appeared stronger 
than their hosts’ did on paper.

When Genoa’s manager, Ivan Juric, gathered his players together before 
kick-off, he made no effort to downplay the scale of the challenge ahead. 
Instead, he conveyed a message that could have come straight from Diego 
Simeone’s own playbook. “Against Juve,” he said, “you have to choose how you 
want to die.” Their response was emphatic.

Genoa advanced on their guests with abandon – racing to every ball at 100mph, 
crashing into challenges and always seeking the most direct route to goal. Not 
before the 30th minute would a cacophonous crowd at the Marassi get the chance 
to draw breath. By that point, Genoa were 3-0 ahead.

Serie A round-up: Genoa’s Giovanni Simeone stuns leaders Juventus
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/27/serie-a-roundup-genoa-giovanni-simeone-juventus>
Juventus had been utterly unprepared for such intensity. If there was any 
single image to sum up the decadence in their approach, it was that of Leonardo 
Bonucci – the outfield player that this team has been most able to rely upon 
even in its sloppier performances – gifting possession to Genoa in the third 
minute with a needless backheel flick. Luca Rigoni intercepted and sprinted 
through on goal. His shot was saved by Gigi Buffon and a follow-up by Lucas 
Ocampos blocked by a defender on the line. Simeone’s first attempt to force 
home the rebound was repelled once again by the keeper but he would not be 
denied a second time.

The stadium erupted as he wheeled away in celebration – but this was only the 
start. In the 13th minute, Darko Lazovic cut inside a ragged Alex Sandro from 
the right and swung a cross towards the six-yard box. Simeone met it with a 
glancing header with a style (if not the distance from goal) that evoked the 
one his father had scored against these same opponents. Buffon got a hand to it 
but could not keep it out.

Juventus were a shambles, aptly compared by one writer from La Repubblica to a 
groggy boxer who had lost the capacity to even raise their guard. Every cross 
that Genoa sent into the area seemed to find an unmarked team-mate. Moments 
after Simeone’s second, Diego Laxalt picked out Rigoni from the opposite flank, 
only for the latter player to fire over from close range.

If Juventus could point to the absences of Chiellini and Barzagli as 
mitigating factors – two-thirds of the vaunted BBC – then that still could not 
justify the lack of composure shown by Mehdi Benatia, who at one point left a 
looping deflection to bounce in the six-yard box, only to then kick the ball 
out of Buffon’s hands when the keeper lunged after it. Nor, indeed, could it 
explain Massimiliano Allegri’s decision to start Dani Alves on the right of a 
back three, with Stephan Lichtsteiner outside him at wing-back. If the manager 
lacked faith in Daniele Rugani as his third central defender – understandable, 
after some missteps against Sevilla – then why not stick with a back four?

Juventus fans might been pondering these exact questions when Genoa’s third 
went in. Rigoni once again found space inside the six-yard box as the ball was 
headed down from a corner, hooking his shot against the underside of the bar. 
It was not immediately clear whether the ball had crossed the line as a 
defender partially hooked it away. Simeone smashed it in at the back post for 
good measure but it was credited as an own goal to Sandro.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fgiovanni-simeone-history-repeat-itself-genoa-thump-juventus-serie-a%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F200c48401a473f03960f0cfe93e285efd4b6aed6%2F0_0_3072_2216%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Giovanni%20Simeone%20makes%20history%20repeat%20itself%20as%20Genoa%20thump%20Juventus%20%7C%20Paolo%20Bandini&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fgiovanni-simeone-history-repeat-itself-genoa-thump-juventus-serie-a%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Giovanni%20Simeone%20makes%20history%20repeat%20itself%20as%20Genoa%20thump%20Juventus%20%7C%20Paolo%20Bandini&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fgiovanni-simeone-history-repeat-itself-genoa-thump-juventus-serie-a%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F200c48401a473f03960f0cfe93e285efd4b6aed6%2F0_0_3072_2216%2F3072.jpg>
 Genoa’s Luca Rigoni celebrates after his team’s third goal. Photograph: Simone 
Arveda/AP 
That was the last of Genoa’s scoring. Juventus, belatedly, started to fight 
back and could feel some frustration over the referee’s failure to award them a 
penalty when Ocampos clattered into Mario Mandzukic in the area shortly before 
the break. A goal at that stage might yet have offered a path back into the 
game. As it was, they had to wait until the 82nd minute for Miralem Pjanic to 
produce a lone consolation strike from a free-kick. The match finished 3-1, a 
defeat compounded for Juventus by the loss of Bonucci to a hamstring injury and 
Alves to a fractured fibula. It is quite possible that the former player will 
not play again before the winter break, while the latter will be out some way 
into 2017.

The timing could not be much worse. Between now and Christmas, Juventus face a 
soaring Atalanta (who won their sixth straight game at the weekend), a derby 
against one of Torino’s best teams in decades and an appointment with title 
rivals Roma. Oh, and then a Supercoppa showdown against Milan in Doha as well.

Allegri sought to spin defeat as a positive, insisting that a “proper 
thrashing” such as this would do his team good for the rest of the season by 
obliging them to plant their feet back on the ground. Certainly, it has been a 
long time since they have taken one like it: not since 2005 had Juventus 
trailed by three at half-time of aSerie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> match. He blamed 
complacency, citing a disparity in the number of fouls committed – Genoa had 26 
to Juventus’s eight – as evidence of his team’s lack of effort. However, the 
quality of Genoa’s performance also needs to be recognised, and especially when 
we consider that they themselves were without Pavoletti, their leading midfield 
creator Miguel Veloso and a starting centre-back in Lucas Orbán. Rigoni was a 
menace, roaming free between the lines of midfield and attack, while Laxalt and 
Lazovic dominated their flanks and Ocampos led a ferocious press from the 
front. But the undoubted star of the show was Simeone, who not only kept on 
finding the gaps in Juventus’s defence but also showed impressive composure in 
front of goal.

His father posted a picture on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/Simeone/status/802996702823272448?lang=en> at full-time, 
showing each of them celebrating their respective goals against Juventus – 
6,084 days apart. Diego might not like to give his son pointers on how to play 
this game but some things just run in the blood.

Talking points

• Atalanta? More like “Ital-Leicester”, if you ask the headline writers at 
Gazzetta dello Sport. The pink paper is certainly not alone in making the link 
between the Bergamese club’s improbable rise and that of the Foxes last season. 
Gian Piero Gasperini’s side have now taken 25 points from the last 27 
available, and sit only five behind Juventus before next weekend’s visit to 
Turin. They couldn’t, could they? Perhaps not – theBianconeri’s home record 
since they moved into J-Stadium is imposing – but they are certainly playing a 
more cohesive brand of football and there are players in this team who might 
walk into Allegri’s starting XI right now if they were put at his disposal.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fgiovanni-simeone-history-repeat-itself-genoa-thump-juventus-serie-a%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3529c75052c13a195578c3e896b75e59a158f31%2F0_0_3072_2048%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Giovanni%20Simeone%20makes%20history%20repeat%20itself%20as%20Genoa%20thump%20Juventus%20%7C%20Paolo%20Bandini&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fgiovanni-simeone-history-repeat-itself-genoa-thump-juventus-serie-a%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Giovanni%20Simeone%20makes%20history%20repeat%20itself%20as%20Genoa%20thump%20Juventus%20%7C%20Paolo%20Bandini&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fgiovanni-simeone-history-repeat-itself-genoa-thump-juventus-serie-a%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3529c75052c13a195578c3e896b75e59a158f31%2F0_0_3072_2048%2F3072.jpg>
 Atalanta’s Jasmin Kurtic scores past Bologna goalkeeper Antonio Mirante. 
Photograph: Giorgio Benvenuti/AP 
• Six consecutive Serie A wins equals a club record for Atalanta but at the 
other end of the spectrum are Palermo, who suffered a seventh consecutive 
defeat this weekend. Never in their history have they lost so many top-flight 
games in a row. Remarkably, this sequence appears not to have provoked Maurizio 
Zamparini into another managerial change … yet. The Palermo owner released a 
statement on the club’s website on Sunday in which he shared his desire to 
carry on working with Roberto De Zerbi.

• Milan fielded their youngest side since 1985 (this weekend’s team had an 
average age of 23 years and six months) and still made light work of Empoli. 
With Gianluca Lapadula scoring a double and former Liverpool man Suso adding 
his fourth in three games, is it any wonder that Silvio Berlusconi seems ever 
less eager to actually go through with his sale of the club? With each public 
utterance the possibility of his remaining at the helm seems to rise a tiny bit 
further. He teased us all at the start of this week by suggesting that he could 
do so if the club’s prospective buyers failed to complete their purchase by 13 
December. On Sunday, Canale 5’s Barbara D’Urso told him live on air that 
everyone hoped he would stay. “Can I tell you a secret?” replied Berlusconi – 
perhaps misusing that final word just a touch. “So do it.”

• Alongside Milan in second are Roma, who once again had Edin Dzeko to thank 
for carrying them through a more-fraught-than-it-should-have-been win over 
Pescara. He grabbed a double within 10 minutes and now has 17 goals in 18 games 
for Roma across all competitions.

Results: Bologna 0-2 Atalanta, Cagiari 2-1 Udinese, Crotone 1-1 Sampdoria, 
Empoli 1-4 Milan, Genoa 3-1 Juventus, Palermo 0-1 Lazio, Roma 3-2 Pescara, 
Torino 2-1 Chievo.

Pos Team P GD Pts 
1 Juventus 14 17 33 
2 Roma 14 17 29 
3 AC Milan 14 7 29 
4 Lazio 14 13 28 
5 Atalanta 14 9 28 
6 Torino 14 14 25 
7 Napoli 13 9 24 
8 Fiorentina 12 7 20 
9 Genoa 13 2 19 
10 Sampdoria 14 -3 19 
11 Cagliari 14 -9 19 
12 Inter Milan 13 2 18 
13 Chievo 14 -2 18 
14 Bologna 14 -7 16 
15 Udinese 14 -5 15 
16 Sassuolo 13 -9 13 
17 Empoli 14 -14 10 
18 Pescara 14 -15 7 
19 Crotone 14 -16 6 
20 Palermo 14 -17 6  