
The European parliament has urged the drafting of a set of regulations to 
govern the use and creation of robots and artificial intelligence, including a 
form of “electronic personhood” to ensure rights and responsibilities for the 
most capable AI.

In a 17-2 vote, with two abstentions, the parliament’s legal affairs committee 
passedthe report 
<http://www.europarl.europa.eu/sides/getDoc.do?pubRef=-//EP//NONSGML%2BCOMPARL%2BPE-582.443%2B01%2BDOC%2BPDF%2BV0//EN>
, which outlines one possible framework for regulation.

“A growing number of areas of our daily lives are increasingly affected by 
robotics,” said the report’s author, Luxembourgish MEP Mady Delvaux. “In order 
to address this reality and to ensure that robots are and will remain in the 
service of humans, we urgently need to create a robust European legal 
framework”.

Giving rights to robots is a dangerous idea | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/jan/16/giving-rights-to-robots-is-a-dangerous-idea>
The proposed legal status for robots would be analogous to corporate 
personhood, which allows firms to take part in legal cases both as the 
plaintiff and respondent. “It is similar to what we now have for companies, but 
it is not for tomorrow,” said Delvaux. “What we need now is to create a legal 
framework for the robots that are currently on the market or will become 
available over the next 10 to 15 years.”

The broad report identifies a number of areas in need of specific oversight 
from theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>, including:

 * The creation of a European agency for robotics and AI;

 * A legal definition of “smart autonomous robots”, with a system of 
registration of the most advanced of them;

 * An advisory code of conduct for robotics engineers aimed at guiding the 
ethical design, production and use of robots;

 * A new reporting structure for companies requiring them to report the 
contribution of robotics and AI to the economic results of a company for the 
purpose of taxation and social security contributions

 * A new mandatory insurance scheme for companies to cover damage caused by 
their robots.

The report also takes special interest in the future of autonomous vehicles, 
arguing that self-driving cars are “in most urgent need of European and global 
rules”. “Fragmented regulatory approaches would hinder implementation and 
jeopardise European competitiveness,” it continues.

It also addresses the risk that overly competitive robots could result in 
large-scale unemployment, and calls for the “serious” examination of a general 
basic income as one possible solution.

Ashley Morgan, of international legal practice Osborne Clarke, says that the 
proposals will be “extremely controversial.”

“One could argue that, effectively, a law of the nature proposed in this 
resolution would grant human rights to robots. That’s not going to go down easy 
with companies that are creating robots and AIs,” he told the Guardian.

“If I create a robot, and that robot creates something that could be patented, 
should I own that patent or should the robot? If I sell the robot, should the 
intellectual property it has developed go with it? These are not easy questions 
to answer, and that goes right to the heart of this debate,” Morgan added.

The full house of the European Parliament will vote on the draft proposals in 
February, which will need to be approved by absolute majority.
 