
African governments have been offered €1.8bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/12/migration-crisis-european-and-african-leaders-agree-18bn-trust-fund>
 to help stem the flow of refugees to Europe. Yet the migrants European leaders 
want to “send back” are in many cases fleeing the governments the EU is now 
collaborating with.

It could almost be satire. Amongst those present 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Internet%20Downloads/V%20SUMMIT%202015%20TROMBINOSCOPE.pdf>
 at the Malta summit in Valletta were Sudan, Eritrea and Ethiopia – widely 
condemned for their disregard of human rights.


In Sudan, for example, according to the High Commission for Refugees 
<http://www.unhcr.org/pages/49e483b76.html> there are currently 400,000 
internally displaced people in Darfur, thanks tocontinued conflict 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/news/2015/06/sudan-darfur-security-council-150610235631458.html>
 between rebel groups and government forces. A further 6.9 million people are 
in need for humanitarian assistance. By the end of 2015, the UN estimates there 
could be up to 460,000 refugees in Sudan alone.

Can $2bn for Africa stem the refugee crisis?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/13/refugee-crisis-africa-2bn-trust-fund>
For many in Sudan, smuggling and trafficking has become a lucrative business. 
Reliable sources in the country allege that many National Intelligence and 
Security Service officers have been involved in human smuggling for financial 
gain. The security force are also alleged to be involved in trafficking 
operations in easternSudan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/sudan> and 
Darfur, transporting refugees up in to Libya.


Amnesty International was quick to point out these contradictions 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/news/2015/11/eu-africa-summit-in-valetta/>, 
arguing that the EU should not cooperate with those guilty of grave human 
rights abuses. “With the EU seemingly intent on enlisting African nations as 
proxy gatekeepers, the Valetta summit is likely to result in a one-sided border 
control contract dressed up as a cooperation agreement. Refugees and migrants 
deserve and are entitled to better,” said Iverna McGowan, acting director of 
Amnesty International’s European Institutions Office.

To date, there has been no evidence that the EU’s previous financial 
incentives to Omar al-Bashir’s government have made any positive impact on the 
crisis, so why will they now?

In November last year, the EU launched another controversial policy, known as 
theKhartoum Process 
<http://ecre.org/component/content/article/70-weekly-bulletin-articles/911-khartoum-process-eu-and-african-union-launch-initiative-against-smuggling-of-migrants.html>
. Announced in Rome, it pledged to tackle human smuggling from the Horn of 
Africa into Europe by providing countries in the region with financial, 
technical and political incentives to manage and control migration.

As part of this, the EU pledged to offer Sudan and Eritrea significant 
payments. However, in the absence of monitoring mechanisms and transparency, 
these funds will likely disappear without trace, swallowed by two governments 
who are currently underinternational sanctions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/oct/09/eritrea-un-monitoring-group-report-eu-sanctions-aid>
 for human rights abuses.

Europe's €1.8bn fund to tackle migration crisis not enough, say Africans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/12/migration-crisis-european-and-african-leaders-agree-18bn-trust-fund>
Writing in African Arguments 
<http://africanarguments.org/2015/04/16/new-eu-approach-to-horn-of-africa-migration-sets-worrying-precedent-by-maimuna-mohamud-and-dr-cindy-horst/>
, migration researchers Maimuna Mohamud and Cindy Horst said the Khartoum 
Process represented a “worrying precedent”.

“All participants of the Khartoum Process ... have policies and political 
systems that directly render them responsible for creating conditions that 
produce refugees and migrants in the first place,” they argued.

Last month, Mike Smith, chair of the commission 
<http://www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=16731&LangID=E>
 of inquiry on human rights in Eritrea, emphasised the significant number of 
Eritreans arriving on the shores of Europe: after Syrians and Afghans, they 
made up the third biggest group of people attempting to enter in 2014.

But EU leaders seem to be turning a blind eye to this, once again turning to 
cash incentives as quick fixes.

For a meaningful solution to the problem, the EU should be forcing the issue 
of conflict in Darfur, or pressurising Isaias Afwerki’s government to end 
indefinite military service inEritrea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eritrea>. Only this way will the root of the 
problem be addressed.
 