
Glasgow Warriors have confirmed the signing of the Italy wing Leonardo Sarto 
for the 2016-17 season.

The 24-year-old has won 26 caps for his country, scoring six tries, and 
started every match in the 2016 Six Nations although he is yet to cross in this 
campaign. He also played all four of Italy’s matches at the 2015 World Cup,
scoring a try against Romania in their final match 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/11/italy-romania-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
.

Italy prop Martin Castrogiovanni banned for two weeks for stamping
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/02/martin-castrogiovanni-banned-stamp-italy-ireland-scotland-six-nations-rugby>
He will join the Pro12 champions from Zebre who despite lying 11th in the 
table, are poised to qualify for next season’s European Champions Cup ahead of 
their compatriots Treviso, who are bottom. Glasgow have struggled to recapture 
the form that saw them win thePro12 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/pro12> 
title last season, with eight wins, six defeats and a draw from their 15 
matches.

At 6ft 4in and almost 15 stone, Sarto is a powerful wing who will bring 
strength and directness to Glasgow’s skilled backline. This variety is likely 
to prove an asset despite his seemingly mediocre strike-rate – he has only five 
tries in 34 Zebre appearances.

“Glasgow Warriors are a massive club and play a great style of rugby,” Sarto 
told the Warriors website. “I’ve always known Glasgow is a great club and I 
know [Italy team-mate] Simone Favaro is enjoying it there. I hear the fans love 
him and I hope I will have a similarly good relationship with them when I move 
over.”

Gregor Townsend, the Glasgow head coach, spoke positively of Sarto. ““Leonardo 
has been one of the best wingers in the Pro12 over the past few seasons and has 
an ability to break tackles. He has also performed well at Test level and hadan 
excellent all-round game against Scotland last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/27/italy-scotland-six-nations-match-report>
. We believe that he will make further improvements in our environment and will 
add to the competition for places in our backline.”
 