
This year’s Glastonbury festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/glastonbury> could be the last one for three 
years … at least by that name.


The festival is set to move locations in 2019 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/19/glastonbury-festival-to-move-from-worthy-farm-in-2019-says-founder>
, Michael Eavis has said, with a fallow year due in 2018. And according to 
Eavis, the event will have a new name when it moves: the Variety Bazaar.


Speaking to Glastonbury FM, Eavis said: “I’ve been a risk-taker all my life. 
In 47 years of taking risks, so far touch wood, I haven’t come unstuck. This 
might be one risk too far, I don’t know.”


He added that the event would be billed as “The Glastonbury festival team 
presents ... The Variety Bazaar” – adding: “That’s a good name don’t you think?”

 Hiatus … there will be no Glastonbury in 2018. Photograph: Matt Cardy/Getty 
Images 
Although the site of the new Glastonbury is unknown at present, Eavis has 
revealed that it’s “halfway to the Midlands” and will be at a location with 
only one landowner. The festival was originally set to move to Longleat before a
family feud between site owner Lord Bath and his son intervened 
<http://www.somersetlive.co.uk/glastonbury-festival-snubbed-by-longleat-but-what-does-this-mean-for-the-future-of-the-event/story-29705090-detail/story.html>
.


At present, Eavis plans to hold the festival in its new location once every 
five years, which means Pilton should still see a return of the festival in 
2020.

In a statement on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/emilyeavis/status/821385124059160577>, Emily Eavis said: 
“We are still planning an event in the future at a different location – which 
we are calling Variety Bazaar. But Glastonbury festival will always be called 
Glastonbury and will remain at Worthy Farm.” She did not mention a year for 
Variety Bazaar, and Glastonbury were unable to confirm whether or not it would 
be 2019.
 