
The new Champions Cup season needed an energetic lift-off and Glasgow 
delivered splendidly on the opening night at the expense of a lacklustre
Leicester <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers>. Never have the 
Tigers felt the cold draught of northern exposure quite so keenly, conceding 
the most points in their 20-year European history to leave themselves in danger 
of an early exit from a hugely competitive Pool One.

On the chilliest night of autumn to date the Warriors were excellent value for 
their bonus-point victory, driven forward by Josh Strauss and enthusiastically 
served on the right wing by Leonardo Sarto. Leicester, who sacked their defence 
coach last week and expressed pre-match misgivings about playing on artificial 
surfaces, had only themselves to blame and will need to improve substantially 
to trouble the French champions Racing Metro next weekend. “It wasn’t good 
enough tonight and that’s my responsibility,” confirmed Richard Cockerill, the 
Tigers’ director of rugby. “We’re not hiding away from how poor that was. We 
were outplayed.”

European Champions Cup 2016-17: pool-by-pool guide | Paul Rees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/13/european-champions-cup-2016-17-pool-by-pool-guide>
It was the most inauspicious of starts to his Leicester career for the 
Australian centre Matt Toomua, who might have been sent off for a shocking 
tip-tackle on the Scotland fly-half Finn Russell in the opening quarter. 
Cockerill’s side were horribly porous in the first half and were soundly beaten 
long before Mark Bennett and Sarto were gifted the softest of interception 
tries in the final quarter.

Toomua will certainly not forget his Tigers debut. The game was only 12 
minutes old when the Wallaby blatantly up-ended Russell and sparked an 
altercation involving all 30 players. With the sold-out crowd baying for a red 
card the 26-year-old was slightly fortunate to see only yellow, having lifted 
the fly-half’s legs in the tackle and made no apparent attempt to bring him to 
ground safely. Only the fact Russell landed on his back rather than his head 
saved Toomua from an ignominious early bath.

It just goes to show how first-night nerves can scramble the most seasoned of 
brains. Toomua has regularly added a touch of class to an average Wallaby side 
and is precisely the type of intelligent, playmaking presence at 12 his club 
have been missing.

A windy Friday night beside the River Clyde, however, is not the most 
stress-free environment for any debutant, particularly for a new arrival who 
has not played since being concussed against the All Blacks in Sydney in August.

A little extra niggle was duly generated, with Glasgow’s forwards visibly 
roused and determined to send Leicester back to the east midlands to think 
again. Even before kick-off there were those connected with the Tigers who felt 
it had been ill-advised of Cockerill to air his preference for grass over 
artificial turf on the eve of the game. He was simply being honest but the risk 
of putting doubt into his players’ minds and bolstering home morale was obvious.

Glasgow, who had persistent problems with their traditional surface last 
season, would have been quietly delighted.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fglasgow-leicester-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24a04fd23465165a0e1921bd65eb97c5a7dd46d6%2F0_78_1680_1007%2F1680.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Glasgow%20hammer%20Leicester%20in%20heated%20European%20Champions%20Cup%20opener&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fglasgow-leicester-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Glasgow%20hammer%20Leicester%20in%20heated%20European%20Champions%20Cup%20opener&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fglasgow-leicester-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24a04fd23465165a0e1921bd65eb97c5a7dd46d6%2F0_78_1680_1007%2F1680.jpg>
 Matt Toomua of Leicester is sent to the sin-bin after 12 minutes. Photograph: 
John Clifton/Reuters 
It did not seem to matter much initially, with Leicester’s Brendan O’Connor 
scoring from a lineout drive shortly after Ryan Wilson had been sent to the 
sin-bin. Being reduced to 14 men, though, did not bother the Warriors who 
promptly scored two tries in five minutes in Wilson’s absence. First the winger 
Sarto found an improbable hole around the fringes before another surging 
sequence of attacking phases caused further defensive panic and allowed the 
hooker Fraser Brown to scramble over.

By the time the scrum-half and captain Henry Pyrgos smartly nipped over for a 
third Glasgow try in the 32nd minute the atmosphere was momentarily akin to 
Parkhead or Ibrox, not a comparison made too frequently in Glasgow’s European 
history. Owen Williams did claw three points back with his second penalty but, 
at 22-13 down, Tigers were in need of some serious second-half inspiration.

Even with the wind at their backs and a slightly unpredictable French referee 
in charge, it never looked like materialising. One statistic suggested 
Leicester carried the ball 23 times for 27 metres in the first half, an 
equation that told its own blunt-edged story, and they were even more toothless 
after the break. Their defensive work around the breakdown remains a major 
issue and they are conceding way too many points, particularly away from home.

Northampton and Alex King part ways day before Champions Cup opener
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/14/northampton-and-alex-king-part-ways-hours-out-from-cup-opener>
The alert Russell and fleet-footed Stuart Hogg duly made them pay, with 
Bennett and Sarto gleefully picking off ill-advised passes to ensure a 
cosmopolitan scoresheet with a Kiwi, an Italian, a Scotsman and a Welshman all 
registering points. Leicester have seldom been made to look so average and, 
without Manu Tuilagi, Mike Williams and JP Pietersen, are staring down the 
barrel of a long, cold European campaign. “We’ve got a lot of work to do before 
we play Racing,” acknowledged Cockerill. “We’re not dead in the water but we’ve 
got to have a huge improvement against a quality side next week.”

Glasgow: Hogg; Sarto, Bennett, Johnson (Grigg, 34), Hughes (S Lamont, 64); 
Russell, Pyrgos (capt; Price, 69); Reid (Allan, 65), Brown (Macarthur, 69) Z 
Fagerson (Puafisi, 62) Swinson, J Gray (capt; M Fagerson, 77), Harley, Wilson 
(Wynne, 72), Strauss.

Sin-bin: Wilson 18.

Tries: Sarto 2, Brown, Pyrgos, Bennett. Cons: Russell 4. Pens: Hogg, Russell 2.

Leicester: Veainu; Thompstone, Tait, Toomua (Burns, 69), Brady (Betham, 48); 
Williams, B Youngs (Harrison, 70); Genge (Mulipola, 55), T Youngs (capt; 
Thacker, 44), Cole (Bateman, 50), Barrow (Slater, 64) Kitchener, Fitzgerald, 
O’Connor (Evans, 70), McCaffrey.

Sin-bin: Toomua 12, Mulipola 58.

Try: O’Connor. Con: Williams. Pens: Williams 2.

Referee: M Raynal (France). Att: 7,351
 