
The Glastonbury festival <https://www.theguardian.com/music/glastonbury> will 
be moved from its home at Worthy Farm in 2019 to protect the site, under plans 
outlined by its founder, Michael Eavis. He said the move to a site about 100 
miles away was likely to take place every five years.

Eavis revealed that he had identified a site in the Midlands, though he did 
not specify where it was. “I am arranging for one year off, say every fifth 
year or so, to try and move the show to a site that’s more suitable, I have to 
say. But it would be a huge loss to Somerset if it went there forever, would it 
not?” he said.
 Michael Eavis says his festival could be held ‘almost anywhere’. Photograph: 
David Levene for the Guardian 
Eavis, who started hosting the festival at Worthy Farm in 1970, told the BBC: 
“We’ve got a wonderful product, what we do, and we can do it almost anywhere. I 
love my own farm … I might have to move it eventually.

“Most people are on side now and it’s a wonderful, wonderful boost for the 
whole of Somerset and beyond as well.” He insisted the move away from the 
county would not be permanent, saying: “I don’t want to lose it for ever, no 
way.”

The festival has a regular fallow year to give local people – and the land 
itself – a rest from the annual disruption. Thenext fallow year is due in 2018 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/12/glastonbury-festival-fallow-year-2018-2017-ticket-sale-dates>
.

Earlier this year Eavis said he had held discussions with the Longleat estate, 
about 15 miles away from Worthy Farm, but they proved unsuccessful.

It was also reported that Eavis had told an audience at the Oxford Union that 
he was keen to move the festival, which can attract about 175,000 people a 
year, away from his farm as early as 2017.
Oxford Union (@OxfordUnion) 
Eavis: #Glastonbury <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Glastonbury?src=hash> is so 
big, we're looking to potentially move in 2017, it's a huge operation and the 
site might not be suitable any more
 <https://twitter.com/OxfordUnion/status/727215766135824385> May 2, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/OxfordUnion/status/727215766135824385> Oxford Union 
(@OxfordUnion) 
Eavis: #Glastonbury <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Glastonbury?src=hash> is now 
so big we need to rent land from 22 other farmers now! It's nothing short of a 
miracle that were still going!
 <https://twitter.com/OxfordUnion/status/727215014940139520> May 2, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/OxfordUnion/status/727215014940139520> Oxford Union 
(@OxfordUnion) 
Eavis: We don't own all the land - I could have bought the land for 
#Glastonbury <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Glastonbury?src=hash> but I don't 
think that is the right thing to do.
 <https://twitter.com/OxfordUnion/status/727215979311300612> May 2, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/OxfordUnion/status/727215979311300612> 
While it is not clear where the festival’s new site would be, the area between 
Milton Keynes and Birmingham is about 100 miles from Worthy Farm.

Eavis’s daughter Emily has previously suggested 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-36201807> that an event held away 
from the farm would not bear the name Glastonbury festival.


Referring to the possibility of moving it to Longleat when that was being 
considered, she said: “It’s going to be the whole team behind the Glastonbury 
festival but it’s not going to be called Glastonbury. The main thing to set 
straight is that Glastonbury festival itself will always be at Worthy Farm.”

 * This article was amended on 19 December 2016 because it incorrectly stated 
that the next Glastonbury festival will be in 2018. The next festival will be 
in 2017, and 2018 is scheduled to be a fallow year.  