
NORTH v SOUTH

A new season starts with an old argument. The global calendar, a concept which 
has for most of the decade casually been kicked around like a ball in a 
warm-up, is an issuethat is now being taken seriously 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/25/premiership-rugby-mark-mccafferty-global-calendar-talks>
.


There is no fit-all solution, no prospect of the seasons in the hemispheres 
being played simultaneously so one has to operate in its summer. It is about 
trying to find a way of playing club/regional/franchise rugby in a different 
window to the international game. And trying is the word.

New Zealand have applied electric shock therapy by saying they are not 
prepared to sign up to a new Test tour schedule to replace the one that runs 
out after the 2019 World Cup if it means the two hemispheres trudge on tour at 
the end of their respective long seasons.

Lions tour the prize but first comes treadmill even robots would find wearing 
| Robert Kitson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/01/lions-tour-treadmill-premiership-pro-12-rugby>
The All Blacks would go it alone. If one of the European nations wanted them 
to visit,it would have to strike a deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/24/global-rugby-union-season-talks-stall-2019-fixture-list>
, something that would also operate in reverse. Under the current tour 
agreement, the host nation banks all the profits from a match, paying the 
visitors’ hotel and transport expenses.

The four home unions and France earn (much) more from a match against the All 
Blacks than New Zealand do for playing any one of them at home. Market forces: 
there are millions more chimney pots in Europe than there are in the major 
southern hemisphere nations; New Zealand’s population is not much more than 
half of London’s.

The New Zealand Union has done remarkably well to sustain success at 
international level at a time when French clubs are offering players 
seven-figure salaries and Japan has become a major importer of talent, but it 
feels it has maximised its financial potential at home and so has to look 
elsewhere.

It knows that as it continues to produce players of such quality that even 
figures such as Richie McCaw, Dan Carter, Ma’a Nonu and Conrad Smith are barely 
missed, so it will have to work harder to hold on to them. The All Blacks’ 
jersey is so alluring that McCaw denied himself the chance of earning 
substantially more abroad to continue wearing it, even if at the same time he 
probably extended his playing career.

Australia and South Africa are not so fortunate, two of the game’s superpowers 
who look in decline, with England now closest to New Zealand in the world 
rankings – they have been prey to the greater financial muscle of clubs in 
Europe. If the current tour schedule works in any way for them it is to make 
French owners ponder the wisdom of signing players who may not be around for 
much of the first three months of the season, and June; not that it has stopped 
them so far.

There is little sympathy in Europe for the relative financial weakness of the 
south and even less enthusiasm to split the proceeds from tour matches evenly, 
although that stance has not stopped some on the four home unions from arguing 
the next Lions deal with New Zealand, Australia and South Africa should give 
them a chunk of the profits from each tour. Yet there would be significant 
ramifications here should countries which have customarily been in the top five 
of the world rankings in the professional era, and very often in the leading 
three, lose their lustre.

One argument why there should be no revenue sharing is that the unions here 
have all redeveloped their grounds at considerable expense and should be able 
to enjoy the rewards. New Zealand, Australia and South Africa play Test matches 
all over their countries rather than in one base, although two of the Tests 
against the Lions next year will be at Eden Park, and only Sydney competes with 
Twickenham, Paris and Cardiff in terms of capacity.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fglobal-season-new-zealand-home-nations-rugby-union-the-breakdown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19a143a61c643b8c37eb57517098a11c9a346bac%2F0_0_5184_3109%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Global%20season%20will%20only%20happen%20if%20New%20Zealand%20and%20home%20nations%20work%20together%20%7C%20Paul%20Rees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fglobal-season-new-zealand-home-nations-rugby-union-the-breakdown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Global%20season%20will%20only%20happen%20if%20New%20Zealand%20and%20home%20nations%20work%20together%20%7C%20Paul%20Rees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fglobal-season-new-zealand-home-nations-rugby-union-the-breakdown%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19a143a61c643b8c37eb57517098a11c9a346bac%2F0_0_5184_3109%2F5184.jpg>
 The RFU recently entered into a £50m revolving credit facility with RBS over 
five years to finance the east stand redevelopment at Twickenham. Photograph: 
Clive Rose/Getty Images 
Stadium development was funded by loans: earlier this year the Rugby Football 
Union <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rugby-football-union> entered into a 
£50m revolving credit facility with RBS over five years to finance the east 
stand redevelopment at Twickenham, which will start after next year’s Six 
Nations, as well as the laying of artificial pitches at community level, 
two-thirds of which has already been drawn down.

Ben Te’o: ‘Some people in union love that Sam Burgess went back’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/31/ben-teo-worcester-rugby-union-league-sam-burgess>
Loans are granted not least on income projection. Take out autumn home matches 
against New Zealand, South Africa and Australia and the three Celtic unions are 
in financial trouble and the RFU’s £152m annual turnover suffers a tumble. The 
hemispheres are in it together and a danger of failing to agree a tour schedule 
after 2019, or taking talks down to the wire as seems to be the way now, would 
be to create a vacuum that would probably be filled by clubs, and not just ones 
in England and France.

The game has stretched itself in the last 20 years to generate the money to 
pay players and coaches: even the RFU blew its international playing budget 
last season through generous bonuses for the Six Nations title and the grand 
slam. A season that used to run from the beginning of September to the end of 
April, with a June tour more occasional than routine, now starts with 
friendlies in August and extends to the end of May – longer in France where the 
Top 14 will again stretch into June having kicked off two weekends ago.

A global season, in which everything was synchronised, would work only if Test 
sides were fed by a league made up of sides from the two hemispheres, Super 
Rugby meets the European Champions Cup. The two windows would be separate, but 
that would devalue domestic leagues, something the Top 14 and Premiership rugby 
would not consider, never mind accept.

And so the debate will go on, more questions than answers. The new campaign 
promises much in England, where if Gloucester and Bath pick up, Harlequins add 
growl to their bite and Northampton loosen up, the battle for the top four 
places will be intense. The Pro12 needs the Welsh regions to come out of 
hibernation, while Conor O’Shea’s move to Italy should galvanise Treviso and 
Zebre.

The global season issue will run in the background. The hemispheres are in it 
together and they can only resolve it together.

• This is an extract taken from The Breakdown, the Guardian’s weekly rugby 
union email.To subscribe, just visit this page, find The Breakdown and follow 
the instructions <https://profile.theguardian.com/email-prefs>.
 