
From the moment that Donald Trump denied, in a nationally televised 
presidential debate, that he had ever groped or kissed a woman without her 
permission, it was only a matter of time beforeGloria Allred got involved 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/22/trump-news-porn-star-jessica-drake-gloria-allred>
.

An ambulance chaser to her critics, a righteous crusader to her admirers, the 
75-year-old women’s rights attorney is never far when a scandal of this nature 
bursts into national view. No one knows this better than Allred herself. “I 
knew,” she said in a recent interview, “as soon as I heard those words – the 
denial in the debate – that women would start contacting me and want to come 
forward.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fgloria-allred-lawyer-donald-trump-sexual-assault%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13bbcc3e85d9c8ea7422e269df5bb7044df8ad4e%2F0_0_1281_2048%2F1281.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gloria%20Allred%3A%20'Many%20women%20contacted%20me%20even%20prior%20to%20the%20Trump%20tape'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fgloria-allred-lawyer-donald-trump-sexual-assault%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gloria%20Allred%3A%20%27Many%20women%20contacted%20me%20even%20prior%20to%20the%20Trump%20tape%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fgloria-allred-lawyer-donald-trump-sexual-assault%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13bbcc3e85d9c8ea7422e269df5bb7044df8ad4e%2F0_0_1281_2048%2F1281.jpg>
 Norma McCorvey, formally known as ‘Jane Roe’, with Gloria Allred in front of 
the US supreme court building on 26 April 1989, just before attorneys began 
arguing the 1973 landmark abortion decision. Photograph: Greg Gibson/AFP/Getty 
Images 
Sure enough, Allred has, as of publication, introduced the world to three 
different women who accuse Trump of inappropriate sexual contact. Her 
involvement has placed Allred back in familiar territory: holding court at one 
of her trademark press conferences, surrounded by a phalanx of news crews.

Politics is her strong suit. Allred tanked Meg Whitman’s bid for California 
governor when she announced that Whitman’s former nanny would be suing for 
unpaid wages. And she fanned the flames engulfing Herman Cain’s presidential 
campaign when she introduced a woman who claimed that Cain once grabbed her 
head, forced it toward his crotch, and leered, “You want a job, right?”

But the California attorney has also pursued causes that have chagrined her 
fellow feminists. It was not so long ago that Allred’s press conferences 
starred Tiger Woods’ ex-girlfriend or a woman who had an online flirtation with 
Anthony Weiner. Allredproclaimed 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2010/12/tabloid-feminist/308300/> 
that Woods’ ex was “a victim because he broke her heart”.


“Some of her causes are incredibly worthy,” the writer Emily Bazelon told the 
New York Times <http://www.nytimes.com/2010/06/20/fashion/20ALLRED.html?_r=0>. 
“But her way of going about it makes me cringe.”

I spoke with Allred this week about her supposed baggage, Trump’s accusers, 
the cultural shifts around rape and sexual assault and what young women may not 
understand about Hillary Rodham Clinton.

Our conversation took place in two, 15-minute bursts. “I just have so many 
people trying to contact me,” she said as she excused herself from our first 
conversation. “Basically, women about Trump. And I have to get back to them.” 
How many? “Many.”

Supposedly we’re in a moment where the culture and the media is much less 
suspicious of women who say they’ve been raped or assaulted or harassed in the 
workplace. Less suspicious of people like your clients.

Yes and no. Someone just sent me a rape case. And in that case, the jury, when 
they were discussing with the prosecutor afterwards why they voted the way they 
did on the case, some of the jurors, according to the prosecutors, said the 
fact that the woman said “no” was not enough.

If a woman does say “no,” why would that not be enough? I mean, if “no” is not 
enough to indicate a lack of consent, what does a woman have to do?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fdonald-trump-sexual-allegations-nine-women-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eleven%20women%20who%20have%20accused%20Trump%20of%20sexual%20misconduct%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fdonald-trump-sexual-allegations-nine-women-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eleven%20women%20who%20have%20accused%20Trump%20of%20sexual%20misconduct%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fdonald-trump-sexual-allegations-nine-women-video&media=>
Eleven women who have accused Trump of sexual misconduct 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/oct/18/donald-trump-sexual-allegations-nine-women-video>
So where do you think some of this optimism comes from, this idea that it’s 
getting better?

Maybe it’s the old two steps forward, one step backwards? A step forward is 
some of the laws that have been passed in some states, what we call the 
yes-means-yes laws.

I’ve also been active on working to change the laws, now in three states, to 
eliminate the statute of limitations for the criminal prosecution of rape and 
sexual assault. To eliminate that arbitrary time period. That’s a step forward 
because it means that more women can have access to justice. But it’s no 
guarantee.

You’re a lawyer, but you said once that women “have to be heard in the court 
of public opinion as well as in the actual courts”. Is that –

In some cases. In some cases. Not all. 

Tell me about that distinction. 

I’m not always back there saying, yes, you must speak out! I do this case by 
case. We settle many, many cases confidentially. No one except the parties and 
the lawyers will ever know that there even was an allegation.


And the women accusing Trump – what goes into the decision to have those big, 
trademark press conferences?

Mr Trump’s own words. I won’t use the P-word, but he did. That, and then his 
denial. I knew, as soon as I heard those words, the denial in the debate, that 
women would start contacting me and want to come forward.
membership callout 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/us-membership/free.html> 
Actually, many women contacted me even prior to the release of the Access 
Hollywood tape. They just wanted me to know what Mr Trump had done.

The accusations being made in these press conferences become news almost 
instantaneously. How is your office vetting these claims before you make them 
public?

We have spoken to individuals who are potential witnesses, who corroborate 
that at approximately the time or at some point after the incident occurred, 
not too long thereafter, they actually told one or more people about what 
happened.

Your critics see you as a serial attention-seeker. And that jibes with Trump’s 
claim – and this is how a lot of people dismiss claims of assault – that these 
women are lying for their “10 minutes of fame”. Do you think your involvement 
with these stories could be seen as compromising?

It’s hard to think of anyone who wants more fame than Mr Trump.

Well, yes.

But I don’t call him an attention-seeker. I just call him a bully. Having said 
that, some of the women who came out before I did a press conference, they’ve 
been labelled all kinds of things by Trump supporters. As Mr Trump said early 
on in his campaign, he could shoot someone on Fifth Avenue and his supporters 
would still support him.

This is something that Emily Bazelon said about you 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2010/06/20/fashion/20ALLRED.html>, I believe around the 
time that you were hosting press conferences with Tiger Woods’ ex-girlfriends, 
who weren’t, to my memory, accusing him of a crime: “Some of her causes are 
incredibly worthy, but her way of going about it makes me cringe.” Why do you 
think you make this other feminist cringe?

I don’t know who Emily Bazelon is. You would have to ask her what things in 
life make her cringe. We’d be in a guessing game about what she means when she 
says “her way of going about it”.

There are some people who would prefer that victims suffer in silence. I’m not 
one of them. We’re lawyers. We don’t take polls or votes to see what other 
feminists believe is right.

OK, but people at the time had this criticism that you were giving an equal 
platform to women with broken hearts and women alleging an actual crime.

Our standard is not: should women only have a voice if they’re the victim of a 
crime? I don’t know who thinks that that’s the standard, that women can only 
speak out if there’s a crime. I’ve never heard that as a requirement.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fgloria-allred-lawyer-donald-trump-sexual-assault%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4ee97de416a115d0f38f9683018656aa2d461a7%2F0_144_3501_2101%2F3501.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gloria%20Allred%3A%20'Many%20women%20contacted%20me%20even%20prior%20to%20the%20Trump%20tape'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fgloria-allred-lawyer-donald-trump-sexual-assault%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gloria%20Allred%3A%20%27Many%20women%20contacted%20me%20even%20prior%20to%20the%20Trump%20tape%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fgloria-allred-lawyer-donald-trump-sexual-assault%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4ee97de416a115d0f38f9683018656aa2d461a7%2F0_144_3501_2101%2F3501.jpg>
 Allred holds hands with spouses Robin Tyler and Diane Olson as they take part 
in the 38th annual San Francisco LGBT pride parade on 29 June 2008. Photograph: 
David Paul Morris/Getty Images 
You’re a big Clinton supporter. Do you notice a generational divide among 
women in how excited they are to see the first woman elected president, 
potentially?

I’m not a pollster. I will say this: I think that there are many women, older 
women, who really understand how important it is that we have a woman president.

Four years from now, and I think of this often, it will be 2020. And Hillary 
Rodham Clinton – if, as, and when she’s elected in November – will still be 
president. And in that year we will mark the 100th anniversary of women’s 
winning the right to vote in the United States.

That will be so important. And yes, I believe that we do, as mothers, as 
grandmothers, understand the importance of having a woman in the White House. 
Not only for the purposes of what I’ll call herstory, but as an inspiration for 
our daughters. And it’s just long overdue.

Is “herstory” really your preferred word for history?

Yes!

Really?

Now it is. If she wins, she really is going to be making herstory.

You referred to Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> as Hillary Rodham 
Clinton. Which I love, I don’t see many people referring to her using her 
maiden name. Is that a conscious choice?

Yes. At some point when she was in Arkansas, after she got married, she added 
her married name. She’s chosen to keep both names. And I’m glad she did. She’s 
saying, consider me on my own merits.

I went to an all-girls high school, and many of these girls went on to be 
accomplished leaders and very successful. When it’s time for a reunion, it’s 
difficult to find some of these girls, because some of them have shed the only 
name we knew them by.

A colleague of mine keeps saying she’s surprised no one is selling shirts that 
just read “Hillary Rodham”.

Yes! I like it. Listen, part of why I admire her is because I have a small 
sense of what she’s endured. She has taken all of this criticism. That’s the 
price you pay for standing up for women’s rights, which is a statement by 
itself. Her election will be a message to our daughters: yYou too can overcome. 
I think this is herstoric and I’m so excited.

I’m sorry, did you say herstoric or historic? 

It’s herstoric.

The Obama presidency unleashed in many ways a racist backlash. Do you think a 
Hillary Clinton presidency could have the potential to do the same for sexism?

There are some people who think that women should be denied opportunities 
because of their gender. But I think she’s going to show, through deeds, not 
just words, what a president can be. For many of the misogynists and male 
chauvinists out there, just experiencing a woman in power hopefully will help 
to eliminate some of those stereotypes.

What’s your level of optimism?

There will still be some who will cling to the gender stereotypes and 
traditional gender roles. But this is it. We’re moving ahead. I’ve already made 
my reservations for the inauguration. I made them back in July.


This Q & A is the product of two phone calls and has been edited and condensed.

 * No billionaire owner, no shareholders. Just independent, investigative 
reporting that fights for the truth, whatever the cost. Why not support it?
Become a Guardian US member 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/supporter?INTCMP=gdnwb_copts_editorial_mem_USAllredTrump_footer>
 for $49 a year, ormake a contribution 
<https://contribute.theguardian.com/home?INTCMP=co_us_editorial_footer_USAllredTrumpRedden>
.  