
Pools of driverless cars, designated aerial drone highways and intelligently 
interconnected transport. All the things that could make transport safer and 
more accessible for everyone are just around the corner.

One of the developments with the biggest potential benefits and social impact 
is driverless vehicles.Consultants KPMG have predicted 
<https://www.smmt.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/CRT036586F-Connected-and-Autonomous-Vehicles-%E2%80%93-The-UK-Economic-Opportu...1.pdf>
 that the annual economic and social benefits for the UK from autonomous 
vehicles could be worth £51bn by 2030, with the greatest share going to the 
places where autonomous technologies are manufactured and actively introduced.

The UK government is keen for Britain to lead the way 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/new-measures-to-help-britain-lead-the-way-in-developing-driverless-technology>
 in developing driverless technology. This puts it ahead of many other 
countries. Under its proposed measures, rules will be changed so thatautomated 
vehicles 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/driverless-vehicles-connected-and-autonomous-technologies>
 can be insured for road use.

Electric vehicles could go first at traffic lights under UK clean air zone 
plans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/13/electric-vehicles-could-go-first-at-traffic-lights-under-uk-clean-air-zone-plans>
But despite optimistic predictions, the autonomous transport revolution faces 
a precarious journey with no smooth pathway or inevitable outcome. Genetically 
modified crops were once believed to be the solution to serious global issues 
of food production, poverty and malnutrition, but adamant opposition and 
tainted public opinion has meant a block on their mainstream use for the 
foreseeable future. The threat is that driverless vehicles could be derailed in 
a similar way.

Social benefits

We need to be clear from the outset about the social benefits and long-term 
benefits for public services and regional planning. At the moment, 93% of road 
accidents are said to becaused by human error 
<https://crashstats.nhtsa.dot.gov/Api/Public/ViewPublication/811059>; by 2030, 
again predicted by KPMG, the introduction of driverless vehicles couldsave 
2,500 lives 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/newsbysector/industry/engineering/11495706/Driverless-cars-to-create-320000-UK-jobs-and-save-2500-lives.html>
 and reduce the number of serious accidents by 25,000 each year.

Greater traffic management could reduce congestion, journey times, CO2 
emissions and noise. Use of unstaffed aerial vehicles for deliveries and some 
public services such as security and monitoring could cut traffic volumes. 
Driverless vehicles won’t need to be parked in crowded central areas, but out 
of town. Less traffic, and the ability of autonomous vehicles to get out of the 
way quickly and to alert other vehicles, could also mean better access for 
emergency vehicles. Roads and central public areas could be safer for 
pedestrians through anti-collision and speed control technology.

Your next car will be hacked. Will autonomous vehicles be worth it?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/13/autonomous-cars-self-driving-hack-mikko-hypponen-sxsw>
There’s more: supporters say autonomous vehicles could help public sector 
workers tackle ageing population issues. More than1 million UK drivers are aged 
over 80 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/blog/2012/mar/26/older-drivers-better-tests-judge-ability>
. Driverless cars could allow mobility and independence for elderly people, 
without having to rely on subsidised public transport.

They could also offer local authorities a lower-cost option for delivering 
services such as security, environmental monitoring and refuse collection. 
Fewer accidents and risks means lower insurance costs. Investment in the 
necessary infrastructure could be recouped by attracting more business and 
residents, looking for next-generation access and mobility.

Older drivers: are better tests needed to judge ability behind the wheel?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/blog/2012/mar/26/older-drivers-better-tests-judge-ability>
The select committee on science and technology is looking 
<https://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/lords-select/science-and-technology-committee/news-parliament-2015/autonomous-vehicles-inquiry/>
 at how to such innovations could be delivered, and how the UK could make the 
most of its early developmental strengths, combining the new tech with existing 
infrastructure.

We’ve become used to existing assistive technologies in our cars, such as 
cruise control, self-parking or collision detection, but fully autonomous 
vehicles are something else. Sitting in or just driving alongside 
computer-controlled “robot” vehicles is an alien concept.

Technology tends to be more trusted when it is under human control – even when 
evidence suggests that the human element creates most of the problems. However, 
IT systems and technology of any kind have the potential to malfunction, 
meaning that accidents are possible, and these will be more complex and more 
unexpected than those we’re used to from those involving human misjudgments and 
mistakes.

Robust cybersecurity is essential. Effective systems will rely on transferring 
data to and from sensors, and also between vehicles and central control 
systems. In theory, that will mean a possible threat of cyberattacks causing 
damage to vehicles, injury to passengers and the potential to gridlock whole 
transport areas. This is where the public sector cost comes in – through 
ensuring a reliable, safe digital infrastructure for telecoms and the 
technology that allows autonomous vehicles to run.

Much of this technology is already available, and the benefits are clear 
enough. But to avoid a bumpy road to an autonomous future, strong collaboration 
is required. If we can deliver well-developed, safe technology, policymakers 
and the public will then be able to feel more confident about going driverless.

Professor Graham Braithwaite is director of transport systems at Cranfield 
University

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 