
Gonzalo Higuaín struck again with a trademark goal to give the Serie A leaders 
Juventus <https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus> a 1-0 win over Roma in 
a tense top-of-the-table match which put them seven points clear on Saturday.

The Argentinian’s 10th goal of the season and his third in the past two games 
gave Juve their 25th consecutive home league win and put them on course for a 
sixth consecutiveSerie A <https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> 
title.

Roma, forced to chase the game after Higuaín 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/31/gonzalo-higuain-survives-napoli-reunion-to-give-juventus-impetus-for-scudetto>
 struck in the 14th minute, had long periods of possession which they failed to 
turn into real chances and now face another long pursuit of the Turin side.

Gonzalo Higuaín survives Napoli reunion to give Juventus impetus for Scudetto 
| Paolo Bandini
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/31/gonzalo-higuain-survives-napoli-reunion-to-give-juventus-impetus-for-scudetto>
With one match to go before the Christmas break, Juventus have 42 points from 
17 games, followed byRoma <https://www.theguardian.com/football/roma> on 35 and 
Milan on 33 after they were held 0-0 at home by Atalanta.

It was a familiar story for Roma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/16/edin-dzeko-roma-serie-a-jeventus>
 who have been the runners-up to Juventus twice in the last three seasons. 
Higuaín saw an early shot saved by Wojciech Szczesny before putting Juventus 
ahead in style.

The former Napoli and Real Madrid player received a pass some 30 metres from 
goal, won a tussle with Daniele De Rossi, slipped past Kostas Manolos and hit a 
left-foot shot in off the post from the edge of the area.

Roma managed to compose themselves after that early setback and their best 
chances fell to Manolos from corners. The Greek defender had a close-range shot 
blocked during a goalmouth scramble in the first half and headed wide at the 
far post in the second half. They won eight corners to five for Juventus but 
resorted to long crosses too often and, for all their pressure, had only three 
shots on target.

At the other end, Szczesny made a brilliant save to deny Stefano Sturaro after 
Mario Mandzukic’s back heel gave him a free shot on goal.
 