
The British are in the midst of a critical health epidemic. In the 12 months 
to June 2016, the number of deaths jumped by the biggest absolute and relative 
amount since 1940 – a rise of 52,400. And this appears not solely to be an 
effect of a growing and ageing population, since the increase is spread across 
age groups. (Deaths rose by 12% among those aged 90 and over; 10% for 85-89; 7% 
for 80-84; 5% for 75-70; and 3% for those aged 55-74.) This is unprecedented in 
peacetime .

The jump, unreported in national media, is not entirely a surprise. Death 
rates have been rising slightly since 2010, reversing what was a steady fall 
since the 1970s. This is part of a general decline in health and wellbeing over 
the same period. TheOffice for National Statistics’ survey 
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/deaths/bulletins/deathsregistrationsummarytables/2015#number-of-deaths-in-the-uk-rises>
 of wellbeing reports that the numbers who are self-reporting satisfaction with 
their health has consistently declined since 2010. The “happiness index” 
recorded its lowest ever level in March 2016.

It was the over-65s whose votes are taking Britain out of the EU: the working 
population between 18 and 64 voted Remain by a narrow margin, with the 
majorities increasing among successivelyyounger voters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/02/brexit-referendum-voters-survey>
. The common explanation is that the elderly, pampered by their pensions rising 
in real terms, could indulge a misty-eyed vision of a 1950s-style sovereign 
Britain and voted for an irrecoverable imperial past rather than a European 
future. But these figures offer a darker explanation. The elderly knew the 
current order was so dysfunctional it was not only making them ill, it was 
making an increasing number of their friends die earlier than anyone had 
expected.

There is affirmation from the US. It was the old and ill who gave Donald Trump 
his victory. The Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation at the University 
of Washington,the Economist reports, has compiled county-level data across the 
US on life expectancy and the prevalence of obesity, diabetes, heavy drinking 
and lack of regular physical exercise. Mr Trump beat Mitt Romney’s base of 
support in 2012 by a stunning margin, but the analysts think that these 
indicators of ill-health explain 43% of those gains – an even greater 
indicator, then, than being college or non-college educated. Asthe Economist 
wryly remarks, if diabetes had been 7% lower in Michigan, heavy drinking 5% 
lower in Wisconsin or 8% more Pennsylvanians had taken regular exercise, then 
Hillary Clinton would now be heading for the White House.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fgood-health-good-society-we-are-suffering%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe7714df1447f34fb5ce644c5934f63adfd52e3aa%2F0_117_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Good%20health%20is%20born%20of%20a%20good%20society.%20Little%20wonder%20that%20we%E2%80%99re%20suffering%20%7CWill%20Hutton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fgood-health-good-society-we-are-suffering%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Good%20health%20is%20born%20of%20a%20good%20society.%20Little%20wonder%20that%20we%E2%80%99re%20suffering%20%7CWill%20Hutton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fgood-health-good-society-we-are-suffering%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe7714df1447f34fb5ce644c5934f63adfd52e3aa%2F0_117_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Some analysts say health indicators go a long way to explain why elderly, 
white US voters handed victory to Donald Trump. Photograph: Ricardo 
Arduengo/Reuters 
White working-class America has been enveloped in a gathering public health 
crisis for decades. As life expectancy for Hispanics and African Americans has 
risen, so it has fallen for poor whites, with alcoholism, suicide and drug 
abuse rising strongly. Deindustrisalisation and the collapse of blue-collar 
employment not only mean lost jobs and declining real wages, they create 
futility and purposelessness that can lead to self-harm and early death, 
especially if the wider structures that offer health and social care are 
weakening.

In Britain, Oxford University’s Professor Danny Dorling 
<http://www.dannydorling.org/wp-content/files/dannydorling_publication_id5639.pdf>
 thinks part of the reason for the jump in British death rates is the roll-back 
of social and health provision. Losses in adult homecare visits, meals on 
wheels, bus services and the general squeeze on health spending have been felt 
most acutely among the late middle aged and elderly. Former chancellor George 
Osborne’s insistence that the entire deficit reduction programme be shouldered 
by spending cuts, rather than in balance with tax rises, was not only bad 
economics, it has been ruinous for health and wellbeing.

All this is overlaid on a country where the inequalities have been growing 
faster and to higher absolute levels than anywhere in the industrialised world. 
In large parts of the country there is no more than a “foundation economy” 
providing subsistence – supermarkets, petrol stations, schools, hospitals and 
local administration – with virtually no economic activity adding value. 
Productivity runs at a fraction of the levels of London and the south-east. 
Local authorities presiding over all this have suffered incredible cuts and 
have less power to compensate by raising money locally than in any other 
western country, another bitter first in a catalogue of baleful league tables. 
Older voters living in these areas – the rise in death rates in the north-east, 
for example, was the highest in the UK – can be forgiven for thinking that 
anything would be better than the status quo, even a change as self-destructive 
as Brexit.

Theresa May’s government, and business secretary, Greg Clark, in particular, 
are at least beginning to understand the spatial inequality problem and the 
redirection of policy needed to address it. The autumn statement promised a 
quintupling, to more than £2bn over the next five years, of the resources that 
Innovate UK will have to stimulate fast-growing firms, especially in the 
“left-behind” parts of Britain – a 360-degree reversal of their predecessors’ 
policy, which was a running down of the entire apparatus.

Dispelling the futility, lack of purpose and unhappiness that besets so many 
lives is going to take more than immigration controls

But while this is a good starting point, there is as yet no sense of urgency 
or creation of a national purpose within which an imaginative and convincing 
response might be cast. Too much energy is spent keeping the fissiparous Tory 
party together rather than governing for the country. Hard Brexit, with a bill 
running into many wasted billions, is a destructive distraction. Meanwhile, the 
squeeze on health and social care continues. There is no willingness to 
relegitimise taxation as the means to create public good. The debate about 
immigration is wildly disproportionate to its importance in the revitalisation 
of British life: after all, fewer than 80,000 non-UK citizens took full-time 
residence in the UK last year. Dispelling the widespread sense of futility, ill 
health and unhappiness that besets so many lives is going to require more than 
controlling immigration.

The Labour leadership offers little or nothing; it is intellectually bereft 
and politically marginalised. Of course, the Lib Dems are right to insist we 
must stay as close to the EU as possible, but that alone will not address the 
depth of the inequalities and lack of hope at the root of declining life 
expectancy and the collapse in wellbeing. Yes, the madness of hard Brexit 
should be stopped, but that can only be done by offering hope and resources to 
the millions who have been denied both for too long. So, 2017 needs to be the 
year when our national debate gets real. A death epidemic is a grim reminder of 
how high the stakes have risen.
 