
An appeals court has found in favour of Google after a man claimed the search 
engine had defamed him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2012/nov/26/google-defamation-libel-australia> 
by publishing photos of him linked to hardened criminals of Melbourne’s 
underworld.

Milorad Trkulja sued Google, arguing when search terms such as Melbourne 
criminal underworld photos andMelbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne> underworld criminals 
were entered, images of him showed up.

He argued the search results put him in the same league as convicted murderer 
Carl Williams, underworld killer Andrew “Benji” Veniamin and drug kingpin Tony 
Mokbel.

Google is publisher according to Australian court | David Banks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2012/nov/26/google-defamation-libel-australia> 
Google <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> tried unsuccessfully to 
have the case against it set aside on the grounds it had no real prospect of 
success. It argued it could not be held to be the publisher of the search 
results, because they were produced by the automated operation of a vast web 
search based on algorithms. Further, it argued the search results were 
incapable of being found to have defamed Trkulja.

On Tuesday, Victoria’s court of appeal ruled Google’s appeal should be 
allowed. “The appeal has a real, not fanciful, prospect of success,” the judges 
said.

The judges held that, as the case was put, Google could not be held to be 
publisher of the allegedly defamatory material. They also found the material on 
which Trkulja sued was not capable of conveying any defamatory meanings.

The judges acknowledged Trkulja could have argued his case in a way that 
enabled the appeal judges to find Google did publish the material, but he did 
not.

They noted the chance for a search engine to produce results that could defame 
someone was “acute”. But if search engines were to have immunity from liability 
for defamation, it should come from the parliament rather than the courts, they 
said.
 