
Google <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> owner Alphabet’s 
subsidiary research company, X, has shut down its project aimed at building a 
solar-powered drone intended to bring internet access to remote areas.

The project, which stemmed from an acquisition Google made in April 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/apr/15/google-buys-drone-maker-titan-aerospace>
 of New Mexico-based Titan Aerospace, was deemed by X to be less promising than 
a competing attempt to use lightweight weather balloons for the same purpose.

“The team from Titan was brought into X in late-2015. We ended our exploration 
of high-altitude UAVs for internet access shortly after,” an X spokesperson 
said. “By comparison, at this stage the economics and technical feasibility of 
Project Loon [its high-altitude balloon project] present a much more promising 
way to connect rural and remote parts of the world. Many people from the Titan 
team are now using their expertise as part of other high-flying projects at X, 
including Loon and Project Wing.”

In ditching solar-powered drones, X has taken a different stance to rival 
Facebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook>, which has gone 
all-in on the technology with its Aquila project. The Aquila drone, a 
130ft-long aircraft developed in Bridgwater, Somerset, is intended to circle in 
the upper atmosphere, using lasers to broadcast data down to base stations on 
the ground.

Facebook reported a “successful” test flight for the drone in July 2016, but 
America’s national transportation safety board later revealed that in fact, the 
drone was blown off course upon landing, resulting inthe end of its wing 
snapping off 
<http://www.theverge.com/2016/12/16/13983868/facebook-drone-crash-aquila-wing-failure-ntsb-report>
. In a follow-up interview with the Verge, Facebook’s Yael Maguire argued that, 
because the drone had flown perfectly in the air and only suffered damage upon 
landing, “we feel like we shared 99.9% of the details, from a time perspective.”

X’s Project Loon proposal, achieved its first major milestone back in June 
2013, when a New Zealand farmer connected to balloon-powered internet. The 
system uses advanced weather forecasting to actively navigate by raising and 
lowering its altitude to select which direction the wind should blow the 
balloons.

Project Wing, X’s other drone project, uses smaller machines to test the 
feasibility of drone-powered deliveries.
 