
The image of the Earth from space is so seared into human consciousness that 
it is hard to conceive what it was like to live without the picture of our 
planet as a blue sphere that we all now carry in our minds.

The first photographs of the Earth’s surface seen from 100 miles were taken in 
1947 <https://www.nasa.gov/multimedia/imagegallery/image_feature_1298.html>. By 
1968, the famousEarthrise image 
<https://www.nasa.gov/multimedia/imagegallery/image_feature_1249.html> 
photographed by the crew of Apollo 8 framed our planet as a beautiful oasis in 
black space. Today, stunning and intensely informative pictures of the Earth’s 
surface are being taken from space constantly: so comprehensively, for so long, 
that Google has now createdtimelapses 
<https://earthengine.google.com/timelapse/> that show three decades of change.

It induces anxiety to watch, in just a few seconds, a desert in Saudi Arabia 
turn into a vast agribusiness complex, a lake in Bolivia vanish or cities grow 
spectacularly in China.

History has become a car crash in speeded-up motion. We can see, in these 
timelapse satellite videos, how the Earth is being torn apart by human acts. We 
can also see, intimelapse videos of Arctic ice 
<http://edition.cnn.com/videos/weather/2015/08/31/glaciers-melt-before-your-eyes-extreme-ice-survey-climate-change-orig-mss.cnn>
, great glaciers melt before our eyes. Yet, are human beings capable of 
assimilating such global perspectives or is our consciousness tragically 
limited to a pre-space age, even pre-Copernican mentality? Are people only 
capable of acting on immediate, personal and local concerns, even though images 
from space can show us the bigger picture?

This is one of the real problems of our time. The new vistas on Earth opened 
up by Apollo 8 in 1968 may seem to have sunk into the very fabric of human 
consciousness, but it also seems that we can watch any number of videos of 
expanding cities and vanishing ice without becoming globally conscious.

Extreme scepticism about climate change has proved a vote winner for Donald 
Trump. Specifically, Barack Obama’s environmental policies have been accused of 
creating a“war on coal” 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/peabody-coal-bankruptcy_us_570eacb6e4b0ffa5937e0e7a>
. Pennsylvania minerswere not happy 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/blue-collar-pennsylvania-voters-all-in-for-trump/> 
to accept that their traditional jobs were doomed for the greater good. All the 
images of climate change, the timelapse videos of a crumbling Earth, the crash 
of glaciers, don’t apparently mean anything compared with the direct 
experiences people have in their own neighbourhoods. If a truth is 
inconvenient, ignore it.

If you want to experience, directly, the gap between imagination and reality, 
science and common sense, that threatens our ability to act rationally to save 
the planet, just consider your smartphone. Walking down the street, I can see 
myself move on the screen of my phone, in a real-time, real-life link between 
myself and a network of satellites. Yet do we go around pondering this magic? 
No, and perhaps it even seems naive to do so. We just use the app to check how 
far we are from the meeting or pub we’re trying to get to.

We are now a species in space, our lives as well as the health of our planet 
scanned by satellites. Globalisation is not abstract but a scientific reality 
that is made visible in these timelapse images of our changing world. Yet that 
knowledge somehow does not get into the depths of our psyches. The GPS in our 
smartphones and cars is an unfortunate metaphor for a crushing failure of human 
imagination. We literally refuse to engage with the dazzling global and 
extra-global nature of modern life. It’s all too complex, apparently.

We are mentally imprisoned, unable to soar in our minds to see the Earth as a 
satellite can see it. And it’s killing us.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fevolving-earth-captured-by-google-timelapse-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Google%20timelapse%20shows%20changing%20earth%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fevolving-earth-captured-by-google-timelapse-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Google%20timelapse%20shows%20changing%20earth%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fevolving-earth-captured-by-google-timelapse-video&media=>
Google timelapse shows changing earth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/video/2016/dec/05/evolving-earth-captured-by-google-timelapse-video> 