
The Croatian Serb rebel leader Goran Hadžić, put on trial by a UN war crimes 
court over his role in the 1991-1995 war, has died.

UN war crimes judges in The Hague had in April ordered an indefinite halt to 
the trial of Hadžić, 57, as he battled the advanced stages of terminal brain 
cancer.

Goran Hadzic capture a milestone for Yugoslav war crimes tribunal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jul/20/goran-hadzic-capture-war-crimes-milestone>
“After a severe illness Goran Hadžić died today,” said the state-run Tanjug 
news agency, quoting the regional hospital of Serbia’s Vojvodina province.

His health “significantly deteriorated in last two months and he spent most of 
that time in the hospital where he died”, the agency said.

In May UN prosecutors called for Hadžić’s trial to be abandoned but no final 
decision had been made.

Hadžić, the last fugitive arrested by the international criminal tribunal for 
the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), was charged with 14 counts of war crimes and 
crimes against humanity.

The accusations included the murder of civilians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/cifamerica/2011/aug/13/goran-hadzic-war-crimes>
 taken from Vukovar hospital in 1991 in one of the conflict’s darkest episodes.

He was also charged with responsibility for the massacre of Croat civilians 
who were forced to walk into a minefield in the Croatian town of Lovas in 
October 1991 – one of the first crimes of the long, bloody conflict.

Hadžić wanted to create a Serb-dominated state after the splintering of the 
former Yugoslavia in 1991 following the collapse of communism.

He was accused of “cleansing” non-Serbs from about a third of Croatia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/croatia> by using murder, unlawful jailings, 
beatings, deportations and forcible transfers.

His trial opened in October 2012 following his arrest in Serbia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/serbia> in 2011 after seven years on the run.

Hadžić, a former warehouse worker who denied all the charges, was diagnosed 
with terminal brain cancer in November 2014.

He was released provisionally six months later and allowed to return to 
northern Serbia for treatment. He had lived at his home in Novi Sad since then.

The one-time leader of the self-proclaimed Republic of Serbian Krajina during 
the early 1990s, he was the last of the 161 suspects to be put on trial after 
being captured in northern Serbia’s idyllic Fruška Gora mountains.

His capture came two months after 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jul/20/goran-hadzic-arrest-serbia-war> 
that of the court’s most wanted fugitive, the former Bosnian Serb army chief 
Ratko Mladić. Mladić, charged with genocide and crimes against humanity for his 
role in the 1992-1995 Bosnian war, is the last defendant on trial before the 
ICTY. A judgment is expected in November 2017.

Investigators had tracked Hadžić down as he was trying to sell an early 
20th-century painting by the Italian master Amedeo Modigliani valued at several 
million dollars.


Triggered by the Slovenian and Croatian declarations of independence from the 
socialist Yugoslav federation in the early 1990s, the Balkan wars claimed about 
130,000 lives and left millions of people homeless.

 * This article was corrected on 16 July 2016. Vojvodina is a province of 
Serbia, not Croatia.
 