
The government has released the final version of the National Planning Policy 
Framework (NPPF), reducing more than 1000 pages of planning guidance to around 
50. From the definition of sustainable development, to concerns about 
protection of green belt land, the draft policy was met with criticism from 
many, so how did the final version measure up? Share your thoughts in the 
comment thread or tweet us@GdnLocalGov <https://twitter.com/#!/gdnlocalgov>.

Dame Fiona Reynolds, director-general of the National Trust



There are a number of important changes that have been made to the draft, 
responding to concerns that we and others raised. All these changes improve the 
document and give it a better tone and balance.

"Now the serious business of planning begins. The country needs huge effort at 
a local level to get plans in place that properly reflect the integration of 
social, economic and environmental goals, and protect places people value. The 
National Trust, along with many other organisations and people, will play our 
part and watch to see how it works in practice.

Clive Betts, chair of the Commons Communities and Local Government committee 



"I am pleased that the government has accepted - in whole or in part - 30 out 
of 35 of recommendations made by the committee in its report on the draft NPPF.

"The key change is the emphasis which the finalised NPPF places on local plans 
and local decision making, linked to the change in the definition of 
sustainable development. I welcome that the final NPPF drops the statement that 
'decision-takers at every level should assume that the default answer to 
development proposals is "yes", except where this would compromise the key 
sustainable development principles set out in this Framework'.

"Other welcome changes include the restoration of a clear emphasis on 
brown-field development and town centre first, alongside recognition for the 
requirement for equivalent or improved replacement sports facilities, when 
existing facilities are lost to development.

"These changes will have strengthened the NPPF. The committee will examine the 
details of the NPPF in due course."

Bob Robinson, chairman, DPP planning consultants

"This is a useful, self-contained document to guide both developers and local 
authorities in the future. The most surprising element following the draft is 
the immediacy of the transitional arrangements for the framework's 
introduction. It was always about making local authorities take responsibility 
at a local level for development in their area. Those authorities that have 
chosen not to bring forward planning frameworks since before 2004, quite 
rightly in my view, are those that will immediately have to operate under the 
new regime.

"Otherwise the NPPF changes only marginally from the draft â€“ although there 
have been some useful and necessary clarifications. As anticipated there is 
further definition of the presumption in favour of sustainable development; it 
now includes aspects ofthe Brundtland definition 
<http://www.unece.org/oes/nutshell/2004-2005/focus_sustainable_development.html>
, and the reaffirmation of the protection for the green belt and the town 
centre first approach also remain."

Brian Berry, chief executive of the Federation of Master Builders

"It's good that the government appears to have stuck to its guns and carried 
out its intended reforms to the planning system which are badly needed if we 
are to meet our housing needs. Over the next five years the gap between demand 
for housing and the increase in housing supply is going to grow by more than 
half a million. It will be the young in our society who are going to suffer 
unless we can build new homes for them to live in."

"The NPPF is a step in the right direction but in order to build more homes 
local planning authorities must allocate sufficient financially viable land for 
the construction of new homes. Local authorities, local communities and 
interest groups need to take a more responsible approach to planning, and to 
permit the introduction of a system that provides sufficient land to satisfy 
the needs of our growing population."

Kate Henderson, chief executive, Town and Country Planning Association

"The NPPF highlights the benefits of planning new settlements or extensions to 
existing villages and towns that follow the principles of garden cities. The 
garden city vision combines the very best of town and country living to create 
healthy homes for working people in vibrant communities.

"The recognition in the NPPF and the prime minister's statement last week 
provide a unique opportunity for councils to plan for new settlements which 
enhance the environment, provide high quality affordable housing and locally 
accessible jobs."

Shaun Spiers, chief executive of the Campaign to Protect Rural England 

"We were very reassured that Greg Clark recognised the intrinsic value of the 
ordinary countryside 'whether specifically designated or not' and stated that 
the five principles of the UK Sustainable Development Strategy are included in 
the document.

"We now need to carry out a thorough analysis of the final document. While 
recognising the scale of the housing crisis, we remain very concerned to ensure 
that the planning framework does not place undue emphasis on short-term 
economic growth at the expense of other important long term, public interest 
objectives of planning, including the protection and enhancement of the 
environment.

"We are also concerned about the length of the transition period, which at 12 
months will pose serious challenges to many local authorities. We hope these 
councils will be given adequate support to get their plans in place. This will 
be critical if local people are to have a real voice in planning decisions."

Mark Henderson, chief executive of Home Group

"As a leading builder of affordable homes, we welcome the decision to simplify 
planning policy and to focus the minds of planning officials on approving 
sustainable development unless there is an over-riding reason to refuse.

"Home Group lobbied hard for a greater recognition of the importance of 
affordable housing in the framework and we're pleased to see that local 
planning authorities will be required to clearly set out the rate at which 
affordable homes will be delivered in their area. The commitment to greater 
mixed-use development is the correct approach as this is the only way to build 
stronger communities and avoid ghettoisation."

Ian Trehearne, planning expert at law firm Berwin Leighton Paisner (BLP)

'Planning authorities will need to engage positively in planning to support 
growth with quicker and more responsive plans. Where there is no plan, 
proposals for development will be judged on the national NPPF criteria.

"The green belt is protected. The general value of the countryside for itself 
- and not just in designated areas - is acknowledged, as are the heritage tests 
previously inPPS5 
<http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/+/http://www.communities.gov.uk/publications/planningandbuilding/pps5>
. But by incorporating rather than separating them, they are put in a different 
context and brought down to earth. Priority for development is given to 
previously developed land and a five year housing supply of land is required.

"Emerging local policy will be given transitional weight in areas where there 
is no completed policy, but in the longer term, planning authorities will need 
to raise their game very significantly, particularly to deal with housing land 
requirements if they are to avoid losing at appeal."

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional. Join the local 
government network 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/local-government-network/2011/oct/10/join-local-government-network>
 for more comment and analysis direct to your inbox
 