
The government is determined to prevent ministers and officials from being 
accountable to the courts for colluding in wrongdoing abroad even if it 
involves torture, three of the country's most senior judges were warned on 
Monday.

In a case with "profound and far-reaching implications for the rule of law", 
British officials would enjoy "impunity from its own courts", the judges were 
told.

The warnings came from Richard Hermer QC, acting for Abdel Hakim Belhaj 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdel-hakim-belhaj> and his Moroccan wife, 
Fatima Bouchar, who were abducted in a joint MI6/CIA operation in 2004 and 
secretly flown to Tripoli, where Muammar Gaddafi's security forces tortured him.

Belhaj wants to sue MI6 and other British agencies, and the then Labour 
foreign secretary,Jack Straw <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jackstraw>, 
accusing them of involvement in the rendition operation and arguing that they 
should share responsibility for it. Lawyers for Straw and the government's 
security and intelligence agencies claim they should be protected by the 
so-called "foreign act of state doctrine".

They say that under this doctrine, British courts should not pass judgment on 
acts where British officials acted with foreign agents abroad. Government 
lawyers say any wrongdoing in this case happened outside the UK â€“ in Malaysia 
and Thailand, where the CIA aircraft transporting the family landed on the way 
to Tripoli, and in Libya.

If the government has its way, Hermer told the master of the rolls, Lord 
Dyson, Lord Justice Lloyd Jones, and Lady Justice Sharp, British officials 
would have "immunity from accountability" in civil courts here "irrespective of 
the illegality of the act".

In the high court last year, Mr Justice Simon dismissed Belhaj's claim, citing 
the "foreign act of state doctrine". However, the judge said he gave his ruling 
"with hesitation" on "what appears to be a potentially well-founded claim that 
the UK authorities were directly implicated in the extraordinary rendition of 
the claimants".

But Hermer told the appeal court on Monday that the acts of British officials 
abroad was the issue, not those of foreign states. In any case, torture was not 
only illegal under English law, it was against the law of those other countries 
where the rendition took place, he said.

The effect of Simon's judgment, Hermer said in a written submission, was that 
"UK officials can participate in a conspiracy to abduct and torture but avoid 
liability in the domestic courts (or anywhere else)".

Amnesty International, Justice (the British affiliate of the International 
Commission of Jurists), and Redress, the human rights organisation helping 
torture survivors obtain justice and reparation, have joined the case. The UN 
special rapporteurs on torture and arbitrary detention have also been granted 
permission to intervene on Belhaj's behalf.

In a written submission for the organisations, Martin Chamberlain QC, told the 
court: "The outcome of this appeal has significant potential to determine the 
availability of an effective remedy to victims of gross violations of human 
rights both in the United Kingdom and other common law jurisdictions where 
officials act in concert with officials from other states."

He added: "The special status of the absolute prohibition of torture is well 
established in international law."

The role of MI6 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/mi6> and the CIA in Belhaj's 
rendition was revealed in 2011 after Nato bombing destroyed the headquarters of 
Gaddafi's intelligence chiefs and scattered documents from their files.

Whitehall sources say that in their dealings with Gaddafi, MI6 was carrying 
out "ministerially authorised government policy". When the Guardian has asked 
Straw about the renditions, he has said he cannot comment because of a 
continuing police investigation into the affair.

The appeal continues.
 