
Parliamentary legislation that paved the way for Britain to enter the EU is 
being treated with contempt by ministers who regard it as less important than 
the Dangerous Dogs Act, the supreme court has been told.

On the second day of a politically sensitive appeal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/dec/06/brexit-article-50-supreme-court-hearing-day-two-live-updates>
 that will decide whether the government or parliament has legitimate authority 
to trigger Brexit, the lofty neo-Tudor courtroom in Westminster was packed with 
teams of government officials, lawyers and the public.

Lord Pannick QC, opening the argument on behalf of the lead claimant, Gina 
Miller, dismissed the government’s assertion that it was entitled to use its 
prerogative powers to deliver notice of the UK’s intention to leave the EU 
under article 50 of the treaty onEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> as “inherently implausible”.

His reply to the government’s submissions came midway through the four-day 
hearing at the supreme court, where, because of the urgency and significance of 
the constitutional issues, for the first time 11 justices are sitting together 
to hear the case.
Atom, article 50 appeal 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=2f00ae48-ade6-4d35-ace1-1024cc0ac8d8>
Miller, an investment manager, sat behind Pannick with two bodyguards as he 
delivered his speech. She has received death threats and abuse from internet 
trolls alleging she is trying to obstruct Brexit. Miller insists her claim is 
about ensuring that it is enacted so that parliament can have a proper debate 
on the process.

Pannick, an expert in constitutional law and one of the most highly paid 
barristers in private practice, emphasised the unique qualities of the 1972 
European Communities Act, which prepared the way for Britain to join what was 
then the European Economic Community.

“The courts have repeatedly recognised that the 1972 act has a constitutional 
status,” Pannick told the justices. “It created a new source of domestic law 
and granted priority to it. The [government’s] argument if [followed] should 
mean that the act, far from having a constitutional status, would have a lesser 
status than that of the Dangerous Dogs Act.”

Initiating Brexit would inevitably lead to the repeal of the European 
Communities Act but to do so required parliament’s authority, Pannick said. 
Ministers alone could not do it by royal prerogative powers. “It would be … 
quite extraordinary that the 1972 act could be set at nought by the actions of 
a minister acting without any parliamentary authority,” he said.

The 1972 act was intended to create a constitutional revolution, Pannick said: 
“It’s inherently implausible that when it’s recognised that there’s a new 
source of legal rights that it could all be set at nought by prerogative 
powers.”

The European court of justice described the act as as “a new legal order”, 
Pannick said. “It’s parliament which has created this new legal order,” he went 
on. “When we joined the EEC what happened was that the 1972 act was brought 
into force before the treaty of accession was ratified.”

It made no sense, “however flexible our constitution is”, he said, “that 
ministers could take away what parliament had created”.

Pannick’s arguments were received with relatively few challenges from the 
justices. His itinerary through legal precedents included references to an1892 
dispute <http://www.bailii.org/uk/cases/UKPC/1892/1892_47.pdf> over lobster 
fishing factories in Newfoundland in which the government tried but failed to 
use prerogative powers to enforce an international treaty.

He outlined seven reasons why the government’s case should fail, including 
that the royal prerogative powers were insufficient to nullify the 1972 
European Communities Act, which had a constitutional status.

Earlier, James Eadie QC, for the government, confirmed that if it lost the 
supreme court case, Theresa Maywould present a “one-line act” to parliament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/06/foreign-policy-controls-article-50-ruling-upheld-supreme-court>
 seeking its authorisation for triggering Brexit. The act would not provide any 
further detail or insight into the way the government intended to develop its 
negotiations with the EU, Eadie said.

He ran into criticism from several justices who accused him of confusing them 
over the significance of the prime minister’s promisedgreat repeal act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/02/theresa-may-great-repeal-bill-eu-british-law>
, which would temporarily preserve European law in UK statutes.

Eadie initially agreed that the bill was irrelevant to the issue before the 
supreme court, but then said it was important in as much as it demonstrated 
parliament was involved in debating Brexit. “You have given two diametrically 
opposed answers to the same question,” one of the justices, Lord Sumption, 
said. “We shall have to work out which one you accept.”

The evolving state of the UK’s devolution settlement will come under fresh 
strain on Wednesday when claimants from Northern Ireland, as well as the 
Scottish government, will argue that ministers cannot begin the process of 
departure withoutconsulting the devolved assemblies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/01/government-lawyers-dismiss-scotland-wales-article-50-devolution-supreme-court>
.

Under the Sewel convention, it is claimed, the Westminster government cannot 
alter the rights of citizens in the devolved nations without parliamentary 
assent and the assent of the devolved legislatures.

Richard Keen, the Westminster government’s advocate general for Scotland, said 
on Tuesday that triggering article 50 would not damage the existing devolution 
architecture of the UK.

 “It’s perfectly clear that the matter of foreign relationships, foreign 
affairs and our relationship with the EU is not within the competence of the 
devolved legislatures,” Lord Keen said.

The hearing continues.
 