
Human rights lawyers have put pressure on the government to release a letter 
that Eliza Manningham-Buller, the then head of MI5, sent toTony Blair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> attacking the role played by 
British intelligence agents in the abduction of two Libyans who were 
subsequently tortured.


Public need answers in 'shocking' MI6 rendition scandal, says senior Tory
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/01/mi5-chief-right-to-be-disgusted-over-mi6-role-rendition-blair>
In the letter, whose contents were exclusively revealed in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/31/revealed-britain-rendition-policy-rift-between-spy-agencies-mi6-mi5>
, Lady Manningham-Buller wrote to the prime minister in 2004 to complain about 
the conduct of MI6 officers, saying their actions had threatened Britain’s 
intelligence gathering and may have compromised the security and safety of MI5 
officers and their informants.


It was raised in the Commons on Monday by the Liberal Democrat MP Alistair 
Carmichael. He told Theresa May, the home secretary, that the letter was 
“particularly concerning” given the decision by the Crown Prosecution Service 
last weeknot to prosecute Sir Mark Allen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/09/mi6-officers-not-charges-rendition-of-libyan-families-abdel-hakim-belhaj>
, a senior MI6 officer.


May replied that she would not comment on a document she said had apparently 
been leaked from the government. The home secretary is responsible for MI5, 
Britain’s domestic security service. The foreign secretary is responsible forMI6
 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/mi6>, the country’s spy agency that operates 
abroad.


Cori Crider, of the human rights organisation Reprieve, said: “We now know 
that senior British intelligence officials were implicated in the abduction and 
rendition of two entire families, and that despite 28,000 pages going to CPS 
from the police, no one will stand trial for it.”


She added: “This attitude by the home secretary cannot be squared with the 
vast amount of material in the public domain and risks undermining confidence 
in the whole investigation. It’s time for the government to come clean, release 
the key documents – like the Manningham-Buller letter – and apologise.”


Ex-MI6 officer will not face charges over Libyan renditions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/09/mi6-officers-not-charges-rendition-of-libyan-families-abdel-hakim-belhaj>
The CPS last week said last week there was insufficient evidence to bring 
charges. It said prosecutors had concluded that Allen had been in contact with 
countries that detainedAbdel Hakim Belhaj 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdel-hakim-belhaj> and Sami al-Saadi in 
2004 as they were transferred to Muammar Gaddafi’s Libya and that he had 
“sought political authority for some of his actions”.


The CPS concluded: “Officials from the UK did not physically detain, transfer 
or ill-treat the alleged victims directly, nor did the suspect have any 
connection to the initial physical detention of either man or their families.”


Andrew Tyrie, the senior Conservative MP and chair of the all-party 
parliamentary group on extraordinary rendition, said: “It is now crucial to 
find out who authorised these operations.”
 