
Graham Taylor deserves to be remembered as the football manager who enlivened 
the English game between 1977 and 1987 by taking Watford, a venerable but 
hitherto nondescript club, from the Fourth Division to the First, where they 
finished runners-up to the mightiest of Liverpool sides, and to the FA Cup 
final, all the while encouraged by an enthusiastic chairman, the 
football-loving pop singer Elton John. This was a feat commensurate with those 
ofBrian Clough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2004/sep/21/guardianobituaries.football>, who 
twice won the European Cup with Nottingham Forest, and Claudio Ranieri, who won 
thePremier League title with Leicester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/02/leicester-city-win-the-premier-league-title-after-fairytale-season>
 last year.

Graham Taylor, former England manager, dies at the age of 72
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/12/graham-taylor-dies-72-england-aston-villa-watford>
Instead Taylor, who has died aged 72 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/12/graham-taylor-dies-72-england-aston-villa-watford>
, lives in the public memory as one of the many England managers who failed to 
make the national team live up to its imagined potential, and one of those who 
was eventually driven to distraction by the job’s demands. After the team had 
failed to qualify for the1994 World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-cliches/2014/may/23/what-if-england-qualified-1994-world-cup-graham-taylor>
 (having reachedthe semi-finals under Bobby Robson four years  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/jun/15/italia-90-world-cup-special>
earlier), Taylor featured in a TV documentary that recorded his agitated 
behaviour in the dug-out during a crucial match in the qualifying campaign. His 
curious expression of anger and frustration, “Do I not like that!”, became a 
catchphrase as a result of the film,An Impossible Job 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/12/the-fiver-graham-taylor-rip-west-ham-dimitri-payet>
, which held him up to ridicule.

He had been given the job in 1990 not just on the basis of his superb work 
with Watford but because in his next job, withAston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aston-villa>, he had performed almost 
equally well in reviving the fortunes of a bunch of recently relegated and 
poorly motivated players. With England, however, he was unable to apply the 
clarity and simplicity of his working methods with equal efficiency, probably 
because the manager of a national team is denied the day-to-day contact with 
the players and the regular work on the training ground that he so enjoyed.

An unfailingly pleasant, amusing and helpful man, Taylor understood the game 
and loved it with a real passion. Yet he was destined to become a figure of fun 
in the pages of the tabloid papers, whose disappointment at England’s poor 
performances turned into a vindictive delight in his discomfiture.“Swedes 2 
Turnips 1” 
<http://www.goal.com/en/news/2377/top-10/2009/12/20/1698466/top-10-greatest-football-headlines>
 was the memorable headline in the Sun after a defeat that cost them a place in 
the semi-finals of the 1992 European Championships, accompanied by a picture of 
Taylor’s face superimposed on the root vegetable. When their elimination from 
the World Cup was finally assured, and the manager resigned, the paper’s front 
page repeated the image and proclaimed: “That’s Yer Allotment.”

Taylor was born in Worksop, Nottinghamshire, and brought up from the age of 
three in Scunthorpe, where his father, Tommy Taylor, was the sports editor of 
the Scunthorpe Evening Telegraph. He attended Scunthorpe grammar school, where 
his footballing prowess led to selection for the England Grammar Schools XI. 
But he was also gifted academically, and his teachers were disappointed when, 
rather than going on to the sixth form to do A-levels, he left to become an 
apprentice with Scunthorpe United and thence to Grimsby Town (1962-68) as a 
full professional. A full back, he played 189 games for Grimsby, followed by 
150 forLincoln <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lincoln> City (1968-72), 
before a hip injury forced his retirement from playing at 27.

By then he had become the youngest person to qualify as an FA coach, and he 
moved immediately into management with Lincoln, whom he took to the Fourth 
Division title in 1975-76 before accepting Elton John’s invitation to join 
Watford. They made a good combination, the publicity attracted by the singer’s 
involvement backed up by the results on the field and, eventually, the quality 
of the football played by teams featuring such fine players as John Barnes,
Luther Blissett <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Luther_Blissett>, Kenny Jackett, 
Steve Sherwood, Nigel Callaghan and Mo Johnston.

Promotions to the Third Division in his first season, to the Second a year 
later, and to the First in his fifth season put Watford among the elite, a 
status they more than justified when finishing second toBob Paisley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/11/bob-paisley-liverpool-this-is-your-life-eamonn-andrews>
’s Liverpool at the first time of asking in the top flight (Blissett finished 
as the division’s top scorer with 27 goals, including four in an 8-0 thrashing 
of Sunderland). A year later they were at Wembley in the Cup final, losing 2-0 
to Everton.

Graham Taylor put Watford on an upward path and rescued Paul McGrath | Simon 
Burnton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/12/graham-taylor-watford-rescued-paul-mcgrath-aston-villa>
His reputation seemingly secure, Taylor moved on to Aston Villa, but his 
success there was soon overshadowed by ignominy with England, and his 
managerial career never fully recovered from the humiliation. He joined 
Wolverhampton Wanderers in 1994, but a short stay ended unhappily. There were 
better times back at Watford, where Elton John had returned and invited Taylor 
to help him rescue the club from the third tier. Two promotions took them back 
into the Premier League in 1999, but two years later he resigned, saying that 
he had lost his ability to motivate his players. He went back to Villa in 2002 
but left within a year, denied compensation after refusing to sign a 
confidentiality agreement that would have prevented him from giving public 
expression to his opinion on the way the club was being run by its autocratic 
chairman,Doug Ellis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2006/jul/21/football.comment>.

He spent 14 years as a popular pundit on BBC Radio 5 Live from 2003, and in 
the same year accepted a vice-presidency of Scunthorpe United. In 2009he 
returned to Watford as a director and interim chairman 
<https://www.watfordfc.com/club/club-statement-gt>, and was made honorary life 
president of the club in recognition of his services. A stand at their ground, 
Vicarage Road, bears his name.

In 1965 he married Rita Cowling. She survives him, with their two daughters, 
Joanne and Karen.

• Graham Taylor, football manager, born 15 September 1944; died 12 January 2017
 