
Greg Lake, who has died of cancer aged 69, first rose to fame with a brief 
stint in King Crimson before achieving colossal success with Emerson, Lake & 
Palmer during the 1970s. Lake was one of the key figures in the creation of 
progressive rock, and had no time for critics who said that the music was 
ludicrously overblown. “I know people think we’re pretentious, but it’s really 
a product of sophistication,” he said in 1973. “Anything that makes demands on 
the listener could be called pretentious ... but those who are really into it 
want something more satisfying.”

Comprising Lake on bass guitar alongside the keyboards player Keith Emerson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/13/keith-emerson-obituary> and the 
drummerCarl Palmer <http://www.carlpalmer.com/>, ELP played their debut gig in 
Plymouth on 23 August 1970, and six days later announced themselves as a new 
force on Planet Rock with a devastating performance at the Isle of Wight 
festival, where the bill also featuredJimi Hendrix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/jimi-hendrix>, the Doors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/doors>, the Who 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/who> and Joni Mitchell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/jonimitchell>. At the time they were in the 
middle of recording their debut album, called merely Emerson, Lake & Palmer.

The group’s momentum was unstoppable. When the album was released that 
November, it reached No 4 in Britain and 18 on America’s Billboard 200, and 
gave them a US Top 50 hit single with the atypically poppyLucky Man 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=89g1P_J40JA>, a song written by Lake when he 
was 12. It gave Lake the title for his 2012 autobiography.

The follow-up album, Tarkus (1971), topped the British charts and reached No 9 
on the Billboard 200, its multi-part,20-minute title song 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WKNOlDtZluU> giving notice of the band’s bold 
musical ambitions. They burnished their reputation further with a live 
recording, Pictures at an Exhibition (1971). Trilogy (1972) and Brain Salad 
Surgery (1973) both stormed the international charts (the latter was the first 
release on the group’s Manticore label, which Lake had been instrumental in 
setting up).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fgreg-lake-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f40fc339147d4708d8747ea8ff1df93ebec0401%2F0_54_3576_2145%2F3576.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Greg%20Lake%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fgreg-lake-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Greg%20Lake%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fgreg-lake-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f40fc339147d4708d8747ea8ff1df93ebec0401%2F0_54_3576_2145%2F3576.jpg>
 Emerson Lake & Palmer in the 1970s: from left, Carl Palmer, Keith Emerson and 
Greg Lake. Photograph: Mazel/Sunshine/Rex/Shutterstock 
The group undertook a packed schedule of touring in America in 1973 and 1974, 
and their live shows became renowned for both technological wizardry and the 
group’s musical expertise.Hoedown <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GpBo2XWjC-Y>
, a track from Trilogy that adapted part ofAaron Copland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/friday_review/story/0,3605,388222,00.html>’s 
ballet Rodeo, became a stage favourite. Milestone events included the band 
performing to a quarter of a million people at theCalifornia Jam 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lyTKmmcXLSs> festival, and the live shows were 
preserved on the triple album Welcome Back My Friends to the Show That Never 
Ends (1974), a Top 10 album in both Britain and the US.

Lake was born in Bournemouth, and grew up in a house he described as an 
“asbestos prefab”. His father was an engineer and his mother a housewife, and 
it was she who gave Greg his first guitar for his 12th birthday. He began 
taking lessons with a local guitar teacher, Don Strike, and became friendly 
with a fellow pupil, Robert Fripp. His early idols includedElvis Presley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/elvispresley>, the jazz guitarist Django 
Reinhardt and Hank Marvin of the Shadows, but he was also fascinated by 
classical composers including Copland and Prokofiev.

Lake took a college course with the aim of becoming a draughtsman, but he 
spent his nights performing with local groups such as the Shame and the Gods 
and his daytime studies suffered. Then Fripp asked if he would like to join his 
new band, King Crimson, as bass player. “I said ‘No, not really’,” Lake 
recalled, “and he said ‘But if you don’t we’ll never get it off the ground’. So 
I said ‘OK, I’ll play bass for you.’ ”

Lake stayed with Crimson for little more than a year, but he appeared as 
bassist and vocalist on their stunningly original debut album,In the Court of 
the Crimson King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2009/sep/28/king-crimson-prog-rock-royalty>
 (1969), which went to No 5 in the UK charts and 28 in the US, and as vocalist 
on In the Wake of Poseidon (1970). By the time the band recorded the latter, 
Lake had already agreed to form a new band with Emerson, whom he had met when 
Crimson and Emerson’s group the Nice had shared the bill at the Fillmore West 
in San Francisco in December 1969.

The sensational progress of ELP slowed in the mid-70s, though Lake scored a 
solo hit in 1975 withI Believe in Father Christmas 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RXCEdrnaFlY>, reaching No 2 in the UK. ELP 
enjoyed a substantial hit with Works Volume 1 (1977), but they hit a brick wall 
with the poorly performing Love Beach (1978) (“We were persuaded to make it 
under duress,” Lake said later), following which they disbanded.

He made the solo albums Greg Lake (1981) and Manoeuvres (1982), both with the 
guitaristGary Moore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/feb/07/gary-moore-obituary>, and in 
1983 made a brief stand-in appearance with the group Asia. He later joined with 
Emerson and the drummerCozy Powell 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/obituaries/obituary-cozy-powell-1155153.html>
 to form Emerson, Lake & Powell, who released one self-titled album in 1986.

The original ELP reformed for the comeback album Black Moon (1992) and 
subsequent touring, and staged further performances between 1996 and 1998. 
Their last show was in July 2010 at theHigh Voltage festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/jul/22/prog-rock-genesis-rush-mostly-autumn>
 in east London.

Lake, who had toured Europe with the Greg Lake Band in 2005, launched a solo 
tour, Songs of a Lifetime, in 2012, inspired by writing his autobiography, and 
using his own songs and cover versions to create a personal musical journey. In 
2015 he combined with Geoff Downes to record the album Ride the Tiger.

He is survived by his wife, Regina, and daughter, Natasha.

• Gregory Stuart Lake, singer, guitarist and producer, born 10 November 1947; 
died 7 December 2016
 