
Every morning before the sun rises, Stella Ampofo, a 25-year-old single mother 
of two boys, frantically gathers her belongings and sets off for work to beat 
the morning traffic in Ghana’s capital, Accra. If she doesn’t leave before 
daybreak, congestion during rush hour could extend her 40-minute journey from 
Accra’s suburbs towards downtown to three or four hours.

 “I’m in trouble if I leave my house around 6 or 6.30am,” Ampofo says. “I then 
won’t arrive at work until nine or 10am, and that creates a lot of problems 
with my manager because I’m supposed to get there by eight. If the government 
doesn’t do anything about the traffic, it’s not going to get any easier …”

 To ensure a punctual arrival, Ampofo, a seamstress at a manufacturing centre 
that converts plastic waste into reusable products, leaves her home at 4am 
every day and begins work an hour later – just as the road traffic starts to 
build up, as roughly 2 million daily commuters converge on the central business 
district in downtown Accra.

Clouds of black exhaust fumes hover over the heads of impatient motorists. Cab 
drivers blast their horns, while pedestrians scurry on to rickety 
commercialised minibuses – referred to as “tro tros” by locals – that carry up 
to two-dozen passengers squeezed tightly together. Only motorcyclists who can 
skilfully manoeuvre between lanes are able to bypass the congestion.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fgridlock-west-africa-accra-troubled-attempts-tackle-traffic-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F963efc51e85da8d1d2afd0c8b4e9f3728c318dc9%2F0_228_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gridlock%20in%20West%20Africa%3A%20Accra's%20troubled%20attempts%20to%20tackle%20its%20traffic%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fgridlock-west-africa-accra-troubled-attempts-tackle-traffic-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gridlock%20in%20West%20Africa%3A%20Accra%27s%20troubled%20attempts%20to%20tackle%20its%20traffic%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fgridlock-west-africa-accra-troubled-attempts-tackle-traffic-crisis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F963efc51e85da8d1d2afd0c8b4e9f3728c318dc9%2F0_228_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 Rush-hour traffic jams on Accra’s outskirts. Photograph: Bloomberg via Getty 
Images 
Although gridlock typically costs European economies 
<https://www.cebr.com/reports/the-future-economic-and-environmental-costs-of-gridlock/>
 billions of dollars annually, insufficient data in developing countries makes 
it difficult to assess the economic impact on cities such as Accra. A recent
report by the World Bank 
<https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/25013/108141.pdf?sequence=4&isAllowed=y>
 measuring the cost of air pollution globally, however, provides some insight 
into how congestion affects people’s health. Gridlock causes longer travel 
times, which increases fuel use and emissions. In 2013, a total of 17,524 
Ghanaians died from air pollution, a 107% increase from 1990.


“Accra has struggled with the management of the mobility challenges and rising 
traffic congestion on almost all arterial routes to the central business 
district,” Lawrence Kumi, director of research, statistics and information 
management at Ghana’s Ministry of Transport, admits in an email. “The 
implementation of various remedial measures was on an ad-hoc basis and not well 
coordinated. There was the need for a holistic approach.”


In 2014, the government of Ghana began developing a plan to reduce congestion 
and overhaul the urban transportation system in the Greater Accra Metropolitan 
Area (Gama), which includes Accra and its outskirts. The plan was in 
collaboration with the Korea International Cooperation Agency (Koica), and 
supported bya $1.5m grant 
<https://www.ghanabusinessnews.com/2015/03/30/south-korea-to-invest-1-5m-to-improve-transportation-in-accra/>
 from the South Korean government.

Before the end of this year, the final transport master plan (TMP) is due to 
be presented to Ghana’s ministry of transport for implementation. The plan 
seeks to “bring together all modes of transport … not only by road” and “reduce 
traffic congestion and logistic costs” over the next 20 years.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fgridlock-west-africa-accra-troubled-attempts-tackle-traffic-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F592f20f12a7b9b0d83fffc53c52a5975030b5068%2F0_14_5276_3166%2F5276.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gridlock%20in%20West%20Africa%3A%20Accra's%20troubled%20attempts%20to%20tackle%20its%20traffic%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fgridlock-west-africa-accra-troubled-attempts-tackle-traffic-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gridlock%20in%20West%20Africa%3A%20Accra%27s%20troubled%20attempts%20to%20tackle%20its%20traffic%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fgridlock-west-africa-accra-troubled-attempts-tackle-traffic-crisis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F592f20f12a7b9b0d83fffc53c52a5975030b5068%2F0_14_5276_3166%2F5276.jpg>
 The government’s traffic master plan aims to ‘reduce traffic congestion and 
logistic costs’ over the next 20 years. Photograph: Thomas Imo/Photothek via 
Getty Images 
Greater Accra’s current population of around 4.3 million is predicted to 
almost double by 2035 – likewise the number of vehicles on the roads. While 
increased congestion can reflect a city’s growing economic vitality, the 
potential negative effects – low worker productivity, hours-long delays, more 
dangerous roads, commuter stress, pressure on road infrastructure and an 
unhealthy intake ofdirty fuel emissions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2016/sep/15/dirty-diesel-from-european-companies-fuels-pollution-in-africa-in-pictures>
 – will place a serious strain on the city if it is not addressed soon.

Accra is not alone in facing transportation challenges. Nearby Lagos, the 
economic capital of Nigeria, isnotorious 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/feb/25/beatings-bribes-corruption-lagos-nigeria-traffic-jams>
 for being one of the most gridlocked cities in the world. But its population 
is around five times Accra’s, and its economy greater than the whole of Ghana – 
so according to Kweku Amoasi, associate director for transport planning at the 
London-based engineering consultancyRSK <http://www.rsk.co.uk/>, Accra should 
have no excuse when it comes to severe congestion.

“With a small population, Ghana <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ghana> 
should be able to manage traffic much better,” Amoasi says. “There’s just been 
a total lack of foresight. The planners should sit down and realise they’re not 
doing this for themselves; they’re doing it for the nation.”

 Bernard Abeiku Arthur, a senior urban specialist with Belgium-based Cities 
Alliance <http://www.citiesalliance.org/>, says it is this kind of regulatory 
neglect that has led to today’s unabating traffic troubles and dysfunctional 
transport system in Accra. “We knew the population was growing,” Arthur says. 
“We knew we were getting urbanised, but we ignored all the necessary 
ingredients and elements for planning our urban space properly.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fgridlock-west-africa-accra-troubled-attempts-tackle-traffic-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3c2973f495d607eedbbfa2456d372ef57540e5d%2F958_0_2765_3456%2F2765.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gridlock%20in%20West%20Africa%3A%20Accra's%20troubled%20attempts%20to%20tackle%20its%20traffic%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fgridlock-west-africa-accra-troubled-attempts-tackle-traffic-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gridlock%20in%20West%20Africa%3A%20Accra%27s%20troubled%20attempts%20to%20tackle%20its%20traffic%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fgridlock-west-africa-accra-troubled-attempts-tackle-traffic-crisis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3c2973f495d607eedbbfa2456d372ef57540e5d%2F958_0_2765_3456%2F2765.jpg>
 Stella Ampofo. Photograph: Brennan Weiss 
Arthur says the new TMP is “very fanciful” on paper, but also too limiting 
geographically – excluding regions beyond Greater Accra from which much of the 
traffic originates. “The urban area is impacted by the fringes,” Arthur said. 
“So if you’re doing your calculation and you cut out the fringes, you might not 
be doing a very good calculation.”

 Francis Akakpo, programme officer at Koica in Ghana, says the planners were 
unable to conduct research on areas beyond the Greater Accra Metropolitan Area 
because of “limited time and resources”.

 Ghana’s first mass transit bus system, Omnibus Services Authority, was 
established in 1927 during the British colonial period. After independence, 
public transportation remained largely state-owned until the late 1980s and 
early 90s, when the government divested itself of assets amid financial 
mismanagement. This was when the privately run buses appeared to fill the gap: 
thetro tro, a significant contributor to congestion, has been the most common 
mode of mass transportation ever since.

In September, however, the Greater Accra Passenger Transport Executive 
launched a pilot run of a new Bus Rapid Transport (BRT) system, unleashing city 
buses across several major routes throughout Greater Accra. In defiance of 
Ghana president John Mahama’s claims that this marked“the beginning of a new 
modern public transport network” for the city, tro tro operators and other 
commercial drivers threatened to strike over fears the new buses would force 
them out of operation.

 The final TMP proposes building on the city’s new bus network by replacing 
thousands oftro tros with high-capacity buses that promise to be safer, faster 
and more comfortable – a move that looks set to increase tensions with the 
existing transport providers. These buses will only be released “on a gradual, 
incremental basis, to make room for adoption and acceptance”, says Koica’s 
Francis Akakpo.

'There is no escape': Nairobi's air pollution sparks Africa health warning
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/jul/10/no-escape-nairobi-air-pollution-sparks-africa-health-warning>
But according to Abeiku from Cities Alliance, even a successful implementation 
of the public bus system will only provide minimal relief to congestion. For 
sustainable long-term improvements, he says, planners must commit to focusing 
on rail, tram and subway developments so commuters like Stella Ampofo aren’t 
forced to upend their daily lives just to get to work.

 “We have to envision what kind of city we want Accra to be,” Abeiku says. “Do 
we want a city that supports its economy, whose people feel free to move 
around? A city where public transportation is properly regulated? That is the 
kind of city I want.”

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 