
The Guardian has been listed as the second most secure news publication on the 
web, according toa ranking produced by the American non-profit Freedom of the 
Press Foundation <https://securethe.news/sites/>.

Points were awarded for supporting technologies which protect the privacy and 
security of visitors, with a focus on using HTTPS, a web protocol that allows 
for encrypted connections.

The ranking was topped by the US news site The Intercept 
<https://theintercept.com/>, created by eBay founder Pierre Omidyar. It gained 
the highest score of A+.

The Guardian, rated as A- along with TechCrunch <https://techcrunch.com/> and 
ProPublica <https://www.propublica.org/>, scored highly for having a valid 
HTTPS version of its website, and for defaulting to that connection for all 
visitors.

The ranking also awarded points for enabling HSTS (HTTP 
Strict-Transport-Security 
<https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Strict-Transport-Security>
), a feature which ensures that repeat visitors cannot be forced onto an 
insecure copy of the website by a “man in the middle” attacker. With HSTS 
enabled, web browsers know to never accept insecure versions of the website, 
providing added protection to readers who fear eavesdropping.

The Intercept was the only site to use HSTS preloading which give it its A+ 
score. Preloading involves passing the HSTS information to a trusted authority 
like Google or Mozilla so that it can be loaded into the browsers of web users 
who have never even visited a particular site, ensuring that even their very 
first visit does not run the risk of eavesdropping.

Freedom of the Press Foundation said that only 28% of news sites offer an 
HTTPS connection, and just 14% default to it. It awarded a grade of F to those 
that did not use HTTPS. The Guardian’s switch to HTTPS as defaultwas made in 
late November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/developer-blog/2016/nov/29/the-guardian-has-moved-to-https>
, after six months of testing to ensure no disruption to readers.

“By using HTTPS, internet service providers (ISPs) are not able to track 
<https://utcc.utoronto.ca/~cks/space/blog/web/ISPsAreThreats> the pages our 
readers are accessing,” wrote Mariot Chauvin and Huma Islam, two members of the 
Guardian’s digital development team. “It means we protect the privacy of our 
readers when accessing content that may disclose political opinions, faith, 
sexual orientation or any information that may be used against them. It matches 
our core values. We believe that protecting our visitors is good internet 
citizenship.”

The Freedom of the Press Foundation called on all publications to protect 
reader privacy: “With HTTPS enabled by default you can protect reader privacy, 
improve your website’s security, better protect your sources, prevent 
censorship, improve your search rankings, provide a better user experience, see 
your website loading speeds potentially increase, and avoid Google shaming.” 
Since 2014, Google has beenranking secure sites 
<https://webmasters.googleblog.com/2014/08/https-as-ranking-signal.html> 
slightly higher in its search results.
 