
Chicago <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/chicago> is on pace to see as 
many as 650 or 700 murders this year, more than any year since the early 2000s, 
and likely more than the total murders in New York and Los Angeles combined.


Through the end of the day Friday, Chicago had seen 475 murders – just six 
less than in all of last year, according to police department statistics. The 
city has already exceeded last year’s total number of gun-related homicides, 
with 430.


As violence rises, an increasing number of shootings and murders are going 
unsolved. Through 28 August, the police department had only made arrests in 73 
of the nearly 2,000 non-fatal shooting incidents so far this year – or just 
under 4%, according to a department spokesman.

The clearance rate for murders is not much better. Last Sunday, police swiftly 
charged two brothers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/28/dwyane-wade-cousin-shooting-nykea-aldridge-men-charged>
 in the murder of Nykea Aldridge, a 32-year-old mother of four, who was shot to 
death the Friday before while pushing a stroller on her way to register her 
kids for school. Her shooting had made national headlines because she was the 
cousin of NBA star Dwyane Wade, who mournedher death publicly  
<https://twitter.com/DwyaneWade/status/769350076162383872>as “unreal” and 
“another act of senseless gun violence”.

But the quick charges in Aldridge’s case are an exception. Police have only 
made arrests in about 16% of fatal shootings through 28 August this year, 
according to a department spokesperson. Through June, the clearance rate for 
all murders was 22.2%. That’s lower than last year’s rate of 30.4%, and 
dramatically lower than the national average of 64.5%, according to the most 
recent available national FBI data.

Overall arrests in Chicago also have dropped 27% compared with last year, 
according to police statistics.

Chicago gun epidemic, out of control: the execution of nine-year-old Tyshawn 
Lee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/25/chicago-guns-child-execution-tyshawn-lee-gang-violence>
Illinois governor Bruce Rauner said on Wednesday 
<http://www.chicagotribune.com/news/local/politics/ct-bruce-rauner-chicago-violence-national-guard-met-20160831-story.html>
 that he did not believe it was appropriate to call in the National Guard, a 
perennial political talking point in response to violence in Chicago.

“No thoughtful leader thinks that’s a good idea or would really provide a 
solution. In fact, it may exacerbate other problems,” he said.

In the 7300 block of Rockwell on Tuesday afternoon, a man’s blood drained 
toward the curb in front of a Buick SUV he had bought the night before, 
according to a stunned neighbor who had known the victim, Brian B Winters, for 
10 years. The blood was from Winters’ face, where he had been shot twice by a 
man in a ski mask, and his chest, where the third bullet struck. As neighbors 
looked on and police knocked on doors, television news helicopters appeared 
overhead, marking what detectives wouldn’t say to onlookers: after being rushed 
to the hospital in critical condition, Winters had succumbed to his wounds.

This was now a homicide scene.

“I just remember that he wasn’t even really running,” said Tynika Garner of 
the shooter. “I would say he was trotting.”

Garner watched from the kitchen window of her mother’s Marquette Park home as 
the shooter – his face covered in a black ski mask and carrying a silver pistol 
– casually left the 33-year-old lying bleeding in the street. The shots woke up 
Garner’s mother, 66-year-old Shirlene Garner, from an afternoon nap. Shirlene 
then watched a tragic scene unfold.

Winters’ mother ran to her son, pleading with him to stay alive.

“She was begging him to stay with her,” Shirlene recalled. “But I didn’t see 
him breathing very well. It was so shallow at that point.”

The Garners said their block is normally quiet – a neighbor chimed in that 
there hasn’t been so much as a fight in years.

“That’s how the city is set up,” Tynika explained. “There’s good blocks and 
there’s bad blocks. It’s almost like once you find a good one you just never 
want to leave.”

In Englewood, on the 6800 block of Ashland on Monday night, four people were 
shot in a single incident. The two men – ages 22 and 24 – are documented gang 
members, police said. The women with them were shot once each and all four 
victims are in stable condition.

Dean Gee watched the shooting from his window. “Come around here at 9 o’clock 
tonight; it’ll sound like you somewhere in Baghdad,” he said.

Racial disparities
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fchicago-gun-violence-unsolved-murders-deadly-year%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26731d11d2bb74a1b8efe1ef8445469bd3250293%2F0_201_3016_1810%2F3016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gun%20violence%2C%20unsolved%20murders%20put%20Chicago%20on%20course%20to%20set%20grim%20record&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fchicago-gun-violence-unsolved-murders-deadly-year%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gun%20violence%2C%20unsolved%20murders%20put%20Chicago%20on%20course%20to%20set%20grim%20record&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fchicago-gun-violence-unsolved-murders-deadly-year%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26731d11d2bb74a1b8efe1ef8445469bd3250293%2F0_201_3016_1810%2F3016.jpg>
 Chicago police investigate a scene where gunfire at a birthday party left a 
man dead and a woman injured earlier last month. Photograph: Ashlee Rezin/AP 
In Chicago, one of the country’s most racially segregated cities, the spike in 
violence has not affected all residents equally. Neighborhoods that have long 
struggled with violence have seen the most dramatic increases.

 In a police district that covers part of Englewood, on the south side, 
murders are up 155%. In the police district that covers Austin, on the city’s 
west side, murders have increased 150%, and the district has seen more than 200 
shootings.

The rising violence comes as Chicago’s police department is under investigation
 
<https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/justice-department-opens-pattern-or-practice-investigation-chicago-police-department>
 by the justice department for potential civil rights violations, with a focus 
on whether there are racial disparities in the department’s use of force.

“We need it,” Rahm Emanuel, the city’s mayor, said last year  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/07/justice-department-investigation-chicago-police>
in response to the announcement of the justice department’s investigation.

On Friday, the mayor’s office said in a statement: “The violence that is 
predominantly happening on the south and west sides of the city is completely 
unacceptable. And it is abundantly clear thatIllinois 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/illinois> needs better laws to hold repeat 
gun offenders accountable for their crimes.”

 Chicago, a city of 2.7 million people, has roughly similar numbers of 
non-Hispanic white and black residents, according to Census data. About one- 
third of the city identifies as Hispanic. But the toll of gun-related homicides 
in Chicago falls disproportionately on men of color, particularly black men.

Last year, only one white female was murdered with a gun in Chicago, according 
to statistics released through a police department records request.
interactive <https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/08/chicago-gun-murders/>
A survey 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2016/05/06/us/document-Chicago-Trn-Final.html>
 of more than 1,000 Chicago residents this spring found nearly half of black 
and Hispanic residents said they had made changes to their daily routines as a 
result of the increase in violence, compared with only a quarter of whites.

Trump would stop violence ‘in one week’ 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fchicago-gun-violence-unsolved-murders-deadly-year%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb0acb88b89e7503e03318f0ab515ca79009ddfee%2F0_24_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gun%20violence%2C%20unsolved%20murders%20put%20Chicago%20on%20course%20to%20set%20grim%20record&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fchicago-gun-violence-unsolved-murders-deadly-year%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gun%20violence%2C%20unsolved%20murders%20put%20Chicago%20on%20course%20to%20set%20grim%20record&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fchicago-gun-violence-unsolved-murders-deadly-year%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb0acb88b89e7503e03318f0ab515ca79009ddfee%2F0_24_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
 Donald Trump has marketed himself as the ‘law and order’ candidate. 
Photograph: John Gurzinski/AFP/Getty Images 
Chicago’s spike in murders and shootings this year has become a political 
flashpoint in the presidential campaign, with Republican nominee Donald Trump 
pointing to Chicago as evidence that Democrats have failed to keep African 
Americans safe.

Trump’s tweet in response to Aldridge’s death, “Dwayne [sic] Wade’s cousin was 
just shot and killed walking her baby in Chicago. Just what I have been saying. 
African-Americans will VOTE TRUMP!” sparked wide criticism.


Wade said in an interview aired on Friday that Trump’s comment left “a bad 
taste 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/02/dwayne-wade-nba-chicago-gun-laws>
” in his mouth. While he wanted the loss of his cousin to spark a national 
conversation, he said it was difficult to see her death “used as a ploy for 
political gain”.

Trump said in an interview <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4XfSErwYN5M> with 
Fox News host Bill O’Reilly that the way to fix gun violence was to empower the 
police department to be “very much tougher than they are right now. They’re 
right now not tough.”

The presidential candidate said he had met with a “rough tough” Chicago police 
officer who told him that, if he was in charge, he would be able to stop the 
violence “in one week”.

“I believed him, 100%,” Trump said. 

Trump’s comments that Chicago’s police should be tougher come in the wake of 
months of protest against police violence towards black residents, including a
sustained occupation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/29/chicago-protestors-occupy-homan-square-police-black-lives-matter>
 outside Homan Square, a police facility investigated by Guardian US that 
protesters said is “emblematic of the fact that our system is boldly and 
unapologetically violent and destructive.”

A police accountability taskforce created by the mayor released a report in 
April 
<https://chicagopatf.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/PATF_Final_Report_Executive_Summary_4_13_16-1.pdf>
 that concluded that citizens’ mistrust of the police department is “justified”.

“The Task Force heard over and over again from a range of voices, particularly 
from African Americans, that some CPD officers are racist, have no respect for 
the lives and experiences of people of color and approach every encounter with 
people of color as if the person, regardless of age, gender or circumstance, is 
a criminal,” the report noted.

“There is substantial evidence that people of color – particularly African 
Americans – have had disproportionately negative experiences with the police 
over an extended period of time.”

The survey 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2016/05/06/us/document-Chicago-Trn-Final.html>
 conducted by the New York Times and the Kaiser Family Foundation this spring 
found white and black residents were split on their views of the police 
department and the racial biases of the criminal justice system. Only 12% of 
black respondents thought the police department was doing an excellent or good 
job, compared with 47% of white respondents.

Roughly half of black respondents said they thought the police were doing a 
“poor” job, and more than three-quarters said they believed racial minorities 
were treated unfairly by the criminal justice system all or most of the time.

Asked about the police department’s low clearance rates for shootings and 
murders, police department spokesman Frank Giancamilli blamed “gang culture” 
for witnesses’ unwillingness to cooperate with the police.

According to police department statistics, 85% of Chicago’s gun murders last 
year were gang-related.

Innocent witnesses were fearful of being identified by gang members if they 
cooperated with the police, Giancamilli wrote in an emailed statement, while 
“those witnesses who are associated with gangs generally seek to retaliate on 
their own or attempt to minimize scrutiny of their associates by police, 
leaving them unwilling to provide information.”

“CPD detectives work tirelessly to pursue leads and bring some level of 
closure to families affected by gun violence,” he wrote.

To improve clearance rates, he said, the department is also trying to provide 
detectives with additional resources, including doing trainings with community 
based organizations “to make sure detectives are sensitive to the needs of 
victims and their families and aware of community dynamics”.

Regarding the levels of community trust in the police among black residents, 
he added: “The ability to keep communities safe and solve crimes is only as 
strong as the partnerships that the police has with the public.”

Although overall arrests are down, gun seizures are up, he noted: police have 
made nearly 6,000 gun seizures this year, compared with nearly 5,000 over the 
same period last year. Gun arrests are also up 5% compared with last year.

At the same time that Trump has pushed for tougher policing and dubbed himself 
“the law and order candidate”, Hillary Clinton, the Democratic nominee, has 
called for stricter national gun control laws and for reforming police 
departments’ treatment of black Americans.

According to Chicago police department data obtained through a records 
request, 88% of last year’s murders were committed with a firearm. The spring 
survey found that large majorities of both white and black Chicago residents 
agreed that the current gun control laws were ineffective at keeping guns out 
of the hands of criminals.

Meet the Republicans representing cities with a higher murder rate than Chicago
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/12/deadliest-cities-gun-control-laws-congress-chicago>
At the Democratic national convention in July, two mothers of children killed 
as a result of Chicago gang violence appeared onstage to support Clinton: 
Cleopatra Pendleton-Cowley, the mother of Hadiya Pendleton, a 15-year-old honor 
student killed in 2013, and Annette Nance-Holt, a Chicago fire department 
official and mother of 16-year-old Blair Holt, killed in 2007.

While Chicago has had the country’s highest total number of murders in recent 
years, it does not have the nation’s highest per capita homicide rate. More 
than a dozen other large cities, including St Louis, Detroit, New Orleans, 
Baltimore and Newark, have dramatically higher murder rates.

The Chicago police department’s murder statistics do not include police 
shootings or homicides that are found to be justifiable. A spokeswoman for the 
Cook County medical examiner’s office said on Wednesday that the office had 
recorded 525 total homicides in Chicago in 2015. This year, through 31 August, 
the office has recorded 505 homicides in Chicago. That number includes people 
who may have been shot in another year but who died this year, she said.

 * This article was amended on 4 September 2016 to correct the block on South 
Ashland Avenue in Englewood where four people were shot last week. It was the 
6800 block, not the 600 block.  