
In 2017, new laws across the US will go into effect. Here are some of the new, 
noteworthy, and impactful policies:

Guns: there may be more armed teenagers in Tennessee

A range of new gun legislation will go into effect, and while places such as 
California are working to restrict guns, Tennessee is opening up its gun laws. 
Starting in 2017, 18-year-olds who are on active duty in the military, are 
retired veterans or were honorably dischargedwill be able to 
<http://wreg.com/2016/12/28/some-tennessee-18-year-old-can-soon-get-handgun-carry-permits/>
 receive handgun carry permits. The age remains 21 for everyone else. The bill
passed unanimously 
<http://www.tennessean.com/story/news/politics/2016/04/19/senate-approves-bill-allow-guns-college-campuses/83249150/>
 in the state senate.

Other laws:

 * More assault weapons are off limits 
<https://leginfo.legislature.ca.gov/faces/billNavClient.xhtml?bill_id=201520160SB880>
 in California, including semiautomatic rifles

 * Californians will have to go through a background check to purchase not 
just guns but alsoammunition 
<http://www.latimes.com/politics/la-pol-sac-essential-politics-updates-gov-brown-signs-six-gun-control-bills-1467394282-htmlstory.html>
 * Babysitters and other guests will be permitted to use deadly force against 
intruders, as part ofMissouri’s new concealed carry law 
<http://www.newsmax.com/TheWire/missouri-concealed-carry-law/2016/09/15/id/748551/>


Minimum wage: many states to see minimum wage rise in 2017

Minimum wage increases remain a contentious political issue but in 2017, a 
record 20 states and the District of Columbia will see increased pay for 
low-wage workers.The fight for $15 <http://fightfor15.org/about-us/> is on in 
New York and California 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/04/california-new-york-governors-minimum-wage-hillary-clinton>
. New York isworking toward 
<https://www.labor.ny.gov/workerprotection/laborstandards/workprot/minwage.shtm>
 a statewide $15-per-hour minimum wage but Governor Andrew Cuomo has different 
timelines, depending on each industry and location in the state. California’s 
minimum wage will go up to $10.50, with the hopes of reaching $15 by 2022. 
Ohio’s state legislaturetook steps 
<http://www.dispatch.com/content/stories/local/2016/12/25/among-dozens-of-ohios-new-laws-some-might-affect-you.html>
 to block Cleveland’s efforts to reach a $15 minimum wage by passing a law that 
forces local jurisdictions to maintain the same wage as the state rate, which 
will go up to $8.15 in 2017.

The following minimum wage increases go into effect 1 January: 

 * Massachusetts: $10 to $11 
 * Connecticut: $9.60 to $10.10 
 * Arizona: $8.05 to $10 
 * Colorado: $8.31 to $9.30 
 * Arkansas: $8 to $8.50 
 * Michigan: $8.50 to $8.90 
 * Vermont: $9.60 to $10 
 * Maine: $7.50 to $9 
 * Hawaii: $8.50 to $9.25 
 * Washington state: $9.47 to $11 
Several other states will raise their minimum wages later in the year. The 
Economic Policy Institute tracks all the changes here. 
<http://www.epi.org/minimum-wage-tracker/#/min_wage/>

Domestic violence and sexual assault: hairdressers to provide support to 
victims

Starting 1 January, cosmetologists, hairdressers and nail technicians in 
Illinoiswill be required 
<http://www.rrstar.com/news/20161130/hairdressers-in-illinois-to-receive-training-to-recognize-domestic-violence>
 to undergo one hour of training on how to provide support tovictims of 
domestic violence or sexual assault 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/01/illinois-domestic-violence-hairstylists>
. It will also be mandatory for establishments to hang posters with helpline 
details.

Several California <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california> laws 
passed this year will also go into effect, addressing the prosecution of sexual 
assault crimes:

 * Following the Brock Turner case, California implemented tougher sentencing 
<https://leginfo.legislature.ca.gov/faces/billTextClient.xhtml?bill_id=201520160AB2888>
 guidelines for sexual assault cases

 * California removed the statute of limitations 
<https://leginfo.legislature.ca.gov/faces/billNavClient.xhtml?bill_id=201520160SB813>
 in some rape cases, meaning there is no time limit for filing charges against 
an alleged perpetrator. Some say the move was inspired by Bill Cosby’s case 
 * The definition of rape has also been broadened 
<https://leginfo.legislature.ca.gov/faces/billNavClient.xhtml?bill_id=201520160AB701>
 to include “all forms of nonconsensual sexual assault” 
Alcohol and pot: Californians can get tipsy at beauty parlors

A new law 
<https://leginfo.legislature.ca.gov/faces/billNavClient.xhtml?bill_id=201520160AB1322>
 allows beauty parlors and salons to serve up to 12 ounces of complimentary 
alcohol without violating state liquor law requirements.

In other substance-related developments, on election day in 2016, four states 
approved ballot initiatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/11/us-election-ballot-measures-marijuana-gun-control>
 legalizing recreational marijuana. Recreational pot will become legal in Nevada
on 1 January 
<http://www.kolotv.com/content/news/Recreational-marijuana-legal-in-Nevada-but-not-legal-to-purchase-408701305.html>
. Maine’s law should gopartially 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-maine-marijuana-idUSKBN14A26P> into effect 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-maine-marijuana-idUSKBN14A26P> in late 
January.

In Connecticut, advanced practice registered nurses will now be allowed to 
certify a patient <https://www.cga.ct.gov/2016/BA/2016SB-00067-R01-BA.htm> for 
medical marijuana use (except for glaucoma). New Yorkannounced 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/new-york/state-expand-medical-marijuana-law-nurses-aides-article-1.2884076>
 a similar regulation in November.

US election bright spots: gun control, recreational marijuana and more
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/11/us-election-ballot-measures-marijuana-gun-control>
Health: doctors with religious objections will have to refer patients elsewhere

A new law amends Illinois’s Health Care Right of Conscience Act 
<http://www.ilga.gov/legislation/BillStatus.asp?DocNum=1564&GAID=13&DocTypeID=SB&SessionID=88&GA=99>
 to require that providers, including doctors and clinics, who refuse services 
for moral or religious reasons ensure their choice does not endanger patient 
health. That means doctors must either refer patients elsewhere or at least 
provide information on alternatives.

The measure has proved controversial - a small number of clinics sued because 
they objected to giving referrals or information related to abortion. A judge 
recently issued a preliminary injunction temporarily preventing the state from 
enforcing the law against the clinics that sued, according to theChicago Tribune
 
<http://www.chicagotribune.com/business/ct-illinois-abortion-lawsuit-1222-biz-20161221-story.html>
.

Other new health-related laws:

 * Illinois will require insurance coverage for FDA-approved contraceptives 
<http://www.illinoissenatedemocrats.com/caucus-news/blog-archive/5183-new-law-requires-insurance-coverage-for-contraceptives>
 * Illinois eliminated the tax on feminine hygiene products 
<http://www.illinoissenatedemocrats.com/caucus-news/feature-story-archive/5218-tax-on-tampons-repealed-in-illinois>
, often called the “tampon tax” 
 * A tax on sweetened beverages 
<https://beta.phila.gov/services/payments-assistance-taxes/business-taxes/philadelphia-beverage-tax/>
 will go into effect in the city of Philadelphia, paid by distributors, marking 
the first timesuch a tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/25/sugary-drink-taxes-soda-donald-trump>
 has been enacted in a major US city 


More foam bans, more civics lessons

San Francisco will implement the country’s widest ban 
<http://www.sfchronicle.com/opinion/editorials/article/SF-bans-Styrofoam-and-other-cities-should-follow-8353106.php>
 on plastic foam, which environmentalists say can take hundreds of years to 
degrade. The new law will ban the substance in food products such as meat 
trays, packing peanuts, ice chests, dock floats and mooring buoys, and even 
coffee cups.

In Tennessee, students will now be required to take a civics test before they 
graduate from high school <http://www.capitol.tn.gov/Bills/109/Bill/HB0010.pdf>
. The questions will be similar to those on the US citizenship test, part of a
movement 
<http://www.newyorker.com/business/currency/whats-the-right-way-to-teach-civics>
 to improve Americans’ engagement and understanding of the country’s democratic 
process.
 