
If you don’t know better, you’ll swear that Guns N’ Roses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/18/guns-n-roses-feature-film-marc-canter>
 are just another band from that LA metal scene, trying to be the newest and 
sleaziest party badasses on the block, hoping eventually to form a corporation 
so they can buy shopping malls and stuff — and not knowing a decent rock n’ 
roll riff if it comes and hits them in the face.


 Before I moved to LA, over a year ago, the hype machine had already been 
running full-throttle for Guns N’ Roses, and although I couldn’t have told you 
anything about the band’s music at the time, it wasn’t hard to figure out that 
the cover of their debut LP,Appetite for Destruction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2011/sep/20/appetite-destruction-guns-roses>
, had managed to offend lots of people with its rape imagery (so much so that 
Geffen released a second cover).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjul%2F22%2Fguns-n-roses-interview-appetite-destruction-1988-spin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F22%2F1437562239565%2F34425c6b-9cd6-46f1-9aa5-ae1faeee2bcc-2060x2060.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Guns%20N'%20Roses%3A%20'Rock%E2%80%99n%E2%80%99roll%20is%20like%20an%20aphrodisiac%20for%20people%20who%20have%20everyday%20jobs'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjul%2F22%2Fguns-n-roses-interview-appetite-destruction-1988-spin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Guns%20N%27%20Roses%3A%20%27Rock%E2%80%99n%E2%80%99roll%20is%20like%20an%20aphrodisiac%20for%20people%20who%20have%20everyday%20jobs%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjul%2F22%2Fguns-n-roses-interview-appetite-destruction-1988-spin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F22%2F1437562239565%2F34425c6b-9cd6-46f1-9aa5-ae1faeee2bcc-2060x2060.jpeg>
 Guns N’ Roses’ banned album cover 
 Of course, word was filtering up from the street about them as well. When the 
band played a huge benefit concert with an all-star heavy metal ensemble 
dubbed: “The Party Ninjas”, they reportedly blew everyone else off the stage. 
When Alice Cooper recently played in Long Beach, three members of GN’R joined 
him onstage for the encore,Under My Wheels 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VHMNBf-szKs>, which was said to be the only 
real highlight of the entire show. (Cooper subsequently took the band into the 
studio to re-record the song.) Of course, none of this may sound like any big 
deal, considering the competition, but then I ran into this guy I know who was 
leaving a party early so he could see Guns N’ Roses play.

 “I didn’t know you liked heavy metal,” I said. (I mean, this guy’s favourite 
band of all time isMission of Burma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/jul/05/mission-of-burma-unsound-review>
). “Guns N’ Roses aren’t heavy metal,” he replied. “Believe me, they aren’t.”

 And you know something? He was right. Oh, sure, Appetite for Destruction 
seems socially irresponsible, sexist, and totally reprehensible at times. But 
you know what else? The music is great. These guys wear their influences on 
their sleeves like a banner – and all the influences are obviously there, not 
just Aerosmith, Led Zep, early Alice Cooper, andBlack Sabbath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/mar/24/black-sabbath-announces-farewell-concert>
, but also the Dolls, Stones,Ramones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/gallery/2014/apr/30/ramones-at-40-punk-in-pictures>
, Cheap Trick, Iggy and the Pistols, as well as Bo Diddley, whose classic riff 
creates GN’R’s Mr Brownstone. These guys have been known to dust off Heartbreak 
Hotel or Jumpin’ Jack Flash for live performances. The dual lead guitars of 
Slash and Izzy Stradlin are much more interested in playing melodies and 
rock’n’roll riffs than demonstrating their Eddie Van Halenisms — and they’re 
both pretty incredible as a result. The rhythm team of bassistDuff McKagan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/06/guns-n-roses-duff-mckagan-publish-book-how-to-be-a-man>
 and drummer Steven Adler has obviously listened to stuff like the MC5 
somewhere along the way. And lead singer/band focal point W Axl Rose —Axl, for 
short <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2003/jan/03/popandrock.artsfeatures>— 
is a man of more voices than any hard-rock singer in recent memory. This is a 
record that may actually make you want to play air guitar again.

 Something else is different about Guns N’ Roses. Although their songs are 
about the decadence one associates with Hollywood, there also seems to be a 
strange, moralistic overtone to some of them. Or at least a song like Welcome 
to the Jungle reflects what the porno scene around the newsstand I frequent 
really feels like more than any song I can think of.

Guns N’ Roses seem to be writing about the things they see in the city, but 
they don’t necessarily glamourise. Mr Brownstone can be interpreted as much an 
anti-heroin song as it can be pro, and, hell, you can say the same thing about 
the Velvet’s Underground’s Heroin. Even the excesses that are celebrated in 
It’s So Easy seem to be delivered with a passive indifference. A steady diet of 
decadence can get pretty boring, or worse. And lyrics like “Take me down to 
Paradise City, where the grass is green and girls are pretty” aren’t exactly 
your standard celebration of sleaze, while some of Axl’s love songs (Sweet 
Child O’ Mine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/may/14/australian-crawl-singer-james-reyne-similarities-between-sweet-child-o-mine>
, Rocket Queen) reveal a beating heart beneath the hardcore exterior. And 
besides, if they really are a bunch of scumbags … well, we didn’t stop 
listening to Paint It, Black just because Keith Richards stuck spikes in his 
veins.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Do1tj2zJ2Wvg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Do1tj2zJ2Wvg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Do1tj2zJ2Wvg&media=>
What am I going to do? Get the bassist from Van Halen strung out on something? 
We’re just a bunch of kids, you know.
Slash 
 Still, there is this image and reputation that have to be dealt with. People 
at Warner Brothers, the band’s parent label, wrote them nasty letters about the 
offensive album cover. These guys even have a bad reputation among their peers, 
and can’t get on certain tours as a result. AC/DC did offer them an opening 
slot, but wanted to hold their pay as security for three weeks, and then 
planned to kick them off the tour at the end of the grace period; they declined 
the offer. The organisers of this summer’s forthcoming Monsters of Rock 
extravaganza (featuring Van Halen, Judas Priest, Metallica, etc.) wouldn’t have 
any part of Guns. “I mean, what am I going to do?” asks guitarist Slash, whose 
eyes make only rare appearances from beneath his Joey Ramone-like bush of hair. 
“Get the bassist from Van Halen or Judas Priest strung out on something? We’re 
just a bunch of kids, you know.”

 Three of these kids – Slash, lzzy,and Duff – are sitting in a quiet Mexican 
restaurant on Sunset Boulevard, conversing with an older dude who likes their 
music but doesn’t understand their image. (Axl, maintaining his mysterious 
veneer, isn’t here for this session, though he has promised to call later.) 
They’ve been in and out of bands since age 14, which was approximately 10 years 
ago. None of them are originally from LA, though Slash moved here from England 
with his parents years ago. Axl and Izzy both migrated from Indiana, while Duff 
hails from Seattle.

The band formed to play a $50 gig in that latter city three years ago – after 
hitchhiking across the desert subsequent to their car breaking down – and 
carried on from that point. A year later they were signed, and, lacking a 
manager, proceeded to negotiate their own contract, a most uncommon occurrence 
in this biz. They claim to be a real band in that they’re all the best of 
friends, create everything together as a joint effort, and really concentrate 
on their music. And — I hate to blow any illusions here, but – they’re nice 
guys (“You’re not going to print that, are you?” one of their publicists asked 
the morning after) … or at least they’re putting on a hell of an act for me. 
Sure, they like to drink a lot, but then so do theReplacements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/21/the-replacements-thirty-years-later-interview>
 and Dean Martin.

 So why the “bad boys” rap?

 “I don’t know,” says Slash. “Because we drink and do whatever, and we’re just 
basically real people to the point that I think it almost offends other people.”

 “I’m immediately embarrassed when that image comes up,” says Duff. “A lot of 
bands go: ‘Good, we got the bad-boy title this week,’ but with us, it’s like 
we’re just a rock’n’roll band. A lot of things go along with that that we take 
full advantage of at times. We were doing all that stuff before we were in the 
band, though. We didn’t try to create any kind of image. It was created for us. 
Decadence was laid on this band.”
 Appetite For Destruction – full stream 
 “Well, some of those early parties were pretty brash,” laughs Izzy.

 “You’ve heard some of those old Stones stories, right?” asks Slash. “It was 
sort of the epitome of that. The thing is, we don’t take shit from people, and 
we’ve never conformed to anybody else’s standards, and most of the people we 
had to deal with at the time, we’d tell, ‘Fuck you.’ So it was like ‘Oh, my 
God!’”

 “But it wasn’t a bratty thing,” Duff explains. “It’s just what we were used 
to, but the industry and record company weren’t.”

 “If I remember correctly, they wanted to drop us at one point,” says Izzy. 
“About a year after they signed us.”

 Slash: “Well, what happened is, we got restless. We get signed, they give us 
a bunch of money, put us in an apartment, we can’t go out and do any gigs – so 
we fucking got bored, and started doing a lot of drugs, drinking a lot, tearing 
up houses. We had $7,500 apiece – which was unheard of for us.”

 Izzy: “We partied hard for about two weeks.”

 Slash: “And just about every single manager that we met was scared shitless 
of us. And it was bad. We couldn’t help it. We were bored. So we started to 
fuck up. But we finally got it together and gave them what they wanted.”

 Izzy: “So now they all love us.”

 What about the rape charges?

 Slash: “That was no big deal. What happened is Axl and me were with these two 
girls, and they got in a sexual situation and they decided to file rape 
charges. Me and Axl had to borrow suits one day to go down to the police 
station and turn ourselves in over this crap – and when it came down to the 
wire, they dropped the charges because it was all bogus. We didn’t fucking do 
anything to them.”

 Izzy: “It turned out that our drummer had fucked one of their mothers, so it 
was a complicated story.”

 Do they feel an association with the metal scene?

 Izzy: “We have metal guitar strings. That’s the only similarity we have.”

The next generation of rock’n’roll is going to be a bunch of morons, because 
these bands aren’t doing anything with it
Slash 
 Slash: “It’s like this new cliche to say, ‘We’re not a heavy metal band. 
We’re a rock’n’roll band.’ Poison and everyone are saying it, so I can’t even 
say that any more. But the truth of the matter is when rock’n’roll was young 
and stuff, the bands were real, the people were real and sincere – the only 
thing that was fucked up was the business itself. But now to sell, bands 
conform to what the record company wants, and the magazines are conforming to 
what’s selling, so they get together to create like this whole bullshit fad. I 
mean, you look at it, and just go, ‘Fuck, it’s so unreal.’ I mean, obviously 
we’re a product of what we’ve grown up with, regardless of what it is. But it’s 
scary because the next generation of rock’n’roll – it’s already getting to be 
this way – is going to be a bunch of morons, because these bands aren’t doing 
anything with it that’s interesting or even educational on a rock’n’roll level. 
It’s all garbage.

 “I mean, you can’t be a rock ‘n’ roll band, and only have your roots go back 
five years. What the fuck is that? As a result, now we have bands like Kingdom 
Come, and their Led Zeppelin … ”

 Izzy: “… regurgitation.”

 The most ironic thing about this interview is that these guys ended up being 
really likeable, Johnny Thunders fetishes and all. They’re passionate about 
certain music that I once felt that way about, and they’re awfully non-jaded 
for all their worldliness. And all indications pointed to them being incredible 
assholes.

 Duff: “What sticks in the back of my head most of the time when I do 
interviews is why would anybody want to know about me and what ticks inside my 
head. I don’t understand that because it’s just a rock’n’roll band. We’re just 
playing.”

 Slash: “In the general scheme of things, us and other bands are pretty 
insignificant when you look at the rest of the world. And for bands to think 
that they’re the centre of the universe just makes me sick. Basically, 
rock’n’roll is like an aphrodisiac for people who have everyday jobs and shit, 
and their one stab at total freedom and anarchy and whatever is to listen to 
rock’n’roll. But if we faded out tomorrow and Guns N’ Roses faded out tomorrow, 
no one’s really going to give a shit [everyone laughs].”

 Duff: “Also, it’s like we’ve played some big places, and all the people are 
going nuts, and we’ll look at each other, and it’s like, ‘What is this all 
about?’ And then doing interviews and stuff, people will get really serious and 
in your face – so you’ll get back in their face, ‘Why would you want to know 
this? This is ridiculous.’ And maybe it’s a band that’s different than the ones 
that have come along in awhile, which I think we are. But, then again, to get 
so into it, and to think that you’re … ”

 Izzy: “… it … ”

 Duff: “… and something like the Persian Gulf doesn’t matter … ”

 As I said, very likeable.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjul%2F22%2Fguns-n-roses-interview-appetite-destruction-1988-spin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F22%2F1437564194185%2F853d5d84-5fb9-4f7c-821e-e7f4b5a71e1f-2060x1376.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Guns%20N'%20Roses%3A%20'Rock%E2%80%99n%E2%80%99roll%20is%20like%20an%20aphrodisiac%20for%20people%20who%20have%20everyday%20jobs'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjul%2F22%2Fguns-n-roses-interview-appetite-destruction-1988-spin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Guns%20N%27%20Roses%3A%20%27Rock%E2%80%99n%E2%80%99roll%20is%20like%20an%20aphrodisiac%20for%20people%20who%20have%20everyday%20jobs%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjul%2F22%2Fguns-n-roses-interview-appetite-destruction-1988-spin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F22%2F1437564194185%2F853d5d84-5fb9-4f7c-821e-e7f4b5a71e1f-2060x1376.jpeg>
 (L-R) Izzy Stradlin, Duff McKagan, Axl Rose, Slash and Steven Adler. 
Photograph: Marc S Canter/Getty Images 
A PHONE CALL FROM AXL:

So, I’m told you’re out of control.

 “Me? Well, out of their control, maybe.”

Do you think the record company has you manufacturing rebellion?

 “It’s kind of weird, because we are just being ourselves, but at the same 
time, these ‘bad boy’ images tend to sell. So it’s being capitalised on, and I 
think the industry may not know how to deal with it because they’ve been 
dealing with bands as a package for years. But then there are bands that 
profess some type of image that they live and lead, but it’s not something that 
they actually do. They’re more apt to stay home. I stay home a lot just so I 
don’t go out and get on a roll that I don’t want to necessarily lead me to 
wherever it may.”

Heavy metal?

 “We like a lot of forms of music. What came out on that record are songs 
we’ve written that we’ve had the most fun with. We don’t consider it heavy 
metal, but hard rock. We recently did two shows in Anaheim in which we did some 
country-type stuff, and it went over really well. We’ve got acoustic stuff 
ready for the next record, and I think we’ll have a pretty broad range of stuff 
to give the public — but it won’t be lacking the loud guitars because that’s 
something I’m a fan of. Right now, like my favourite songs are Man in the 
Mirror by Michael Jackson and Fab by George Harrison – so I try to stay open to 
all kinds of stuff. It’s not cool in the rock’n’roll world to like George 
Michael, but he’s done some great stuff on this last record.”

 On It’s So Easy <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UOqDCSRNgj4>:

 “It is. If you want to like disappear for a while, and then get back into the 
scene a little bit, you’re back in the first night out, whether you want to be 
or not. It’s already there – 200 people in your face with this and that. ‘Come 
and do some blow, I’ve got some heroin … ’ You can choose to do it, and if you 
don’t, it’s kind of weird. But it can get a little depressing.”

 On responsibility:

 “It kind of surprised me to see so many kids coming to the show. Nothing 
against kids, but we didn’t write our songs with anyone in mind really other 
than the people we were writing them about and the Hollywood scene. And in 
Hollywood, most of the clubs were 21 and over, so we weren’t really writing for 
the younger kids. I’m not encouraging a 13-year-old kid to go and do drugs. 
We’re just writing about something that happened in our life. It’s strange 
that’s who comes to the concerts and stuff, and I wonder where all the older 
people are, but, then again, they go to Bruce Springsteen concerts because I’m 
not writing about the things he writes about. I’m not writing about having a 
job in the midwest and stuff.”

 Other fab facts: 

He writes about “things that really happened”; his steady girlfriend (the 
subject of Sweet Child O’ Mine) is famed brother Don Everly’s daughter; he 
plays piano; and he started singing in church at the age of five but never 
wanted to be a singer because he didn’t like his voice.

 And the notorious album cover? “It was a postcard called Appetite for 
Destruction I found and submitted as a joke, and the other guys liked it. I’d 
originally seen it in a book, and I liked the artwork because I’m a fan of 
those underground, strange, X-rated comics. And it got turned into us condoning 
rape and stuff.”

 “I can’t believe everyone made such a big deal out of a postcard,” says Izzy.

 Slash cons me into driving him and his girlfriend home (he actually lives in 
a TraveLodge motel) to Hermosa Beach. He tells me that, being naive at first to 
celebrity status (“We used to have to look for drugs, now people force them on 
us”), he eventually had to move outside of Hollywood just to keep things under 
control. He gets me lost on the California freeways for over two hours. “I’m 
really sorry, man. I’m always wasted when I leave Hollywood, so I forget.” We 
both agree that almost every song on the heavy metal station that’s playing 
sounds alike, and that Judas Priest’s Johnny B Goode doesn’t sound anything 
like Chuck Berry.

 © Bill Holdship, 1988
 