
There is a mysterious feel to Hereford, the picture-book English cathedral 
city on the border with Wales. When I stop people in the street to ask if they 
know the city houses a massive private security industry that operates in 
conflict situations all over the world, some say they don’t even know what 
private security is.


But many other residents have military or intelligence connections themselves. 
One man tells me: “I am local but I don’t want to say what I do.” He continues: 
“A lot of stuff goes on in Hereford; it’s a right little hub. There’s a lot of 
very deep stuff here, but it’s kept very hush hush.”

The world’s private military-security industry is always controversial, with 
critics arguing that it operates in a lawless regulatory climate and undermines 
the very fundamentals of democracy: the idea that only an accountable state has 
the right to the legitimate use of force.

Many Hereford locals remain unaware that this burgeoning industry is being 
developed on their doorstep. There is very little in the local newspaper,The 
Hereford Times <http://www.herefordtimes.com/>, on the subject, and even less 
in the national media. But with new groups emerging to represent the security 
and defence industries in the city, that could be about to change.

It is a multibillion dollar industry operating in virtually every country in 
the world

A recent report from War on Want <http://www.waronwant.org/> called the UK the 
globe’s“mercenary kingpin” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/03/britain-g4s-at-centre-of-global-mercenary-industry-says-charity>
, and found that no fewer than 14 private military and security companies are 
based in Hereford. That number is growing, and has made this 60,000-strong city 
a major hub for an industry which has boomed during the “war on terror”.

The business model involves providing “soldiers for hire” to companies and 
governments around the world, to protect assets and important people from 
criminals and terrorists (and sometimes dissidents). It is a multibillion 
dollar industry operating in virtually every country in the world. Few 
outsiders, however, would expect quaint old Hereford to be a key player.

As the rain comes down and evening descends, it starts to feel like we’re in a 
Kafka novel, and there’s a conspiracy going on: everyone is part of this 
strange ex-military, ex-intelligence milieu, but no one can speak about it.

One man who won’t give his name says he “used to work for the Ministry of 
Defence in the security business … Hereford has become a private military 
centre because of the SAS,” he explains. “There’s other units too, and a lot of 
them tend to settle here after they’ve finished their time, so they go into 
that sort of field.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fhereford-inside-england-unlikely-military-city-centre-global-conflict%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24671273882d5e9c1652be9bc8e792970a1cdcff%2F0_66_5599_3360%2F5599.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Guns%20for%20hire%20in%20Hereford%3A%20inside%20England's%20unlikely%20global%20security%20hub&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fhereford-inside-england-unlikely-military-city-centre-global-conflict%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Guns%20for%20hire%20in%20Hereford%3A%20inside%20England%27s%20unlikely%20global%20security%20hub&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fhereford-inside-england-unlikely-military-city-centre-global-conflict%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24671273882d5e9c1652be9bc8e792970a1cdcff%2F0_66_5599_3360%2F5599.jpg>
 ‘A lot of stuff goes on in Hereford; it’s a right little hub.’ Photograph: 
Manor Photography/Alamy 
Another woman I speak to doesn’t know what a private military company is, but 
agrees: “There’s a lot of people involved in the SAS or military here, so yes, 
people will know what is happening. On the private military industry, lots of 
people here are probably profiting from it – so they wouldn’t be complaining 
about it, and it wouldn’t be in the newspaper.

“You don’t see soldiers around in uniform here,” she adds, “but they are all 
over the place in their civilian clothing. And if there’s a pub fight, it’s 
always shut down pretty quickly by the SAS guys ...”

Walking around central Hereford, with its thatched-roof houses and grand 
Edwardian offices, it’s hard to believe there are companies here that are 
intimately involved in many of the most dangerous regions in the world, from 
Somalia to Iraq.

You don’t see soldiers around in uniform, but they are all over the place in 
their civilian clothing

On St Owen’s Street, in the heart of the city opposite its grand registry 
office, two private security companies,Octaga <https://www.octaga.co.uk/> and 
GardaWorld <https://www.garda.com/ips/>, have offices in a twee redbrick set of 
houses. The latter has work in places as diverse asHaiti, Libya and Yemen 
<https://www.garda.com/ips/locations/> – yet on a frosty winter evening 
standing outside their headquarters, it’s hard to feel further away from those 
places.

The main reason for Hereford’s position at the centre of global conflict is 
its location right next to the village of Credenhill, where Britain’s Special 
Air Service – the SAS – is based. There is, of course, no official 
acknowledgment of this fact, but when you drive into Credenhill and pass the 
RAF base, you see the layers of armed police and military manning the entrance.

Signs invoking the Official Secrets Act 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1989/6/section/1> and banning photos are 
tacked to the walls of buildings here. In 2010, the undercover nature of the 
base became controversial when Google Mapsrefused to take off images 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-1259162/Google-Street-View-shows-secret-SAS-base-major-security-breach.html>
 of it on the maps of the area.

The War on Want report noted 
<http://media.waronwant.org/sites/default/files/Mercenaries%20Unleashed%2C%202016.pdf?_ga=1.219190041.1231765350.1482318786>
 that “at least 46 companies [throughout the UK] employ former members of the 
UK Special Forces”. SinceGeorge W Bush launched the war on terror in 2001 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2001/sep/21/september11.usa13>, it has 
become the UK’s – maybe even Europe’s – principal location for private security 
and military companies, or PMSCs, as they are known in the business. Now, there 
is a move to formalise and consolidate this community of security services in 
the city, under the banner of theHerefordshire Security & Defence Group 
<http://www.hsdg.org/> (HSDG).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fhereford-inside-england-unlikely-military-city-centre-global-conflict%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28a9a508b2999fc68f027e93a7429f233465750a%2F0_117_3888_2333%2F3888.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Guns%20for%20hire%20in%20Hereford%3A%20inside%20England's%20unlikely%20global%20security%20hub&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fhereford-inside-england-unlikely-military-city-centre-global-conflict%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Guns%20for%20hire%20in%20Hereford%3A%20inside%20England%27s%20unlikely%20global%20security%20hub&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fhereford-inside-england-unlikely-military-city-centre-global-conflict%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28a9a508b2999fc68f027e93a7429f233465750a%2F0_117_3888_2333%2F3888.jpg>
 Walking around Hereford it’s hard to believe there are companies here that are 
intimately involved in many of the most dangerous regions in the world. 
Photograph: Alamy 
“If someone had said to me that British private security companies have 
ex-intelligence or special forces in their membership, obviously I wouldn’t 
have been surprised by that,” says Sam Raphael, asenior lecturer 
<https://www.westminster.ac.uk/about-us/our-people/directory/raphael-sam> in 
International Relations at Westminster University and author of the War on Want 
report. “But what is surprising is the extent to which that’s the case; the 
sheer number of operations and outfits [in the UK] that are employing 
ex-special forces, who have operated in a shadowy world working for the state, 
and now continue to operate in a shadowy world.”

Hereford’s military history

The military imbues Hereford. In the local Waterstones, SAS books get pride of 
place in the main display; there are shops selling military gear, and leaflets 
everywhere advertising the Military Wives Choirs’ “Home for Christmas 
<http://www.cuffeandtaylor.com/news/military-wives-announce-home-for-christmas-tour-2016>
” concert at the cathedral.

The city has a long military history and always adapted to the changing nature 
of war. The SAS base at Credenhill was previouslyRAF Hereford 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RAF_Hereford>. In the first world war, the 
Herefordshire Regiment was aTerritorial Force 
<http://www.army.mod.uk/reserve/31793.aspx> – but it was one of the first to 
volunteer for overseas service, and went on to serve in Egypt, Palestine and 
France.

There is a small hub of security companies in Hereford. It’s a good place to 
be if you want to be in this line of work
John Thompson 
On 27 July 1942, the Luftwaffe bombed the Rotherwas Munitions Factory 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-hereford-worcester-19001211> on the 
outskirts of Hereford: a site which is now an industrial estate housing a 
private security company.

The SAS was formed in North Africa in 1941 by David Stirling 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-517254/SAS-founder-broke-army-HQ-crutches-persuade-generals-needed-crack-unit.html>
, who had grown weary of the failures of large operations and wanted to switch 
to faster-moving, four-man patrols. Since 1960,22 SAS 
<http://www.eliteukforces.info/special-air-service/organisation/>, the regular 
army unit, has been based in Hereford. In 2000, the regiment moved to the RAF 
base at Credenhill. It is thought to have four operational squadrons, each 
comprising around 60 men.

Most of the private security companies in Hereford have been started by 
ex-special forces soldiers. The PMSCs offices are located all around Hereford, 
from quaint old houses to industrial estates on the edge of the city.


The walk from the centre of Hereford to the offices of Ambrey Risk 
<http://www.ambreyrisk.com/> – a private security company focused on maritime 
protection against modern-day pirates, for example – is a full-on country 
affair. About five minutes of walking outside the city brings you to a bridge 
jutting across the River Wye, with greenery as far as the eye can see. This 
continues until you reach the Thorn Business Park.


Inside Ambrey’s nondescript office, 40 people are manning the phones, working 
on securing the assets of some of the biggest companies in the world in some of 
the most dangerous places in the world, from Somalia to Nigeria. When they look 
outside their window, however, all they can see is freight lorries standing on 
a rainy, windswept industrial estate on the outskirts of Hereford. It’s a 
bizarre juxtaposition of worlds.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fhereford-inside-england-unlikely-military-city-centre-global-conflict%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28e9849065c17e527ad318b6ad45ec71261f4fa1%2F0_211_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Guns%20for%20hire%20in%20Hereford%3A%20inside%20England's%20unlikely%20global%20security%20hub&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fhereford-inside-england-unlikely-military-city-centre-global-conflict%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Guns%20for%20hire%20in%20Hereford%3A%20inside%20England%27s%20unlikely%20global%20security%20hub&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fhereford-inside-england-unlikely-military-city-centre-global-conflict%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28e9849065c17e527ad318b6ad45ec71261f4fa1%2F0_211_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
 The walk to Ambrey Risk’s offices takes you into the countryside. Photograph: 
Matt Kennard for the Guardian 
John Thompson was in the parachute regiment from 2003 to 2009, working within 
the special forces support group for most of that time. He then worked for a 
big international security company in Africa, before setting up Ambrey Risk in 
2010. Thompson says he set up shop in Hereford because it’s where he is from 
(he’s a local boy), but also because “there is a small pool of security 
companies here that are born out of people being in the regiment, and there is 
a small mini-hub of security and defence companies in Hereford. It’s a good 
place to be if you want to be in this line of work; one of the few areas in the 
country where there is a small cluster of companies that do what we do.”

Thompson is now pushing to bring the private security companies in Hereford 
tighter together. He recently helped set up the HSDG, which will meet regularly 
to create coordination and synergies between the industry in the city. The 
group calls itself “an association of security and defence companies”, formed 
by local Herefordshire companies with the aim of “raising significantly the 
commercial and industrial capacity of this niche and specialist sector in 
Herefordshire, for the benefit of group members and the wider community”.

“There are 15 companies locally,” Thompson says. “We are probably the biggest 
in terms of these companies – but we know pretty much all the others, and the 
HSDG is our first attempt to get everyone talking, and working together both to 
win work and to share our ideas and information.”

Guns for hire

Hereford is a particularly attractive location because office space is cheap 
and readily available, and because the city sits in the middle of huge expanses 
of countryside, where residential training courses can be easily organised. One 
of these training centres lies on the outskirts of Hereford in the sleepy 
village ofMadley <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Madley>: population 1,200. It’s 
the closest thing to the Postman Pat bucolic idyll one can imagine, with the 
Red Lion pub, parish church and post office the only signs of life outside of 
the grazing cows in the surrounding fields.

But nearby stands an unremarkable, converted barn which, every six weeks, is 
filled with prospective recruits for the global private security industry from 
places as diverse as Eastern Europe, the US and Latin America. Here’s where 
some of the next generation of “guns for hire” start their journey – from those 
guarding VIPs in war zones to corporate assets in the developing world. Madley 
and Baghdad couldn’t seem further away, but they are intimately linked by 
conflict.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fhereford-inside-england-unlikely-military-city-centre-global-conflict%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c2f79355bb819f40d3aecf6c91793c6dd548765%2F0_0_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Guns%20for%20hire%20in%20Hereford%3A%20inside%20England's%20unlikely%20global%20security%20hub&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fhereford-inside-england-unlikely-military-city-centre-global-conflict%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Guns%20for%20hire%20in%20Hereford%3A%20inside%20England%27s%20unlikely%20global%20security%20hub&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fhereford-inside-england-unlikely-military-city-centre-global-conflict%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c2f79355bb819f40d3aecf6c91793c6dd548765%2F0_0_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Weapons ready for private security training. Photograph: Matt Kennard for the 
Guardian 
John Geddes is the founder and owner of Ronin Concepts 
<http://www.roninconcepts.co.uk/>, a private security company set up in 2004. 
Geddes spent his long military career in the parachute regiment and SAS, before 
quitting and going to Iraq as a private soldier with British companyOlive Group 
<http://www.olivegroup.com/>. He became disillusioned with the quality of those 
applying for jobs, and saw an opportunity to move into training.

“In 2004 I jacked in Iraq and came back to the UK, and threw all my money into 
creating Ronin Concepts,” he tells me as we stand inside the converted barn.

Geddes says Hereford is the kind of place where, if he goes out, he will see 
other people from PMSCs and say hello. It’s a community.

“For instance, we just did a venue in Glasgow, an executive protection job,” 
Geddes says. “I raised a team of six in Hereford and took them up to Glasgow; 
five days’ work, and we flew back yesterday – it was fantastic.” He then 
admits: “We’re all friends, but it’s a quiet competition.”

Where are the world's most war-damaged cities?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/dec/17/where-world-most-war-damaged-city>
Inside the barn, dummies lie on the floor with plastic heads strewn around. 
The main wall has a big screen on which Geddes puts his training videos, 
showing live-fire training in Poland and the US (he has training properties in 
both countries as well).

Geddes explains the unlikely success of the UK in dominating this 
multibillion-dollar industry. “The answer goes back a couple of hundred years 
to the rise of theEast India Company 
<https://www.britannica.com/topic/East-India-Company>, which was a private 
military army. They occupied huge tracts of the globe, and mostly were 
ex-services patched throughout the empire.”

Now Hereford finds itself at the centre of this industry, whose continued 
growth carries deep significance for the future of global conflict. “Private 
security and military companies mean that being able to constrain the use of 
force and making sure it complies with morality and the law becomes 
increasingly hard,” says Sam Raphael, the academic who has highlighted the UK’s 
– and Hereford’s – leading role. “Holding states to account, and ensuring 
regular armies use force in proportionate and legal ways, is hard enough – 
never mind the number of different actors we see proliferating now.”

A number of these private-sector actors are using Hereford as the stepping 
stone into a world of hyper-violence and big money – to the discomfort of some 
locals, at least. As one exclaimed when told about the industry in the city’s 
midst: “How is that legal? That’s not legal, surely!”

While the legality of these industries is not at issue, there is no specific 
regulatory framework – and a visit to this sleepy cathedral city raises many 
questions in these turbulent times.


Travel support for this article was provided by the Pulitzer Center on Crisis 
Reporting <http://pulitzercenter.org/>
 