
My story comes from the Notting Hill carnival in 1999, though you may have 
your own. It was sunny and there wasn’t really a plan, other than to wander the 
streets and enjoy ourselves. Towards the end of the day, we came to a 
crossroads flooded with thousands of people. Like everybody else, we headed in.

Gradually the crowd tightened as we neared the junction. My friends and I had 
to go single-file, which made it difficult to see each other. If we wanted to 
talk we had to shout, because everybody else was shouting. Soon the crowd was 
so tight that it was impossible to turn back, or even choose direction. My arms 
were pinned by my sides. My head was wedged like an egg into a box of others. 
Mostly we all just stood and waited, but every so often the pack would slip 
forwards and we’d all have to shuffle with it. Sometimes we’d be carried.

I’m 5ft10in, so I could just about peer around. Smaller people were caged 
between chests and backs, their only view upwards at a ragged patch of blue. A 
few police were stationed behind crash barriers at the side shouting helpful 
things like, “Keep moving, please!” At one point I remember asking one of them 
how much longer this would last, only to be yelled at angrily. I don’t remember 
what he said, just that he was not in charge of his emotions.

Now and then there’d be a cry of panic, somewhere, followed by angry calls to 
stop pushing. I imagined some people were getting claustrophobic, 
understandably. I was pretty keen to get out myself, but I don’t think I ever 
doubted that I would. The idea that I was in danger seemed silly, and indeed 
some people were laughing. We were outside. There was no urgency. How could 
anybody die from lack of space beneath this empty sky?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F03%2Fhajj-crush-how-crowd-disasters-happen-and-how-they-can-be-avoided%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F87e2c1bf0e3acb6d9f0e0aa6e502a4d13d7e626f%2F14_76_4218_2533%2F4218.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hajj%20crush%3A%20how%20crowd%20disasters%20happen%2C%20and%20how%20they%20can%20be%20avoided&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F03%2Fhajj-crush-how-crowd-disasters-happen-and-how-they-can-be-avoided%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hajj%20crush%3A%20how%20crowd%20disasters%20happen%2C%20and%20how%20they%20can%20be%20avoided&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F03%2Fhajj-crush-how-crowd-disasters-happen-and-how-they-can-be-avoided%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F87e2c1bf0e3acb6d9f0e0aa6e502a4d13d7e626f%2F14_76_4218_2533%2F4218.jpg>
 Pilgrims on the Jamarat bridge, which can handle up to 600,000 people per 
hour. Photograph: Fayez Nureldine/AFP/Getty Images 
Nobody was crushed to death at the 1999 Notting Hill carnival, but I was wrong 
about crowds. Since 1999, crush accidents killing 10 or more people have 
happened on at least 44 recorded occasions, or about one every four months. 
They’ve happened in South Africa, Ghana, Japan, the US, China, India, the 
Philippines, Tanzania, the Netherlands, Germany, Cambodia, Brazil, Egypt … 
everywhere. In 2005, 953 people died inthe Al-Aaimmah bridge crush in Baghdad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2005/sep/01/iraq> – a loss of life far 
greater than in any of Iraq’s terrorist attacks.The list of crowd disasters 
associated with theHajj in Mecca, Saudi Arabia, is especially appalling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/24/timeline-of-tragedies-in-mecca-during-hajj>
. In 1990, 1,426 people were crushed to death, in 1994 it was 270, in 1998 it 
was 118 (at least), in 2001 it was 35, in 2003 it was 14, in 2004 it was 251, 
in 2005 it was three, in 2006 it was 360 (at least). More surprising than the 
769 deaths so far confirmed from last month’s crush is the fact that the Hajj 
got through eight consecutive quiet years.

Why do crowd crushes happen? Why do they keep happening? That is easy. These 
are not natural disasters. They happen because no one stops them. Indeed, 
Professor Edwin Galea thinks they are happening more frequently. “Not all of 
them get reported,” he says. “But I think they are increasing. We’re trying to 
service more people in less time, which means higher crowd densities, which is 
leading to increased frequency. More urbanisation, I think that’s the key 
thing.”

Galea and his Fire Safety Engineering Group <http://fseg.gre.ac.uk> at the 
University of Greenwich use behavioural experiments and mathematical modelling 
to understand how crowds move in different scenarios. The aim is to prevent 
dangerous densities from building up. At the table in his narrow office, lined 
with box files, I tell him about my time at the junction in 1999. “That’s 
extremely dangerous,” he says without hesitation. “You should never be in that 
situation. That should never happen.”
Crowd crushes - the risk of accidents in a moving crowd 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/10/hajj_risk-zip/giv-31114SO37WRcmf93V>
Galea is Australian by birth and an astrophysicist by training, having 
originally specialised in the fluid dynamics inside stars. He became interested 
in the spread of fires after the disaster on the tarmac at Manchester airport 
in 1985, in which 54 people died when a Boeing 737 caught fire; then he became 
interested in the movement of crowds, then in crowd behaviour. Crowd crushes 
used to be thought of as a fluid-dynamics problem, but that isn’t quite right. 
When people are packed very tightly, they do move somewhat like a fluid, but 
understanding the dynamics of that kind of crowd isn’t going to keep it safe. 
By the time a crowd is moving like a fluid, it is already in danger. Knowing 
what it is going to do is like knowing how a plane will move without wings – 
interesting, maybe, but too late.

When crowds are not too tightly packed – less than four people per square 
metre – the individuals in them have room to make decisions, and they do not 
move like a fluid. When you think about this, it’s obvious: for any number of 
reasons, people aren’t particles. You don’t usually go to a music festival 
alone, you go in a group, which means you are not just trying to get somewhere, 
you are also trying to stay together. Sometimes you turn round after forgetting 
something, or you veer off when you recognise a friend. Galea’s research 
suggests that people are generally decent and calm, and behave rationally, even 
in a crisis, but their decisions can only be based on what they know – which is 
rarely what simple models expect.

Instead of treating them as “ball bearings” therefore, Galea and a few others 
around the world have developed software that models crowds as what they are – 
a mass of complex agents, simulating as closely as possible the choices and 
limitations of real people. “Each of the agents has a respiration rate,” Galea 
explains, “and [in a fire] they’re inhaling the toxic products and being 
exposed to the heat. We’re calculating and predicting the effect of the 
exposure to the products and the exposure to the heat had on the person. 
They’ll try and avoid hot areas, for example. If the smoke descends, they’ll 
fall to the ground and try to crawl … ” It sounds intensely complex. “It is.”

He shows me the result on his computer – blocky animations, many of them free 
to view on YouTube, which show hundreds or thousands of stick figures trying to 
deal with crushes and fires – sometimes crushes and fires that actually 
happened. They make unpleasant viewing. In one, Galea’s people try to escape 
the Station nightclub fire on Rhode Island in 2003. You can see how they mostly 
ignore the emergency exits and head for the front, where a severe crush 
develops, killing some and blocking the path of the others, who try to break 
windows, then try to crawl, then die. After three minutes there are 100 corpses 
on the floor, just as there were after three minutes of the real thing.
Progressive crowd control collapse graphic 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/10/hajj_collapse-zip/giv-31114Rg3yz0LHx2HP/>
If crowd densities rise above four people per square metre, and especially if 
they get to six, they become prone to two broad types of accident. Both – be 
warned – are horrifying. A “progressive crowd collapse” often begins when one 
person falls over, perhaps because of a shock wave travelling through the 
crowd, or just because they slip. Suddenly denied the fallen person’s body to 
lean against, but still under pressure on the other side, the adjacent people 
fall on top of them, or are knocked over trying to help. This in turn creates a 
larger hole, which ever more people are forced into, and more, and more, piled 
high on top of each other until the pressure eases. It is being buried alive in 
bodies, perhaps bodies that you know. A progressive crowd collapse often 
happens when a large crowd is moving steadily through a confined route, driving 
ever forwards. Early indications are that the most recent disaster in Mecca was 
a progressive crowd collapse, seemingly caused by the meeting of two crowds 
that were moving against each other – something that should simply never be 
allowed to happen.

The other type of crowd disaster occurs when people are simply squeezed to 
such an extent that they can no longer inflate their lungs, and die gradually 
of compressive asphyxiation. This is a “crowd crush”, and it typically happens 
when ever more people push into a confined area – either on the way in, or 
trying to get out. Often those who die in crowd crushes are the ones against 
the wall. Hillsborough was one example, but many terrible fires are crowd 
crushes, too. No matter how calmly a crowd behaves, it can only fit through a 
narrow exit at a certain rate. Those caught at the back have a choice between 
pushing harder and waiting to die. In 1997, 243 people were killed on theHajj 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/hajj> when a fire among the tents caused a 
crowd crush.

For all their complexity, however, crowd disasters are as much a political 
problem as a technical one. A common reaction – indeed the usual reaction – is 
to evoke the idea of an indiscriminate mob, of mass panic. To blame, in short, 
the crowd. In the case ofHillsborough, this was done deliberately by the police 
and the Sun newspaper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/mar/04/hillsborough-police-decided-to-blame-drunken-ticketless-liverpool-fans>
. In other cases, it may just be assumed and implied. People who have never 
seen mass panic find it easy to imagine, but in fact that’s almost everybody, 
because mass panic virtually does not exist. Indeed believing in mass panics is 
dangerous, because it means the authorities sometimes conceal alarming but 
important information for fear of starting one. “Utter, complete rubbish,” is 
what Galea thinks of that strategy. “All the evidence shows that people will be 
able to react and take sensible decisions based on the information you provide. 
You don’t want to provide them with too much information so they can’t process 
it all … You just want to provide them with accurate, simple information they 
can act on.”

Saudi Arabia under pressure to improve safety at Mecca after fatal hajj crush
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/25/saudi-arabia-hajj-stampede-mecca-safety>
One word bears a lot of blame here, at least in English. Mention a “stampede” 
in front of Galea and he starts to look pretty wild-eyed. “This is just 
absolute nonsense,” he says. “It’s pure ignorance, and laziness … It gives the 
impression that it was a mindless crowd only caring about themselves, and they 
were prepared to crush people.” The truth is that people are only directly 
crushed by others who have no choice in the matter, and the people who can 
choose don’t know what is going on because they’re too far away from the 
epicentre – often reassuringly surrounded by marshals and smiling faces. Like I 
was, in fact, when I entered – and helped create – that dangerous carnival 
crowd.

On the extremely rare occasions that a real stampede happens – that is, people 
running over you – it is unlikely to be fatal. “If you look at the analysis, 
I’ve not seen any instances of the cause of mass fatalities being a stampede,” 
saysKeith Still, professor of crowd science <http://www.gkstill.com/> at 
Manchester Metropolitan University. “People don’t die because they panic. They 
panic because they are dying.” In Still and Galea’s small but growing field, 
this is now the consensus view. “Crowd quakes [or collapses] are a typical 
reason for crowd disasters, to be distinguished from those resulting from ‘mass 
panic’ or ‘crowd crushes’,” says Dirk Helbing, a computing professor at ETH 
Zurich. “The idea of the hysterical mass is a myth,” says Paul Torrens, a 
professor at the Center for Geospatial Information Science at the University of 
Maryland.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgmPOIriMiyU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgmPOIriMiyU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgmPOIriMiyU&media=>
Still advises architects, police and event planners – including the planners 
of the royal wedding – on handling large events, and he insists that crushes 
are wholly “preventable, predictable and avoidable”. In 2004, he was hired by 
the Saudi authorities to consult on designs for the new Jamarat bridge in 
Mecca, in order to ease what had become an obvious bottleneck in front of the 
pillars. As he explains, however, that may not solve the problem. “They are 
improving one part of a complex system, making it much more efficient,” he 
says. “It used to only handle 200,000 people per hour. Now it can handle around 
500,000 or 600,000. So that load puts pressure on the rest of the system” – in 
other words, a greater number of people arriving at potential bottleneck points 
further along the route. Since the new bridge was built, the layout of the Mina 
valley encampment, where the recent disaster happened, has not changed.

A redesign of the whole complex could, Still believes, make the Hajj safe, but 
Galea has his doubts. “If you’re designing an event to handle that crowd 
density, it’s inherently dangerous,” he says. The challenges, as always, are 
the pinch points. Everybody must get within throwing distance of the pillars, 
for instance (where the deaths occurred in 1994, 2003, 2005 and 2006), and 
everybody must circle the Kaaba within the Masjid-al-Haram, so there will 
always be a limit to how many people can safely be present in these spaces in a 
day – and numbers at the Hajj are quite extraordinary. For comparison, 500,000 
people an hour over Jamarat bridge is the largest-ever football crowd once 
every 24 minutes, or the whole of Germany once a week. One possible solution, 
of course, would be to spread the Hajj over more days.

The problem for crowd management generally, however, is that no two places are 
alike. In 2010,21 young people were crushed to death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jul/24/love-parade-festival-tunnel-stampede>
 in Duisberg, Germany, during a music festival called the Love Parade, which 
was taking place on a new site. A plan had been made, but for some reason it 
expected the crowds to flow in both directions through a single tunnel, where 
the disaster happened. In fact, by dividing the flow into three streams, 
Galea’s model suggests that twice as many people could actually have moved 
safely through the area.

In Mecca I saw little of Islam’s compassion, but a lot of Saudi Arabia’s 
neglect | Sabreena Razaq Hussain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/02/hajj-muslims-mecca-islam-protest-saudi-arabia>
Still speaks highly of local knowledge and experience in crowd management at 
large events, but also warns of the false confidence they can create. “For 
instance,” he says, “I saw a gold [police] commander who took over Wembley 
stadium with a tactic that worked well at Arsenal. He wanted to try it that way 
at Wembley, and 30,000 lives were at risk … Nobody was even in distress, but it 
was one of those moments where you thought, ‘They’re all going through a 
6ft-wide gate, and there’s nothing to stop them.’ I was in the control room at 
the time, and everybody was sitting there watching it unfold. The strategy 
worked in geometry A, but it did not work at all in geometry B. I witnessed not 
just that, but a number of close calls.” What infuriates Still especially is 
that we fail to learn from them. “There is nothing in the industry that records 
that information and seeks to improve or better it in following years,” he 
says. If Notting Hill 1999 is recorded anywhere, it’s here, only, and maybe in 
a police officer’s nightmares.

If such a system were implemented, if the law more generally required 
organisers to “ensure crowd safety”, if we could stop calling them “stampedes”, 
and if new research and technology could help – perhaps by putting real-time 
simulation software on to marshals’ phones – then crowd crushes might stop 
happening. In the meantime, the near-misses – and the catastrophes – will 
continue. Just a few months ago Galea himself experienced a dangerous crowd at 
London Bridge station. “I feared for my safety and other people’s safety,” he 
says. “I thought this could easily end up being a tragedy. Very easily.” He 
made a formal complaint, hopefully with some effect.

Next time you approach a large crowd, Still has some basic rules to follow. 
“Be aware of your surroundings,” he says. “Look ahead. Listen to the crowd 
noise. If you start finding yourself in a crowd surge, wait for the surge to 
come, go with it, and move sideways. Keep moving with it and sideways, with it 
and sideways.” Usually, of course, people survive. Usually not realising. They 
check their pockets and go home, telling their friends how – for a minute there 
– they were nearly scared.
 