
By now you’d think we know everything there is to know about Hank Williams 
<http://hankwilliams.com/>. He had a short life, dying New Year’s Day 1953 aged 
29 in the back of a car parked at a gas station in rural Virginia. Three years 
earlier he had made his debut on theGrand Ole Opry <http://www.opry.com/>, 
launching a body of work that would serve as one of the definitive blueprints 
of modern country music.A definitive box set in 1998 
<http://www.allmusic.com/album/the-complete-hank-williams-mw0000600693> claimed 
to house every note Williams sang.

Not so fast. This month marks the reissue of a 15-CD set  
<http://www.allmusic.com/album/hank-williams-the-complete-mothers-best-recordingsplus!-mw0002045121>
called The Complete Mother’s Best Collection ... Plus! unveiling 142 lost 
performances by the country music star in an unvarnished setting as the 
featured performer of an early morning radio program in 1951. The recordings, 
rescued from acetates salvaged in the 1970s and the center of a 10-year legal 
battle, contradict the image of a doomed and self-destructive country singer 
known for harrowing fare likeI’m So Lonesome I Could Cry 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oyTOZCfp8OY>, Your Cheatin’ Heart, and I’ll 
Never Get Out of This World Alive <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w7FQeFOBtBk>.

On these records, Williams is a wisecracking improviser at the height of his 
musical powers with an encyclopedic brain for gospel hymns, traditional folk 
ballads, children’s songs and anything else a rural listener in the Tennessee 
region might want to hear in the early 1950s from one of the biggest country 
stars of the day.

“He is singing like his life depends on it,” says Jett Williams, the daughter 
of the late singer. “You can hear the freedom in his voice because it’s not in 
a recording studio. This was just ‘get around the mic, let it rip and have 
fun’.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2Fhank-williams-country-music-radio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F98affbd5921a56e7bafeee0d848cf1c7eb78a281%2F0_0_800_628%2F800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hank%20Williams%3A%20the%20lighter%20side%20of%20the%20godfather%20of%20country&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2Fhank-williams-country-music-radio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hank%20Williams%3A%20the%20lighter%20side%20of%20the%20godfather%20of%20country&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2Fhank-williams-country-music-radio%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F98affbd5921a56e7bafeee0d848cf1c7eb78a281%2F0_0_800_628%2F800.jpg>
 Hank Williams recording the Mother’s Best sessions. Photograph: Supplied 
The notion of being heard more than a half-century later did not occur to 
Williams and his band the Drifting Cowboys because the recording discs, called 
acetates, were meant for single use only. The 15-minute shows, aired weekdays 
at 7.15am onWSM <http://wsmonline.com/listen-live/>, home of the Grand Ole 
Opry, were recorded only for dates the band was on the road. The discs were a 
popular way for radio stations to preserve broadcasts, first for shipping 
overseas in the second world war to entertain the troops, and then for 
broadcast in different time zones. No acetate transcription was intended for 
commercial use, which is why most radio programs from this time period remain 
lost forever.

The story of the recordings is long and tortuous. Les Leverett, a former 
station photographer for WSM, is credited for salvaging the recordings from the 
garbage after the station had moved offices in 1961. He held onto them for 
years and then sold them toHillous Butrum 
<http://articles.latimes.com/2002/may/03/local/me-passing3.2>, bassist in the 
Drifting Cowboys but who had left the band in 1950, one year before music on 
the acetates had been recorded.

They were copied to tape in 1981. One year later the tapes ended up in the 
hands of Legacy Entertainment Group, a Texas company that Williams said lifted 
her father’s vocals and match them to new music. Polygram, parent company of 
MGM Records, Williams former record label, claimed it owned the exclusive 
rights of the performances and sued. In April 2000, the court dismissed 
Polygram’s claims, saying its 1947 contract with the singer did not apply to 
recordings never intended for commercial release.

In 2006, the court placed the recordings exclusively in the hands of Jett 
Williams and her half-brother Hank Williams Jr 
<http://www.nashvillepost.com/home/article/20446074/unreleased-hank-williams-tunes-belong-to-children-court-says>
. The siblings initially issued the recordings in a 2010 box set for Time-Life. 
This new edition is tailored to accompany I Saw the Light 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/05/i-saw-the-light-review-tom-hiddleston-hank-williams-country-singer-biopic>
, the recent biopic starring Tom Hiddleston as Williams.

Listening to the discs reveals Williams as sweetly charming and also a 
prankster. His wife and occasional duet partnerAudrey Williams 
<http://www.cmt.com/artists/audrey-williams/biography/> sings with him and 
their interaction – teasing and playful – is more poignant knowing their 
tumultuous backstory. Audrey dedicates her self-penned songTight Wad Daddy 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HE1rPb7nnGI> to her husband. The couple would 
divorce the following year.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMoyJ5NzbyJw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMoyJ5NzbyJw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMoyJ5NzbyJw&media=>
The shows were for Mother’s Best, a flour company in northern Alabama, 
Williams’s home state. The show followed a simple formula: Williams opened with 
Lovesick Blues, followed by banter with show announcer “Cousin Louie” Buck. 
Then, in-between scripted commercials aimed at housewives, Williams performed 
two more songs, the last always a spiritual. That song selection is why music 
historians consider the shows so valuable. Many of these are early live 
recordings of Williams’s best-known songs, made shortly after their studio 
versions and not well known to audiences. He also presents songs, like Alabama 
Waltz, which he wrote but never recorded. Then there are favorites of his 
written by other people, such as Have I Told You Lately That I Love You 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O4EchTx7o2w> by Scotty Wiseman of National 
Barn Dance fame or Precious Lord, Take My Hand by Chicago gospel greatThomas 
Dorsey <http://www.pbs.org/thisfarbyfaith/people/thomas_dorsey.html>. 

Williams says the shows brought her closer to her father, whom she never met. 
Before playing the traditional song On Top of Old Smoky, for instance, Hank ad 
libs that he will sing the version his grandmother sang to him before bedtime. 
“Now I can imagine my dad as a little boy,” she says. The song selection, she 
says, “tells me what kind of music he liked and what he listened to and who he 
respected.”

Jett Williams  <http://www.jettwilliams.com/>has a story that could be a 
country song itself. She was born to Bobbie Jett, a woman her father had an 
affair with between his two marriages. Jett gave birth to their daughter five 
days after Williams died and not long after he had married his second wife. Her 
father had established a custody agreement for his daughter, naming his mother 
as sole custodian in the wake of his death. But three years later, Jett’s 
grandmother died and she ended up in the state’s foster care system. It wasn’t 
until she was 21 that her adoptive parents told her the identity of birth 
father and it took until 1987 for a circuit court in Montgomery, Alabama, to 
officially establish the bloodline. She then had to fight Hank Williams Jr to 
be recognized as a legal heir to their father’s estate; the Alabama supreme 
court ruled in her favor in 1989.

Williams, who is a co-producer of the Mother’s Best collection, has taken a 
lead role in promoting her father’s legacy. A few years ago she brought another 
set of radio recordings from 1950 titledThe Garden Spot Programs  
<http://omnivorerecordings.com/music/the-garden-spot-programs-1950/>to 
Omnivore, the reissue label lauded for packages by Big Star and Dr John, among 
others. The setwon a best historical album Grammy last year 
<http://theboot.com/hank-williams-the-garden-spot-programs-named-best-historical-album-2015-grammy-awards/>
.

She continues to scout for more acetate discs that detoured from the local 
landfill but have festered in basements, attics or storage lockers. “I feel 
like a steward. I tell people if you find anything, don’t play it because 
sometimes you only get one play and you destroy it,” she says. She also 
performs her father’s songs to audiences, young and old, that may never have 
heard them previously. Late this month she is bound to China by invitation of 
the state government to play a festival. (“We can make enough noise and give 
them a Hey, Good Lookin’,” she says with a laugh.)

With his death, Hank invented the musicians’ archetype of living fast and 
dying young. But the Mother’s Best shows push back. The singer’s playful banter 
with his band, knowledge of current headlines and biting humor suggests a star 
capable of illuminating audiences even between songs. The recordings are 
especially poignant knowing he was in the throes of major back pain that he 
tried to remedy, first with morphine and alcohol, and later that year with 
surgery at Vanderbilt University Hospital in Nashville.

Williams says the general image of her dad – “so lonely, so drugged out, a 
total alcoholic” – is tiring. “Nonsense. This guy is in the studio first thing 
in the morning and he sounds pretty damn chipper to me.

“I’m not saying he didn’t take pills or drink, but I just can’t fathom it was 
to the extent they say. People that abuse alcohol can’t write songs that have 
the impact that his did. When you look at what he accomplished in those last 
three years,” she says, her words trailing off. Then a question in awe: “How 
did that guy do that?”
 