
Hans Ulrich Obrist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/hans-ulrich-obrist>, curator 
extraordinaire, likes to say that he models himself on the Russian impresario 
Sergei Diaghilev, the general idea being that he is someone who brings great 
artists together so that wondrous things might happen. But while this may well 
be true on paper, in person the analogy can seem a touch preposterous. Not for 
Obrist the silver-topped canes and fur-trimmed overcoats favoured by Diaghilev. 
He prefers a more anonymous look: white shirt, cotton jacket, 
transparent-rimmed spectacles. When he has his carry-on bag in tow, which is 
most of the time, he could be just another European businessman on his way to a 
meeting at, say, Adidas or Bayer. He even sounds right, prone as he is to 
talking in a kind of jargon, albeit one that belongs to the art world rather 
than to middle management. “That is the paradigm,” he will say, in his 
sibilant, rapid-fire mittel-European accent (he was born in Switzerland, and 
grew up speaking German). Or: “There is a dialogue to be had with history.” Or: 
“The next generation will decide.”

Still, beaver collars or not, there’s no doubting Obrist’s influence. In the 
near decade since he and his co-director, Julia Peyton-Jones, began jointly 
running the Serpentine Gallery in Hyde Park, it has become one of the art 
world’s most talked about boutique spaces. The elite crowd swoons at its 
collaborations with architects, at its annual verbal and visual “marathons” 
duri ng which scientists, writers, film-makers and other thinkers talk – and 
talk – about such nebulous subjects as memory, extinction and maps. The subject 
of a recent New Yorker profile, Obrist (HUO to his colleagues) regularly tops 
lists of art’s most powerful. His network of proteges and followers extends 
around the world, and back again. There cannot be an artist alive of any note 
who has not had dealings with him of one kind or another. (Though it must be 
said that not everyone is convinced: “His telephone is continually ringing and 
leaving twicks and tweets and all that,” Ed Ruscha told theNew Yorker. “I’m 
like one little fragment of his interest.”)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmar%2F08%2Fhans-ulrich-obrist-everything-i-do-connected-velocity-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F5%2F1425555580666%2Fdb9b4f88-0d04-480c-b154-cf36505ef58d-1530x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hans%20Ulrich%20Obrist%3A%20%E2%80%98Everything%20I%20do%20is%20somehow%20connected%20to%20velocity%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmar%2F08%2Fhans-ulrich-obrist-everything-i-do-connected-velocity-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hans%20Ulrich%20Obrist%3A%20%E2%80%98Everything%20I%20do%20is%20somehow%20connected%20to%20velocity%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmar%2F08%2Fhans-ulrich-obrist-everything-i-do-connected-velocity-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F5%2F1425555580666%2Fdb9b4f88-0d04-480c-b154-cf36505ef58d-1530x2040.jpeg>
 Obrist: ‘It’s never been about ownership for me.’ Photograph: Suki 
Dhanda/Observer 
And then there is his writing, which may or may not be the 46-year old 
Obrist’s best claim to being an artist in his own right. He and I are meeting 
today to discuss the publication of no fewer than three books. The first of 
these isWays of Curating 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/ways-of-curating-265241.html>, a brief memoir. 
The second isLives of the Artists, Lives of the Architects 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/282266/>, a collection 
of verbatim interviews with, among others, Rem Koolhas, Zaha Hadid, Louise 
Bourgeois, David Hockney and Gerhard Richter (to date, Obrist has published 40 
volumes of such interviews, based on some 2,400 hours of recorded material). 
And the third is... oh dear. I don’t know how best to describeThe Age of 
Earthquakes 
<http://www.penguin.co.uk/books/the-age-of-earthquakes/9780141979564/>, a 
baffling monochrome paperback inspired by Marshall “the medium is the message” 
McLuhan, whose authorship he shares with the novelist Douglas Coupland and a 
writer-editor called Shumon Basar.

I smile encouragingly at HUO, who’s sitting in his office at the Serpentine, a 
notebook open on the table in front of him. How would he describe it? “It’s 
about an extreme form of the present,” he says. “It’s about trying to come to 
grips with contemporary realities, with phenomena around the digital age.” The 
gist of it seems to be that the internet messes with time (oh, the hours we 
lose down its wormholes watching kittens), with our heads (the web makes us 
smarter, but it also makes us impatient, less able to concentrate), and with 
the planet (the transporting of data already uses 50% more energy than world 
aviation). However, he is anxious to downplay his role in its conception. 
Apparently, his co-authors should take most of the credit for this one. “I was 
brought in to curate the illustrations: it’s both a book and a group show.”

Is he surprised to find himself setting store by such a quaint thing as print? 
The art Obrist favours is “dematerialised” – he likes work that cannot be 
separated from its reception by gallery goers, and which, having no physical 
form, all but disappears once they go home – and he’s an Instagram obsessive. 
So why a book rather than, say, an app? “Well, my biography has a strong 
connection to physical books. In Switzerland, the first place I went to with my 
parents [that had an impact on me] was this monastery library. I was six or 
seven. You put on felt shoes and white gloves and then you could touch these 
medieval books. This experience was somehow the beginning of me entering the 
world of museums.” When he first began visiting studios three decades ago, he 
heard a lot about artists’ books, and he believes that in the digital age 
conventional publishing is by necessity moving in their direction, its 
hardbacks growing ever more beautiful. “I was up until five this morning with 
my friend [the experimental novelist]Tom McCarthy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jul/31/c-tom-mccarthy-novel-review>; we 
spent half an hour talking about the design of his new novel. The book is 
becoming an object, an exhibition.”

Obrist can hardly have had any sleep at all. Today, he arrived at the 
Serpentine at eight; he and Peyton-Jones were hosting a breakfast for 
journalists and supporters to launch the gallery’s latest exhibitions (he and 
she are close, and very fond, but they make for something of an odd couple, 
Peyton-Jones elegant in sculptural Westwood or McQueen, Obrist standing beside 
her in characteristic pose, his shoulders back, his long arms swinging, his 
weight shifting constantly from one foot to another). But then, this is hardly 
unusual. Perpetual motion is his addiction largely, he claims, because he is 
forever trying to cheat time. During the early 90s, he tried Balzac’s caffeine 
regime, drinking dozens of cups of coffee a day; he then had a go at the 
Leonardo method, catnapping for 15 minutes every three hours. These days, he 
tries to get five hours’ sleep a night, though when he fails, he has only 
himself to blame. In 2006, he started the Brutally Early Club, the better to 
fit in conversations with writers and artists before a day at his desk. More 
recently, it has been replaced by the OM3AM Club, which meets in the middle of 
the night. Recent venues have included a 24-hour motorway service station and 
the King’s Cross branch of Costa; next up, he hopes, will be the Hilton at 
Heathrow, famously JG Ballard’s favourite hotel.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmar%2F08%2Fhans-ulrich-obrist-everything-i-do-connected-velocity-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F5%2F1425567757536%2Fe73ab6a9-7885-439d-9685-2ceb7801bf10-1482x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hans%20Ulrich%20Obrist%3A%20%E2%80%98Everything%20I%20do%20is%20somehow%20connected%20to%20velocity%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmar%2F08%2Fhans-ulrich-obrist-everything-i-do-connected-velocity-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hans%20Ulrich%20Obrist%3A%20%E2%80%98Everything%20I%20do%20is%20somehow%20connected%20to%20velocity%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmar%2F08%2Fhans-ulrich-obrist-everything-i-do-connected-velocity-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F5%2F1425567757536%2Fe73ab6a9-7885-439d-9685-2ceb7801bf10-1482x2040.jpeg>
 Obrist with co-director of the gallery Julia Peyton-Jones at the Serpentine 
gallery summer party, 2014. Photograph: David M Benett/Getty Images 
And then there is the travelling: he spends 50 weekends of every year away. 
New York, Paris, Vienna, Munich, Vancouver, Los Angeles, Singapore: the artists 
of these cities and many more must all be visited as part of his endless quest 
for new talent, trips that he funds by giving lectures (the week that we meet, 
for instance, he is off to New York, where on Saturday he will address the 
Swiss Institute on the subject of the late David Weiss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/apr/30/david-weiss>). He and his 
artist partner, Koo Jeong-A, who share a small Kensington flat, don’t cook at 
all – Obrist claims never to have made even so much as a cup of coffee – in 
order that they don’t “waste time” when they could be talking (they go out even 
for breakfast). Doesn’t he ever feel like a lie-in, or just spending a couple 
of days just mooching about? “No! I’m so curious to see art,” he yelps, 
sounding almost alarmed. “That burning urgency has never gone away.” Perhaps 
the truth is that he feels he needs this schedule to stay sane? “Probably. The 
film director Tarkovsky once lamented that in our society, ritual has 
disappeared. He said we need to invent our own. I thought that was stimulating, 
and I have always tried to do that.”

He insists it’s impossible to say where he ends and Peyton-Jones begins; 
they’re equally involved in all decisions, whether artistic or administrative. 
Do they ever disagree? “They’re not disagreements. It’s more… bouncing ideas 
off one another.” What about the artists? His brand of curatorship is highly 
collaborative, but his regard for those who make art is also so intensely high 
it seems to me to manifest itself as an extreme form of deference, even a kind 
of awe – which must bring with it certain risks. What, for instance, would he 
have done had he doubted the value of Marina Abramovic’s plans for the gallery? 
(Last year, the Montenegrin performance artist spent512 hours 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/jun/15/marina-abramovic-512-hours-review-serpentine-gallery>
 leading visitors around its spaces, encouraging them to stare at walls, to 
slow walk, to count grains of rice.) I’m not entirely sure Obrist can imagine 
this scenario, for all that some critics find Abramovic’s spectacles of mass 
obedience fatuous and a bit suspect. “I would tell her!” he says. “But it 
wouldn’t happen because you talk to the artist every day; it isn’t the case 
that we are simply a space in which the artist does as he or she wants.” As 
he’s the first to admit, Obrist’s enthusiasm is his engine, the source both of 
his prodigious energy and of his breathless tempo. “I can’t speak any slower,” 
he tells me.

“Everything I do is somehow connected to velocity.” No wonder, then, that he’s 
unwilling to admit even to occasional cynicism. To do so might jeopardise the 
source of his power.

Obrist grew up an only child in a small town near Lake Constance, at the foot 
of the Alps. His father worked in the financial side of the construction 
industry; his mother was a teacher. “Switzerland felt incredibly narrow, 
growing up,” he says. “It was good, in a way. There were so many museums. But 
it was always a no-brainer that I would have to leave, and I’m grateful for 
that. If I’d grown up in Paris, I might not have had the urge.” The beginning 
of his obsession with art – the catalyst for his departure – came when he was 
just 12. He took the train to Zurich, and went to a gallery where he saw work 
by Giacometti and fell in love. After this, he was always peeling off to see 
art during school trips. Things came to a head when he was 17. Visiting a show 
by Peter Fischli and David Weiss in Basel, it occurred to him that he could try 
to meet them, which is precisely what he did (amazingly, they didn’t turn him 
away). “This was 1985. I went to the studio of Fischli Weiss, and it was 
magical. I thought: this is what I want to do with my life, I want to work with 
artists and be useful to them. I was magnetically attracted. I was kind of 
lost, but they saw this obsession in me. They questioned me and made me think 
and sent me to other artists. For the next six years I was on this grand tour.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmar%2F08%2Fhans-ulrich-obrist-everything-i-do-connected-velocity-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F5%2F1425567561716%2Fc9c4edf0-b697-4fd1-9438-2f0a956cb7ef-2060x1368.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hans%20Ulrich%20Obrist%3A%20%E2%80%98Everything%20I%20do%20is%20somehow%20connected%20to%20velocity%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmar%2F08%2Fhans-ulrich-obrist-everything-i-do-connected-velocity-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hans%20Ulrich%20Obrist%3A%20%E2%80%98Everything%20I%20do%20is%20somehow%20connected%20to%20velocity%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmar%2F08%2Fhans-ulrich-obrist-everything-i-do-connected-velocity-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F5%2F1425567561716%2Fc9c4edf0-b697-4fd1-9438-2f0a956cb7ef-2060x1368.jpeg>
 Obrist (on the left) takes part in il Tempo del Postino, an experimental 
time-based group show he curated at the Manchester International Festival, 2007.
He asked Gerhard Richter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gerhard-richter> if he could visit 
his studio in Cologne, andAlighiero Boetti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/mar/04/alighiero-boetti-game-plan-tate-review>
 if he could visit him in Rome (Boetti took him to see both the Pantheon and 
his astrologer, who drew HUO’s horoscope). He also went to seeLouise Bourgeois 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/bourgeois> in Paris. Alarmed by his 
exhaustion – unable to afford hotels, Obrist always took the night train on 
these trips – she called his mother and instructed her to take more care of 
him. Wasn’t he ever worried they would simply shut the door in his face? Yes, 
but something pushed him on: “I was really shy, but the desire was stronger 
than the timidity.” It was Boetti who suggested he consider curation. However, 
no degree course being available in that discipline, he enrolled at the 
University of St Gallen to read economics and social science. Even then, 
though, the train travel continued. “I was a voyager. I would travel non-stop, 
and I would look and look and look. It was a school of seeing.” What did his 
parents make of it all? “They were a little bit worried, but the French film 
critic Serge Daney would always send his parents a postcard, and that’s what I 
did, too. They thought curating was something to do with medicine. It wasn’t a 
buzz word then.”

By 1991, Obrist knew more professional artists than many curators. So he took 
the next step, and held a show in the kitchen of his student apartment; beneath 
the sink, the French artistChristian Boltanski 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/jan/17/christian-boltanski-personnnes-paris-review>
 projected a film of a lit candle. Visitor numbers to this curious attraction 
were low, but among their number was a curator from the Cartier Museum in 
Paris, and soon afterwards he was offered a three-month fellowship at the 
institution. He left Switzerland for good, and very quickly established himself 
as someone worth knowing in the art world. He was, and is, an odd combination 
of canny and naive. People remember him during this period as innocent, with a 
sweetness – he is generous, open-minded and a good listener – that he seems 
still to have, even now. But he also made some smart moves: a show of Richter’s 
paintings in a house where Nietzsche had written, an exhibition of work 
featuring lavatories which took place in and around the Zurich sewers.

He spent most of the 90s in a job he might have designed for himself – at the 
Musee d’Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris, his title was head of migratory 
curation – and now the travelling got really serious: “I spent 250 to 300 days 
of every year on the road. But in the end I felt something was missing. I 
needed to be anchored, so I could concentrate, so in 2000 I established a new 
methodology, the one I use today. I spent the week in my office, and travelled 
every weekend, even at Christmas.” He and Peyton-Jones were introduced by the 
sculptorRichard Wentworth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/richard-wentworth>, and in 1995 she 
invited him to put on a show at the Serpentine. He came up with Take Me (I’m 
Yours), in which visitors were invited to leave with an object. “We stayed in 
touch. In 2005, I gave a lecture in London on the architect Peter Smithson, and 
after that we had a long conversation about what it would mean if two people 
were to run an institution and…”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmar%2F08%2Fhans-ulrich-obrist-everything-i-do-connected-velocity-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F5%2F1425564780800%2F9ffec694-bd69-476c-8a88-43d36e51b51c-1419x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hans%20Ulrich%20Obrist%3A%20%E2%80%98Everything%20I%20do%20is%20somehow%20connected%20to%20velocity%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmar%2F08%2Fhans-ulrich-obrist-everything-i-do-connected-velocity-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hans%20Ulrich%20Obrist%3A%20%E2%80%98Everything%20I%20do%20is%20somehow%20connected%20to%20velocity%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmar%2F08%2Fhans-ulrich-obrist-everything-i-do-connected-velocity-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F5%2F1425564780800%2F9ffec694-bd69-476c-8a88-43d36e51b51c-1419x2040.jpeg>
 Obrist with his partner, South Korean artist Koo Jeong-A. Photograph: Nick 
Harvey/WireImage 
In 2006, he moved to London. Today, the first thought he has when he wakes up 
is in English. (He speaks five languages.) I wonder if he ever feels homesick 
for Switzerland. “I go to visit my mother. I send her every catalogue, every 
article, every interview, so she has a full archive, and now she knows a lot 
about art, which is exciting. We can talk. But, no. For me, the books ofRobert 
Walser 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2008/feb/11/abriefsurveyoftheshortst7>
[the Swiss novelist] are home.”

Obrist told the New Yorker that, in the 21st century, it’s difficult to do 
meaningful work in paint. But when I (perhaps a little crossly) bring this up, 
he denies that this means he’s not interested in work on canvas. He is. 
Sometimes, in fact, he even sees shows by artists who are – whisper it – dead. 
“The future is very often invented with fragments of the past,” he says. “It’s 
important that we don’t disconnect contemporary art from the past.” However, 
that is not to say that he has a secret stash of 19th-century oils at home. He 
has next to nothing at home. “It’s never been about ownership for me. There are 
great collectors, but I’ve always believed that is a different activity. Also, 
my girlfriend. She makes these amazing things, and we’re always surrounded by 
them, so that’s another reason.”

How will he mark his 10th year at the gallery? He looks uncertain. “I hate 
looking back.” Will he stay at the Serpentine? “Yah. There is no masterplan.” 
He never feels that he has arrived: “I only ever feel that small things have 
been achieved; the main thing has always still to be done.”

For many years, he has always asked artists he is meeting for the first time 
the same question, which is: do you have any unrealised projects? Does he? He 
laughs. “Yes, lots. I have a huge list. Shall I print it out for you?” Assuming 
he’s joking, I laugh too. But, no. He stands up and goes across the corridor to 
where his assistant sits, and a moment later returns, several sheets of paper 
in his hands. His list makes for extraordinary reading. One is a collaboration 
between Vito Acconci, the American performance artist, and Austrian Airlines 
(the idea was that Acconci would construct makeshift suitcase installations, 
which passengers would be able to construct and deconstruct on board). Another 
involvesa Gio Ponti house in the hills of Caracas 
<http://www.domusweb.it/en/from-the-archive/2011/02/02/villa-planchart-caracas-1953-57.html>
 where he longs to stage a show (he gets excited at the mere thought of the 
interventions that could be staged in its rooms). Another, even more grandiose, 
is his great dream of establishing a new Black Mountain College, the North 
Carolina experimental liberal arts college where John Cage, Cy Twombly and 
Robert Rauschenberg all studied.

A week later, I go to the ICA to see Obrist in action: the public man. He is 
to give a lecture to the Contemporary Art Society, whose annual conference is 
entitledOn Collecting Performance Art 
<http://nn.contemporaryartsociety.org/resources/annual-conference-on-collecting-performance-art/>
. It’s his perfect subject, of course, but also his dream crowd – their 
spectacles are even more directional than their jewellery, which is saying 
something – and he goes down well, for all that the words pour from his mouth 
faster than water. First, he compares his role once again to that of Sergei 
Diaghilev, a photograph of whom he projects on the screen behind him, after 
which he talks at some length about the problem of ownership when it comes to 
live work. It’s a pristine day, bright and cold, and the sunshine that floods 
the room keeps bouncing off his glasses as he speaks. It’s as if he’s an 
installation in his own right: a dazzling light show whose ultimate meaning 
remains, perhaps, rather elusive.

Ways of Curating is published by Penguin (£9.99). To buy it for £7.99 click 
here. <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/ways-of-curating-265241.html>Lives of 
the Artists, Lives of the Architects is published by Allen Lane (£22).To buy it 
for £17.60 click here.  
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/282266/> The Age of 
Earthquakes: A Guide to the Extreme Present by Douglas Coupland, Hans Ulrich 
Obrist and Shumon Basar is published by Penguin (£9.99). To buy it for £7.99 
click here <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/age-of-earthquakes.html>
 