
The England prop Joe Marler has been described as “not in any way, shape or 
form racist” just hours after being told he will face an independent misconduct 
hearing for verbally abusing Samson Lee.

England’s Joe Marler in dock again for calling Samson Lee ‘Gypsy boy’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/23/joe-marler-england-world-rugby> 
Marler had initially escaped punishment from the Six Nations for calling the 
Wales prop a “Gypsy boy” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/13/england-joe-marler-apologises-gypsy-boy-samson-lee-wales>
during England’s 25-21 victory at Twickenham, but World Rugby has deemed action 
should have been taken.

Marler apologised to Lee for the insult at half-time and was subsequently 
reprimanded by the England head coach, Eddie Jones, but the decision not to 
sanction him was met by an outcry.

However, Marler’s club coach at Harlequins has lent his support to the 
under-fire forward. “He is not in any way, shape or form racist,” Conor O’Shea, 
theHarlequins <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/harlequinsru> director of 
rugby, said. “He is an edgy person, he made a mistake and he apologised.

“Does he know that he has got a responsibility? Of course he does. Do we 
accept it? Of course we don’t, but some of the vitriol that has been directed 
to him is tough for a 25-year old to take and he has to take it on the chin.

“I am not going to talk about political correctness, I am not going to talk 
about banter. He knows he shouldn’t have said it. He apologised at half-time, 
he knew it was wrong.

“I had a good sit-down with him [on Tuesday]. You couldn’t get anything 
further from a bloke that is racist going.

“Joe Marler is a bloody great bloke and I made him captain here for a reason. 
He is actually in great form because he knows that the people who know him, 
know how things are and the two players involved have gone ‘it’s done’.”

Six Nations ruled no action against Marler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/22/joe-marler-cleared-gypsy-boy-ian-ritchie-rfu>
 but World Rugby stepped in and, if he is found guilty at the independent 
hearing, he could still face a suspension.

A statement from the governing body read: “World Rugby has confirmed that 
England’s Joe Marler will face an independent World Rugby misconduct hearing 
for comments made towards Wales’s Samson Lee during the RBS Six Nations match 
at Twickenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/mar/13/five-talking-points-six-nations-twickenham>
 on 12 March.

“World Rugby is of the view that the comments amount to misconduct and/or a 
breach of the code of conduct under World Rugby Regulation 20 and should have 
been considered by an independent process.

Will Greenwood to coach Barbarians against South Africa in November
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/23/will-greenwood-coach-barbarians-south-africa-november-robbie-deans-rugby-union>
“In the absence of such a process by Six Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sixnations> Rugby, World Rugby is exercising 
its right to take appropriate action before an independent judicial committee.

“The RFU [the player’s union] and Six Nations Rugby have been informed and the 
case will be heard by an independent judicial committee as soon as practically 
possible. Details will be announced in due course and the player is free to 
continue playing in the interim.”

The Welsh Rugby Union released a statement saying: “We stand by our belief 
that there is no place for the use of racist language in sport.”

Verbal abuse of a player based on religion, race, colour, national or ethnic 
origin, sexual orientation or otherwise carries an entry-point sanction of four 
weeks.
 