
Dughia village is idyllic, but the lives of many of the women who spend their 
days among its mango orchards, duck ponds and brilliant green paddy fields are 
anything but. For them, the beauty of the village has been a backdrop to 
decades of suffering.

They fight back tears to explain how they are lucky to eat once a day and 
cannot even afford blouses to wear under their tattered saris. All are 
illiterate, and several have been parted from their children – who have died, 
gone to faraway cities or been taken in by other families when the cost of 
raising them at home proved too much.

“I don’t want to think about my life. It’s a very hard story – even listening 
to it will make you cry,” says Lalita, who spent 16 years separated from her 
children, doing back-breaking manual labour to pay off £400 in loans. “My 
husband got sick, and when he died I was drowning in debt, so I went away to 
look for work.” Although she travelled barely 100km, wages were so meagre she 
couldn’t afford to return home for more than a decade, and when she did her son 
and daughter were strangers.

Yet, says aid worker Sagarika Indu, in two years’ time the ageing widow and a 
handful of other women gathered around her, also living without hope or 
self-confidence, will probably be secure. They will have modest savings, 
valuable assets in the form of a cow and some chickens, and be respected by 
fellow villagers, perhaps courted by the relatives who once cast them aside as 
paupers.

Indu is confident about this extraordinary transformation because she will be 
its agent, as head of a rigorously tested project that she has personally seen 
change thousands of lives. “In Bangladesh we reach 90,000 families a year,” she 
says of the scheme, which was created more than a decade ago by huge national 
aid organisationBrac <http://www.brac.net/>, Indu’s employer. It has also now 
been exported to 10 other countries.

It is often described as a “poverty graduation 
<https://www.ids.ac.uk/files/dmfile/2.1.Pahlowan2014-CFPR-TUPProgramBRACpptv229-apr-14.pdf>
” scheme, because it offers not just a financial lifeline out of destitution, 
but education in the confidence and skills to maintain newfound prosperity, 
from basic literacy to animal care.

Brac programme lifting 'ultra-poor' out of poverty in Bangladesh | Mark Tran
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2012/feb/13/brac-lifts-ultra-poor-out-poverty>
After two years, the “graduates” can support themselves and their families 
without further aid, and the team that assisted them can move on to helping 
others. InBangladesh <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bangladesh> alone more 
than 1.7m households have been transformed.

Supporting people to move out of extreme poverty long-term, rather than just 
providing food, medicine or cash as temporary relief, is a notoriously stubborn 
challenge, so the “poverty graduation” model has been analysed extensively by 
academics from the London School of Economics, Yale and other leading 
universities. They have confirmed that a one-off intervention can permanently 
end the most crippling destitution, with benefits that multiply over time – 
making it a kind of holy grail of aid projects.

“The [Targeting Ultra Poverty <http://www.brac.net/tup?view=page>, or TUP] 
programme sets beneficiaries on a sustainable path out of poverty,” say the
authors of the LSE report 
<http://www.theigc.org/blog/creating-entrepreneurs-a-big-new-idea-in-development/>
, which included seven-year follow-up checks on women once enrolled in the 
programme. They looked at projects around the world to evaluate whether the 
model thrived beyond Bangladesh, where Brac can tap into a strong network of 
services and staff to support the scheme, and found it was still effective in 
most places.

Charities and governments are often now as keen as bankers to see “return on 
investment”, although their goal is better lives rather than more profits, and 
so they are inspired by the experience of women like Rezia Begum, whose village 
is a short drive from Dughia. The 35-year-old mother of six lost her parents at 
eight, and went hungry and homeless for nearly two decades, until she enrolled 
in the “poverty graduation” programme.

“I would see people feeding their children bananas, good food, but never taste 
it. They would just shout at me to stop staring,” she remembers.

Married by the Karli village community at around 13 to stop her “floating 
around”, she hoped that would bring an end to destitution – but her husband was 
equally poor. “I was half naked when Brac arrived, I didn’t even have clothes. 
I would beg people for cast-off saris,” she remembers.

Today she is relaxed and confident, an owner of land and livestock. All her 
younger children are in school, her elder son is married, and she is a 
dispenser of charity rather than a recipient. “People invite me to their 
weddings so I can give gifts,” she says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fhas-bangladesh-charity-found-way-to-banish-extreme-poverty%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9381637b357e6c65b33eb7a3352391bfea72bd0%2F0_57_2592_1555%2F2592.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Has%20a%20Bangladesh%20charity%20found%20a%20way%20to%20banish%20extreme%20poverty%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fhas-bangladesh-charity-found-way-to-banish-extreme-poverty%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Has%20a%20Bangladesh%20charity%20found%20a%20way%20to%20banish%20extreme%20poverty%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fhas-bangladesh-charity-found-way-to-banish-extreme-poverty%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9381637b357e6c65b33eb7a3352391bfea72bd0%2F0_57_2592_1555%2F2592.jpg>
 Women move possessions from their homes, under threat of flooding, in 
Kalashuna village, Gaibandha district, September 2014. Photograph: Allison 
Joyce/Getty Images 
The other five women who graduated with her, and are gathered a decade later 
on a village porch, have also been transformed. Not all have done as well as 
Begum, but they are independent and financially confident.

Bangladesh has a track record of producing radical ideas to tackle poverty. Its
Grameen Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2009/jun/03/interview-muhammad-yunus> 
invented and pioneered micro-credit loans to give the poorest people in society 
the chance to transform their lives by borrowing money.

The team at Brac, who have seen the experience of Karli village repeated tens 
of thousands of times, believe the “poverty graduation” model is one of the 
most important innovations since then, rigorously tested and tackling one of 
the most stubborn problems in development.

“It seems to be a good answer to the problem of the ultra-poor,” says Brac’s 
vice-chair,Mushtaque Chowdhury 
<http://www.brac.net/governing-body#Mushtaque_Chowdhury>. A professor at 
Columbia University’s school of public health, he pioneered the in-house 
research and evaluation team that allowed Brac to tweak initial versions of the 
programme and provide the first rigorous evaluations of its success.

He believes the model will be key to the goal of ending the most extreme 
deprivation within a decade. “I know no other programme that has been followed 
up for so long, no other trajectory so consistent – not only providing income 
and occupational changes, but also other benefits, in terms of nutrition and a 
wider sustained impact, particularly on children.”

Despite the rollout around the world, from Latin America to Africa, and the 
academic confirmation that the model works, it has not met with universal 
acclaim, partly because it is relatively expensive. It provides women with 
livestock and gives intensive support on caring for themselves, their families 
and their animals. The regular meetings with a mentor over two years, and the 
initial gift, together cost hundreds of dollars per family.

The Copenhagen Consensus Center <http://www.copenhagenconsensus.com/> 
thinktank put “graduation” schemes halfway down a list of poverty-reduction 
projects ranked by their value for money, after commissioning research on the
most cost-effective ways to end poverty 
<http://www.copenhagenconsensus.com/bangladesh-priorities/top-three-priorities-bangladesh>
 from Brac itself.

Near the top of the list was digital access, shifting to e-procurement and 
digitising land records, to cut down on corruption, which should bring more 
than $600 (£470) in rewards for each $1 (80p) spent. By comparison, the 
graduation model offers a $2 return for each one paid out, the economists 
decided.

But supporters of the programme point out that those returns are virtually 
guaranteed. By contrast, the possible benefits of putting more government 
functions online were extrapolated from a tiny local project.

“[The graduation model] comes out comparatively badly, with returns of two to 
one – but at least the benefits are certain. For other projects the evidence is 
weaker,”the Economist magazine 
<http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21698302-ambitious-attempt-work-out-best-use-scarce-resources-how-spend-it>
 conceded.

Supporters of the project also point out that it is unusual because of the 
people it targets, the most deprived and very hardest to reach, whose lives are 
often too precarious to take advantage of opportunities opened up by mainstream 
aid projects in areas such as education and healthcare.

“There is a growing realisation that the poorest may be being bypassed both by 
economic growth and by current anti-poverty programmes,” found the LSE report, 
published in July.

Children cannot learn if they are not in school; public hospitals only help 
those able to reach a doctor or who know that care will be free. Even 
microfinance projects that have made loans available to millions are out of 
reach for the very poorest.

“They focused on the economic return, not the confidence improved, the social 
acceptance, the knowledge improved,” says Indu. The economists also missed how 
even marginal economic improvement in dollar terms can completely transform the 
life of the poorest. “Most couldn’t eat more than once a day. Now they eat at 
least two meals, and better food,” she says.

The graduation project works because it tackles poverty and social confidence 
at the same time. Women get an asset – some form of livestock – but also have 
demands placed on them, and regular mentoring on everything from basic literacy 
and caring for their animals to visiting government clinics and how to get a 
micro-loan.

Their children must go to school, they must save, even if it is just a few 
pennies a month, and they must set aside time to look after their animals, in 
return for a tiny stipend to cover basic food costs.

A community council helps to rate the village families and choose the most 
destitute, to avoid corruption and resentment, and protects them as the project 
gets under way.

“It has actually helped the whole village – every single child here now goes 
to school,” says Nasammat Salema Khatun, a local politician who organised the 
selection. “Ten years ago only perhaps 20 of 100 children in Karli were at 
school, and the scenario was even worse for the girls.”

She had to broker some disputes, but most neighbours were happy to see people 
who had gone hungry able to feed themselves. The biggest problem was a husband 
with a gambling problem who stole his own family’s cow, hiding it in the house 
of a conniving neighbour in the middle of the night. He planned to sell it once 
the search had died down, but the committee found the animal.

“We brought the cow and the husband here, and said to him: ‘If this cow is not 
safe, we will call [the] police and arrest you as a thief’,” Khatun says with a 
grin. “That lesson helped.”
 