
The head of Japan’s biggest advertising agency is to resign, as prosecutors 
launch an investigation into his firm for enforcing excessive overtime after an 
overworked employee took her own life.


Tadashi Ishii, the president of Dentsu, said he would step down next month, 
just over a year after Matsuri Takahashi killed herself at a company dormitory 
in a case Japanese authorities classified askaroshi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2007/jan/13/careers.work>, or death from 
overwork.

“Excessive amounts of work is something that should never be allowed to 
happen,” Ishii told reporters. “I deeply regret and feel responsible for this. 
I will take full responsibility and resign as president at January’s board 
meeting.”

Ishii said he regretted his failure to tackle the company work practices that 
led to Takahashi’s death, eight months after joining Dentsu in April 2015. “We 
deeply regret failing to prevent the overwork of our new recruit. I offer my 
sincere apologies,” he said.

Takahashi, 24, had worked more than 100 hours of overtime a month leading up 
to her death. In September, a labour standards inspection office in Tokyo said 
she had been driven to kill herself due to stress brought on by long working 
hours.

Japan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> has spent years struggling to 
addresskaroshi. About 2,000 people a year kill themselves due to work-related 
stress, according to the government, while other victims die from heart 
attacks, strokes and other conditions brought on by spending too much time at 
work.

Death from overwork: Japan's 'karoshi' culture blamed for young man's heart 
failure
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/18/death-from-overwork-japans-karoshi-culture-blamed-young-mans-heart-failure>
Weeks before she died on Christmas Day 2015, Takahashi posted on social media: 
“I want to die.” Another message read: “I’m physically and mentally shattered.”

Her death prompted calls for Japan to overhaul its work culture, which often 
forces employees to put in long hours of overtime as a demonstration of 
corporate loyalty.

Dentsu’s notoriously demanding work practices have long been the target of 
criticism and it was raided by regulators last month amid suspicions that it 
had broken labour standards law.

On Wednesday, the labour ministry referred the company and an unnamed Dentsu 
executive to prosecutors on suspicion of driving Takahashi to kill herself.

In response to criticism that it was doing too little to curtail excessive 
overtime, the firm started turning off the lights at 10pm at its Tokyo 
headquarters to encourage employees to go home.

In its first white paper on karoshi in October, Japan’s government said one in 
five workers were at risk of death from overwork 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/08/japan-one-fifth-of-employees-at-risk-of-death-from-overwork-report>
. The paper found that despite attempts by some companies to establish a better
work-life balance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/22/japan-long-hours-work-culture-overwork-paid-holiday-law>
, Japanese workers still spend much longer hours in the office than their peers 
in other countries.

According to the paper, 22.7% of companies polled between December 2015 and 
January 2016 said some of their employees logged more than 80 hours of overtime 
each month – the official threshold at which the prospect of death from work 
becomes serious.

Japanese media said any overhaul of work practices should apply across the 
board. “The problem is not with Dentsu alone,” the Asahi Shimbun said in a 
recent editorial. The paper, which itself received a government warning about 
overtime this month, acknowledged that changing attitudes would be difficult 
but was essential as it affected employee morale and productivity.

Last week, on the first anniversary of her daughter’s death, Takahashi’s 
mother, Yukimi, said she hoped to “change the consciousness of every working 
person in Japan”.

Ichiro Oshima, a 24-year-old Dentsu employee, killed himself in 1991 in 
Japan’s first recognised case ofkaroshi-related suicide. Oshima had not had a 
day off for 17 months and was sleeping for less than two hours a night before 
his death.

In the UK, the Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the National 
Suicide Prevention Hotline is1-800-273-8255 <>. In Australia, the crisis 
support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14. Hotlines in other countriescan be 
found here <http://www.suicide.org/international-suicide-hotlines.html>
 