
How Soon Is Now?, the old Smiths song, could work now as an anthem for 
high-speed online deliveries, which are, in turn, increasingly raising 
questions about workers’ rights.

In the same week that the Department for Transport reported a crisis in road 
congestion, owing primarily to online deliveries – in some parts of Britain, a 
horse and cart would be faster – an undercoverBBC report 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-37912858> revealed that Amazon delivery 
drivers are forced to deliver up to 200 parcels a day, working illegal hours 
and breaking speed limits.

A supervisor told the undercover BBC reporter that he didn’t need to wear a 
seatbelt as the police didn’t stop delivery drivers, while fellow drivers 
advised him to urinate into bottles and defecate into bags to save time.

It’s no surprise that Amazon (where drivers are classified as self-employed 
and thus not entitled to minimum wage, sickness benefit and other rights and 
protections) is also one of the companies implicated in the “gig economy”, 
highlighted by the recent Uber tribunal,where drivers won basic employment 
rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/28/uber-uk-tribunal-self-employed-status>
.

All of which may feel a bit too much to take in when you’re just returning 
home to find that your driver has flung your parcel into your front garden, 
like a paperboy in an American drama.

However, while it’s Amazon’s responsibility to sort out how it is conducting 
its business, taxes and treatment ofall staff (not just drivers), perhaps it is 
also time to acknowledge that our growing culture of unreasonable customer 
demand is part of the problem.

There is a fundamental disconnect in the British psyche that means that people 
get rightly exercised about kids slogging in sweatshops in Asia, but remain 
wilfully underinformed about the disgusting way that workers in Britain are 
treated – and disgusting is the operative word.

All that stuff about defecating in bags and urinating in bottles made me feel 
sick and not just for the obvious reasons. It renders these drivers subhuman, 
almost like a form of “battery workers”, where the only goal is to keep driving 
and delivering.

On the other side of the equation, there are consumers demanding ever-faster 
service and I’m no exception. Bone idle in the extreme, I adore the ease of 
next -day delivery, and not just withAmazon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon>. Now you can even get things 
delivered on the same day.

However, while there’s much to be said for swiftness, surely it can’t be at 
the expense of drivers’ dignity or, indeed, their safety or the safety of 
others they might encounter on roads while they’re speeding or pissing in 
bottles to save time.

While it’s up to Amazon to sort this out, consumers could do worse than 
addressing our own bratty demanding culture of “I want it NOW!”

Let’s face it, while some deliveries are urgent, usually it’s just a bonus. 
Most of us rarely need to have books, DVD box sets, or whatever, slammed into 
our hands within hours or even the next day.

If that were the case, we could undertake the retro ritual of going to the 
shops, which in turn might stop British town centres evolving into eerie, 
almost empty coffee-place-and-eyebrow-threading super-zones.

This is not letting the likes of Amazon off the hook – it’s up to them and 
companies like them to address the issues raised by the BBC report, which, once 
again, seems to require hiring more people, respecting their labour and paying 
them properly.

In the meantime, just as people should be concerned about labour outrages 
overseas, let us also spare a thought for our own frazzled, powerless, almost 
invisible workforce.

Unreasonable customer expectation and demand is nothing new, but when it is 
automatic and unthinking it plays a part in worker exploitation.

Leonard Cohen’s final gesture typified a truly great life
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fhelp-amazon-driver-hot-foot-it-to-shops%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3a590621e8d725e6e900482cbe1c3eb4af8a31b%2F0_92_2258_1354%2F2258.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Help%20an%20Amazon%20driver%3A%20hotfoot%20it%20to%20the%20shops%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fhelp-amazon-driver-hot-foot-it-to-shops%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Help%20an%20Amazon%20driver%3A%20hotfoot%20it%20to%20the%20shops%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fhelp-amazon-driver-hot-foot-it-to-shops%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3a590621e8d725e6e900482cbe1c3eb4af8a31b%2F0_92_2258_1354%2F2258.jpg>
 Cohen’s last album could be read as an artistic statement of intent. 
Photograph: Diego Tuson/AFP/Getty Images 
The damned year of 2016 has claimed another significant creative scalp, this 
time, musician and poetLeonard Cohen. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/11/leonard-cohen-dies-aged-82> 
Judging by the heartfelt wails of grief, many consider Cohen, even at 82 years 
old, to have been taken too soon.

However, Cohen recently said that he felt that his own death was imminent, 
writing a letter to his dying muse,Marianne Ihlen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/aug/21/my-lunch-with-marianne-ihlen-leonard-cohen-muse>
 (for whom he wrote Marianne, Bird on a Wire and So Long), saying: “Know that I 
am so close behind that if you stretch out your hand, I think you can reach 
mine.”

Cohen also released an album, You Want It Darker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/23/leonard-cohen-you-want-it-darker-review-on-level-traveling-light-leaving-table-treaty-seemed-better>
, so close to his death that it could almost qualify as posthumous. Certainly, 
like David Bowie’sBlackstar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/07/david-bowie-blackstar-review-a-spellbinding-break-with-his-past>
, it could be read as an artistic statement of intent, a final defiant cry that 
says: “This is the last of the real me, not the slew of greatest hits packages 
that are bound to follow.”

Perhaps it takes era-defining musicians of this calibre to refashion the 
hackneyed, but thriving rock’n’roll death industry, a mischievous yet 
determined refusal by Cohen and Bowie to let third parties entirely own the 
posthumous narrative.

At last my Labour pains are at an end 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fhelp-amazon-driver-hot-foot-it-to-shops%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0fd69df4bf6edc0abc567897fe620a977c6c0f9%2F0_160_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Help%20an%20Amazon%20driver%3A%20hotfoot%20it%20to%20the%20shops%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fhelp-amazon-driver-hot-foot-it-to-shops%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Help%20an%20Amazon%20driver%3A%20hotfoot%20it%20to%20the%20shops%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fhelp-amazon-driver-hot-foot-it-to-shops%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0fd69df4bf6edc0abc567897fe620a977c6c0f9%2F0_160_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Sorry, Jeremy, but I’ve finally managed to get my way out. Photograph: Stefan 
Wermuth/Reuters 
For those who are interested, I’ve finally managed to escape from the Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party. I don’t use “escape” 
lightly. At times, it felt akin to a personal remake ofThe Great Escape – not 
quite carrying soil out in my trousers, scurrying under searchlights or jumping 
over barbed wire fences on my Steve McQueen motorbike, but it was still bad 
enough.

I now know what it feels like to be stalked by a British political party. It 
took me about five minutes to join the Labour party and several months to leave 
– sorry, I mean to be allowed to leave – to free myself from what appeared to 
be their desperate frenzied (“Please don’t leave us here alone with Jeremy!”) 
grasp.As I’ve stated before 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/22/barabara-ellen-why-i-am-leaving-labour-party>
, stopping the money isn’t enough, you’ve got to write to the Labour party to 
resign, but it doesn’t end there.

You end up fielding emails asking you to reconsider and others saying you’ll 
be given time to reconsider (subtext: whether you like it or not). Even when, 
finally, the termination letter arrived, it was still wondering whether I’d 
like to reconsider.

Well, I’ve considered, reconsidered, maybe even re-reconsidered, if that’s 
grammatically possible, but I’m still off, most probably to join the Liberal 
Democrats, if they keep making anti-Brexit noises, and I can source 
unfashionable enough knitwear.

Will the Labour party miss me and my inconsiderate non-reconsidering? It’s 
unlikely. Still, let my experience serve as a warning to anyone else thinking 
of leaving Labour. Make sure you take extra vitamins and get proper 
sleepy-byes, because, while parting is such sweet sorrow, it’s also exhausting. 
If you have any holiday left, you may need to use that, too.
 