
The Finnish capital has announced plans to transform its existing public 
transport network into a comprehensive, point-to-point "mobility on demand" 
system by 2025 – one that, in theory, would be so good nobody would have any 
reason to own a car.


Helsinki aims to transcend conventional public transport 
<http://www.helsinkitimes.fi/finland/finland-news/domestic/11062-the-future-resident-of-helsinki-will-not-own-a-car.html>
 by allowing people to purchase mobility in real time, straight from their 
smartphones. The hope is to furnish riders with an array of options so cheap, 
flexible and well-coordinated that it becomes competitive with private car 
ownership not merely on cost, but on convenience and ease of use.


Subscribers would specify an origin and a destination, and perhaps a few 
preferences. The app would then function as both journey planner and universal 
payment platform, knitting everything from driverless cars and nimble little 
buses to shared bikes and ferries into a single, supple mesh of mobility. 
Imagine the popular transit plannerCitymapper 
<http://www.helsinkitimes.fi/finland/finland-news/domestic/11062-the-future-resident-of-helsinki-will-not-own-a-car.html>
 fused to acycle hire service 
<http://www.tfl.gov.uk/modes/cycling/barclays-cycle-hire?cid=fs008> and a taxi 
app such asHailo <https://hailocab.com/london> or Uber <https://www.uber.com/>, 
with only one payment required, and the whole thing run as a public utility, 
and you begin to understand the scale of ambition here.

That the city is serious about making good on these intentions is bolstered by 
the Helsinki Regional Transport Authority's rollout last year ofa strikingly 
innovative minibus service called Kutsuplus 
<http://www.wired.com/2013/10/on-demand-public-transit/>. Kutsuplus lets riders 
specify their own desired pick-up points and destinations via smartphone; these 
requests are aggregated, and the app calculates an optimal route that most 
closely satisfies all of them.

All of this seems cannily calculated to serve the mobility needs of a 
generation that is comprehensively networked, acutely aware of motoring's 
ecological footprint, and – if opinion surveys are to be trusted – not 
particularly interested in the joys of private car ownership to begin with. 
Kutsuplus comes very close to delivering the best of both worlds: the 
convenient point-to-point freedom that a car affords, yet without the onerous 
environmental and financial costs of ownership (or even a Zipcar membership).

But the fine details of service design for such schemes as Helsinki is 
proposing matter disproportionately, particularly regarding price. As things 
stand, Kutsuplus costs more than a conventional journey by bus, but less than a 
taxi fare over the same distance – and Goldilocks-style, that feels just about 
right. Providers of public transit, though, have an inherent obligation to 
serve the entire citizenry, not merely the segment who can afford a smartphone 
and are comfortable with its use. (In fairness, inFinland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/finland> this really does mean just about 
everyone, but the point stands.) It matters, then, whether Helsinki – and the 
graduate engineering student the municipality has apparently commissioned to 
help it design its platform – is proposing a truly collective next-generation 
transit system for the entire public, or just a high-spec service for the 
highest-margin customers.

It remains to be seen, too, whether the scheme can work effectively not merely 
for relatively compact central Helsinki, but in the lower-density 
municipalities of Espoo and Vantaa as well. Nevertheless, with the capital 
region's arterials and ring roads as choked as they are, it feels imperative to 
explore anything that has a realistic prospect of reducing the number of cars, 
while providing something like the same level of service.

To be sure, Helsinki is not proposing to go entirely car-free. (Many people in 
Finland have a summer cottage in the countryside, and rely on a car to get to 
it.) But it's clear that urban mobility badly needs to be rethought for an age 
of commuters every bit as networked as the vehicles and infrastructures on 
which they rely, but who retain expectations of personal mobility entrained by 
a century of private car ownership. Helsinki's initiative suggests that at 
least one city understands how it might do so.

• The most congested cities – in pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/gallery/2014/jul/07/most-congested-cities-europe-america-in-pictures-traffic-jams>

 