
Hibernian have promised to co-operate with investigations into the crowd 
trouble 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/21/hibernian-rangers-scottish-cup-pitch-invasion>
 which marred their first Scottish Cup win for 114 years. Several Rangers 
players were assaulted as thousands of Hibs fans ran on to the Hampden pitch 
followingtheir dramatic 3-2 triumph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/21/rangers-hibernian-scottish-cup-final-match-report>
.

Footage showed Lee Wallace being punched and the goalkeeper Wes Foderingham 
attacked as the celebratory pitch invasion turned ugly. Dozens ofRangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> fans also came on to the pitch 
and fights broke out between rival supporters, while Hibs fans broke one of the 
goalposts and ripped up sections of the Hampden turf.

Scottish FA chief ‘shocked and appalled’ as crowd trouble mars Cup final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/21/hibernian-rangers-scottish-cup-pitch-invasion>
The Hibs chairman, Rod Petrie, who is the vice-president of the Scottish 
Football Association, put the scenes down to “over-exuberance” in the immediate 
aftermath and described them as “unacceptable”.

A club statement later confirmed Hibs would “co-operate fully into any inquiry 
into the pitch invasion which followed the club’s historicScottish Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup> win at Hampden Park”.

It added: “The club reiterates its regret at the events which unfolded 
immediately following the final whistle. Hibernian always seeks to maintain 
high standards, and we will work with the authorities to identify any supporter 
who may have taken part in any form of unacceptable behaviour which has 
tarnished the club’s reputation.Hibernian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hibernian> will work with Police 
Scotland, Hampden Park stadium management, the Scottish FA, Rangers FC and any 
other relevant parties to bring those responsible to book.”

Police are collecting CCTV footage and have appealed to spectators who may 
have information, images or video footage.

Chief superintendent Kenny MacDonald said: “An investigation team has now been 
established at Helen Street police office. So far there have been 11 arrests 
for minor offences.”

He added: “As our investigation progresses I have no doubt that additional 
arrests will be made and would appeal to anyone with information that may 
assist police enquiries to come forward. If there are any images or video 
footage of incidents on the pitch involving violence or disorder, please 
contact officers at the enquiry team through the non-emergency number 101.

“Alternatively contact Crimestoppers on 0800 555 111, where anonymity can be 
maintained.”

On Saturday Rangers players were handed their medals in the dressing room, 
while Hibs players had a long wait to lift the trophy after the pitch was 
cleared, and the lap of honour had to be cancelled.

The SFA, along with the police and stadium managers, have launched an 
investigation into some of the worst scenes of violence seen inside a Scottish 
football ground since the 1980 final, when Celtic and Rangers fans battled on 
the Hampden pitch. The Scottish government is “liaising closely” with the 
inquiry.

Rangers said they were shocked at the “disgraceful” behaviour of Hibs fans and 
their players left the stadium without giving interviews. A club statement 
read: “Rangers players and staff were assaulted by these fans who invaded the 
pitch and in the interests of their safety could not return to the pitch for 
the medal presentation. The club would like to commend Rangers fans for the 
restraint they showed under severe provocation.”

Hibernian and David Gray stun Rangers to make Scottish Cup history
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/21/rangers-hibernian-scottish-cup-final-match-report>
Hibs players were oblivious to the violent scenes as they were caught up in 
the adulation of fans. Liam Henderson, who set up two goals, said: “I couldn’t 
tell you what was happening. I was getting hugged by all sorts. These things 
happen, cup finals, you see it happen down south when fans run on to the pitch.

“It was a bit emotional, but I went straight to my mum and dad. When we scored 
the winner my wee brother was right there in the stand so I was hugging him. 
After the game I went straight to my mum and dad. It was a great feeling. I’m 
an extremely proud person and I’m extremely proud of my team-mates.”

The midfielder Fraser Fyvie added: “It was obviously disappointing the fans 
ran on, but you can’t really stop them. They got a bit over-excited, but you 
can’t really blame them because they have waited a while for a trophy. It’s 
great to be part of it. I have never experienced a pitch invasion and it was 
fantastic. I’m just glad we got out in the end and lifted the Cup – what a 
feeling.”
 