
First, the positive. Hibernian’s status as the butt of so many jokes has now 
been removed. In a moment where time appeared to freeze, Liam Henderson’s 
corner was met by the head of David Gray in ending a 114-year wait forScottish 
Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup> glory. Poetically, the 
winner arrived in stoppage time. Glory, Glory to the Hibees as the old song 
dictates.

This Hibs vintage of 2016 has thereby been afforded legendary status by 
stepping where so many before them, including wonderful teams, could not. 
Logan, Gray, Hanlon, Fontaine, Fyvie, McGeouch, Stevenson, McGinn, McGregor, 
Stokes, Cummings, Henderson, Keatings and Gunnarsson will roll from the tongues 
of Hibs fans forever more. They have captured the Holy Grail when led by Alan 
Stubbs. After so many decades of hurt, bordering on torture at times, only the 
seriously churlish would deny Hibs their basking in epic glory. Good on them.

Nonetheless, Hibs’ triumph came at an immediate cost to reputation. The scenes 
that arrived at full-time, and will provide enduring images of the 131st 
Scottish Cup final, were despicable. Laughing them off as excessive jubilation 
would be a scandal in itself. Plenty have already tried. This was easily the 
worst Scottish football scene since the infamous Hampden riot of 1980.

Hibernian condemn crowd trouble which marred Cup win over Rangers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/22/hibernian-condemn-crowd-trouble-cup-win-rangers>
For thousands of Hibs supporters to invade the Hampden playing surface with a 
desire to celebrate, haul down goalposts and claim turf – as plenty did – is 
dubious but perhaps understandable. The problem was perfectly obvious; an 
element took it upon themselves to immediately head to theRangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> end of the ground and goad the 
opposition. Physical confrontation with the defeated players was also apparent 
before police horses arrived to belatedly restore at least an element of calm. 
Why any individual would choose to mark such a wonderful moment in their club’s 
history with such antics is utterly baffling.

Some of the Rangers following had responded by entering the field themselves, 
in itself worthy of condemnation despite provocation. The fighting that ensued 
could conceivably have been worse but was horrible enough to offer a shameful 
image of Scottish football to an audience who had earlier been treated to an 
excellent match. The Rangers players could not so much as receive their medals 
in public, while Hibs were denied a lap of honour. Only those in Cloud Cuckoo 
Land can believe there is any chance of the push to sell alcohol at Scottish 
grounds succeeding in the near future.

Supporters aside, the failure of authorities to appropriately control what was 
transpiring before their very eyes was a scandal. In part, they understated 
what this meant to Hibs. Perhaps the Scottish FA will charge itself with an 
inability to properly preside over a cup final. Rod Petrie, the Hibs chairman 
and a vice-president of that governing body, bizarrely met the media and 
praised the “professional manner” with which events were dealt with. Petrie 
repeatedly pointed to “over exuberance” as an explanation.

“You guys should be writing about five great goals and our success after years 
of toil and effort. That’s the story,” asserted Petrie, delving into the 
territory of flat earth. This reflected exceptionally poorly on both Petrie, 
his club and his SFA position. “Behaviour that is unacceptable should be 
punished,” Petrie eventually added, after castigating one journalist for 
“exaggerating”.

It was Gray, unwittingly of course, who lit the touchpaper. Hibs had led 
through Anthony Stokes inside three minutes, the opening blow of a terrific 
first half. Kenny Miller restored parity with a fine header after James 
Tavernier crossed from the right.

Stokes, his strike partner Jason Cummings and John McGinn all had 
opportunities to endorse what was lengthy Hibs superiority in the early stages 
with more goals. Instead, Rangers gradually gained a foothold in the second 
half and edged in front through Andy Halliday’s long-range, powerful drive.

For so long, Hibs’ bottle had been questioned. They were now expected to wilt. 
Instead? Henderson’s first, key outswinging corner was met at the near post by 
the outstanding Stokes. Even better was to follow.

Hibs had commonly been castigated for their failure to gain promotion to the 
Scottish top flight for a second time in succession. Being realistic, this cup 
win will probably matter more than the league botch to those who sampled 
disappointment for so long. The victory means Hibs will even take their place 
in the qualifying phase for next season’s Europa League.

Mark Warburton, the Rangers manager, did not attend any post-match press 
conference. Police Scotland’s assessment of “disorder and violence” was more 
valid, in any case. Sadly, the achievement of stunning victory from the jaws of 
defeat for Hibs and a painful defeat for Rangers had already been overlooked in 
so many quarters. We have not heard the last of 21 May 2016 at Hampden. Nor 
should we have.
 