
The High Line, an elevated railway turned park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2008/nov/18/new-york-high-line-park> 
in New York City, is getting a new addition and with it, a new, permanent 
location for temporary art installations – theHigh Line Plinth 
<http://art.thehighline.org/project/highlineplinth/>.


As those who have visited the High Line know, it has already been the home to 
various temporary art installations 
<http://files.thehighline.org/pdf/FHL-ARTMAP.pdf> – from Tony Matelli’s 
startlingly lifelikeSleepwalker 
<https://twitter.com/HighLineArtnyc/status/817501613178896384>, part of the 
park’s Wanderlust installation, to amural from artist Barbara Kruger 
<http://art.thehighline.org/project/barbarakruger/>, both currently on display.

“For me, this project is an extension of what we do every day on the High 
Line, which is to bring a great example of contemporary art or culture in 
general to our audience free of charge, every day of the year, rain or shine,” 
said Cecilia Alemani, director and chief curator of High LineArt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fhigh-line-plinth-art-new-york%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F941fefc0d13db584c3ede64e78e2599a55b36e7f%2F0_0_9375_6600%2F9375.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=High%20art%3A%20New%20York's%20High%20Line%20to%20introduce%20new%20artwork%20plinth&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fhigh-line-plinth-art-new-york%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=High%20art%3A%20New%20York%27s%20High%20Line%20to%20introduce%20new%20artwork%20plinth&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fhigh-line-plinth-art-new-york%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F941fefc0d13db584c3ede64e78e2599a55b36e7f%2F0_0_9375_6600%2F9375.jpg>
 Simone Leigh, Cupboard VII, 2016 (rendering of the plinth). Photograph: 
Architectural rendering by James Corner Field Operations and Diller Scofidio + 
Renfro, courtesy of the City of New York;artwork courtesy of the artist. 
The difference is that this new plinth will be the first spot along the High 
Line specifically dedicated to artwork, whereas art in other locations “has 
always been within the fabric of the High Line itself”, said Alemani.

The plinth will be the focal point of the Spur, a cul-de-sac-like section of 
the High Line which is currently under construction at 30th Street and 10th 
Avenue. Alemani described the forthcoming space as feeling like a public 
square, as opposed to the High Line’s typical pathways. “Here we expect people 
to use the space in a different way because basically it’s a dead end,” she 
said, with a hope being that it will become a destination and point of 
conversation. There will be a 10ft x 10ft area in the center of the Spur for 
artists to display their work, which will be on view for 18 months, the curator 
said.

Thumbs up to David Shrigley's fabulously feel-bad fourth plinth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/29/david-shrigley-really-good-fourth-plinth-trafalgar-square>
Alemani related this new location for artwork to London’s Fourth Plinth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/fourth-plinth>, which brings a 
rotation of art to Trafalgar Square. “There’s always so many discussions and 
conversations around it,” she said of the plinth in London. “I think that’s 
what ours should do … They might dislike it, they might be bored by it, or they 
might love it, but it’s in that kind of friction where the power of art 
happens.” Unlike the Fourth Plinth, this plinth may change appearance depending 
on the desires of the artist.

To determine the first two artists whose work will be featured on the plinth, 
High Line Art used an advisory committee “to get suggestions for names so they 
wouldn’t just come from me”, Alemani said. From a list of 50 proposals, they 
created a short list of 12, including artists Charles Gaines, Haim Steinbach, 
Cosima von Bonin and others. The proposals vary widely, from Gaines’s Tilted 
Tower to Lena Henke’s Ascent of a Woman.

New York's historic elevated train line becomes a park
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2008/nov/18/new-york-high-line-park> 
From February to April, models of the potential artworks will be on display, 
with an opportunity for public comment. Alemani also said they would be 
contacting community groups for feedback. The first two artists will be chosen 
in May of this year, and the plinth will open at some point in 2018, after the 
construction of the Spur is completed.

Outside of the High Line, New York is already known for public artwork like 
Tony Rosenthal’s Alamo (also known asAstor Place Cube 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/02/new-york-astor-place-cube-public-art-sculpture-alamo>
), a permanent artwork which had just recently been reinstalled after months of 
maintenance, or Martin Creed’sUnderstanding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/may/02/martin-creed-understanding-east-river-brooklyn-new-york>
, a temporary, neon installation which was located at Brooklyn Bridge Park’s 
Pier 6 until last October.
 