
If you come to Hip Hop Saved My Life With Romesh Ranganathan expecting nothing 
but hardcore talk about rap, you’ll be disappointed – in the best way possible. 
Ranganathan’s consistently great podcast covers a whole lot more.

His latest guest is Robert Popper, the writer of Channel 4’s Friday Night 
Dinner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/jun/21/friday-night-dinner-tv-review>
, who is a delight from the moment he begins to speak. He opens with a most 
un-hip-hop takedown of Ranganathan’s decision not to take his mum on holiday to 
Center Parcs. “Is it just water everywhere?” asks Popper. “I would imagine 
there are tunnels going through your room, with kids swimming everywhere.”

Musings about holidays aside, Ranganathan is there to take his guests through 
their recollections of hip-hop, which for Popper, or Bobby P as he’s known for 
the duration of the podcast, began inOur Price 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2001/apr/06/3> when he heard Grandmaster 
Flash’s The Message. While hearing him rap: “My penis rise up in the morning 
like a Phoenix,” is beyond disturbing, his casually dropped-in story about 
meetingWu-Tang’s Method Man and ODB 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/wutangclan> when he wrote for Zig and Zag 
on The Big Breakfast is impressive. There’s light controversy when he admits he 
finds De La Soul annoying, and don’t get him (or Ranganathan) started on Guru’s 
collaboration-happy 1993 album Jazzmatazz.

Ranganathan’s enthusiasm for talking about music and life is infectious; even 
when some guests claim not to like hip-hop, he gently squeezes them until they 
spill anecdotes. The chats normally unearth a few old gems in the song 
department, but remain the right side of nerdy to satisfy listeners looking for 
comedy, not Nas B-sides. There’s a refreshing lack of pretentiousness, with 
Ranganathan not afraid to rant about the level of guacamole in the perfect 
burrito or giggle self-effacingly about calling a hit “a big smash”.

Ranganathan’s attempts to get his guests to open up are always fruitful. DJ 
Yoda reveals his love of Stock Aitken Waterman’s back catalogue, particularly 
Kylie Minogue and Jason Donovan. Frankie Boyle is subdued and thoughtful as he 
unveils his theory about Biggie and Tupac’s romantic feelings for each other, 
which he muses led them to fake their deaths and will ultimately see them 
resurrected at the Eurovision song contest.

When it comes to interview‑based podcasts, this one is bang on.

If you like this, try … Distraction Pieces Podcast With Scroobius Pip 
<https://www.acast.com/distractionpieces>.
 