
More than a dozen examples of British erotica are being made available to view 
by the British Film Institute (BFI).

Rex appeal: the literary attraction of dinosaur erotica
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/feb/13/rex-appeal-literary-attraction-dinosaur-erotica>
On Friday the BFI <https://www.theguardian.com/film/bfi> is releasing an 
online collection, called The Pleasure Principle, of newly digitised films 
dating from 1896 to the early years of this century. They range from a 
Victorian lady’s frilly petticoat to a fuzzy, brief shot of a nude woman 
cavorting at the seaside, to a naked interview with a 1970s adult actor and 
model, Fiona Richmond.

The BFI’s curator, Vic Pratt, said there was a noble purpose behind making the 
material available. “We are trying to tell the story of illicit celluloid 
pleasure from the beginnings of film to the present day. It is a social and 
cultural journey across the 20th century with the kind of films people are 
sometimes embarrassed to talk about.” Pratt said the British attitude to sex 
was often strange and unusual to other nationalities – the French, for example 
– and this was borne out in some of the films. “We are much happier when we can 
talk in seaside and Carry On innuendoes.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhistorical-erotica-becomes-available-british-film-institute%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbffa2a4834e09170b63323e6eb4f37b25a7acce6%2F221_0_1473_884%2F1473.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Historical%20erotica%20becomes%20available%20at%20British%20Film%20Institute&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhistorical-erotica-becomes-available-british-film-institute%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Historical%20erotica%20becomes%20available%20at%20British%20Film%20Institute&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhistorical-erotica-becomes-available-british-film-institute%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbffa2a4834e09170b63323e6eb4f37b25a7acce6%2F221_0_1473_884%2F1473.jpg>
 Stags to Stardust, featuring the female gaze. Photograph: BFI 
The earliest film is Victorian Lady in Her Boudoir (1896), considered possibly 
Britain’s oldest erotic film, if a petticoat and exposed ankle can be called 
erotic. The 1943 film Action in Slow Motion has the cavorting nude and the 
warning that it is for artists – and that anyone watching it could be liable 
for prosecution. Other films include a Soho burlesque film from 1961 and from 
1960, Xcitement! featuring Pamela Green in the type of 8mm film that was 
delivered in brown paper to someone replying to an advert in the back of 
Exchange & Mart.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhistorical-erotica-becomes-available-british-film-institute%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb228e4a5964c1b22920c750b97487ed0859bb1b3%2F225_17_1478_887%2F1478.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Historical%20erotica%20becomes%20available%20at%20British%20Film%20Institute&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhistorical-erotica-becomes-available-british-film-institute%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Historical%20erotica%20becomes%20available%20at%20British%20Film%20Institute&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhistorical-erotica-becomes-available-british-film-institute%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb228e4a5964c1b22920c750b97487ed0859bb1b3%2F225_17_1478_887%2F1478.jpg>
 Stranger in the City. Photograph: BFI 
The films reveal early film-makers experimenting with just how much they could 
get away with. Many of the films were shown at private men’s clubs. The BFI has 
digitised them as part of its ongoingBritain on Film project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/07/britain-on-film-thousands-of-pieces-of-archive-footage-go-online-for-first-time>
 with 10,000 films from the BFI National Archive and the UK’s national and 
regional film archives being made available online by the end of 2017. Around 
half will be free to view.

Eyebrows might be raised at erotica but Pratt insisted: “We need to look at 
these films, they are interesting. There is a lot in here we can learn about 
ourselves. They play a really important part in social history. People have not 
really wanted to acknowledge it and I think we need to ... There is a lot we 
can learn from these films and there is a lot people will find fascinating. 
People will see how things have changed but also how things have not changed.”

A spokesperson for the BFI said the collection would be added to in the next 
few weeks and would also include a film calledBoys and Girls Together 
<http://www.bfi.org.uk/films-tv-people/4ce2b6f82d446> from 1979, described as 
the “sexploits of a multi-racial group of tenants sharing a Hampstead house”. 
It is also the first certificated sight of gay men making love. “It is 
accidentally quite groundbreaking,” said Pratt.
 