
Earlier this month, the equipment company Riddell announced its Smarter 
Football campaign <http://smarterfootball.riddell.com/>. The aim was to wage “a 
grassroots campaign that recognizes and rewards those who advance the sport 
through more progressive playing habits and approaches to the game”. The 
campaign also includes a $100,000 pledge to pay for equipment for teams “that 
best articulate how an equipment grant strengthens their ability to implement a 
safer, smarter game on and off the field.”

Judge upholds NFL's 'imperfect but fair' $1bn concussion settlement
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/18/nfl-concussion-settlement-upheld-retired-football-players>
Attempts to make football “smarter” have come in droves as football has 
experienced a concussion crisis over the past decade or so. Helmet companies 
like Riddell advertise fancy technological features on new models, and compete 
in studies in physics departments at top universities like Virginia Tech. And 
USA Football, the NFL-created governing body for the sport, has instituted the 
Heads Up Football program, dedicated to teaching players, coaches and referees 
the smarter way to tackle.

But there is an important implication in the idea that simply playing football 
“smarter” will solve football’s head injury crisis. Riddell’s Smarter Football 
campaign places the blame on equipment; the Heads Up campaign places the blame 
on poor form and improper coaching. Both of these deflect attention from the 
truth: that no matter how you play football, head injuries are inevitable.

This is not the first time football has faced an injury crisis, and not the 
first time big players in the industry have promised to fix them through making 
the game smarter. Yet no matter how smart we have made football – tinkering 
with the rules, improving the equipment, fixing leadership problems, or 
encouraging better conditioning – the damage caused by the game has proven 
inescapable.

On his blog, historian Matt Chaney 
<http://fourwallspublishing.com/BlogMChaney/> has detailed the history of 
trying to create smarter football. Programs akin to today’s Heads Up Football 
in fact date back to the 19th century. “Butting” – ramming the opponent with 
the crown of the head, more commonly called “spearing” today, created an 
epidemic of injuries in the 1880s. Yale’s offensive line in particular was 
noted for charging through holes and headbutting opponents to clear the way for 
ballcarriers.

Unsurprisingly, since the only head protection available in football’s early 
days were leather helmets and nose guards, traumatic brain injury was a regular 
occurrence. Some coaches, like Dr FC Armstrong of New York’s Pratt Institute, 
offered advice startlingly close to the preachings of Heads Up football. “The 
best way to learn tackling is with a dummy with head thrown to one side; that 
saves your head,” Armstrong wrote.

This rhetoric continued throughout the early 20th century. Chaney cites a 
story from the Asbury Park Press that stated: “In any event, ‘tackle’ with 
heads up should be substituted for ‘tackle’ with heads down in the football 
contest. Athletes may get along with broken noses and gradual elimination of 
front teeth but the skull is valuable and rules should be made to hold it 
intact if possible.”

Despite the intervention of Teddy Roosevelt 
<https://www.loc.gov/rr/news/topics/football1.html>, the creation of the NCAA, 
revision of the rulebook, and a commitment to stricter enforcement of those 
rules, injuries in football kept piling up. In the 1930s, the American Football 
Coaches Association began commissioning studies into football injuries, their 
causes, and how they could be prevented. The 1933 edition of this study found, 
according to the Associated Press, that “27.8% of the total could have been 
avoided by closer attention to playing fields, coaching and the players’ 
condition.”

Reports covering the study focused on that minority of preventable injuries. 
“Poor leadership blamed for gridiron injuries,”shouted the headline 
<https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=950&dat=19331226&id=U8tPAAAAIBAJ&sjid=o1QDAAAAIBAJ&pg=3742,5048428&hl=en>
 in the (St Petersburg, Florida) Evening Independent. “Coaches can avoid many 
grid injuries,”declared the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette 
<https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=1129&dat=19331226&id=9LVRAAAAIBAJ&sjid=L2kDAAAAIBAJ&pg=1004,1373468&hl=en>
. The Ellenburgh Daily Record usedsome fuzzy math 
<https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=860&dat=19331226&id=DtUrAAAAIBAJ&sjid=toQFAAAAIBAJ&pg=4908,5808182&hl=en>
 to arrive at their headline, “Leadership Is Blamed For Half Grid Accidents.” 
All of this despite, as both the AP and the study itself noted, “the natural 
hazards of the game still were the major cause of all accidents.”

The advent of plastic helmets, which first appeared in the 1940s, helped to 
stem the injury tide. But in 1968, 36 high school football players died on the 
field and another 30 suffered paralysis. The National Federation of State High 
School Associations (NFSHSA) promptly led a campaign against improper tackling. 
Crack-back blocks within three yards of the line of scrimmage and 
below-the-waist blocks during kickoffs and punts were made illegal within the 
first half the the 1970s, and referees wereallowed to disqualify players 
<https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=1346&dat=19751211&id=l0dNAAAAIBAJ&sjid=4foDAAAAIBAJ&pg=7007,2783921&hl=en>
 caught “spearing” an opponent.

A study of football players conducted by the University of North Carolina, 
however, found that of 133 concussions suffered in their data set, only 28 
(21.1%) could be blamed on spearing. Still, the NFSHSA harped on about this 
issue, as they printed 100,000 of two brochures, one titled “Facts on Football 
Safety,” and the other titled “Butt Blocking and Spearing, Dangerous.” The 
lesson was a familiar one: play with your head up if you don’t want to get hurt.

Catastrophic injuries declined after the 1970s, but that was likely less 
because of anti-spearing rules and more due to the introduction of the National 
Operating Committee on Standards for Athletic Equipment (NOCSAE) and mandatory 
safety standards for football helmets in 1969. But while helmets were getting 
better and better, and preventing the nasty skull fractures that created 
football’s ugliest injuries, the force of these big hits were still being 
applied to players’ heads – and their brains – over and over again.

And it turned out, the injury crisis wasn’t so much solved as it was hidden. 
Instead of skull fractures and paralysis, players were suffering concussions in 
silence and carrying the long-term effects with them through retirement, where 
for most fans they were out of sight and out of mind. With the discovery of 
chronic traumatic encephalopathy, or CTE, in the brain of the Pittsburgh 
Steelers’ Hall of Fame lineman Mike Webster, we saw football’s powers that be 
run the same playbook. In the late 2000s and early 2010s, anti-spearing rules 
were once againemphasized by officials 
<https://theconcussionblog.com/2013/09/18/rules-of-the-game/#more-7381> across 
all levels. USA Football’s Heads Up program aimed to teach kids, much like a 
full century before, that tackling with the head up was the safe way to play 
the game.

But in the information age, the best way to be smart is through technology, 
and many turned to equipment as the solution to this crisis.An entire industry 
popped up 
<https://sports.vice.com/en_us/article/welcome-to-the-concussion-industrial-complex>
 around fixing football’s concussion problem, offering solutions from sideline 
robots to gel helmet inserts to anti-concussion mouthguards and drink powders. 
Of course, most of these products are making promises they can’t keep, and many 
have already drawn the wrath of the Federal Trade Commission for making false 
claims.

The helmet industry itself is now in an arms race to create the most 
technologically robust helmet. But, as Kyle Lamson of helmet company Xenithtold 
me this past winter 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2016/02/super-bowl-football-helmet-concussion/460092/>
: “A concussion can actually happen without actually hitting your head, and if 
you can get a concussion without hitting your head, then a helmet can’t 
possibly prevent every concussion that can actually happen.” Concussion is 
caused by rapid acceleration and deceleration of the brain, so a whiplash 
effect can cause a concussion even if the head itself isn’t struck. And while 
helmet companies do not explicitly market their products as anti-concussion 
(the FTC investigated Riddell formaking such claims without compelling proof 
<https://www.ftc.gov/system/files/documents/public_statements/205241/140313sportssafetyhouse.pdf>
 in 2014), it isn’t difficult to see that marketing of helmets that “reduce 
impact” and are “backed by extensive research” is sending a specific message to 
consumers: this helmet will protect you from concussions.

Those who are invested in football, like coaches and helmet manufacturers, 
have been making the claim for over a century that the debilitating injuries 
that characterize football can be avoided simply by playing it smarter. Follow 
and enforce the rules, wear better equipment, tackle with your head up, coach 
with a more watchful eye.

Of course, none of these suggestions are bad on their face. But each of them 
implies that injuries are not simply caused by playing football, but by playing 
football incorrectly – if the player used correct form, if the coach had better 
leadership, if the school bought better equipment, this problem would have been 
solved. Football itself escapes unscathed.

But for over 100 years, people have been playing football, and for over 100 
years, head injuries, both short and long-term, have been the norm, no matter 
how loudly we scream at players about keeping their head up and no matter how 
many flags we throw for spearing, and no matter how fancy the helmets we put on 
the players before we send them into battle.

As the concussions and CTE cases pile up with no end in sight, at some point, 
we might have to acknowledge the only way to play smarter football is to not 
play it at all.
 