
An EgyptAir passenger plane en route from Cairo to Beijing has been forced to 
make an emergency landing inUzbekistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/uzbekistan> after receiving a security 
threat that the airline said turned out to be a hoax.

All 118 passengers and 17 crew members on board the Airbus plane were 
evacuated in Urgench, western Uzbekistan, on Wednesday after the threat was 
made three hours into the flight, EgyptAir said.

The plane and passengers were searched by Uzbek authorities who confirmed that 
the threat was a hoax.

“The necessary actions are under way to resume the journey to Beijing 
airport,” the airline’s statement said.

An EgyptAir flight crashed into the Mediterranean last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/19/no-theory-ruled-out-as-hollande-confirms-crash-of-egyptair-flight-ms804>
, killing all 66 people on board.An investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/25/egyptair-crash-plane-showed-no-signs-of-technical-fault-preflight>
 to determine why and exactly where it crashed continues.

EgyptAir has received a number of bomb threats since the crash, all of which 
have turned out to be hoaxes.

An EgyptAir official, who asked not to be named because he is not authorised 
to speak to the media, said the hoaxes had caused numerous delays and cost the 
company a lot of money.

“It is a conspiracy against EgyptAir,” he said. “It is very costly.” 

Last month’s crash was the third major aviation incident for Egypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> since a Russian plane was brought 
down by a bomb in late October. In March, a man wearing a fake suicide belt 
hijacked an EgyptAir plane and diverted it to Cyprus.

Wednesday’s false security threat, which was unusual in that it was made after 
the plane had taken off, could add to a climate of uncertainty that has already 
put off visitors.

The number of tourists visiting Egypt fell 54% in April 2016 compared with a 
year earlier as the country has struggled to restore confidence and lure 
visitors back to its sandy beaches and pharaonic relics.

Egypt’s tourism industry, a cornerstone of the economy and a critical source 
of hard currency, has been struggling since the 2011 uprising that ended Hosni 
Mubarak’s 30-year rule and ushered in a period of political and economic 
upheaval.

Egyptian forces are also battling to end an Islamist insurgency in the Sinai 
peninsula, where the Russian plane crashed. Islamic State claimed 
responsibility for that attack.
 