
Spoiler alert: this blog is published after Homeland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/homeland> airs in the US. It returns 
in the UK on 22 January at 9pm. Come back when you’ve watched it to join in the 
discussion.

The world has never looked so dangerous, so it’s a welcome return for Homeland 
and those fearless guardians of national security at the CIA. Having watched 
her foil the Berlin terror attack, we left Carrie single and jobless but with 
the very real prospect of both a new relationship and a new role at the agency. 
Quinn we left on the verge of death. We pick up the action several months later 
in America.

“Law enforcement needs to stop harassing and demonising an entire community.”

Having made some dicey ethical decisions in her time, Carrie is now living 
back on US soil and heading up a non-profit organisation with law professor 
Reda Hashem, defending the rights of Muslim-Americans from the Patriot Act and 
thenew normal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/dec/13/homeland-season-five-episode-10-recap-new-normal>
. Once she wasthe Drone Queen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/oct/12/homeland-recap-season-four-episode-one-the-drone-queen>
, the Empress of extrajudicial killing but now it’s all rights awareness 
workshops and outreach work. When Saul asked her to come up with a new paradigm 
for her roaming brief at the CIA, I’m pretty certain he didn’t foresee any of 
this.

“There’s two sides to every story. Know that.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fhomeland-recap-season-six-episode-one-fair-game%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d18d145999243d531d20ac6b902436558b3ebdb%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Homeland%20recap%3A%20season%20six%2C%20episode%20one%20%E2%80%93%20Fair%20Game&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fhomeland-recap-season-six-episode-one-fair-game%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Homeland%20recap%3A%20season%20six%2C%20episode%20one%20%E2%80%93%20Fair%20Game&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fhomeland-recap-season-six-episode-one-fair-game%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d18d145999243d531d20ac6b902436558b3ebdb%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 When does being an angry kid with a big mouth cross over into terrorism? … 
young Nigerian-American firebrand Sekou Bah. Photograph: 20th Century Fox/Mark 
Schafer/SHOWTIME 
Living in public housing with his mom, listening to loud rap music and with 
conservative views about his sister’s dress code, young Nigerian-American 
firebrand Sekou Bah has a lot of anger. A committed citizen journalist, he 
celebrates terrorist activity on his website and is a fierce critic of US 
foreign policy. There’s a subversive family history too, with his father being 
expelled from the country 14 years ago. But when does being an angry kid with a 
big mouth cross over intomaterial support of terrorism 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/material-support-statute-is-front-and-center-in-antiterror-push-1432719002>
?

FBI Special Agent Ray Conlin thinks he knows, and noisily arrests Sekou with a 
SWAT team in tow. Stopping DIY terrorists before they make their first move is 
his strategy. The plane tickets to “playground of Boko Haram” Nigeria in 
Sekou’s possession don’t help his case, but Carrie is there to fight his corner.

Homeland hits New York City: 'Things are very disrupted here at home'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2017/jan/13/homeland-season-six-new-york-city-claire-danes>
“If the war isn’t winnable, what are we still doing there?”

It’s a big day for Saul and Dar. They are summoned to the customary 
pre-inauguration intelligence briefings with President-elect Elizabeth Keane 
(Elizabeth Marvel). “You know how I love to talk,” she tells them. It’s true, 
she hasthe best words <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7UIE_MRAhEA>. 
Furthermore, she takes to the briefing like a pro and isn’t shy about 
challenging established orthodoxies.

Although she was elected without ever exploiting the memory of her son who 
lost his life serving in the Armed Forces in Iraq, she’s promising to be a 
hands-on commander-in-chief when it comes to foreign policy. She seriously 
considers pulling out of the Middle East altogether and wants to know about the 
lethal programs that don’t require the president’s signoff. Anything done 
abroad in America’s name by the CIA, she wants to hear about.

It’s safe to say that Dar would have a few issues with that. Saul is willing 
to give her a chance (“She’s not entirely wrong. Where she is wrong, she’s 
persuadable”) but Dar already has his mind made up.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fhomeland-recap-season-six-episode-one-fair-game%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb531806041ee721eff0d6298be26a04fce5c111c%2F0_13_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Homeland%20recap%3A%20season%20six%2C%20episode%20one%20%E2%80%93%20Fair%20Game&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fhomeland-recap-season-six-episode-one-fair-game%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Homeland%20recap%3A%20season%20six%2C%20episode%20one%20%E2%80%93%20Fair%20Game&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fhomeland-recap-season-six-episode-one-fair-game%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb531806041ee721eff0d6298be26a04fce5c111c%2F0_13_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 What is to be done with the troublesome new dove in the White House? General 
McClendon, Saul Berenson and Dar Adal discuss the President-elect. Photograph: 
20th Century Fox/JoJo Whilden/SHOWTIME 
“I think she despises us, Saul. I think she blames us for her boy.” It sounds 
ominous. Dar reaches out to his Mossad contact Tovah Rivlin to accelerate their 
joint covert action program before the new president starts curtailing it. 
Later, he hosts a secretive gathering of generals, senators and other hawkish 
types, presumably to discuss what is to be done with the troublesome new dove 
in the White House.

“I’m not getting any better.”

No one likes Quinn’s indefatigability more than me. Many (including Quinn 
himself 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/nov/09/homeland-recap-season-five-episode-five-better-call-saul>
) have tried to kill him and many have failed. This was always part of his 
attraction. But a certain closure was achieved when he appeared to expire at 
the end of last season with Carrie watching over him, the ultimate sacrifice 
paid, his legacy secured. But now there’s a ghost Quinn, one severely 
diminished – one with distorted vision, slurred speech, mashed memory and 
klutzy motor skills.

His care team feel that Carrie’s persistent daily visits only worsen his mood, 
not that she’ll listen to them. When he sneaks out of his veteran’s hospital 
care facility to score drugs he ends up getting rolled for his government check 
and knocked out. Then he moves out of hospital into Carrie’s basement, which 
she locks behind her. It’s all so tawdry. Death seems a better outcome – a view 
he seems to share.

“Let me go,” he tells Carrie. And it’s good advice; the show should have 
heeded it. I’m not saying the struggle of disabled military veterans isn’t a 
story worth telling. There’s absolutely a TV series in it – just not this one.

“You think you’re better off alone. You think your sins require it, but they 
don’t.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fhomeland-recap-season-six-episode-one-fair-game%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa85a7096e3de48bcdb806b907907bec25d729a86%2F0_0_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Homeland%20recap%3A%20season%20six%2C%20episode%20one%20%E2%80%93%20Fair%20Game&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fhomeland-recap-season-six-episode-one-fair-game%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Homeland%20recap%3A%20season%20six%2C%20episode%20one%20%E2%80%93%20Fair%20Game&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fhomeland-recap-season-six-episode-one-fair-game%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa85a7096e3de48bcdb806b907907bec25d729a86%2F0_0_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
 Handsome billionaire philanthropist Otto Düring is in a new relationship – a 
blow for all you Carrie-Otto worshippers out there. Photograph: JoJo 
Whilden/Showtime 
The last we saw of Otto Düring, he was asking Carrie to share his life with 
him. Whatever attracts people to the handsome billionaire philanthropist still 
hasn’t worked its magic on her though. He chastises her for persisting with her 
“small potatoes” advocacy gig when she could be saving the world with him. He 
thinks she’s doing penance for contributing to Quinn’s plight, and he’s 
probably right. He’s also in a new relationship – a blow for all you 
Carrie-Otto worshippers out there.

Notes and queries

• Quinn’s reduced circumstances remind me of The Fall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/28/the-fall-why-were-we-ever-excited-about-this-dead-dog-of-a-show>
 series three, with Paul Spector reduced from magnificent bastard to bedbound 
amnesiac.

• “On the plus side, it didn’t last long.” Robert Knepper will always be T-Bag 
from Prison Break to me, but it’s good to have him here as General McClendon in 
what I assume will be a significant recurring role.

• Homeland has often been eerily prescient in reflecting real-world events. I 
wonder if, like so many, the showrunners anticipated Hillary Clinton as 
President-elect at this time and wrote Elizabeth Keane accordingly.

• If President-elect Keane really does think Edward Snowden is a hero, at 
least that’s one thing she has in common with Trump supporters.

• Sekou identifies El Sayyid Nosair’s assassination of the ultranationalist 
Jewish Defence League founder Meir Kahane as the first Al-Qaida strike on 
American soil.Some background here 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/news/national/rabbi-meir-kahane-shot-killed-speech-1990-article-1.2418049>
.


• Sekou also references the horrifying case of the rape and murder of 
14-year-old Abeer Qassim al-Janabi by American soldiers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2006/nov/17/iraq.usa1” Abeer Qassim 
al-Janabi>. 

What are your thoughts on Homeland’s return? Is Carrie the advocate working 
for you, or do you long for the drone years? Do you think they should have let 
Quinn rest in peace or are you just happy he’s alive? Let me know below.
 