
Nail bars have been targeted by immigration officers, leading to dozens of 
arrests as part of an operation last month, the Home Office has announced.

Robert Goodwill, an immigration minister, revealed there has been a week-long 
operation that saw 97 people held, 68 businesses warned they could face fines 
and 14 people identified as potentially at risk of modern slavery.

The majority of the people arrested were Vietnamese nationals, but there were 
also people from Mongolia, Ghana, China, Nigeria, Pakistan and India.

The Home Office said those who are potential victims of trafficking will be 
offered support, while those who have no right to be in the UK will be removed.

Goodwill praised the operation for sending a “strong message to those 
employers who ruthlessly seek to exploit vulnerable people and wilfully abuse 
our immigration laws.

“Modern slavery is a barbaric crime which destroys the lives of some of the 
most vulnerable in our society,” he said.

Nail bars: modern-day slavery in plain sight? | Holly Baxter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/aug/20/nail-bars-slavery-trafficking-vietnam>
The operation, led by Immigration Enforcement, took place from 27 November to 
3 December and saw officers visit more than 280 businesses across the UK.

The crackdown has so far focused on the construction, care, cleaning, 
catering, taxi and car wash industries during 2016, with further activity in 
similar sectors planned for 2017.

As home secretary, Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> made it a priority to 
legislate against modern slavery. She has also repeatedly stressed over six 
years that she wants to bring down illegal immigration as well as reduce 
numbers of people who enter the country legally.

Some of those policies have been controversial including trials of vans urging 
migrants not legally in the country to “go home” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/oct/22/go-home-billboards-pulled>.

It emerged last month that the Home Office under May had also proposed 
allowing thechildren of parents unlawfully in the UK to be dropped to the 
bottom of lists for school places 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/01/may-wanted-to-deprioritise-school-places-for-children-of-people-illegally-in-uk>
 – a proposal that was not taken forward.
 