
A night shelter for rough sleepers in Leicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/leicester> will rotate between Anglican and 
Catholic churches, a Muslim community centre, a synagogue and a Hindu temple 
over the next 11 weeks in the first multifaith venture of its kind in the UK.

The shelter, which provides overnight bed, board and support for 10 homeless 
men, opened on Monday. Seven faiths or denominations are involved, with Quakers 
and Sikhs providing support and meals at different religious venues. More than 
200 people from different faith communities and of no faith have volunteered to 
support the project.

Spikes, railings and water are weapons of ‘dehumanising’ campaign against 
homeless
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/11/rough-sleepers-homeless-charity-architecture>
It is managed by One Roof <http://www.oneroof.org.uk/>, a Leicester 
organisation which focuses on homelessness, and funded by the Muslim charity
Human Appeal <https://humanappeal.org.uk/?src=donate>, the Church of England’s 
Near Neighbours <http://www.cuf.org.uk/near-neighbours> programme and the 
Christian charityHousing Justice <http://www.housingjustice.org.uk/>, as well 
as donations.


“For most of the faith venues, this is the first time they’ve provided night 
shelter for rough sleepers,” said Salma Ravat, the project’s manager. The 
venues are made available from 6pm until 9am, with volunteers setting up beds, 
serving meals and socialising with the men. “We refer to them as ‘guests’ 
because we’re trying to create a warm, welcoming environment, in which people 
are treated with respect,” said Ravat.

The response to an appeal for volunteers was overwhelming, she said. “Not all 
of them are religious, but we’re encouraging them to volunteer at venues that 
aren’t necessarily familiar to them – Muslims in churches, or Christians in 
synagogues for example.


“It’s hugely important for people to have experience of working with or living 
alongside or making friends with people of different faiths or religions. A 
project like this brings everyone together in a shared desire to help, and 
takes away a lot of barriers. It’s really humbling to see how friendships 
develop, and the impact this can have on our society.”

The number of rough sleepers in Leicester had more than doubled in the past 
year, Ravat said, from 22 in the 2015 annual count to 46 this year. “These are 
just the ones we know of. It’s a rising problem,” she said.


The men who have been referred to the shelter this week have included some 
Britons, some eastern Europeans and one whose asylum application had been 
rejected. The multifaith project was “not about preaching”, said Ravat. No 
religious activities were offered to the guests, she said, and “there is no 
expectation on anyone”.

Leicester is one of the most ethnically and religiously diverse cities in the 
UK outside London, with significant Pakistani, Bangladeshi, Polish, Turkish 
Kurdish, Afghan and Somali communities. The proportion of the population 
identifying as Christian isestimated 
<http://www.publicspirit.org.uk/the-religious-life-of-a-plural-city/> at just 
under one-third. Muslims make up 18.6% and Hindus 15.2% of the population.
 