
‘Homelessness can affect anybody’


I knew someone who, despite her many prestigious qualifications, ended up 
sleeping rough because of her mental status. Homelessness can affect anybody. 
It’s not just people that we believe may have fallen off the edge of society. 
It can be you or me, or someone we once knew. Please do not look away.(Jeff 
Hurll <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/17226011>)

‘There can be no greater cruelty in this country’

As individuals, we don’t have the resources or incentive to help every 
homeless person. By looking after our own families, we contribute to keeping 
people off the streets – if only everyone did. But we can pressure our 
societies to sort out the problem. This is what having a social system is about 
in the end, surely.

I grew up in India, which boasts some of the greatest income inequality in the 
world, and experiences heartbreaking levels of poverty. Needless to say, 
homeless communities are typically larger and coalesce into large support 
networks. And the country is warm. To be homeless in Britain brings with it a 
punishment of the harsh cold and material want. There can be no greater cruelty 
in this country. (Anahita Sharma 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15814370>)

‘We have a government that has no empathy’

We have to do more to help homeless people but nothing will change while we 
have a government that introduces policies that make life impossible for people 
who are living hand to mouth.

There was an awful incident near Westfield a few months ago where school-age 
teenagers, laughing, filmed their friendskicking an elderly homeless man 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/sickening-video-shows-youth-kicking-8888970>
 onto the floor in broad daylight. We have a government that has no empathy, so 
perhaps it’s no surprise school kids get off being like that too.(Grafton01 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16000302>)

‘I’ve heard stories of homeless people having their tents set on fire’

I have just spent 31 days hitchhiking across the UK with no money and 
surviving on the kindness of strangers to highlight homelessness across the 
country andraise money for Centrepoint 
<https://www.justgiving.com/fundraising/findingremi>. Every homeless person has 
a different story, and for most, it goes beyond not having a home. I’ve heard 
stories across the UK during my journey of homeless people having their tents 
set on fire, being urinated on and physically abused.

On a more positive note, I have experienced the kindness and generosity of 
people across the UK, from directing me to the nearest shelter to booking me a 
train ticket to the next town with dinner money in hand. There are very kind 
people out there handing out food, toiletries and socks.Social Bite 
<http://social-bite.co.uk/> is a charitable cafe chain in Scotland that invests 
100% of their profits and have now started building shelters for the homeless. 
No matter where you are in life, the only thing that should matter is showing 
kindness to one another and extending a hand instead of a foot. (King Wilson 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/17225928>)
 ‘Every homeless person has a different story and for most, it goes beyond not 
having a home.’ Photograph: Carl Court/Getty Images 
‘I graduated with honours … and ended up on the streets’

I graduated from a top university with honours, and was successful in my 
field, working internationally for a number of years. In my mid-20s, my young 
and beautiful wife died suddenly, and violently. I tried to get help. I was 
diagnosed with a whole raft of disorders – PTSD, major depression, etc. I 
cycled through medications and psychologists; nothing worked. Eventually, and 
in suicidal desperation, I found something that did – injecting heroin.

Eventually, I ended up on the streets. Most addicts will have similar stories 
– they are victims of rape, child abuse, and all manner of horrors. Many lack 
even the barest chance to get help, or any kind of family.

I think what many fail to realise is that every man and woman has a breaking 
point

I’m no longer homeless, yet to this day it upsets me to see people ignore the 
homeless rather than give them money “to spend on drugs”. If you’re going to be 
generous, if you’re that lucky to be able to do so, then do it without moral 
judgement. Those who use drugs will stop when they are able to, not when they 
run out of money.

I admit that prior to falling well and truly over the edge, I had neither 
experience nor understanding of drug addicts and homeless people. And hence 
very little sympathy for them. Yet, what I think many fail to realise, in such 
common ideas like they “would never revert to drink or drugs”, is that every 
man and woman has a breaking point, somewhere, even if most will thankfully 
never have to meet with it.

I lost my wife, but I also lost myself – every ambition, every hope and dream, 
every enjoyment and passion, every possibility of happiness, and in short, 
everything that defined me as a person. If it happens that a person is stripped 
absolutely bare, becomes a stranger even to themselves, who can say what they 
are or are not capable of doing, and of becoming? The moral superiority of 
those who look down on drug addicts and homeless people, or presume to know 
what is best for them, hangs by a thread.(john doe 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/17225093>)

‘A little humanity can mean the world’

My wife takes orders off the homeless people who sit outside our local shop. 
Last month one woman asked for a bag of crisps and a bottle of cherry coke and 
burst into tears when she got it. These are human beings at their lowest ebb, a 
little humanity can mean the world to them.(Greg Rose 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14892412>)
 ‘Show kindness to one another and extend a hand instead of a foot.’ 
Photograph: Andy Hall for the Observer 
‘I walked around although I was dead on my feet with hunger’

During a bout of homelessness that began one Christmas eve, I could not “get 
down” to sitting on the street. I saw that it was necessary or normal but I 
just couldn’t accomplish it. This led me to walking around maintaining regular 
appearance although I was dead on my feet with sleeplessness and hunger – but 
it also led to opportunities, like coming across aHare Krishna mobile food 
kitchen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/aug/09/krishna-food-kitchari-prasad-homeless>
 that was being all but ignored. This was literallymanna from heaven and it 
made them very happy to reach somebody in need. (Neuromantic 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1592813>)

‘If sleeping on the street doesn’t sharpen you up, nothing will’

My own experience with being homeless in London lead me to the conclusion: 
help yourself, keep going. You are poor in the wealthiest city in the world, 
the crumbs fall downwards, you will be given a chance to get up again. There is 
an awful lot of patronising which sees the homeless as almost braindead or 
comatose, but if sleeping on the street doesn’t sharpen you up and get you 
active, nothing will.(Mark Kavanagh 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15987341>)

‘The government encourages us to look down at the needy’

A friend of mine has opened up a mobile soup kitchen, and after some homeless 
people were chucked out of their sleeping spots, someone else in our community 
kitted out an old bus to make it a safe place for people to sleep.

Though the council have tried to stop them helping homeless people, the public 
support for these local initiates has now forced the council to start acting – 
but it is so cash-strapped that it is groaning under the impossibility of the 
demands. Central government won’t properly resource local authorities to do the 
work they are legally – let alone morally – obliged to do. It is appalling and 
it all starts with a government that encourages us to look down at the needy 
and see them as less than human.(sylviamc 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14440915>)
 Eight million people in the UK are one payday away from being homeless, 
according to Shelter. Photograph: Antonio Olmos for the Observer 
‘She felt awful when people looked at her in the street’

Recently I spoke to a woman who had been homeless for six weeks. Lucid, 
articulate, she had experienced a set of horrible circumstances – the loss of 
her mother recently, plus she had recently recovered from pneumonia and lost 
her home. She said she felt awful when people looked at her in the street, as 
it was nasty and judgmental. She told me that the shelters were always full and 
she just wanted to get back into doing what she had always done – hairdressing. 
But without somewhere reliable to stay or sleep, she could barely think 
straight and was so tired, constantly trying to nap, as she could not sleep in 
doorways on the streets.

I know that there are numerous commercial buildings which have empty floors, 
yet more commercial buildings are being constructed elsewhere. In times of 
crisis, such as storms or flooding, leisure centres and public buildings open 
their main halls to give the public shelter. While all of this requires 
coordination and funding, it surely affords many homeless people a better 
chance at maintaining some control over their lives. (Phoebe3 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/10270655>)

‘The scale of cities is the major problem’

The scale of cities is the major problem. Some years ago a guy whose 
relationship broke down pitched up, literally, in a £10 tent under a road 
bridge in our small town. Within hours the police were there officially telling 
him to move on. Within another hour they were back with a bag of food and drink 
from the Co-op manager. He was given clothing to keep him dry and warm, and 
after a while talking to locals he found a job and an old caravan on the farm 
where he worked.

My own experience of homelessness in a small city leads me to believe that the 
way we were treated was purely down to fear. People are so close to destitution 
in the UK that when it stares them in the face they can easily react badly.
Eight million people in the UK are one payday away from being homeless 
<http://media.shelter.org.uk/home/press_releases/8_million_people_one_pay_check_away_from_being_unable_to_pay_for_their_home>
. Half of the entire US population is one crisis from the streets. Neo-liberal 
capitalism needs these conditions because, as my late commie uncle used to say: 
“Nobody ever got ‘up in the world’ without standing on somebody’s face”.(
showmaster <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3844077>)

‘It’s not actually about homes. If only it were’

When I asked a friend who worked with homeless people why more was not being 
done about it, the answer was: “The problem about homelessness is that it’s not 
actually about homes. If only it were!” Her point being that if it were just a 
case of housing people then that could be solved quite easy, by spending a 
limited amount of money.

The problem comes from all the other stuff that comes with homelessness. As 
she explained, a large majority of people on the streets – in the British 
context at least – are experiencing mental illness and/or addiction issues. And 
to deal with that requires another level of social care and full-on support. 
All of which costs a lot more than simply putting someone in a flat. It 
requires the sort of joined-up thinking by all the various agencies to really 
focus on the needs of the individual. The question is: will any government be 
willing to pay out for that?(clerkenwellboi 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4723332>)
 Two people at a Crisis Christmas homeless shelter in north London, 2015. 
Photograph: Felix Clay for the Guardian 
‘Make sure you ask the homeless person what they’d actually like’


I worked in homeless services for many years during the time of the Rough 
Sleepers Initiative 
<http://www.insidehousing.co.uk/london-mayor-extends-rough-sleeper-initiative/6525038.article>
 and while this was a long way from perfect, it really did make a difference 
and the number of rough sleepers did dramatically reduce. I have been horrified 
to see that our society has allowed the numbers to increase again – it is to 
our shame.

I find comments about giving people food and clothes rather than money 
slightly concerning. While nothing against this in principle, please make sure 
you are asking the homeless person what they would actually like. To just 
assume a homeless person should be grateful for whatever they are given, 
ignoring their personal tastes, is also dehumanising them. As a former homeless 
worker my view on whether you give cash or not is ... it is up to you. If you 
do, some of your money will be used to pay for drugs and alcohol – but some of 
your money spent on anything is paid in wages to individuals who will choose to 
spend some of it on drugs and alcohol!(sundance 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1345202>)

‘The addiction will always come first’

I have had experiences of homelessness in my life – sometimes out of choice, 
and later through addiction. One thing I remember from the streets is that 
there were a lot of charities, shelters and food handouts. But using these 
became increasingly difficult with addiction. If it’s a choice between feeding 
your addiction or belly, the addiction will always come first. Likewise, even 
the meagre paperwork or time-keeping needed for a bed in a hostel will seem 
insurmountable when trying to maintain a habit.(mista 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1327155>)

To just assume a homeless person should be grateful for whatever they are 
given is also dehumanising them

‘Hundreds of shelters support women, but very few support men’

As someone who’s spent time homeless and rough sleeping myself, I’m going to 
cause a bit of controversy and ask people to take a look at the homeless people 
they see around them. What’s common to the majority of these people? They’re 
predominantly men. There are hundreds of shelters, refuges and organisations 
that will support women in relationship breakdowns, but very few that support 
men. Men are just expected to “get on with it”.

Time and again, as an older man with both physical and mental health problems, 
I saw my place in the queue for housing being taken by young women with family 
and resources. Even a period of hospitalisation was not sufficient to help my 
cause. Please understand, I’m not bitter and I’m not suggesting that men should 
be put first – I’m suggesting that local authorities adopt a more equitable 
approach to homelessness.(Glenn Willis 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/17223318>)

‘Often the people who have the least are the most generous’

I’ve slept rough in London twice having drunkenly missed my last train home. 
On the second occasion I got chatting to a couple of homeless guys and they let 
me crash in their “pad”, ie an old mattress which they’d installed in a hotel 
courtyard storage cupboard. If there’s a moral to this story – aside from not 
getting drunk and missing your train – it’s that often the people who have the 
least are the most generous, and the homeless are no exception.(BanjoGuru 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13803957>)

Related: 'Spat on and ignored': what I've learned from a month sleeping rough 
in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2017/jan/06/what-learned-sleeping-rough-london>

‘It’s not a problem that will be solved by individual acts of kindness’

This is not a problem that will be solved by individual acts of kindness. 
Being kind to rough sleepers, giving them hot drinks or care packages, or just 
saying hello is very nice. But, we also need to hold the government to account, 
and address the policies that have put people on the street in the first place. 
For example, because of deep cuts to council budgets in the last five to six 
years, funding for hostels for rough sleepers has declined. I believe 
Westminster council recently had to shut down two hostels due to cuts in 
funding. Those are places that could have offered a warm, safe bed for rough 
sleepers.(Leviathan212 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4227195>)

‘Even if all you can offer is a few words, please give those freely’

The most common thing I’ve heard from homeless people I’ve talked to is that 
the feeling of being invisible is what really drags them down. Giving to 
homeless charities is great; they do essential work and need as much support as 
they can get. But the mental and emotional lift it can give a homeless person 
just to have a bit of human interaction with a stranger on the street shouldn’t 
be underestimated.

It doesn’t matter how they ended up on the streets, that’s not your business; 
it still remains that you have a roof over your head and they don’t, so even if 
you’re so strapped for cash that all you can offer is a moment’s eye contact 
and a few words as you pass, please give those freely. It’ll cost you nothing 
and could mean a great deal to them.(StayFree 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2060223>)

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> to join the discussion, and 
explore our archive here <https://www.theguardian.com/cities>
 