
A bowtie. A Barack Obama commemorative plastic sack. Nine pairs of tube socks 
at $2.99 per 3-pak (sic). A dustpan. A free turkey. A pair of $20 dress shoes 
bought for a wedding as the cab waited outside. Shabbat candles. A toy Titanic 
that transforms into a robot. Many, many gold Elvis busts.

Ask Torontonians to name their favourite purchase from the Honest Ed’s 
department store 
<http://torontoist.com/2013/07/honest-eds-building-is-for-sale-but-his-storeys-live-on/slide/20130717memorial/>
, and you rapidly compile a compendium of kitsch to fascinate any 
anthropologist from the future. The most prized artefact, of course, should be 
the store itself – a garish, ramshackle funhouse that for decades held the 
world record for most electric lights on a building – were it not for the fact 
that Honest Ed’s is slated for demolition on New Years’ Eve, 2016.


When the dust settles at the start of 2017, Toronto will be one more mixed-use 
residential-retail complex 
<http://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/toronto/redevelopment-of-honest-eds-in-toronto-holds-several-surprises/article23274452/>
 richer. Gone, however, will be a store that didn’t just sell cheap formalwear 
and ironic birthday gifts to hipsters, but was central to Toronto’s proud 
history as one of the great immigrant cities.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F01%2Fhonest-eds-toronto-closure-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F31%2F1433107128899%2F9f676426-c937-4f3a-be0a-10bd2593eddd-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Honest%20Ed%E2%80%99s%2C%20Toronto's%20doomed%20compendium%20of%20kitsch%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2047&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F01%2Fhonest-eds-toronto-closure-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Honest%20Ed%E2%80%99s%2C%20Toronto%27s%20doomed%20compendium%20of%20kitsch%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2047&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F01%2Fhonest-eds-toronto-closure-history-cities-50-buildings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F31%2F1433107128899%2F9f676426-c937-4f3a-be0a-10bd2593eddd-2060x1236.jpeg>
 ‘Only the floors are crooked’ ... inside Honest Ed’s. Photograph: Keith 
Beaty/Toronto Star/Getty 
The “world’s biggest discount shop” was the flagship of a Toronto retail and 
cultural empire that began in earnest in 1948, when Ed Mirvish – the US-born 
son of Jewish immigrants from Lithuania and Austria – overhauled the ladieswear 
outlet he ran with his wife, Anne, by buying the salvaged stock from a 
Woolworth’s department store that had burned down in nearby Hamilton. So began 
Mirvish’s memorable strategy of selling random bulk merchandise bought from 
fire and bankruptcy sales, piled on crates under vaguely abusive signs with 
messages such as “Come in you lucky people”.

The store’s approach to retail can best be described as ‘confuse and 
disorientate’. In this it was a trailblazer

The store’s approach to retail can perhaps best be described as “confuse and 
disorientate”. In this, as in so many other ways, it was a trailblazer. Mirvish 
set up mirrors everywhere on the uneven floors, lured in buyers with giveaways 
and below-cost discounts on selected items – he apparently claimed to have
invented the “loss leader” <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ed_Mirvish> – and 
covered the exterior in thousands of coloured lightbulbs and corny hand-painted 
signs, such as “Honest Ed is for the birds … but his prices are cheep! cheep!” 
The sales strategy, meanwhile, was spelled out plainly: “Come in and get lost.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F01%2Fhonest-eds-toronto-closure-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F31%2F1433107665979%2F11aca268-a6d2-4158-8b08-5cf29eaddd3b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Honest%20Ed%E2%80%99s%2C%20Toronto's%20doomed%20compendium%20of%20kitsch%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2047&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F01%2Fhonest-eds-toronto-closure-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Honest%20Ed%E2%80%99s%2C%20Toronto%27s%20doomed%20compendium%20of%20kitsch%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2047&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F01%2Fhonest-eds-toronto-closure-history-cities-50-buildings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F31%2F1433107665979%2F11aca268-a6d2-4158-8b08-5cf29eaddd3b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Ed Mirvish outside his shop. The son of Jewish immigrants, he welcomed new 
Canadians with store greeters and threw an annual birthday party that was open 
to all. Photograph: Boris Spremo/Toronto Public Library 
The “cheep” prices also immediately attracted a vast customer base: recent 
immigrants who’d arrived inCanada <https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada> 
with more hope than money. Each morning, Mirvish gave away “gifts” to the first 
few customers through the doors (to this day, a determined and shivering few 
line up at 6am on the corner of Bloor and Bathurst to claim their free tuning 
fork or toaster), as well as dollar bills to the poor and turkeys before 
Thanksgiving and Christmas. He employed in-store “greeters” – another 
innovation – for new customers and generally made the new-world consumer dream 
real for Canadians, and in the process helped turn Toronto into the powerhouse 
of immigrant-driven commerce it became.


It’s pleasant to fantasise that if Mirvish hadn’t died in 2007, the building 
would never have been sold for scrap – but Ed’s defining characteristic wasn’t 
so much honesty as a hard nose. As the store grew, Mirvish bought up 
neighbouring Victorian buildings with the intention of tearing them down to 
create a car park. The city stopped him. So he rented out the properties to 
artists, and inadvertently spawned a bohemian community that became known as 
Mirvish Village; a home to galleries, comic stores, restaurants, antique shops 
and that alternative-culture landmark,Suspect Video 
<http://www.suspectvideo.ca/>. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F01%2Fhonest-eds-toronto-closure-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F29%2F1432905891750%2F5ee4e637-9b5a-4938-aec0-d14bb39a39b7-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Honest%20Ed%E2%80%99s%2C%20Toronto's%20doomed%20compendium%20of%20kitsch%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2047&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F01%2Fhonest-eds-toronto-closure-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Honest%20Ed%E2%80%99s%2C%20Toronto%27s%20doomed%20compendium%20of%20kitsch%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2047&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F01%2Fhonest-eds-toronto-closure-history-cities-50-buildings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F29%2F1432905891750%2F5ee4e637-9b5a-4938-aec0-d14bb39a39b7-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Titanic-Bot, a transformable toy bought at Honest Ed’s in 1999. Photograph: 
Nick Gunz 
Mirvish cemented his status as cultural hero by becoming a theatre impresario, 
refurbishing the Royal Alexandra Theatre in 1963 (another supposedly unviable 
building slated for the wrecking ball) and the Old Vic in London, which went on 
to enjoy a golden age, and for which Mirvish was awarded a CBE.


After his death, the city’s then-mayor David Miller named 12 August “Ed 
Mirvish Day” in Toronto. But by then land prices had already begun their 
stomach-churning ascent, making downtown unaffordable to most immigrants. The 
surviving Mirvishes found themselves with a huge store that was losing its 
customers, while the value of its real estate went through the leaking roof. 
The party was never going to last.

The developer who bought the site, Westbank, has proposed 
<http://torontoist.com/2015/03/plans-revealed-for-honest-eds/> a series of 
multi-storey towers with apartments and a glass-covered market. But regardless 
of what specific plan finally gets approved, when Toronto’s immigrant landmark 
is transformed into the inevitable chain-retail, street-level mall, and the 
existing eateries of Mirvish Village are thrust into their new role as what the
Globe and Mail breathlessly describes 
<http://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/toronto/> as “destination restaurants”, 
one of the ventricles of indie Toronto’s heart will shrivel.

 * Which other buildings in the world tell stories about urban history? Share 
your own pictures and descriptions with GuardianWitness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/mar/23/50-buildings-great-stories-urban-history>
, on Twitter and Instagram using #hoc50 or let us know suggestions in the 
comments below  