
Hope Solo has had an interesting Olympics to put it mildly. Before the Games 
had even started she had alienated many people in the host country by posing 
with anti-mosquito gear, a reference to the problems Brazil is experiencing 
with the Zika virus.

That led to the USA goalkeeper being taunted with cries of “Zika” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/03/carli-lloyd-usa-womens-football-soccer-olympics-rio-new-zealand>
 at every goalkick by Brazilian fans during the World Cup.She then made two 
errors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/09/usa-colombia-rio-2016-olympics-hope-solo>
 as the US drew with Colombia in their final group game of the tournament.

USA's women lost – blaming it on 'cowards' simply misses the point
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/13/usa-women-national-team-soccer-rio-2016-analysis>
On Friday, she really stepped things up. As the US faced a penalty that would 
see them crash out of the tournament to Sweden in shoot-out, Solo claimed she 
needed to change her gloves. That forced Lisa Dahlkvist to wait a few minutes 
to take her spot-kick, an uncomfortably long time at such a crucial moment. The 
Swede scored anyway and the defending champions were out.


Solo did not take kindly to the defeat. “I thought we played a courageous 
game. I thought we had many opportunities on goal,” she said. “I think we 
showed a lot of heart. We came back from a goal down, I’m very proud of this 
team. And I also think we played a bunch of cowards. The best team did not win 
today, I strongly, firmly believe that.”

Solo was asked to clarify her comments and said her issue with the Swedes 
stemmed from their style of play. “They didn’t want to open play. They didn’t 
want to pass the ball. They didn’t want to play great soccer. It was a 
combative game, a physical game ... And they tried to counter with longballs.”

The goalkeeper was also dismissive of Sweden’s chances going ahead. “I don’t 
think they’re going to make it far in the tournament. I think it was very 
cowardly. But they won, they moving on and we’re going home.”

US women's national team crash out on penalties after Sweden hold their nerve
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/12/usa-lose-womens-football-sweden-olympic-quarter-finals-penalty-kicks>
She told Sports Illustrated’s Grant Wahl that she was proud of her team-mates. 
“Tonight Sweden found a way to beat us. Nevertheless, I am so proud of the way 
we played tonight, our fight, our heart, and the skill we showed. Things don’t 
always go the way you want them to. Such is life, and such is sport.”

There was widespread criticism of Solo on social media following her comments. 
She later admitted on Twitter that 
<https://twitter.com/hopesolo/status/764201530475950080> “losing sucks. I’m 
really bad at it.”

The Sweden coach, Pia Sundhage, led the US to gold and the 2008 and 2012 
Olympics and was dismissive of Solo’s outburst. “I don’t give a crap,” she told 
reporters after the game. “I’m going to Rio, she’s going home.”
 