
Two weeks ago, the US women’s soccer team crashed out of the Olympics. Now 
their controversial goalkeeper, Hope Solo,has been suspended 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/24/hope-solo-suspended-us-womens-soccer-rio-olympics-loss>
 for six months.

“The comments by Hope Solo after the match against Sweden during the 2016 
Olympics were unacceptable, and do not meet the standard of conduct we require 
from our national team players,” said US Soccer president Sunil Gulati, in 
announcing her suspension.

After the defending world champions exited in the quarter-finals on penalties, 
Solo offered somecolorful commentary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/12/hope-solo-sweden-cowards-olympics-football-rio-2016>
 on opponents Sweden, now led by former USWNT coach Pia Sundhage. Solo 
emphatically defended the tactical integrity of her team and said: “I think we 
played a bunch of cowards.” It can, of course, be argued that winning on 
penalties hardly qualifies as cowardly, but that isn’t the point. Some of her 
team-mates, including the highly respected Megan Rapinoe, werethoroughly 
unimpressed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/18/megan-rapinoe-disappointed-hope-solo-bunch-of-cowards-sweden-rio-2016>
.

Solo is widely regarded as one of the finest goalkeepers ever, but she has 
been plagued by scandal. She was accused of beating up her 17-year-old nephew 
and half-sister, allegations that she categorically denied, claiming she was a 
victim. Solo opened up about the details of the case in anespnW profile 
<http://www.espn.com/espn/feature/story/_/id/12957499/hope-solo-prepares-third-world-cup-dealing-recent-controversy>
 that focused on her public image and her angst with media coverage of her 
case. “My name was completely smeared. I had already been compared to Ray Rice, 
to Adrian Peterson. From here on out, no matter what happens, I’ll forever be 
associated with domestic violence.”

After Solo contributed to her team winning the World Cup in July 2015, city 
prosecutors in Washington state appealed a court decision to have a domestic 
violence charge against her dismissed. The charges were reinstated, and she is 
currently waiting for a resolution in that case.

Just before the Olympics began, Solo insulted many Brazilians by publicly 
tweeting out her vast collection of mosquito repellants with the hashtag
#zikaproof 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3704740/If-village-forgets-pack-repellent-come-Hope-Solo-shows-Zika-proof-arsenal-s-packing-Rio-Olympics.html>
. Understandably, some people were offended, and at amatch in Belo Horizonte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/03/carli-lloyd-usa-womens-football-soccer-olympics-rio-new-zealand>
, proceeded to chant “Zika” every time she touched the ball. I don’t believe 
that the fans were unfair to her. Solo is no shrinking violet, as her role at 
the forefront of thelawsuit filed 
<http://www.elle.com/culture/career-politics/a37386/womens-soccer-equal-pay/> 
against US Soccer for pay equality suggests.

Although Solo’s private issues are ongoing, US Soccer has dealt with her 
poorly. She was not suspended for being involved in the domestic violence 
dispute. Veteran sportswriter Christine Brennan opined whetherUS Soccer 
actually cared 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/sports/soccer/2015/10/02/hope-solo-us-soccer-domestic-violence/73237644/>
 about anything other than winning, which is perhaps why Solo was not 
reprimanded, or at the very least benched, when the case was first make public.

Now that the USA’s beloved soccer darling did not fare very well at the 
Olympics, it would seem easier to penalize her.
Grant Wahl (@GrantWahl) 
SI: Response to Hope Solo suspension from Rich Nichols, executive director, 
USWNT Players Associationpic.twitter.com/ZOPsYgSCk7 <https://t.co/ZOPsYgSCk7>
 <https://twitter.com/GrantWahl/status/768602732425048064> August 25, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/GrantWahl/status/768602732425048064> 
While I am by no means a fan of Hope Solo’s conduct, the mismanagement by US 
Soccer executives and their absurd punishment does not go down easy.

This is not the first time an Olympian has landed in hot water after some 
ridiculous commentary or actions post-competition. As much as we would love to, 
we can’t forgetRyan Lochte’s debauchery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/22/ryan-lochte-speedo-sponsorship-ended-rio-2016-olympics>
 that led to an exquisitely embarrassing moment for the Team USA.

But Lochte has not yet faced disciplinary action from USA Swimming. Yes, he 
lost some sponsorship deals, but he will be starring in the upcoming season of 
Dancing with the Stars, and he’s admitted that he’s already thinking about 
Tokyo 2020.

And it is not the first time that other male athletes have been involved in 
some imbroglio and have gotten off relatively easy.

Orange County soccer player Richard Chaplow has been given a two-game 
suspension and a fine from the United Soccer League for using “offensive and 
abusive” language towards LA Galaxy midfielder Robbie Rogers, who is gay. While 
theUSL insists 
<http://www.uslsoccer.com/news_article/show/689979?referrer_id=2333971> that 
Chaplow’s comments were not “homophobic” but “abusive”,Rogers’ own reaction 
<http://www.mlssoccer.com/post/2016/08/21/robbie-rogers-pens-emotional-note-after-homophobic-abuse-usl-game>
 to the incident certainly indicates that he experienced blatant homophobia.

Solo used the term cowards. The USL did not disclose the language used by 
Chaplow. But had he been a player in the US women’s national team, perhaps his 
punishment would have been far more severe.

Sports governing bodies can sit and argue about semantics and what constitutes 
abusive versus homophobic language until the sun goes down. But the optics are 
very clear within the sports community: men are slapped on the wrist, women are 
given harsh sentences. And, thus far, white privileged male swimmers waltz away.

Yes, Solo foolishly badmouthed her Swedish opponents. Yes, she is a hard 
competitor. No, I am not a fan of her behavior or antics. But her contract was 
terminated by the federation, and her suspension begins immediately. It means 
that she will not be eligible for the national team roster until February 2017. 
Did her offense truly merit a consequence that severe?

I don’t believe so, particularly when fellow soccer players are also 
recklessly wagging their tongues but receiving far lesser punishments. Solo’s 
involvement in a very serious domestic violence case should have been met with 
a better response from US Soccer. But it wasn’t. To retroactively enforce 
punitive measures on a player is a disingenuous attempt to deal with this mess.

Former USWNT player Julie Foudy tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/JulieFoudy/status/768600822850531328> that Solo will still 
be permitted to play for Seattle Reign, her current National Women’s Soccer 
League team, so the gesture is more “symbolic than substantive”.

If that is the case, why would US Soccer bother handing her a suspension? In 
order to humiliate her? Solo replied to the suspensionwith her usual emphatic 
commentary <https://twitter.com/hopesolo/status/768613634951958529>: “For 17 
years I dedicated my life to the US women’s national team, and did the job of a 
pro athlete the only way I knew how – with passion, tenacity and an unrelenting 
commitment. With so much more to give, I am saddened by the federation’s 
decision to terminate my contract.”

As Solo continues to play for Seattle, she might want to consider some media 
training to help avoid future gaffes. As much as I support women being 
forthright, tact is certainly not Solo’s forte. And she needs to mature 
considerably.

But the fact remains that men with similar or more grievous offenses are given 
lesser punishments. Solo is a staunch defender of the goal, and the women’s 
game. She speaks up unabashedly when she has to, on pay equality orleague 
conditions 
<http://www.seattletimes.com/sports/reign/uswnt-reign-goalkeeper-hope-solo-rips-nwsl-in-latest-blog-post/>
. I always don’t like her methods, but there is no denying she is passionate 
about soccer.

Solo feels that she was punished too harshly. And according to the players’ 
association statement <https://twitter.com/GrantWahl/status/768602732425048064>
, an appeal is forthcoming.

In this particular case, I hope that she fights this suspension with the 
tenacity she’s show over a career between the posts.
 