
Hope Solo, the notorious USA goalkeeper who was given a six-month ban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/24/hope-solo-suspended-us-womens-soccer-rio-olympics-loss>
 after the team’s failure to win Olympic gold, has announced she won’t be 
playing for her club side in the NWSL this season.

Solo, 35, confirmed the news in a brief statement that said she was not 
mentally ready to return to football.

Hope Solo's punishment shows that women are judged more harshly | Shireen Ahmed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/26/hope-solo-suspension-female-athletes-double-standards>
“After careful consideration, I have decided to end my season with the Seattle 
Reign, an organization I love playing for,” the statement read. “Mentally, I am 
not there yet.”

Solo was given a six-month suspension by US Soccer for making critical 
comments following her team’s penalty shootout defeat by Sweden in the Olympic 
quarter-finals. Solo called Sweden “a bunch of cowards” for their defensive 
strategy in the game – a choice of words that went down badly with US Soccer 
president Sunil Gulati.

Gulati said last week that Solo’s comments were “unacceptable, and do not meet 
the standard of conduct we require from our national team players”, and 
announced a six-month termination of her contract.

“Beyond the athletic arena, and beyond the results, the Olympics celebrate and 
represent the ideals of fair play and respect,” Gulati said. “We expect all of 
our representatives to honor those principles, with no exceptions.”

Solo, who has won two Olympic gold medals and one World Cup with the national 
team, said the decision had been “devastating” for her.

“Coming to terms with the fact I was fired from the US women’s national team 
after 17 years of service has been devastating,” she said. “After watching the 
team’s win against Portland this weekend and seeing Haley Kopmeyer playing so 
well in goal, I truly believe this decision is what’s best for me and for the 
Reign organization.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Fus-goalkeeper-hope-solo-six-month-ban-calling-swedish-team-cowards-video-report&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=US%20goalkeeper%20Hope%20Solo's%20six-month%20ban%20for%20calling%20Swedish%20team%20cowards%20%E2%80%93%20video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Fus-goalkeeper-hope-solo-six-month-ban-calling-swedish-team-cowards-video-report>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=US%20goalkeeper%20Hope%20Solo%27s%20six-month%20ban%20for%20calling%20Swedish%20team%20cowards%20%E2%80%93%20video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Fus-goalkeeper-hope-solo-six-month-ban-calling-swedish-team-cowards-video-report&media=>
US goalkeeper Hope Solo’s six-month ban for calling Swedish team cowards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/aug/25/us-goalkeeper-hope-solo-six-month-ban-calling-swedish-team-cowards-video-report>
Solo did not say on Tuesday whether she planned to return to action next 
season.

Her comments were widely criticised – Solo’s team-mate Megan Rapinoe said that 
she was “really disappointed” by the remarks – but US Soccer acknowledged that 
Solo’s chequered history also counted against her. Solo was arrested in 2014 on 
charges of assaulting two family members.

“Taking into consideration the past incidents involving Hope, as well as the 
private conversations we’ve had requiring her to conduct herself in a manner 
befitting a US national team member, US Soccer determined this is the 
appropriate disciplinary action,” Gulati said.

Seattle Reign have four regular-season games remaining, and current sit in 
fifth place, 12 points behind the league-leading Washington Spirit. The 
top-four teams qualify for the postseason.
 