
The founder of the campaign group Hope Not Hate has described Nigel Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nigel-farage> as “disgustingly offensive” 
for saying the widower of the murdered MP Jo Cox was tainted by extremism 
because he supported the organisation.

Writing for the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/22/nigel-farage-hope-not-hate-brendan-cox>
, Nick Lowles likens the Ukip politician to Donald Trump, saying both seek to 
“vilify, abuse and bully their opponents into silence”, in part through abuse 
from their supporters on social media.

Nigel Farage has attacked us at Hope not Hate. It’s time to draw a line in the 
sand | Nick Lowles
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/22/nigel-farage-hope-not-hate-brendan-cox>
Farage dislikes Hope Not Hate, Lowles argues, because his organisation, which 
campaigns against political militancy, has “shone the spotlight” on Ukip, and 
campaigned to stop Farage being elected to the Thanet parliamentary seat at the 
2015 election.


Lowles’s comments follow a row on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/20/nigel-farage-accuses-jo-cox-widower-brendan-cox-of-supporting-extremism>
, which began when Brendan Cox, whose wife was murdered in Juneby the neo-Nazi 
terrorist Thomas Mair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/thomas-mair-found-guilty-of-jo-cox-murder>
, replied to a tweet by Farage blaming the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, 
for the Berlin truck attack. This was “a slippery slope”, Cox warned.

Speaking soon afterwards to LBC radio, Farage accused Cox of links to 
extremism via Hope Not Hate, one of three charities supported by afoundation 
set up in the name of <https://www.gofundme.com/jocox> Jo Cox.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Ffarage-accuses-brendan-cox-of-backing-extremist-groups-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Farage%20accuses%20Brendan%20Cox%20of%20backing%20extremist%20groups%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Ffarage-accuses-brendan-cox-of-backing-extremist-groups-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Farage%20accuses%20Brendan%20Cox%20of%20backing%20extremist%20groups%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Ffarage-accuses-brendan-cox-of-backing-extremist-groups-video&media=>
Farage accuses Brendan Cox of backing extremist groups 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/dec/20/farage-accuses-brendan-cox-of-backing-extremist-groups-video>
Farage said: “Well, of course, he would know more about extremists than me, Mr 
Cox. He backs organisations like Hope Not Hate, who masquerade as being lovely 
and peaceful, but actually pursue violent and undemocratic means.”


This prompted a barrage of criticism from Labour MPs, and a demand from Hope 
Not Hate that Farage withdraw his comments or face legal action. A crowdfunding 
campaign to pay for the casehas received a huge response 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/21/hope-not-hate-reports-huge-response-to-nigel-farage-legal-fund-appeal>
, the group said on Wednesday.

In his article, Lowles says Farage has “lashed out in the most unbelievable 
way” by trying to say Brendan Cox was associated with extremism.

“Even by his standards, Farage’s comments were disgustingly offensive. Many 
were outraged, not just us,” he writes.


It is, Lowles says, “a David v Goliath struggle, where the other side portrays 
itself as the underdog, yet in reality is backed by an online army and 
millionaires in the wings”.

Farage and Trump form part of a resurgent populist right, Lowles argues: 
“That’s why it’s time to draw a line in the sand and why we have demanded a 
retraction and an apology from Nigel Farage. He cannot keep getting away 
unchallenged with his lies any longer.”

Hope Not Hate is an offshoot of Searchlight, a long-established anti-fascist 
magazine. While the bulk of its campaigning has targeted the likes of the 
British National party and the anti-IslamicEnglish Defence League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/english-defence-league>, it also covers areas 
such as Islamist extremism.


How British anti-racist group infiltrated the Ku Klux Klan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/15/ku-klux-klan-hope-not-hate-infiltrate-loyal-white-knights-police-members>
Farage’s animosity against the group dates back to Hope Not Hate’s decision in 
2013 to monitor Ukip’s policies 
<http://www.hopenothate.org.uk/blog/nick/opposing-ukip-we-could-but-should-we-2680>
 and extreme elements attracted to the party, although it has never classified 
Ukip itself as far right.


Lowles says Hope Not Hate began looking into Ukip “as it began adopting a more 
anti-immigrant stance and specifically whipping up scare stories with claims 
that 29 million Bulgarians and Romanians would come to the UK”.

He adds: “Events since have proved we were right to do so.”

Hope Not Hate is split into two parts: a charitable arm 
<http://beta.charitycommission.gov.uk/charity-details/?regid=1013880&subid=0> 
that funds community projects and research, anda company 
<https://beta.companieshouse.gov.uk/company/08188502> that carries out more 
overtly political campaigns. The charitable trust haspreviously received 
government funding 
<https://www.whatdotheyknow.com/request/funding_of_hope_not_hate> to run 
community work in areas where the EDL was active. Money from the Jo Cox 
Foundation will benefit both parts of the organisation.
 