
A beautiful day on the atoll. Water lapping at the beach, ships out on the 
water. Sea birds screeching, a light breeze mussing the palm in the foreground 
of a black-and-white view of the lazy Pacific. Then the bomb goes off.

It is 25 July 1946. “Things happened so fast in the next five seconds that few 
eyewitnesses could afterwards recall the full scope and sequence of the 
phenomena”, wrote the physicistWA Shurcliff 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_Shurcliff>, in the official report of 
Operation Crossroads <https://en.wikipedia.org/?title=Operation_Crossroads>, a 
series of US nuclear bomb tests held less than a year after bombs were dropped 
onHiroshima and Nagasaki 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2010/aug/06/hiroshima-nagasaki-bombs-65-years>
.

And then it happens again, and goes on happening, time after time in Bruce 
Conner’s 1976 film Crossroads 
<http://www.vogue.com/3621677/bruce-conner-restored-crossroads-film/>, recently 
restored in high definition and now the sole exhibit atThomas Dane Gallery 
<http://www.thomasdanegallery.com/>, in London.

We see the explosion from cameras mounted behind lead and concrete shielding 
on a specially constructed tower on the Bikini atoll. We see it from ships and 
from drone planes, and from high-altitude cameras. We see it filmed with 
high-speed cameras, developed by the US Department of Defense, that could shoot 
up to 8,000 frames a second.

The reason observers at the 1946 Baker test 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zCoxmru38Xs> at Bikini atoll had so much 
trouble recalling and describing what they had witnessed, Shurcliff adduced, 
was the inadequacy of language itself. “The explosion phenomena abounded in 
absolutely unprecedented inventions in solid geometry … No adequate vocabulary 
existed,” he wrote. The phrase “inventions in solid geometry” sticks, and 
sounds less like an event, more like a sculpture. How can one adequately review 
an atomic explosion?

Dome. Fillet. Side-jets and bright tracks. Cauliflower cloud, fallout, 
airshock disc, water-shock disc. Base surge, water mound, uprush, aftercloud. 
The words have a chilling poetry. Shurcliff, who had worked on the development 
of the atomic bomb for theManhattan Project 
<http://www.manhattanprojectvoices.org> and went on, in later years, to be a 
vocal critic ofRonald Reagan’s Star Wars programme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2000/jul/28/uselections2000.usa1>, describes 
how these terms were arrived at and agreed upon “after two months of verbal 
groping”, during a conference convened especially to create a terminology. 
Language has its limits. Words fail, and feel almost entirely inadequate when 
faced with such enormity.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fbruce-conner-crossroads-1976-nuclear-test-film-rapture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F15%2F1434384127721%2F80bbf545-e78b-4d10-8a69-426c3b9c0bc3-2060x1546.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Horribly%20compelling%3A%20Bruce%20Conner's%20nuclear%20test%20film%20still%20holds%20us%20in%20rapture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fbruce-conner-crossroads-1976-nuclear-test-film-rapture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Horribly%20compelling%3A%20Bruce%20Conner%27s%20nuclear%20test%20film%20still%20holds%20us%20in%20rapture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fbruce-conner-crossroads-1976-nuclear-test-film-rapture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F15%2F1434384127721%2F80bbf545-e78b-4d10-8a69-426c3b9c0bc3-2060x1546.jpeg>
 The cloud rose eight miles above earth … a scene from Bruce Conner’s film 
Crossroads 
Conner studied Shurcliff’s report as he planned his film. Watching Crossroads 
is still a horribly compelling experience. Conner petitioned for the unreleased 
but declassified footage, some of which had, even just after the explosion, 
been shown in gung-ho government documentaries about the necessity of atomic 
tests. They had great propaganda value. The test was broadcast on radio around 
the world. A kind of awe surrounded the event, which saw the enterprising 
Parisian engineerLouis Réard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2006/jun/10/sttropez.filminspiredtravel.france.culturaltrips>
 give the name of the Marshall Islands atoll to his controversial swimwear 
invention, the bikini, later that same year.

Footage of the explosion was also used at the end of Stanley Kubrick’s 
satirical 1964 movieDoctor Strangelove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/the-h-word/2014/mar/06/sympathy-for-strangelove-kubrick-film-science-history>
, as Vera Lynn sangWe’ll Meet Again 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=15YgdrhrCM8>, which became perhaps the most 
redolent song of Britain at war.

Cauliflower cloud, fallout, aftercloud … the words have a chilling poetry

The ship from which the bomb had been suspended underwater was completely 
atomised. No trace of it was ever found, after what has been described as the 
most photographed event in history. An array of more than 70 ships had been 
positioned in the atoll around the site of the test. Of these, nine of the 
biggest aircraft carriers and submarines, some captured from the Japanese 
forces in the preceding years, sank. Sixty-five others were severely damaged 
and contaminated. Dozens of pigs, sheep, goats, rats and guinea pigs had been 
positioned on vessels to study the effects of radioactivity. The pigs – put 
there because their mass, skin and hair provided an approximate substitute for 
human beings – died instantly.

In many respects, Crossroads is a found film. “All I added were the splices”, 
Conner once remarked. Although we witness the explosion 15 times, from 
different viewpoints and at different speeds (the footage from a high-speed 
camera extends one second of real time to more than three minutes of screen 
time), the pace of Crossroads is almost sedate and elegiac.

Presented in two unequal halves, the film allows us to witness the event both 
as a sudden, wrenching unleashing of power – the association with the male 
orgasm is unavoidable – and as a slow eclipse of the world. Sometimes, we are 
lost in the cloud (just as we are lost for words) and in a sublime 
meteorological event, then we are homing in on huge battleships tossed 
vertically in the upsurge of a great column of 2m tons of water, rising in an 
instant over a mile and a half into the sky. The cloud column rose over eight 
miles above the earth. The scale is hard to grasp.

All this, Conner orchestrates at an almost funereal pace, even though he 
didn’t tinker with the speeds of the footage itself, only looping the opening 
sequence, to prolong the wait for the first explosion. As the film progresses, 
our view becomes more elevated, punctuated by moments where the screen is 
either totally black or totally white. Even these moments of blankness are 
dizzying. An image of a cross in a circle appears: the Crossroads of the title, 
the crosshairs of a telescopic sight, a plus sign, or perhaps even a reference 
to the crucifixion, as one commentator has noted.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fbruce-conner-crossroads-1976-nuclear-test-film-rapture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F15%2F1434385295336%2Fa07b3a76-d059-4444-a1f6-22d20e54a604-2060x1545.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Horribly%20compelling%3A%20Bruce%20Conner's%20nuclear%20test%20film%20still%20holds%20us%20in%20rapture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fbruce-conner-crossroads-1976-nuclear-test-film-rapture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Horribly%20compelling%3A%20Bruce%20Conner%27s%20nuclear%20test%20film%20still%20holds%20us%20in%20rapture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fbruce-conner-crossroads-1976-nuclear-test-film-rapture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F15%2F1434385295336%2Fa07b3a76-d059-4444-a1f6-22d20e54a604-2060x1545.jpeg>
 Viewed from every angle … ships surround the explosion at Bikini atoll. 
Photograph: Bruce Conner 
To begin with, the sound seems to be a live recording – sea birds, a white 
noise akin to the sea, a shock wave and the blast of the explosion itself, 
aeroplane engines. All produced on aMoog synthesizer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/aug/02/moog-synthesisers> by Patrick 
Gleeson 
<http://dailybruin.com/2014/11/18/qa-composer-patrick-gleeson-talks-film-scoring-crossroads-legacy/>
, sound and image are out of sync with the footage itself – and with the 
judders and swerves of the cameras when the shock waves hit them, sometimes 
quite long after the visible explosion itself. Gleeson was originally 
commissioned to collaborate with the composerTerry Riley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2013/jan/28/terry-riley-contemporary-music-guide>
, but the two eventually worked on music for the film independently. Sound and 
image sheer together and apart. Riley’s bubbling, repetitive tape-looped and 
delayed rhythms creep in, and accompany the second part of the film. All we see 
is an oily, flattened sea with a smudged horizon, a ship silhouetted on the 
left of the screen, disappearing and reappearing as a radioactive tidal surge 
overwhelms it, like fog rolling in. I think I see other vague ghost ships 
beyond.

Every time I have watched Crossroads, since first encountering it at the 
Berlin Biennale in 2006 <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2006/mar/28/2>, I 
have seen – and remembered – different things. Repeated watching, compounded by 
memory and mental replay, gives it a cumulative power. You want to watch the 
explosion. You want to watch the front of the shock wave rush across the water, 
and the perfect circle of white that expands behind, overtaking it. The fall of 
the water, the expanding, towering uprush, the fillets, the side jets, the base 
surge and the fallout are compounded in an awful nuclear sublime, from which it 
is hard to drag oneself away. You just want to watch it again.

Conner makes us dwell on the incommensurable. Unavoidably, we somehow collude 
in rapture of the image. He was fascinated by the bomb, using footage from 
Operation Crossroads several times, both in his first filmA Movie 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4FMjBtvsx2o> (1958), and in the Report 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0130976/reference> (1967), another film using 
documentary and news footage about the assassination of John F Kennedy. Conner 
spent most of his career in San Francisco; he argued withAllen Ginsberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/feb/23/allen-ginsberg-howl-poem-film> 
over the efficacy of militant anti-Vietnam War protests (believing such solemn 
events should instead be celebrations, replete with floats and costumes); he 
worked on underground concert light shows, and went on to advise his friend
Dennis Hopper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/jul/12/dennis-hopper-inside-man-photography>
 on the filming ofEasy Rider 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/36278/easy-rider>. He also made early 
pop videos, including with the bandDevo 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W7bfwdzv9BA>. 

Conner, who died in 2008 at the age of 74, was an assemblagist, a sculptor and 
photographer as well as a film-maker, and is only nowreceiving a long-overdue 
reassessment <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_S8Vfv8wApg>. Engaging us despite 
ourselves, Crossroads remains a difficult, unmissable film. You dwell on it, 
and it dwells in you.
 