
'London is growing up!" trumpets a sign in the window of the New London 
Architecture centre <http://www.newlondonarchitecture.org/exhibition.php?id=593>
. Inside, there's a forest of sticks and stumps, blobs and lumps – just some of 
the novelty silhouettes due to appear on the city's skyline over the coming 
years. There are more than 230 such towers in the pipeline,a figure that 
shocked even the city's deputy mayor for business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/mar/29/london-skyline-lack-of-consultation>
, who might be thought to know about such things.

Sprouting over every corner of the city, most are of an architectural quality 
that recalls the outskirts of Dubai or Shenzhen. The overall impression is of 
an unplanned free-for-all, a steroidal frenzy of building tall, with little 
attention to individual design quality, or the cumulative effect that these 
scattered hulks might have on the city.

The Planning Decisions Unit of the Greater London Authority, the body 
responsible for greenlighting these schemes, begs to differ. "It is simply not 
true to say these towers haven't been planned," says director Colin Wilson. 
"They have been very carefully planned. But we prefer to use a 
flexible framework, rather than a rigid masterplan. This liberty is what makes
London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> successful."

The London Plan <http://www.london.gov.uk/thelondonplan/policies/4b-09.jsp>, 
the mayor's rulebook for development across the capital, supports tall 
buildings where they "create attractive landmarks enhancing London's 
character". It states that such developments "should be of the highest design 
quality … attractive to look at and, where appropriate, inspire, excite and 
delight".

So how are these rules shaping up in reality? Here, we give our verdict on 10 
new towers, built and imminent, counting down to the very worst offender …

10. 1 Merchant Square 
<http://www.merchantsquare.co.uk/the-buildings/1-merchant-square/>

Location: Paddington Basin | Floors: 42 | Height: 140m | Architect: Robin 
Partington | Status: approved | Use: residential and hotel
 1 Merchant Square 
Already home to a motley collection of brash waterside blocks, all competing 
for attention with their jazzy cladding, Paddington Basin will soon be joined 
by Westminster's first skyscraper, in the form of this shiny blue cucumber. 
Designed by Robin Partington, architect of the Carbuncle Cup-winning Strata and 
the giant ground-scrapingslug of Park House 
<http://www.bdonline.co.uk/pictures/741x405/5/6/1/1723561_RPA.jpg> on Oxford 
Street, its apartments will apparently represent the "height of luxury living". 
Clad in a "midnight-blue ceramic rainscreen", this plump cousin of the Gherkin 
(in which Partington also had a hand) appears to be bursting out of its corset 
of "white porcelain ribs", which overshoot the penthouse skybar to form a tacky 
tiara on the skyline.

The GLA planners said: "An attractive form and a high-quality finish, and the 
impact of the building would be positive."

9. Canaletto <http://canalettolondon.com/>

Location: City Road | Floors: 31 | Height: 100m | Architect: UN Studio | 
Status: on site | Use: Residential.
 Canaletto 
"Designed by genius", proclaim the billboards on City Road. "An architectural 
masterwork." Behind these slogans rises a concrete lift shaft that will soon 
service some of the most expensive penthouses in London. This is Canaletto, a 
tower designed by Professor Ben van Berkel of Dutch practice UN Studio, and one 
of the most hyped apartment buildings of recent times. With fat silvery frames 
wrapping around groups of floors in a vain attempt to break up the sheer bulk, 
it looks like a stack of hard drives or the back of a computer server – an 
accidental nod to the nearby Silicon Roundabout. The first of an unintended 
cluster, it has opened the doors for a thicket of forthcoming towers by Foster 
and Make, rising to more than half its height again.

The GLA planners said: "The materials used provide a homely feel to the 
building, reflecting its residential use as well as responding positively to 
the surrounding conservation areas."

8. Helix <http://www.essentialliving.uk.com/developments/helix/>

Location: Canary Wharf | Floors: 35/29 | Height: 122/104m | Architect: Make & 
Darling Associates | Status: approved | Use: residential
 Helix 
Standing on top of a drive-through McDonald's like two oversized air ducts 
conjoined by a knotted tangle of wiring, the Helix towers will be a bizarre 
addition to Canary Wharf – a place increasingly choked by plans for silly 
silhouettes, each trying to stand out among the forest of corporate slabs. 
Designed by Make – no strangers to dressing up mindless buildings in novelty 
outfits – the two cylindrical towers will be connected at certain floors by 
sinuous metallic bands, supporting a series of "sky gardens" for a chosen few 
flats. Described by its developer, the real-estate arm of McDonald's, as "an 
intricate landmark project", you can't help feeling they've missed a trick: 
wouldn't a giant pair of golden arches be better?

The GLA planners said: "The images and elevation detail indicate a design that 
is unique and high quality."

7. Imperial West <http://www3.imperial.ac.uk/imperialwest>

Location: White City | Floors: 35 | Height: 141m | Architect: PLP | Status: 
approved | Use: residential
 Terracotta wedge … Imperial West tower Photograph: /PLP Architects 
The lumbering west-London cousin of Richard Rogers' Cheesegrater 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/jun/16/cheesegrater-leadenhall-building-richard-rogers>
, the Imperial West will stand as an angular wedge on the skyline, a terracotta 
Dalek looming above the terraced streets of north Kensington. It is intended to 
be a "gateway" to London for those driving into town along the Westway, and a 
"landmark" for Imperial College's new campus at White City, announcing the 
presence of a "new ecosystem for research and innovation". So will it contain a 
thrilling world of skylabs and experiments in the clouds, scientists liberated 
from their windowless basements? Alas, no. It is another a silo of luxury 
flats, to be sold to fund the rest of the development, over which the tower 
will cast a long shadow. A local campaign group,Imperial Folly 
<http://imperialfolly.org.uk/>, says it "will be remembered for many years for 
destroying the western skyline for all those living in this part of London".

The GLA planners said: "[It will] provide a striking skyline feature and 
distinctive focal point that could contribute to local legibility."

6. Vauxhall Tower <http://www.vauxhalltower.com/>


Location: Vauxhall | Floors: 50 | Height: 181m | Architect: Broadway Malyan | 
Status: built | Use: residential.
 Vauxhall Tower 
Like a cigarette stubbed out by the Thames, the Vauxhall's lonely stump looks 
cast adrift, a piece of Pudong that's lost its way. It was generally agreed to 
be in the wrong place, sprouting slap-bang in the middle of the view from 
Westminster Bridge, and was refused permission. John Prescott, then a deputy PM 
keen to leave his own mark on the skyline, called the scheme in and gave it 
permission in 2005 – against strong warnings from his advisers that it "could 
set a precedent for the indiscriminate scattering of very tall buildings across 
London". How right they were. It has since opened the floodgates for 
second-rate totems that will soon turn this part of the river into mayor Boris 
Johnson's nightmare of "Dubai on Thames 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/apr/13/boris-johnson-proper-debate-london-skyline>
".

The GLA planners said: "The new tower is likely to result in an improvement in 
visual terms … it would be a welcome addition to the riverside and skyline."

5. Stratford Halo <http://www.genesishahomes.org.uk/for-rent/stratford-halo/>


Location: Stratford | Floors: 43 | Height: 133m | Architect: Stock 
Woolstencroft | Status: built | Use: residential.
 Photograph: Martin Godwin for the Guardian 
Like flies to a compost heap, developers swarmed to Stratford in the runup to 
the 2012 Olympics, each determined to build the "gateway to the Games" and cash 
in on the legacy gold-rush. Paying over the odds for small plots, they had to 
go tall to claw back profits. The result is a physical bar chart of inflated 
land values:steroidal towers now march down the high street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/jul/21/london-2012-olympics-architecture-legacy>
, each trying to be more iconic than the next, forming a shouty gauntlet of 
cheap coloured cladding panels and bolt-on balconies. The Stratford Halo, at 43 
storeys, is the biggest and boldest, wrapped with dubious purple pinstripes and 
topped with a jaunty quiff – and hosting a gaudy light show by night.

What the GLA planners said: "It has the potential to contribute towards the 
consolidation of a cluster of tall buildings at Stratford and the enhancement 
of its skyline."

4. Strata <http://www.stratalondon.com/>

Location: Elephant and Castle | Floors: 43 | Height: 147m | Architect: BFLS | 
Status: built | Use: residential.
 Photograph: View Pictures/UIG via Getty Images 
If south London had always felt a bit like Mordor to some, then that 
reputation was firmly cemented by the arrival of its very own Dark Tower in 
2010, topped with no fewer than three Eyes of Sauron in the form of wind 
turbines – which have remained stationary ever since. Variously compared to a 
knuckleduster aggressively punching at the skies, or an electric razor waiting 
to give the clouds a quick trim, the Strata, with its sinisterly sculpted peak, 
has certainly put Elephant and Castle on the map. Dressed in a sporty livery of 
black and white stripes, it was the deserved winner of the Carbuncle Cup for 
the worst building of the year, "for services to greenwash [those three wind 
turbines have never moved], urban impropriety and sheer breakfast-extracting 
ugliness".

What the GLA planners said: "The proposal is welcome, as it will initiate the 
regeneration of Elephant and Castle … the scheme should provide a positive 
addition to the London skyline."

3. Walkie-Talkie

Location: City of London | Floors: 36 | Height: 160m | Architect: Rafael 
Viñoly | Status: Under construction | Use: office
 Photograph: Stuart Forster/REX 
Trumpeted as "the building with more up top", the Walkie-Talkie swells as it 
rises to pack in more office space at the upper levels, where rents can be 
higher, giving it the shape of a bulging pint glass. As a literal diagram of 
developers' greed, it provides the painful proof that form follows not function 
but finance. An aberration of the planning system, the building stands alone 
outside the planned City cluster, like the school bully expelled from the 
classroom, poking its unwelcome bulk into the skyline from almost every 
possible vista. Not content with looming aggressively above its neighbours and 
blocking out their light, the Walkie-Talkie has even scorched them with its own 
death ray –channeling the sun in its concave facade to temperatures capable of 
melting cars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/sep/06/walkie-talkie-architect-predicted-reflection-sun-rays>
.

The GLA planners said: "The quality of the design would make a significant 
contribution to London's architecture and reinforce the distinctiveness that 
other tall schemes have contributed to the City skyline."

2. The Odalisk <http://www.onelansdowneroad.com/>


Location: Croydon | Floors: 55 | Height: 199m | Architect: CZWG | Status: 
approved | Use: residential and hotel
 The Odalisk 
"The days of drab grey buildings are at an end," pronounced Piers Gough when 
he unveiled his design for the Odalisk, a self-consciously whacky totem pole 
for Croydon, planned to house a four-star Intercontinental Hotel and luxury 
serviced apartments within in its lumpen shell. Looking as if it has suffered a 
severe mauling from a Rottweiler, the tower appears to have been ripped to 
pieces and stitched back together in the wrong way, standing as a monstrous 
Frankenstein concoction. A looping bronzed band swoops and swirls up and down 
the building, gouging out great gashes here and there, cutting slippery 
fissures into the facade, before flaring out in a graceless canopy above the 
street.

The GLA planners said: "The projecting and recessing features are strong 
elements that help add depth and character."

1. The Quill <http://www.spparcstudio.com/Project/QUILLLondonBridgeSE1.aspx>

Location: Southwark | Floors: 31 | Height: 109m | Architect: SPARRC | Status: 
approved | Use: student accommodation
 The Quill 
What would a building look like if it had a fight with a gigantic porcupine, 
and the porcupine won? You can get some idea by looking at plans for the Quill, 
a great silver cliff-face of a thing that will sport a broken assortment of 
spines on its top. This ungainly hulk was miraculously granted permission by 
Southwark council's planning committee, who described it as "dynamic" and 
"dramatic", no doubt wooed by the architect's claims that the form was 
"inspired by the literary heritage" of the borough. The spines, you see, are 
supposed to look like the top of a feathered quill pen, of the kind local lad 
Shakespeare might have used. But there the cultural connection ends: this spiny 
monster will house high-end accommodation for 500 students, mostly 
international, who will be able to peek out from their luxury lair through 
mean, arrow-slit windows.

The GLA planners said: "A building with a unique composition, with a striking 
roof form and an architectural appearance of the highest order, consistent with 
the aspirations of the London Plan."
 