
In 2014 the bed overtook the sofa as the most used item of furniture in 
British homes. This shift might be something to do with shrinking living space, 
but it mostly is the outcome of a behavioural change indicated by other 
well-I-never statistics – thatBritons now spend more time looking at screens 
than sleeping <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-28677674> and that 80% of 
smartphone users look at their devices within 15 minutes of waking up.

I receive these nuggets from the trio in charge of the British pavilion at 
this year’s Venice Architecture Biennale,Jack Self, Shumi Bose and Finn Williams
 
<http://design.britishcouncil.org/blog/2015/oct/22/british-council-announces-winning-venice-proposal/>
, who say they want to address Britain’s “anxious relationship to the idea of 
home”. Aged 29, 32 and 33 respectively, and selected through an open call for 
entries by the British Council, they are the youngest ever to receive this 
honour and appear determined to use the stage of the world’s biggest 
architectural exhibition to make an impact.

They have chosen as their theme housing, a subject now so vast, intractable 
and pervasive, at least in the more expensive parts of the country, that it 
dominates mayoral election campaigns and dinner parties, pervades the 
twittersphere, and inhabits the sleeping and waking dreams of those with and 
without homes, politicians, planners, economists, landlords, developers, 
tenants, owners. And, indeed architects, whose job description is about doing 
something or other to do with buildings and might therefore be thought to have 
something to contribute, but who have so far tended to be ineffectual in 
leading the debate.

Self, Bose and Williams are not architects in the sense that they have 
designed a number of completed buildings. None of them, indeed, are fully 
recognised by the Architects Registration Board, the official body for such 
matters, although ARB begrudgingly accepts thatSelf 
<http://www.jackself.com/bio>’s qualification, obtained in Australia, has some 
validity. They have all studied architecture, but they have different ways of 
putting that training into practice.Bose 
<http://www.arts.ac.uk/csm/people/teaching-staff/spatial-practices/shumi-bose/> 
teaches, writes, edits and curates. Self also writes, has worked for the 
esteemed practice of Jean Nouvel and now has his own practice that is somewhat 
conceptual in its output.Williams 
<http://commonoffice.co.uk/index.php?/about/people/> has been working in the 
planning departments of local authorities for eight years, first in the London 
borough of Croydon and then for the Greater London Authority.

A square bed is proposed to allow for the increasing range of activities we do 
on mattresses

The three combine speculation with (in Williams’s case) decisions that have 
definite effects on the built environment. They are following different career 
paths to some in previous generations, who might have advertised their skills 
(in the 60s) by building a nice little house for themselves or (in the 80s) a 
natty flat conversion. As representatives of Generation Rent, these options are 
not open to them.

Perhaps for these reasons Self, Bose and Williams avoid the tracks along which 
the arguments on housing usually run – build on green belt or brownfield land? 
How much “affordable” housing can be squeezed out of developers? What does 
“affordable” mean? They are not pretending to have all the answers – indeed 
they say that “housing issues are at least as old as capitalism” and that there 
is no ultimate solution to them. Instead, they are offering approaches that 
take into account not so much prices and numbers as the changes in the way 
people inhabit their homes.

This is why they like the data on furniture and screentime. Traditional ways 
of occupying a home, with particular rooms dedicated to particular functions, 
are they say “collapsing” under the pressures of both new technology and 
insecure tenancies (again, more in some places than others), which mean that 
“more and more people are living month by month in insane lets”. Why, then, 
they ask, should homes be compartmentalised in a way that is fundamentally 
Victorian?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Fhousing-curators-british-pavilion-venice-architecture-biennale-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9108e60a387f38450e100116c1f1aa020992db26%2F0_0_3411_4547%2F3411.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Housing%3A%20rethinking%20inside%20the%20box%E2%80%A6&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Fhousing-curators-british-pavilion-venice-architecture-biennale-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Housing%3A%20rethinking%20inside%20the%20box%E2%80%A6&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Fhousing-curators-british-pavilion-venice-architecture-biennale-%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9108e60a387f38450e100116c1f1aa020992db26%2F0_0_3411_4547%2F3411.jpg>
 Williams, Bose and Self outside Futuro House. Photograph: Suki Dhanda for the 
Observer 
In Venice, under the title Home Economics, they will communicate their 
thinking in a series of rooms that will be structured around the theme of time 
more than space, “the first exhibition on the architecture of the home to do 
so, as far as we know”. There will be sections on the ways we inhabit homes 
over periods of hours, days, months, years and decades. They are doing so not 
alone but in partnership with artists, designers and other architects. There 
will be an audio guide by the writer Will Self, uncle of Jack. They have also 
taken advice from (for example) RBS andPegasus Life 
<http://www.pegasuslife.co.uk/>, which develops and runs high-end “retirement 
living”. They want their speculation to connect back to financial and other 
realities.

Under “Hours”, they will propose a communal living room, where, in the 
interests of saving time and space, flat dwellers share as much as possible – 
tools, vacuum cleaners, even clothes, which are kept in a transparent communal 
wardrobe. The hope is to make sharing “a luxury, not a compromise”. “Decades”, 
by the London/Oslo practiceHesselbrand <http://www.hesselbrand.com/>, will try 
to address the tendency towards “under-occupancy among the elderly and 
over-occupancy among young”, whereby old people are tending to live in homes 
bigger than they now need, while “living rooms and even bathrooms become 
bedrooms”.

Here, the proposal is for rooms that have qualities rather than designated 
functions such as bedroom, bathroom and kitchen; that are to varying degrees 
“light and dark, open and closed, private and public, wet and dry, soft and 
hard”. The notion is that such spaces can adapt to people’s changing needs and 
desires through their lifetimes; as part of the same concept, communities are 
imagined where residents volunteer to mind children or help the old.

The hope is for exchange between generations. A square bed is proposed, 2m x 
2m, to allow for the increasing range of activities we do on mattresses, and 
which “doesn’t dictate which way you should sleep, or even how many people can 
rest here together”. It “sounds like a Swedish orgy scenario”, says Self, “but 
it is a serious attempt to question the structure of families”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Fhousing-curators-british-pavilion-venice-architecture-biennale-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F21837fa335d16a9eba93694937ccd546a49fe73a%2F0_0_1241_1754%2F1241.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Housing%3A%20rethinking%20inside%20the%20box%E2%80%A6&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Fhousing-curators-british-pavilion-venice-architecture-biennale-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Housing%3A%20rethinking%20inside%20the%20box%E2%80%A6&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Fhousing-curators-british-pavilion-venice-architecture-biennale-%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F21837fa335d16a9eba93694937ccd546a49fe73a%2F0_0_1241_1754%2F1241.jpg>
 Artwork by OK-RM and Matthieu Lavanchy from the Home Economics exhibition. 
If some of this sounds dreamy and theoretical, at least one idea has some 
prospect of becoming reality, as a London borough is interested in exploring 
it. “Years”, developed with the architectJulia King <http://www.julia-king.com/>
 and the community buildersNaked House <http://nakedhouse.org/>, imagines a 
“shell” stripped of all the fixtures and fittings (“not even a kitchen sink”) 
with which developers make a chunk of their profits. They have worked out a way 
to lock resale price of the home into the value of the shell only, whatever 
might be added to it. The idea is both to lower the price and to liberate 
interior works from concerns about resale value. Whatever you do to the home is 
because it suits you, not because it puts the price up.

Self, Bose and Williams represent one version of the future of British 
architecture. They are intelligent, articulate, political, keen to contribute 
to society, a bit bolshy. They do not view their trade as the creation of 
magical individual buildings by famous and singular magicians, but as 
collaborative and wide-ranging. “Architecture is the most powerful design 
method that exists,” says Self, “and as soon as you apply it you can get 
absolutely incredible results.”

Architecture <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture>, for 
them, includes the conception of mortgages that enable one kind of a home 
rather than another. Williams regards his time spent in municipal offices, in 
which he does not directly design buildings, as architecture. At the same time 
they stress the importance of other kinds of expertise, such as those of their 
collaborators and advisers in Venice: “Architects shouldn’t design everything 
but they should be involved in everything.”

We are holding this conversation in an example of the Futuro House 
<http://www.futurohouse.co.uk/>, a UFO-like structure conceived in the 1960s by 
the Finnish architect Matti Suuronen, restored by the artist Craig Barnes, and 
currently standing on the roof of Central Saint Martins college of art and 
design in London. It’s engaging but also cautionary in that only around 60 now 
exist, an example of architects’ penchant for imagining futures that never 
arrive. Their mistake is usually to express themselves through fixed forms, a 
fate that might also befall some of the ingenious constructions in the British 
pavilion. Certainly no one expects them all to become reality. But there is 
thinking and imagination there more flexible than Suuronen’s that could 
contribute to the future ways of living on this crowded island.
 