
Five housing executives and a professor of economics and housing policy have 
been awarded medals in theNew Year honours list 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/new-year-honours-list>. 

Bob Green, chief executive officer of Stonewall Housing 
<http://www.stonewallhousing.org/insights.html> services, has been awarded an 
OBE for services to LGBT communities.

Why the UK housing market is brutal if you're young, LGBT and homeless
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/mar/22/brutal-housing-market-young-lgbt-homeless>
Keith Loraine, former chief executive of Isos Housing 
<https://www.isoshousing.co.uk>, receives an OBE for services to housing and 
the community in north-east England. Loraine worked at the organisation for 24 
years, and was chief executive for a decade.

Thomas Miskell, group chair of Accent Group <http://www.accentgroup.org> and 
Northern Housing Consortium <http://www.northern-consortium.org.uk>, has been 
awarded an OBE for services to housing associations in northern England. Until 
2014, Miskell was chief executive ofTogether Housing Group 
<http://www.togetherhousing.co.uk>.

Ian Munro, group chief executive of New Charter Group 
<http://www.newcharter.co.uk>, receives an OBE for services to housing. Munro 
has held this position for 16 years, and is a former director of housing at 
Tamesside council, starting his career as a housing inspector in Kensington and 
Chelsea.

After retiring earlier this year, Professor Michael Williams has been awarded 
an OBE for services to health, housing and homeless people in Wales. As well as 
35 years as chief executive of Grwp Gwalia Cyf, Williams has worked extensively 
in health in Wales, and is a visiting professor of social housing and care at 
the University of South Wales.

Paul Cheshire, professor of economic geography at the London School of 
Economics <http://www.lse.ac.uk/home.aspx>, receives a CBE for services to 
economics and housing. Cheshire has written extensively on planning issues, 
land use and regulation, and mixed communities.

Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/housing/> for your free Guardian 
Housing network newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to you on the 
last Friday of the month. Follow us:@GuardianHousing 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>
 