
In the late spring of 2013, Kyrre Gørvell-Dahll was a 22-year-old student of 
business and finance at Edinburgh University. He was born in Bergen, Norway, 
where he studied piano for 10 years and started making electronic music, 
inspired by the electronic dance music (EDM) giant Avicii. In Edinburgh, armed 
with a MacBook, Logic software and a Midi keyboard, he experimented with 
different sounds and posted the results on SoundCloud and Facebook under the 
name Kygo. He hit the jackpot with his sweet-natured, mid-temporemix of 
Passenger’s ballad Let Her Go <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FpQY90M-hww>, 
debuting the distinctive twinkling keyboard sound that has decorated many of 
his tracks since.

“I called it Sexy because I felt like it was a sexy sound,” Kygo says with a 
bashful laugh. “When I saw everybody loved it I thought, ‘OK, I’m going to 
continue with this style.’ I think people were looking for something new in the 
EDM scene and found it in my music.” He did not finish his business course.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9Sc-ir2UwGU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9Sc-ir2UwGU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9Sc-ir2UwGU&media=>
 Kygo’s track Firestone charted in the top 10 across Europe. 
The style Kygo developed in his Edinburgh bedroom, known as tropical house, 
has become absurdly, record-breakingly popular. Kygo himself has gone from 
unlicensed remixes ofJames Blake <https://www.theguardian.com/music/james-blake>
 andMarvin Gaye 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/mar/26/marvin-gaye-rocks-back-pages-disc-music-echo-1971>
 to commissions from megastars such asColdplay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/coldplay> and Ed Sheeran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/ed-sheeran>. Last December, he exceeded 1bn 
streams on Spotify faster than any artist before him, reaching that milestone 
in only one year. Simultaneously, tropical house has infiltrated pop at the 
highest level, via German producerFelix Jaehn’s blockbuster remix of OMI’s 
Cheerleader <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jGflUbPQfW8> and Justin Bieber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/justin-bieber>’s No 1 hits What Do You Mean? 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DK_0jXPuIr0> and Sorry 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fRh_vgS2dFE>. Its hallmarks are a relaxed 
tempo (around 100 beats a minute, compared with EDM’s standard 120), wistful 
good vibes and sounds that signify sunny climes: pan pipes, marimbas, steel 
drums. It’s the tuneful, laidback flipside to mainstream EDM’s blaring 
hyperactivity.

Unusually for a dance genre, tropical house has no roots in clubland and 
thrives where it was born – on SoundCloud, Spotify and YouTube. Without any 
underground origins, it has never really been cool, which is part of its mass 
appeal. The sound is benign, inviting, non-judgmental and effortlessly 
international. There’s no risk of enjoying it in the wrong way, or discovering 
it too late, because its biggest star is also its originator – and he’s not 
very cool, either. If Coldplay – Kygo’s favourite band – were a dance genre, 
they would be the frictionless, borderless sound of tropical house. “It’s not a 
sound you would associate with any particular place,” says Philip Sherburne, 
who writes about dance music for titles such as Pitchfork. “It’s everywhere and 
nowhere at once. It’s from the ether.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fhow-dreamy-escapism-tropical-house-took-dance-music-by-storm%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e4d784bb4c70d9abc22d6e75f7e56d71f60c7c0%2F0_586_9000_5401%2F9000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20tropical%20house%E2%80%99s%20dreamy%20escapism%20took%20dance%20music%20by%20storm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fhow-dreamy-escapism-tropical-house-took-dance-music-by-storm%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20tropical%20house%E2%80%99s%20dreamy%20escapism%20took%20dance%20music%20by%20storm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fhow-dreamy-escapism-tropical-house-took-dance-music-by-storm%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e4d784bb4c70d9abc22d6e75f7e56d71f60c7c0%2F0_586_9000_5401%2F9000.jpg>
 Robin Schulz performing in Milan in February. Photograph: Francesco 
Prandoni/Redferns 
Down the line from New York, where he’s on tour, Kygo is straightforward, 
optimistic and relaxed – much like his music. “He is the nicest, most loyal and 
humble guy,” says his manager, Myles Shear. “I don’t know if he thought any of 
this would really happen.” With typical modesty, Kygo says he was “in the right 
place at the right time”.

In 2013, EDM’s relentless peak-time rush was beginning to wear thin; several 
European dance hits of the time reflected a growing appetite for melodic house 
or deep house (no relation, confusingly, to the hip, jazz-influenced deep house 
of the late-80s and 90s.) Tracks likeSonnentanz by Austrian duo Klangkarussell 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=79YDgv_zWA4>, Jubel by French producer 
Klingande <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b6vSf0cA9qY>, and German DJ Robin 
Schulz’s remix of Waves <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6MH9qWemtPo> by Mr 
Probz favoured hazy synths, acoustic guitars and saxophone riffs, while the 
videos majored in fresh-faced millennials frolicking in the sun, leading Mixmag 
to dub it “Instagram house” in August 2014. Alastair Webber of Island Records 
told Mixmag it “soundtracks a European summer perfectly”.

Many of the producers, like Kygo, were amiable young Europeans who started out 
by posting DIY remixes of mellow pop songs on SoundCloud. It was through the 
site that Shear, only 19 at the time, contacted Australian DJ Thomas Jack in 
2013 and invited him to come to Miami. Hanging out in Shear’s college 
apartment, the two new roommates discussed how to capture the music’s 
“Caribbean cool vibe”; Jack, Shear’s first client, came up with “tropical 
house” as the title of his free online mix series, which has since featured 
sets by Kygo, Jaehn, Schulz, Klingande and Bakermat.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dz9porfO8C_Q&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dz9porfO8C_Q>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dz9porfO8C_Q&media=>
 Stay, the fifth single for Kygo’s debut album, Cloud Nine. 
Shortly afterwards, Shear heard Kygo’s Passenger remix and got in touch. “When 
I heard his music I felt, ‘No one’s not going to like this!’” Shear says. “Kygo 
is bringing music back into dance music.” He negotiated Kygo’s deals with Ultra 
– the biggest US dance label – and Sony, and secured him a main-stage sunset 
slot at Georgia’s TomorrowWorld festival in 2014 when Avicii fell ill. “I 
didn’t know how people would react, because you can’t jump up and down, but 
when I played that show it was crazy,” Kygo says. “I think people appreciated a 
little break between the hard-hitting bangers.”

As a form of house minted by affluent Europeans rather than inner-city 
Americans, tropical house’s dreamy escapism speaks to a lifestyle that’s 
idyllic but affordable, if only for a fortnight in the summer. It evokes a 
vague but potent feeling of nostalgia for the recent past, the way you might 
look back on your Instagram shots of a blissful summer holiday in October.
Vice’s Clive Martin wrote last year 
<https://www.vice.com/en_uk/read/how-kygo-became-the-king-of-instagram-house-clive-martin-724>
 that it suggested “a time and place cobbled together from Qantas adverts, 
episodes of Made in Chelsea, Boden catalogues, TripAdvisor reviews [and] other 
people’s gap-year photos”. On YouTube,tropical house tracks are still 
invariably illustrated with beaches, sunsets and tanned girls in sunglasses and 
bikinis <https://www.youtube.com/results?search_query=tropical+house>. It’s the 
music of happy times, rather than the hedonism of all-night clubs (“I actually 
haven’t even seen that much drugs,” Kygo told Billboard recently. “I feel like 
red wine gets you in that chill vibe”).

“It fits in with the Tumblr/Instagram aspirational aesthetic,” says Sherburne. 
“You see good-looking people in bathing suits sipping mojitos in nice places 
and you wish your life was more like that. I was watching a Thomas Jack 
interview, and the interviewer asked him why he’s such a happy person. He said, 
‘Why be sad?’ That’s his whole philosophy of life, and he makes music that goes 
along with that.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fhow-dreamy-escapism-tropical-house-took-dance-music-by-storm%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec3603f357f78a643fd0b3765a71f28caa600dfb%2F0_0_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20tropical%20house%E2%80%99s%20dreamy%20escapism%20took%20dance%20music%20by%20storm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fhow-dreamy-escapism-tropical-house-took-dance-music-by-storm%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20tropical%20house%E2%80%99s%20dreamy%20escapism%20took%20dance%20music%20by%20storm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fhow-dreamy-escapism-tropical-house-took-dance-music-by-storm%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec3603f357f78a643fd0b3765a71f28caa600dfb%2F0_0_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Tobias Rieser (left) and Adrian Held of Klangkarussell. Photograph: Astrid 
Stawiarz/Getty Images 
Kygo, who is usually photographed smiling and wearing his baseball cap 
backwards, is the perfect anti-frontman for this self-effacing, 
audience-friendly sound. “Just bring up good memories,” he says, “that’s what 
I’m trying to do.”

Tropical house’s barriers to entry are incredibly low. If you like pretty 
melodies and sunshine, walk right in. You can dance to it, but you can also 
slot it into a yoga playlist. Its popularity has been helped by shifts in the 
EDM landscape, such as the rise of dance music as a force at festivals, where 
the notion of beautiful, happy, young people relaxing in the sun fits perfectly 
with tropical house’s self-definition – “The image in my head was people at a 
summer festival, sitting down in the grass having a beer,” says Kygo, who will 
have his own festival, Cloud Nine, in Norway later this year – and the waning 
dominance of the musclebound “EDM bro”. Kygo’s audiences feature roughly as 
many women as men. “His music is something anyone can relate to,” Shear says. 
“He is music. This is the next big thing. This is a legend.” He’s certainly 
sufficiently big business that last month he wasfeatured on the cover of 
Billboard 
<http://www.billboard.com/articles/news/cover-story/6882495/billboard-cover-kygo-rise-fame-dance>
, the surefire sign of a cash cow in the US music market.

Tropical house’s momentum has been so unstoppable that Sony was keen for Kygo 
to mark his territory with a few actual hits, starting with 2014’s Firestone, 
before anyone else adopted his sound, but Kygo and Shear both consider Bieber’s 
take on the sound the sincerest form of flattery. “It’s awesome,” says Shear. 
“It means we’re creating a movement.”
 Thomas Jack has said he no longer wants to put out tropical house music. 
Photograph: Miikka Skaffari/Getty Images 
Kygo’s forthcoming debut album, Cloud Nine, features guests such as Tom Odell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/mar/24/tom-odell-broken-hearts-songs> 
andLabrinth <https://www.theguardian.com/music/labrinth>, and – Kygo promises – 
moves beyond tropical house. Adam Granite of Sony thinks he has the same pop 
potential as Avicii orCalvin Harris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/calvin-harris>. “Kygo has an incredible 
sense of melody, and he has been very smart to work with great topline writers 
[the people who write the main melody – the topline – of a song]. We view him 
very much as a pop artist. We’re looking forward to a career that will 
hopefully extend well beyond an of-the-moment genre description.”

As for tropical house, it remains to be seen where a sound with hordes of 
imitators but no experimental fringe can go from here. Unlike its eclectic 
precursors, Balearic and chillout, it lacks an eccentric hinterland.Jack is 
already restless, telling Noisey last year 
<http://noisey.vice.com/blog/thomas-jack-tropical-house-interview-2015>: “I 
don’t even wanna do it any more.”

“There’s a big marketplace for light, agreeable electronic pop, and I’m sure 
there will be another tag put on that soon,” says Sherburne. “I don’t see the 
tropical thing sticking around for that much longer. It’s the Xanax of light 
electronic pop. I don’t think there’s any range of emotion at all. It’s 
interesting that it takes Justin Bieber to inject some danger into this genre.”

Kygo, at least, is “super happy” with his success so far, although he’s most 
comfortable back home in Bergen, far from the crowds and the industry buzz. 
“When I’m on the road and it’s super stressful, it definitely affects my 
music,” he says. “When I’m hanging out with my friends and my girlfriend and 
things are good in my life, then it’s better.”

Why be sad?
 