
Rua Padre Anchieta, as one of the main thoroughfares in Curitiba, Brazil, is a 
logical focal point for the city’s bus network. But whereas bus stops in many 
other cities consist of little more thana sign and perhaps a bench 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/sep/12/crowdsourcing-better-bus-stops-in-brazil>
, the ones on Rua Padre Anchieta are a bit different. In the middle of the 
street sit two tube-shaped stations, raised from ground level and protected 
from the elements, that open on to two-way express lanes. These lanes are 
reserved for long orange buses, which zip past slower car traffic and quickly 
shuttle passengers on and off at the stations on outward-folding ramps. 
Stations like this now exist throughout the city and metropolitan area.


Though difficult to imagine, these distinctive stations that are now the 
symbol of the city were originally a cost-cutting measure. Implemented as a 
practical way for the city to create faster mass transit without breaking the 
bank, they would go on to revolutionise transport, not just in Curitiba but in 
cities around the world.

For much of its existence, Curitiba was a sleepy town eclipsed by São Paulo, 
its much larger neighbour to the north-east. But by 1960, the city’s population 
was beginning to grow significantly and within 20 years it had surged from 
120,000 people to 361,000. Planners began wondering how to cope with this 
growth, and initially, there were plans to make the city more like Brasilia, 
the nation’s newly built capital. Avenues were to be widened and the city 
centre was to be adapted so that cars could become the primary mode of 
transport.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F26%2Fcuritiba-brazil-brt-transport-revolution-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F22%2F1432311617933%2Fde1c4d79-5844-42ed-b043-f0c6f3b0911a-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Curitiba's%20BRT%20stations%20sparked%20a%20transport%20revolution%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2043&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F26%2Fcuritiba-brazil-brt-transport-revolution-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Curitiba%27s%20BRT%20stations%20sparked%20a%20transport%20revolution%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2043&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F26%2Fcuritiba-brazil-brt-transport-revolution-history-cities-50-buildings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F22%2F1432311617933%2Fde1c4d79-5844-42ed-b043-f0c6f3b0911a-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Jaime Lerner gave the stations a distinctive look by placing them in 
futuristic glass tubes. Photograph: Sharifulin Valery/ITAR-TASS Photo/Corbis 
However, these plans would be cut short when Curitiban architect Jaime Lerner, 
then in his early thirties, took office as mayor in 1971. Under the 
dictatorship rulingBrazil <https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil> in the 
late 1960s, the local governor selected Lerner as mayor, confident that the 
young architect wouldn’t challenge his political order.


Lerner immediately began to shake things up. His vision for Curitiba turned 
the conventional urban planning at play in Brasilia on its head. Instead of 
widening avenues, he created a pedestrian mall in the city centre. And rather 
than turning frequently floodingarroyos into concrete drainage canals, he 
dammed the small streams to create parks, which would close during floods. But 
his most memorable contribution came in his ideas for the city’s bus network.

Realising the importance of mass transit, planners called for the creation of 
subway lines, as well as widened streets for cars – but construction would be 
costly and could take decades to complete.

Instead, Lerner saw an opportunity in the one form of transport that many 
considered a lost cause: the bus. His idea was to devise a system that gave 
buses as many of the functional advantages of urban train systems as possible. 
He proposed to integrate dedicated bus lanes along the city’s main arteries, 
with stations placed on medians along the routes. This would allow buses to run 
at speeds comparable to light rail, while dramatically reducing the cost.

A savvy deal-maker, Lerner made a bargain with private bus operators to pay 
for the creation of the new infrastructure, while they would provide the 
vehicles in exchange. With this trade-off in place, the first rapid bus lanes 
of Curitiba ended up costing 50 times less than rail.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F26%2Fcuritiba-brazil-brt-transport-revolution-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F22%2F1432311522051%2Fc61570c7-95c0-40de-b5b6-b84485040b26-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Curitiba's%20BRT%20stations%20sparked%20a%20transport%20revolution%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2043&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F26%2Fcuritiba-brazil-brt-transport-revolution-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Curitiba%27s%20BRT%20stations%20sparked%20a%20transport%20revolution%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2043&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F26%2Fcuritiba-brazil-brt-transport-revolution-history-cities-50-buildings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F22%2F1432311522051%2Fc61570c7-95c0-40de-b5b6-b84485040b26-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Curitiba’s population has now swelled to over 1.8 million people – more than 
four times what it was when the BRT system first opened. Photograph: Getty 
Images/Flickr RF/EduardoPA 
Though the system wasn’t an instant success after the opening of the first 
line in 1974, it gradually worked its way into the livelihoods of residents. In 
1979, Lerner created the Rede Integrada de Transporte (IntegratedTransport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> Network) to better manage the system 
and, as new routes were added, it began to show its full potential. By 1993, it 
was carrying 1.5 million passengers a day.

But high ridership created a problem. Buses in the system still used 
conventional boarding systems, where passengers entered through the front of 
the bus and paid fares on board. Lerner, who was back in office for his third 
term as mayor, came up with an elegant solution.

He called for a revamped station design that enabled faster boarding through 
multiple doors, and fares would be exchanged before entering the station – 
similar to subway or light-rail systems. Offboard payment would also allow for 
the creation of transfer stations, meaning one fare would cover the entire 
system. To top it off, Lerner gave the stations a distinctive look by placing 
them in futuristic glass tubes. These new “tube stations” debuted in October 
1991 as part of the first Ligeirinho express line. Today there are 357 tube 
stations throughout the city.

With this important addition, the city’s system became the world’s first bus 
rapid transit (BRT) network 
<https://www.itdp.org/library/standards-and-guides/the-bus-rapid-transit-standard/>
. “Curitiba was the first to include the essential elements necessary for a BRT 
system to function effectively,” says Andrés Fingeret, director of the 
Institute for Transportation and Development Policy in Buenos Aires.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F26%2Fcuritiba-brazil-brt-transport-revolution-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F22%2F1432311764140%2F4aaeed22-5e9c-4046-81fb-912dcd3b8771-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Curitiba's%20BRT%20stations%20sparked%20a%20transport%20revolution%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2043&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F26%2Fcuritiba-brazil-brt-transport-revolution-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Curitiba%27s%20BRT%20stations%20sparked%20a%20transport%20revolution%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2043&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F26%2Fcuritiba-brazil-brt-transport-revolution-history-cities-50-buildings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F22%2F1432311764140%2F4aaeed22-5e9c-4046-81fb-912dcd3b8771-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Despite the BRT’s success, the city has made initial plans for the creation of 
a subway system Photograph: Weng Xinyang/Xinhua 
The success of Curitiba’s BRT, which had mostly gone unnoticed elsewhere, 
began to attract attention from other cities in Latin America. BRT would be 
soon be given the chance to prove itself on a much larger scale in Bogotá, 
Colombia, a city of 8 million people. There, mayor Enrique Peñalosa seized on 
the concept as a way to solve the crippling traffic problems of his city. After 
taking office in 1998 he borrowed and added to many of the system’s concepts to 
build a viable BRT network, the Transmilenio. The stations, which feature many 
of the key functional elements of Curitiba’s, contributed to its success.

From there, BRT’s success continued to grow, spreading as far as the United 
States, South Africa and China. However, Latin America continues to have a 
special relationship with BRT, where the systems carrymore people than in any 
other region in the world <http://brtdata.org/>. “Due to the similar language 
and cultural context, it was easier for the success of BRT in Curitiba to be 
replicated elsewhere in Latin America,” says Fingeret.

But as BRT took off internationally, it began to face problems back in 
Curitiba. Though ridership remained among the highest in the world for BRT, a 
2012 article in CityLab reported that it wasdeclining with respect to previous 
years 
<http://www.citylab.com/commute/2012/06/has-south-americas-most-sustainable-city-lost-its-edge/2195/>
, while car usage climbed. Curitiba newspaper Gazeta do Povo has noted that the 
stations did a poor job protecting passengers from extreme temperatures, and in 
some cases were inefficient at keeping out rainwater.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F26%2Fcuritiba-brazil-brt-transport-revolution-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F22%2F1432311872871%2F001cbf19-baf2-4151-8eda-6ac1d479114c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Curitiba's%20BRT%20stations%20sparked%20a%20transport%20revolution%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2043&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F26%2Fcuritiba-brazil-brt-transport-revolution-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Curitiba%27s%20BRT%20stations%20sparked%20a%20transport%20revolution%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2043&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F26%2Fcuritiba-brazil-brt-transport-revolution-history-cities-50-buildings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F22%2F1432311872871%2F001cbf19-baf2-4151-8eda-6ac1d479114c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The revamped station design enabled faster boarding through multiple doors, 
and fares are exchanged before entering the station. Photograph: Weng 
Xinyang/Xinhua Press/Corbis 
In addition, Curitiba’s population has now swelled to over 1.8 million people 
– more than four times what it was when the BRT system first opened. Mobility 
remains an issue in the city and, despite BRT’s success, the city has made 
initial plans for the creation of a subway system – a form of transport Lerner 
called “a thing of the past” and did his best to avoid.


One other potential solution now being considered in Curitiba is the bicycle. 
Unlike other cities known for sustainability, Curitiba is only recently 
beginning to take cycling seriously. After two decades of hardly any new plans 
for cycling, a2012 bicycle masterplan 
<http://curitibainenglish.com.br/government/urban-mobility/curitiba-to-have-400km-of-bike-lanes/>
 called for the creation of 400km of new lanes. 


Fortunately, the bus system may be an asset toward these efforts. “The BRT 
system and cycling can and should work together to provide better mobility 
options for the city,” says Alexandre Costa Nascimento, editor of the Curitiba 
cycling blogIr e Vir de Bike <http://irevirdebike.com.br/>. Though critical of 
the implementation of the city’s current bike masterplan, he notes: “Planners 
should consider integration programmes such as bike racks, bike parking and 
fare incentives.”

Despite these lingering issues, BRT in Curitiba has become a cultural 
touchstone, the city’s answer to the freewheeling carnival spirit of Rio and 
the fast-paced, business-dominated lifestyle in São Paulo. The city’s ministry 
of culture has set up theTuboteca 
<http://www.fundacaoculturaldecuritiba.com.br/literatura/programas/tuboteca>, a 
book exchange programme, in the city’s bus stations. And, as if to remove any 
doubt as to their status as this city’s symbol, Curitiba’s airport gift shop is 
built in the shape of a life-size BRT station.
 