



‘Introduce tax incentives for companies to relocate, rebalance the economy’

We need tax incentives for companies to move jobs away from London. Why are 
people commuting from Reading or Maidenhead or Brighton, large places in 
themselves which ought to have a flourishing jobs market and lively economy, in 
the first place? (FFC800 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13393041>)

The core problem is our London-centric economy. London creates most of the 
jobs in this country which brings more and more people to the south-east, 
putting pressure on public transport, housing and other public services. In 
northern cities like Sheffield there are rows and rows of unoccupied houses. 
What’s needed is a rebalancing of the economy – job creation in the north and 
elsewhere. However, this requires investment in public transport, better 
connections etc – otherwise businesses aren’t going to consider Manchester or 
Birmingham over London. Build it and they will come. (TrappedLBW 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15826354>)

We need to stop encouraging development in London. Stop investing in transport 
and infrastructure and start developing out provincial cities: Bristol, 
Birmingham, Liverpool, Newcastle, Sheffield. Not every business has to be in 
London to be a success. If one-fifth of the businesses in London moved out to 
other cities, where they would have cheaper running costs, for example lower 
rent, and are potentially able to pay workers less (as house prices etc would 
be lower) then it would give the capital breathing space. It would reduce the 
demand on all infrastructure, transport included, and crucially, it would allow 
those working in London on a lower wage the opportunity to continue living 
there without being priced out of the housing market. It would also improve the 
economies of the provincial cities, providing employment opportunities in these 
smaller places. (notlobdivad <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12387322>)

‘Build better transport infrastructure in other UK cities’

I truly believe that better local transport links will not only regenerate 
some dying regional towns but will also have the added benefit of alleviating 
some pressure on the capital. (Sidilino 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2484248>)

‘Move Parliament out the capital’

Yet another good reason why Parliament should be moved to Liverpool or 
Newcastle. That will drag a substantial number of jobs away from the south-east 
of England, freeing up housing, transport, health and education infrastructure. 
We don’t need London to be our legislative and financial capital. (Liesandstats 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2586945>)

‘We relocated and we’re far happier’

We relocated our business, with a staff of 35, to Plymouth. It was a 
collective decision, to avoid the daily commute. All 35 (and families) made the 
move; we have doubled in size since the move three years ago; sick leave is 
negligible, absenteeism is zero; office life is calmer and we’re a far happier 
bunch. An unexpected bonus, 30 of the original 35 cycle, run or walk to work – 
so we’re healthier and fitter. (Pinotage 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12684951>)

‘Build affordable housing in London’

I think what’s needed here is higher-density affordable housing made of 
low-rise blocks in central London. The sorts of things housing associations and 
councils used to be able to build. (nicmason 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3295121>)

‘Encourage working from home’

The level of commuting by people who go to an office to sit all day at a 
computer is sheer idiocy. Work from home! Yes, I know that the main obstacle is 
British management, the second worst in Europe after Italy, but to allow even 
one out of 10 people to work from home three days a week would be an incredible 
boon. Theseare the days of the internet, you know. (Milton 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2412184>)

A quick win, in terms of easing overcrowding, would be for more employers to 
stop being so wedded to 20th-century working practices. I managed a team of 12 
that could have easily worked from home, as it was all computer-based, 
autonomous work. I was very keen to encourage this, but was stymied by senior 
management who felt the team needed to be “present in the office”. Too many 
bosses still equate visibility with productivity. (Checkpoint1000 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1718224>)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fhow-to-solve-the-hell-of-commuting-to-london-readers-share-their-thoughts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95395e7a46996c09819e49bd8ae8c63943a096bf%2F0_3_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20solve%20the%20hell%20of%20commuting%20to%20London%3F%20Readers%20share%20their%20thoughts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fhow-to-solve-the-hell-of-commuting-to-london-readers-share-their-thoughts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20solve%20the%20hell%20of%20commuting%20to%20London%3F%20Readers%20share%20their%20thoughts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fhow-to-solve-the-hell-of-commuting-to-london-readers-share-their-thoughts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95395e7a46996c09819e49bd8ae8c63943a096bf%2F0_3_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
 Attempting to board the train at Hornsey station. Photograph: 
ravishlondon/GuardianWitness 
‘Look to Paris’

Greater Paris has a population just shy of 12 million. Its transport is under 
pressure too but nothing as bad as London. The reason is clear. In London they 
are talking of Crossrail 2 but there are already six RER lines in Paris and the 
Metropole Grand Paris calls for a massive expansion, including circular lines, 
as part of an overall urban plan to increase development of local 
transit-oriented developments (TODs) around the RER stations. Crossrail 1 is 
explicitly modelled on Paris RER-A which was opened in 1977 and had its most 
recent upgrade completed a few years ago (new double-decker trains, new 
three-door design to improve rapid egress and loading, new signalling), which 
allows the 300 million passengers per annum, the highest of any commuter line 
outside of Asia. That’s how. Daniel Moylan needs to hop on a Eurostar and do 
some research. (mrhodes <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4144015>)

‘Renationalise the railways’

So much for privatisation, renationalise the railways and subsidise them so 
everyone can get to work cheaply and safely, without having to use cars or take 
their lives in their hands just to get to work. (Sunday1Morning 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12492018>)

‘Scrap first class’

I pay around £2,500 a year for a commute into London Victoria. For that I have 
the pleasure of always standing on overcrowded and infrequent trains which are 
often delayed. By far my biggest gripe is first class ... we don’t need so many 
first class sections, especially in the mornings. (Arstastic 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3334230>)

‘More flexible working hours’

Our modern economy with the majority of people tied to a 9-5 working day means 
you are always going to have a crush of people coming in and leaving at the 
same time. Encouraging more flexible working hours is an obvious way to reduce 
the demand on the infrastructure at limited extra cost and it fits in better 
with people’s home lives. It would suit some people to work 7am-3pm and others 
to work 10am-7pm, and this should be encouraged to reduce the burden on the 
peak services. (notlobdivad <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12387322>)

‘Have flexible fares’

Along with the growth of more flexible working where people work partly from 
home, flexitime, nine-day fortnights etc, we need more flexible fares. The days 
when one parent worked and one stayed at home are long gone. Season tickets are 
based on this old-fashioned model so now anyone who works part-time is paying 
for a full-price season ticket and only using the ticket for three or four days 
a week. This makes commuting even more overpriced than it already is.

I think that part-time season tickets would actually help the overcrowding 
because it would provide an additional incentive for employees to work from 
home on a regular basis and to work part-time without being penalised by 
full-price season tickets. This would help to reduce the number of passenger 
journeys and be a fairer pricing system for those not using the railways every 
day of the week. (Wishingonastar2 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14631785>)

Some other solutions...


Ban work. (david_morrison <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15023923>)

Teleportation is what’s needed, I mean how hard can it be? (ID1519791 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4250074>)

And, finally, the view from the other side:

I’m on-board railway staff and some of the abuse you get from these militant 
commuters is hateful. I’ve been spat at, grabbed by the throat and called a 
veritable rainbow of crass profanities for having the temerity of trying to get 
people home when something goes wrong. It’s rarely my fault. It’s frequently 
not even the train company’s fault; for example, if someone has been hit by a 
train or if a driver has been taken ill. But still the vitriol pours, because a 
subset of these militant types will do anything up to and including physical 
assault on me (and then the train’s going nowhere as there’s nobody to open and 
close the doors!) to demonstrate how much they hate my company.

Of course the other type of moaning commuter, and perhaps this is just part of 
the British psyche, is the one that will say nothing when you walk through, 
check their ticket or wish them a good evening but will have insulted me, my 
driver, the other passengers and the customer service rep on an exchange on 
Twitter. (Dan Jones <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15982034>)

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 