Interactive timeline 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/article-embeds/middletown-timeline/embed.html>
In 1924, Robert and Helen Lynd, a husband-and-wife team of researchers, 
travelled from New York City into the heart of the midwest to undertake a study 
of daily life in an ordinary American town, Muncie, Indiana. TheLynds 
approached their mission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/membership/2016/oct/18/view-from-middletown-us-muncie-america>
 in much the same spirit that Joseph Conrad entered the Heart of Darkness – to 
look upon denizens of middle America as an anthropologist might chronicle the 
strange customs of another race.

While many sociologists were “quite willing to discuss dispassionately the 
quaintly patterned ways of behaving that make up the customs of uncivilised 
people,” Helen Lynd wrote, for many others it was “distinctly distasteful to 
turn with equal candour to the life” of their fellow Americans. “Yet nothing 
can be more enlightening than to gain precisely that degree of objectivity and 
perspective with which we view savage peoples.”

The Lynds didn’t happen upon Muncie by chance. Indeed, they scoured the 
country in search of a city “as representative as possible of contemporary 
American life” – something that could stand in for the whole of American 
culture. In the bestselling book they published five years later, which would 
become a classic work of American sociology, they did not name Muncie or any of 
its citizens. They simply called it “Middletown”.

For the past six months, the idea of the “real people” out there has been the 
preoccupation of most journalists. First during Britain’s EU referendum 
campaign, and then asDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> ran away with the Republican 
primaries, commentators opined from the metropolis while reporters ventured to 
the parishes to anthropologise the white working class. Editors charged their 
employees with finding out why “they” are so angry; what has made “them” so 
disaffected; what is driving “their” erratic electoral behaviour.

{{atom}}

But the real problem is baked into the premise: “they” are not “us”. “We” 
don’t know “them”. “Their” views are not often heard in newsrooms and “they” 
know it. And so the journalist swoops in for a day or two, armed with polls, 
reports and expectations and finds the angry and disaffected people they are 
looking for. The reporters question their subjects on the holy trinity of 
identities – race, sex, and class, but only one at a time – and then they find 
some local colour (but rarely people of colour) and hurry back to the office.

Pundits speculated whether Hillary Clinton could win Texas when it turned out 
she couldn’t even win Michigan

The protagonists of any given story are easily slotted into already existing 
archetypes – soccer moms, white van men – and placed within a narrative arc 
that makes sense of their views: a revolt against the elites, or why the right 
must embrace diversity, or how the left needs to learn values. And then 
election night arrives – and the whole thing collapses under the weight of its 
own hubris, before starting all over again the next day with the hasty 
construction of a new narrative to explain what happened.

I came to Muncie in the path of the Lynds, although not necessarily in their 
tradition, in the hope that I might do something a bit different. Like them, I 
did not happen on Muncie by chance. It sits in a swing county – both Barack 
Obama and George W Bush won it twice – and voted for both Donald Trump and
Bernie Sanders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/membership/2016/oct/20/middletown-bernie-sanders-hillary-clinton-muncie>
 in their respective primaries, rejecting the pleas of both party 
establishments. It seemed like an ideal place to avoid the made-for-TV 
spectacle of a presidential election – which had pundits, at one stage, 
speculating about whether Hillary Clinton could win Texas when it turned out 
she couldn’t even win Michigan.

I arrived on the night of the second debate to find people more embarrassed 
than angry. Looking for a debate-watching party, I went to the Fickle Peach, a 
bar in town, where the three screens were set to either Sunday-night football 
or baseball. Dylan, the barman, put the debate on for me with the sound down 
and two of us watched it with subtitles. It was two days after news broke of 
Donald Trump bragging aboutgrabbing women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/donald-trump-leaked-recording-women>
 “by the pussy” – when his election prospects were understood to be over.

When I left town a month later, Trump was putting together his transition team 
and meeting Obama in the White House. On election night, a small crowd had 
gathered in the Fickle Peach. The results were on every screen, with the sound 
turned up, as the liberal audience, some crying, watched the certainties of 
just a few hours earlier evaporate – their hopes crushed in real time, state by 
state.

We woke to a new normal. The object of our derision would soon have the 
nuclear codes. Gingerly, but deliberately, respect for the process, the office 
and its trappings, superseded the moral issue of what the victor had said and 
done en route to victory. Many of the very same people who, just the day 
before, said he was unfit for office, now told America to unite around him. 
Meanwhile, those who had not seen any of this coming confidently told us what 
we had seen and what would be coming next. Middletown had spoken. For reasons 
to do with class, gender, race, masculinity, disaffection, populism, elitism – 
or all of the above – it had made common cause with a garish New York City 
multimillionaire to send a message to the establishment. Reporters were 
dispatched not to test this thesis but illustrate it.

When the Lynds arrived in Muncie 92 years ago to begin their fieldwork, they 
had more resources and more time than are generally available to a newspaper 
reporter. They had two research assistants, and they stayed for the best part 
of two years. They published their findings in 1929 with a detailed portrayal 
of a town becoming less devout and less deferent, more educated and more 
automated, where women were less likely to bake their own bread and more likely 
to work outside the home, young people led more independent lives, public 
speeches were getting shorter and schoolgirls preferred cotton to silk 
stockings.

“We are coming to realise, moreover, that we today are probably living in one 
of the eras of greatest rapidity of change in the history of human 
institutions,” they concluded. The sentiment is all too familiar. Something is 
happening, and faster than we thought possible. Trump follows Brexit as Marine 
Le Pen may follow Trump. Our political parties no longer seem capable of 
connecting with those they claim to represent; our democracies are more fragile 
than we knew; those institutions that make a functioning democracy possible – 
the press, Congress, the police – are less trusted than they were.
Munice now and then 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/01/now-and-then-embed/embed/embed.html?mobile_before=//media.guim.co.uk/653778bfee9b00b0d8fc1b73e4434c0303285b04/0_0_2141_1515/500.jpg&desktop_before=//media.guim.co.uk/653778bfee9b00b0d8fc1b73e4434c0303285b04/0_0_2141_1515/1000.jpg&label_before=Then&mobile_after=//media.guim.co.uk/ca8884016449eaabffa9fd7c921b5e8717e1184e/0_0_2141_1515/500.jpg&desktop_after=//media.guim.co.uk/ca8884016449eaabffa9fd7c921b5e8717e1184e/0_0_2141_1515/1000.jpg&label_after=Now&>
At these moments, the natural tendency is to search for a mirror we might hold 
up to ourselves – a reflection that tells “us” who we really are in the midst 
of crisis and change. When the Lynds publishedMiddletown 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/305468.Middletown> , it was immediately 
celebrated as an authentic portrait of real America in dozens of rave reviews, 
and reprinted six times in its first year. The influential columnist HL Mencken 
declared: “It reveals, in cold-blooded, scientific terms, the sort of lives 
millions of Americans are leading.” Stuart Chase at the Nation magazine wrote: 
“Whoever touches the book touches the heart of America.”

Robert Lynd once claimed that ideally the best person to study Muncie would 
not be American but a Chinese anthropologist with sufficient distance from his 
subject to fully understand it. But, he reflected, a foreigner would “have had 
a devil of a time in Middletown getting into homes, being a regular fellow at 
Rotary and the Chamber of Commerce, and generally hob-nobbing”.

I didn’t do much hobnobbing – though I did attend a swanky opening at an art 
gallery on campus. But I did have a prime-rib dinner one night with some 
Republicans and enjoy a Cuban sandwich with some Sanders supporters. Stick 
around long enough and you’ll meet the Republican chairman, with Syrian 
grandparents, who loaded his factory’s machines on to the lorry that took them 
to Mexico, and the Democratic school board candidate who lost his brother to a 
drug overdose. You’ll see the gun show at the Delaware County Fairgrounds right 
next door to a cavernous hall where they are giving away coats so the poor 
don’t go cold in the winter. You’ll hear a black candidate for local office 
choke up as she admits she will not let her husband accompany her canvassing 
for fear that he might get shot, and meet Republicans who ask if London is safe 
because the mayor is a Muslim and you can’t carry a gun.

You’ll hear things that have nothing to do with the elections and everything 
to do with politics. You’ll realise that the reason this outcome was 
unimaginable has as much to do with our imaginations as the outcome itself. The 
seeds for this moment were sown long ago and the roots are deep.

The result was dramatic; the fallout was tumultuous and the consequences will 
be dire and, for some, even deadly. But the final stages of the process that 
led us here were characterised less by anger than ambivalence. They didn’t poll 
for indifference. Few imagined we would sleepwalk into the abyss.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fhow-trump-took-middletown-muncie-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b14265b6aa538fc143aff1cc2361760faf2df66%2F0_166_5000_3002%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Trump%20took%20middle%20America%20%7C%20Gary%20Younge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fhow-trump-took-middletown-muncie-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Trump%20took%20middle%20America%20%7C%20Gary%20Younge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fhow-trump-took-middletown-muncie-election%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b14265b6aa538fc143aff1cc2361760faf2df66%2F0_166_5000_3002%2F5000.jpg>
 The disused Borg Warner factory in Muncie, which once employed more than 5,000 
men and women. Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian 
 * The disused Borg Warner factory in Muncie, which once employed more than 
5,000 men and women — Photograph David Levene 
Every country has a Middletown. A real place made mythical by its elevation as 
an archetype – a town, city or region that encapsulates what a country wishes 
it had been; a nostalgia rooted in a melancholic longing for economic stability 
and cultural homogeneity, then nourished by patriotic myth.

Muncie is a small post-industrial town in eastern Indiana of around 70,000 
that is on the way to nowhere in particular. On the inside cover of Middletown 
in Transition, the follow up written by Robert Lynd after the Depression,a map 
lays out the human geography 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=Middletown+in+transition+map&espv=2&biw=1482&bih=739&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwi07-CuztXPAhUBeCYKHQYPCzIQ_AUIBygC&gws_rd=cr&ei=dQ8rWIzuD4bbaqCtrKgK#imgrc=mFbTh9ZW4M58SM%3A>
 of the town. To the north-west of the railroad tracks lie “homes of business 
class” and a small college and hospital, to the north-east of the tracks is the 
“Negro” area also known as Whitely, to the south of the tracks and the White 
River are “homes of working class”.

Abandoned plants like giant art installations depict what capitalism looks 
like when it doesn’t need people any more

“You could take this map and lay it on the town today and it’s just the same,” 
says James Connolly, the director of theCenter for Middletown Studies 
<http://cms.bsu.edu/academics/centersandinstitutes/middletown> at Ball State 
University, which occupies a far bigger section of the north-west than it did 
on the 1930s map; it is now the town’s largest employer.

No tour around Muncie is complete without a visit to the sites of its closed 
factories. The car slows down to the pace of a funeral cortege as your guide 
rolls past the tens of thousands of square feet of brownfield where abandoned 
plants sit like giant art installations depicting what capitalism looks like 
when it doesn’t need people any more. Muncie used to host factories that mostly 
made transmissions for cars. One in five people in the town were employed in 
manufacturing – today it’s one in 10. During the 1960 campaign, John Kennedy 
addressed workers at the Borg Warner factory, which is now abandoned.

“Almost everybody worked there,” says Jamie Walsh, 35, who grew up in Muncie’s 
Southside, the poor white part of town. “Most of my family, my friends’ 
parents. My grandpa retired from Borg Warner. Everyone was affected. By the 
time I grew up it was all gone … People started retiring early by 2000. By 2005 
they were completely done.”

{{callout link}}

Skilled union jobs either went abroad, or to the south – places where labour 
is cheaper and unions are weaker. In the meantime heroin and crystal meth have 
arrived, ravaging huge sections of the town, both black and white. According to 
the US census, a third of Muncie lives below the poverty line, while white male 
earnings have slumped dramatically since 2000.


“When the university or the hospital [the town’s second largest employer] goes 
to hire a professor or a doctor, they don’t put an ad in the local paper,” says 
Connolly. “They draw people from around the world as applicants. So you have 
one part of this community that is plugged into these global networks and lives 
in a way that is not that different from a major metropolitan centre. And then 
you have another part of the town that is more isolated than ever because those 
old things that connected them, like unions and the party, have withered and 
the connections they created have declined. So not only are some people paid 
poorly but they’re not at all engaged with this global economy and these 
networks of connections that extend far and wide.”

This is as good a place as any to start understanding Trump’s victory. Because 
just as almost every nation has a Middletown, most western nations also have a 
Trump. Indeed, in no small part, they have a Trump precisely because they have 
a Middletown and their Middletown is suffering. Ukip’s Nigel Farage campaigned 
with Trump; Marine Le Pen, the leader of the Front National in France, was one 
of the first to congratulate him. Whether it’s Geert Wilders in the 
Netherlands, the Vlaams Belang in Belgium or Viktor Orbán in Hungary, each 
applies the same mixture of patriotic fervour, class grievance, racial animus 
and economic insecurity to their own national conditions.

The link between economic anxiety and rightwing nationalism can be overdone. 
The easy narrative of a populist revolt has an appealing simplicity, but 
Clinton won votes from more than half of the people who earn less than $50,000; 
the rich voted for Trump. He won the electoral college and lost the popular 
vote. Thanks to the lowest turnout in 20 years, Trump won a lower percentage of 
the eligible vote than John Kerry, John McCain, Mitt Romney and Gerald Ford – 
and they all lost. He got the same proportion of the white vote as Romney in 
2012 and Bush in 2004 and only a little more than McCain in 2008. He may have 
led the charge to the right but comparatively few marched with him.

Nor is such a link inevitable. In several countries across Europe – from 
Greece to Britain – a populist left response has emerged to this same crisis. 
In the USBernie Sanders <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/bernie-sanders>, 
the Vermont senator who calls himself a democratic socialist, shocked 
everybody, including himself, by mounting a dynamic insurgent campaign that 
addressed these very economic issues.

Nonetheless, the link cannot be denied. The case for solidarity requires more 
effort and empathy than the case for scapegoating. It also flies against the 
prevailing headwinds of individualism, nationalism and a narrow understanding 
of self-preservation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fhow-trump-took-middletown-muncie-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5e495962973eb65ebdb4021e00bf65a7074c6301%2F0_0_5230_3138%2F5230.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Trump%20took%20middle%20America%20%7C%20Gary%20Younge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fhow-trump-took-middletown-muncie-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Trump%20took%20middle%20America%20%7C%20Gary%20Younge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fhow-trump-took-middletown-muncie-election%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5e495962973eb65ebdb4021e00bf65a7074c6301%2F0_0_5230_3138%2F5230.jpg>
 Nigel Farage arrives at Trump Tower to meet president-elect Donald Trump. 
Photograph: Yana Paskova/Getty Images 
 * Nigel Farage arrives at Trump Tower to meet president-elect Donald Trump — 
Photograph Yana Paskova/Getty Images 
The connection between closed factories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/membership/2016/oct/25/middletown-muncie-factories-photo-essay-midwest>
 and the rise of the populist right is threefold. First, people are desperate. 
They were desperate before the economic crisis. It’s not that there are no jobs 
available in Muncie. As well as the university and hospital, some new 
manufacturing jobs have arrived. But none can provide the kind of lifestyle to 
which previous generations were accustomed. Many of the houses on Muncie’s 
Southside that are not abandoned are collapsing, signalling that a way life is 
disappearing. Some factory jobs cannot be filled because applicants cannot pass 
company drugs tests. I heard of at least one manager who is thinking of laying 
on a bus to get people to work because they don’t have cars and public 
transport is inadequate.

People need something to change. “The [Democratic party says] ‘Let’s just do 
the things we’ve always done and have incremental change’.” says Dave Ring, who 
runs the Downtown Farm Stand, an organic food store and deli. “So they’re very, 
very happy with incremental change. And the rest of the public is out here 
like: ‘We don’t have time for incremental change.’”

Second, people blame the entire political class for making them desperate. 
Bringing down trade barriers and letting manufacturing move abroad was part of a
western political orthodoxy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/21/death-of-neoliberalism-crisis-in-western-politics>
 that became dominant in the 1990s, creating an overcrowded political centre 
and leaving so much room at the extremes. The North American Free Trade 
Agreement (Nafta), was promoted and passed byBill Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/21/hillary-clinton-bill-90s-nostalgia-reform-scandal>
 – who also repealed the Glass-Steagall Act, which deregulated the financial 
sector and contributed to creating the conditions that produced the crash of 
2008. Obamachampioned the Trans-Pacific Partnership 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-32498715>, an ambitious trade deal 
involving 11 other countries, crafted mostly in secret, which would not only 
have likely depressed wages but allowed companies to sue governments if they 
change policy on, say, health and education to favour state-provided services. 
Clinton vacillated on it, first backing it, then opposing it. In the wake of 
Trump’s victory Obama has noweffectively abandoned TPP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/12/tpp-trade-deal-congress-obama>
, Trump having campaigned heavily against it.

This also helps explain why Sanders, who campaigned hard against TPP, did so 
well here. “They understand the trade issue,” said Ring, who voted for Sanders 
in the primary and then Clinton. “People know what killed their jobs and that 
was Nafta. And not only did it kill our jobs here but it exploited people 
elsewhere, and I think people are starting to understand how multinational 
corporations work. They move the jobs where there’s people they can exploit.”

But the issue was not simply about trade or globalisation: to many voters in 
Muncie, Clinton looked not only like an integral part of the establishment that 
had brought them to this place, but like a candidate advocating more of the 
same. “If you take a step back and look at all America has achieved over the 
past eight years, it’s remarkable to see how far we’ve come,” Clinton argued. 
For many of those who already had their backs against the wall, it was hard to 
see the progress. Trump, on the other hand, offered the near certainty that 
something would change. “At least he’ll shake things up,” was the phrase that 
kept coming up. One in five of those who voted for him thought he didn’t have 
the temperament to be president. For some who had little to lose, he was 
evidently a risk worth taking.

“The Democrats keep making out like everything is OK,” says Todd Smekens, the 
publisher of the progressive online magazine Muncie Voice. “And it’s not. 
Nobody’s buying it.”

Third, and perhaps most dramatic of all, people have come to feel they have no 
say about what is happening to their lives. That is why the slogan “Take Back 
Control” resonated with so many during the Brexit referendum. The nation state 
is still the primary democratic entity; but given the scale of globalisation it 
is clearly no longer up to the that task of meeting the needs of its citizens. 
Voters see people coming through borders they can’t close and jobs leaving that 
they can’t save and wonder how they can assert themselves on the world.

Trump, and his counterparts, are often described in Europe as a threat to 
democracy. But in truth they would be better understood as the product of a 
democracy already in crisis.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fhow-trump-took-middletown-muncie-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5dd729d751a4996cb1d40dbddcc9f0ab1bd974ea%2F630_139_4295_2578%2F4295.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Trump%20took%20middle%20America%20%7C%20Gary%20Younge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fhow-trump-took-middletown-muncie-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Trump%20took%20middle%20America%20%7C%20Gary%20Younge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fhow-trump-took-middletown-muncie-election%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5dd729d751a4996cb1d40dbddcc9f0ab1bd974ea%2F630_139_4295_2578%2F4295.jpg>
 Madison Street, Muncie, Indiana, USA. Photograph by David Levene 4/10/16 
Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian 
 * Madison Street, Muncie, Indiana, USA — Photograph David Levene 
The Lynds were keen to concentrate on issues of class, and sought out a town 
with a “homogenous, native-born population” in order to avoid “being forced to 
handle two major variables, racial change and cultural change”. So one of their 
key criteria for selecting Muncie as “Middletown” was that it had “a small 
Negro and foreign-born population”. The foreign-born population really was 
small because the local business class deliberately imported workers from 
Tennessee and Kentucky. “There was a conscious attempt to keep foreign workers 
out,” says Connolly. “Because they wanted people to go home during slack times 
and they were worried foreigners would bring in dangerous ideas.”

So like a fairground mirror, Middletown gave America an image of itself that 
was both familiar and woefully distorted

The black population, however, was not small. At 5%, it was proportionally 
higher at the time than New York, Chicago, or Detroit – and growing faster as 
well. Today it stands at 12% of the population. “They try to unmask this myth 
about class. But what it did was create this other myth about a representative 
America – a nostalgic, white nativist America,” says Sarah Igo, a historian at 
Vanderbilt University, and the author of The Averaged American.

So like a fairground mirror, Middletown gave America an image of itself that 
was both familiar and woefully distorted – an image that the American 
commentariat preferred to reality. That myth, says Igo, is enduring. It can be 
found in Sarah Palin’s praise of the “real America” in 2008 or Ronald Reagan’s 
TV ad “It’s morning again in America” in 1984, or, most of all, Donald Trump’s 
pledge to “Make America great again” – a phrase first employed by Reagan in 
1980.

Its persistence has been unaffected – and perhaps even strengthened – by the 
increasing diversity of the American population. As the white population 
shrinks in relation to other groups, some people keep their whitewashed image 
of the country alive by finding ever more desperate ways to dismiss the 
existence or validity of non-white Americans.

A few days before the election, when reports of huge Latino turnout for early 
voting presented the false promise of a Clinton landslide, the rightwing troll
Ann Coulter tweeted <https://twitter.com/anncoulter/status/795833821501460480> 
that “If only people with at least 4 grandparents born in America were voting, 
Trump would win in a 50-state landslide.” (Apparently not realising that would 
mean neither Trump, whose mother is Scottish, his children or his wife, who is 
Slovenian-born, could vote.)

Race was a key part of Trump’s message and appeal. He branded Mexicans 
rapists, vowed to build a wall on the border and to stop Muslims coming into 
the country. He complained that an American-born federal judge presiding in a 
case against Trump University was“hostile” because he was “of Mexican heritage” 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/donald-trump-keeps-up-attacks-on-judge-gonzalo-curiel-1464911442>
. He threatened that he would not accept the results of the election because 
there would be voter fraud in the “inner cities” – a term that Trump uses to 
refer to places where non-white people live. When a black Trump supporter was 
booed at a rally in North Carolina, presumably because the crowd could not 
imagine he was not there to protest, Trump ordered security to throw the man 
out and called him “a thug”.

This was as electorally savvy as it was morally reprehensible. After eight 
years with Obama at the helm, at a time of heightened racial consciousness, the 
white anxiety on which Trump preyed was ripe for leveraging.

This sense of racial fragility was both local and global, real and imaginary. 
At home, white people will become a minority in around 25 years, the president 
is the black child of a mixed-race relationship that involved a lapsed foreign 
Muslim, the southern border is porous, and black people are on the streets 
again, demanding equality before the law. Abroad, jihadi terrorists are 
becoming ever more brazen and brutal in their attacks on western cities and 
civilians, the Chinese economy will soon be larger than America’s, the US 
military has failed to deliver victory in several Muslim countries, and 
refugees are desperately fleeing the Middle East. Add all that to the stagnant 
wages, falling living standards, decreasing life expectancy, and vanishing 
class mobility, and you can see how being a white American feels like it’s not 
what it used to be.

“While few explicitly talk about Obama in racial terms, the base [Republican] 
supporters are very conscious of being white in a country with growing 
minorities,” the veteran Democratic pollster Stan Greenberg explained a few 
years ago. “Their party is losing to a Democratic party of big government whose 
goal is to expand programs that mainly benefit minorities. Race remains very 
much alive in the politics of the Republican party.”

Making small talk over dinner with some Republicans in Muncie, I asked one if 
he had any plans to visit Britain. He shook his head and said he wouldn’t feel 
comfortable travelling in Europe at the moment – I assumed because of the 
threat of terrorism. The only place he would feel safe outside of America, he 
continued, was Israel. (In 2014, themurder rate in Muncie 
<http://www.city-data.com/crime/crime-Muncie-Indiana.html> was higher than in 
London.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fhow-trump-took-middletown-muncie-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F66b75caa72e6c0545dd09a1475e5c3ad359ad13d%2F0_67_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Trump%20took%20middle%20America%20%7C%20Gary%20Younge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fhow-trump-took-middletown-muncie-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Trump%20took%20middle%20America%20%7C%20Gary%20Younge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fhow-trump-took-middletown-muncie-election%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F66b75caa72e6c0545dd09a1475e5c3ad359ad13d%2F0_67_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
 Former Drive-Thru on Memorial Drive, Muncie. Muncie, Indiana, USA. Photograph 
by David Levene 4/10/16 Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian 
 * Former Drive-Thru on Memorial Drive, Muncie — Photograph David Levene 
For the white working class, says Jamie Walsh, who voted for Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/membership/2016/oct/27/middletown-trump-muncie-clinton>
, the benefits of being white aren’t obvious. “People are afraid that they’re 
stupid. This whole PC thing – racism, sexism. All this stuff is being stupid. 
All these isms are ignorance. People don’t feel racist, they don’t feel sexist 
… They feel marginalised because of their ignorance. You don’t want to offend 
people.”

Trump’s victory cannot be explained by racism alone. He won several states 
that Obama took easily in 2008 and 2012

It is in the precise place where race and class merge that a section of white 
America finds itself both bereft and beleaguered. “White privilege is like a 
blessing and a curse if you’re poor,” Walsh says. “White privilege pisses poor 
white people off because they’ve never experienced it on a level that they 
understand. You hear ‘privilege’ and you think money and opportunity and they 
don’t have it. There’s protected women, minorities – they have advocates. But 
there’s no advocates for poor people.”

So Trump got almost 60% of the white vote and performed poorly among every 
other racial group. Race was clearly a central fault line – and how could it 
not be, in a country that practised slavery for 200 years, apartheid for the 
next 100, and has been a non-racial democracy for only the last 50?

But Trump’s victory cannot be explained by racism alone – and the efforts to 
understand race and class separately result in one misunderstanding them both 
entirely. Indeed, to get to the bottom of Trump’s appeal we will have to go 
beyond any monocausal interpretation of these results and adopt a more 
intersectional approach, one that takes into account the fractious way a 
constellation of identities collide and align.

People are, of course, many things – male, white, straight, rural, 
college-educated and so on – and just one thing: themselves. It is that whole 
person, not a segment of it, that goes to the polls and that we need to 
understand. Hillary Clinton won women – butTrump won white women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/membership/2016/nov/01/the-view-from-middletown-the-perfect-female-presidential-candidate-doesnt-exist>
 and older women. 

This, despite the fact that his campaign was steeped in misogyny, lambasting 
women for their looks, dismissing women who accused him of sexual harassment as 
gold-digging liars, and excusing his own boasts of assault as “locker room 
talk”. He even passed judgment on Clinton’s looks, telling a crowd in North 
Carolina: “She walked in front of me, believe me, I wasn’t impressed.”

Bea Sousa, the former spokesperson for the League of Women Voters of 
Muncie-Delaware County, said a higher bar was set for Clinton than her male 
counterparts of the past. “I’ve met a lot of women who detest her intensely,” 
said Sousa, who said she was not a “rabid Hillary fan” herself. “I can’t take 
credit for this statement but I heard someone say, ‘We’ve gotten used to voting 
for males we don’t like. We’ve held our nose and we’ve voted for them for 
whatever reason. But we aren’t used to doing that with a woman.’ Our culture 
holds women to a higher standard.”

But once again, to isolate misogyny as the central factor in Clinton’s defeat 
would ignore the fact that 94% of black women went for Clinton – and black men 
were nearly twice as likely to vote Clinton as white women. Just as race alone 
cannot sufficiently explain the choices of Trump voters, looking at only class, 
or only gender, in the absence of race, cannot make sense of these disparities.

Older people voted for Trump and younger for Clinton, although young white men 
went to Trump. In another sign of the widening divide over education – also 
visible in the Brexit vote – college graduates were for Clinton, those who did 
not attend or finish for Trump. An even starker partisan divide than gender or 
age was visible in the split between the rural and the urban vote.

To fully grasp how identity played a role in this – and clearly it did – the 
challenge is not to try to isolate the variables, as the Lynds did, but to 
include them. Otherwise, we trade the distortions of one fairground mirror for 
another.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fhow-trump-took-middletown-muncie-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13a49d767d9eebf42efa97349d40adaa1bff8bd7%2F0_200_5000_3001%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Trump%20took%20middle%20America%20%7C%20Gary%20Younge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fhow-trump-took-middletown-muncie-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Trump%20took%20middle%20America%20%7C%20Gary%20Younge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fhow-trump-took-middletown-muncie-election%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13a49d767d9eebf42efa97349d40adaa1bff8bd7%2F0_200_5000_3001%2F5000.jpg>
 Detail of a rusty old Diamond T Truck from the early 1950s. Photograph: David 
Levene for the Guardian 
 * Detail of a rusty old Diamond T Truck from the early 1950s — Photograph 
David Levene 
“The age of party democracy has passed,” the late Irish political scientist 
Peter Mair declared in Ruling the Void, his 2013 autopsy of “the hollowing of 
western democracy”. “Although the parties themselves remain, they have become 
so disconnected from the wider society and pursue a form of competition that is 
so lacking meaning, that they no longer seem capable of sustaining democracy in 
its present form.”

The situation is no less dire in America than Europe – and it finds 
illustration everywhere you look in Muncie.

Thanks to its past as a manufacturing hub with strong unions and a reputation 
for machine politics, Muncie was once known as Little Chicago. The “little” 
matters: Muncie is big enough to have a political machine, but small enough 
that most of the people in that machine have known each other since childhood.

The Democratic party is based at 214 North Walnut Street, not far from the 
courthouse and City Hall – locally, the party establishment is referred to 
simply as 214. It drew its leadership, primarily, from the local fire 
department – the current mayor was once a firefighter – and it has a dynastic 
culture that would not be unfamiliar to the Clintons or Bushes. A few families 
have dominated the party, and their names still carry weight: Annette 
Craycraft, the unsuccessful candidate for Delaware county commissioner, for 
example, is the sister of Steve Craycraft, the Delaware county auditor, and 
both are the children of Ally Craycraft, who long held positions in town.

In 2010, a reformist caucus took shape within the Democratic party, calling 
themselves “Team Democrat”. These were Democrats who wanted to disassociate 
themselves from what they saw as the incestuous and corrupt grip of the machine 
overseers. “Every person had their own breaking point,” explains Victoria Rose, 
who once held a senior position in the local party. “I just couldn’t take it 
any more.” Rose says that each candidate for local office had to pay 10% of 
their salary to the party in order to stand, and then 1% annually if elected. 
Whenever possible, she says, the party liked the money in cash; much of it was 
never accounted for.

For at least six months, the FBI has been investigating Muncie’s Democratic 
city government over allegations of corruption. In one case, it is alleged that 
the city’s building commissioner – the son of a local Democratic party grandee 
who is also a fireman – gave his own building company more than $250,000 of 
work, some of it for demolitions at addresses where there are no buildings. “It 
doesn’t surprise me at all,” says Rose. “You could see it coming years away.”

Team Democrat set up a separate “political action committee”, asked people to 
sign up to a code of conduct, and ran in Democratic primaries against 
establishment candidates. Their office, a more modest, threadbare affair, sits 
on the other side of City Hall from 214. Beyond the ethics issue, Rose says 
there is little in the way of political difference between Team Democrat and 
the local establishment, although the reformists are possibly less 
working-class and more likely to have supported Sanders.

On election night last week, 214 looked like a wake. Presidential outcomes 
aside, Republicans won a virtually clean sweep, from what should have been a 
closely contested US Senate race, to the governor’s house, down to the county 
commissioners. The only Democrat candidates that broke through in local races 
were from Team Democrat.

During the primaries there was no doubt whose side 214 was on: Clinton’s 
campaign was based there. But beyond the African American community, where 
Clinton won handily, there was little they could do for her. Sanders talked 
trade and class, and that message goes down well in Muncie. Bit by bit during 
the primary, the sceptical became committed and the committed became active. 
Sanders won.

Muncie’s Democratic machine, much like the Clinton machine, maintained power 
but lost influence. Within the Democratic party, the Clintons had been 
cultivating connections for a generation. During the primaries they had the 
superdelegates sewn up; after it they had the funders lined up. They had the 
best surrogates: Barack Obama, Michelle Obama, Bernie Sanders, Elizabeth 
Warren, Jay-Z, Lady Gaga, Beyoncé. Clinton’s past provided extensive evidence 
that she was qualified, but for her future presidency – and the changes she 
might bring – there was no narrative.

In this period of despair and volatility, their offer of milquetoast, 
market-led managerialism is not a winning formula

You can pin it on the Russians, WikiLeaks, the FBI, the media, third parties, 
and they all played a role. But sooner or later moderate liberals are going to 
have to own the consequences of their politics. In this period of despair and 
volatility, their offer of milquetoast, market-led managerialism is not a 
winning formula. For a political camp that boasts of its pragmatic 
electability, it has quite simply failed to adapt.

Carefully scripted but complacently framed, the Clinton campaign emerged from 
a centrist political tradition at a moment where there is no centre, offering 
market-based solutions at a time when Clinton’s own base has begun to see the 
free market as part of the problem.

Nationally, the machine does not need a tune-up – it needs a complete 
overhaul. The people to whom Clinton failed to appeal wanted more from their 
politics than she would provide or was prepared to deliver. In short, economic 
injustice and class alienation are as much the reason why Clinton lost as why 
Trump won. He stoked his base’s fears; she failed to give her base hope.

{{callout link two}}

“People look around Muncie and think, ‘What has capitalism done for the 
working man?’” says Dave Ring, the Downtown Food Stand owner who voted for 
Sanders and then Clinton. “Well, it’s taken our jobs and ruined our 
infrastructure and increased our healthcare prices so they’re unaffordable. If 
your job is good and you have good healthcare and you have retirement, then you 
don’t understand. That’s a very small group of people. And it happens to be the 
group of people who are in power.”

Trump did not introduce racism to the modern Republican party. He simply 
refused to observe institutional etiquette.

For half a century, Republicans had relied on Richard Nixon’s “Southern 
Strategy”, which deployed a coded racial message that could bind together a 
formidable coalition of southern states and suburban white voters. “You have to 
face the fact that the whole problem is really the blacks,” Nixon told his 
chief-of-staff Bob Haldeman. “The key is to devise a system that recognises 
that while not appearing to.”

Trump had no problem “appearing to”, although he focused his bigotry on 
Latinos and Muslims more than African-Americans. Some people voted for him 
because of this rhetoric, while others voted for him because it didn’t put them 
off. The Republican party establishment was terrified by it. Even with less 
inflammatory rhetoric, the party had been struggling to win the White House.

Over the last few election cycles, the black Republican vote has all but 
vanished – and the party’s escalating anti-immigration rhetoric seemed certain 
to erase its share of the Latino vote as well. The trend is clear: Republicans 
are attracting fewer votes from a growing segment of the population.

Party leaders have long been arguing that this trend is not sustainable. 
“We’re not generating enough angry white guys to stay in business for the long 
term,” Senator Lindsey Graham said in 2012. Then along came Trump, the 
erstwhile leader of the birther movement – insisting that Obama was not a 
legitimate president, because he had really been born in Kenya. When people 
said they hadn’t seen anything like this before, they actually hadn’t been 
paying attention. True, he was more brazen than his predecessors. But he didn’t 
break the mould; he adapted it.

I hated Donald Trump during the primaries. He was a mockery
Jamie Walsh, Trump voter 
Trump’s nomination was supposed to tear the Republican party asunder. When the 
primaries came to Indiana, only Ted Cruz and John Kasich were still in the 
race, and Trump’s nomination felt like a done deal. He won 53% in Delaware 
County, but most of the Republicans I spoke to there thought he was a deeply 
flawed candidate.

“A lot of what he’s done and said is indefensible,” said Jim Arnold at a 
meeting of the Citizens of Delaware County for Good Government (CDCGG), a local 
conservative group. “I would have been happier with almost anyone else. I 
wanted [Ben] Carson, then Cruz then Rubio. Trump would have almost been my last 
choice.” Most of the 12 in the group preferred another candidate. One senior 
Republican called him a “bully”. Jamie Walsh, who voted for Trump, called him 
“garbage” and a “word-butcher”. “I hated Donald Trump during the primaries,” 
she said. “He was a mockery.”

Around the time I was talking to the CDCGG, the national press were writing 
premature obituaries for the Republican party, complete with circular firing 
squad metaphors, civil war analogies and even comparisons to the last days of 
Hitler’s bunker. The local Republican party was also divided – with the CDCGG 
attacking the party establishment with the same kinetic energy and purist 
ideology I had seen in other Tea Party groups over the years. When someone 
threw a brick through the window of Delaware County’s Republican headquarters, 
the joke in town was that nobody knew whether the vandal was a Republican or a 
Democrat.

But when election day arrived, the Republicans all voted for Trump – because 
however they felt about him, they loathed Clinton – and they enjoyed a 
near-sweep of state and local races as well.

“From the beginning I worried about whether she could win,” says Bea Sousa, 
who cast her ballot for Clinton. “I think if the Republicans had voted for John 
Kasich or Jeb Bush, we wouldn’t be talking about this now because I think a lot 
of people who are having a hard time voting for Trump would not have a hard 
time voting for a moderate Republican.”

She had a point. Trump lost the popular vote – which the Republicans have only 
won once since 1992. But this year, it turns out that the people who might have 
had a hard time voting for Trump had a harder time voting for an establishment 
Democrat like Clinton. In the end, it was Trump who was lucky to have her as an 
opponent.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fhow-trump-took-middletown-muncie-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a06188d10e4781cbd71a952007914f7aa2ed99d%2F0_128_5000_3002%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Trump%20took%20middle%20America%20%7C%20Gary%20Younge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fhow-trump-took-middletown-muncie-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Trump%20took%20middle%20America%20%7C%20Gary%20Younge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fhow-trump-took-middletown-muncie-election%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a06188d10e4781cbd71a952007914f7aa2ed99d%2F0_128_5000_3002%2F5000.jpg>
 Muncie, Indiana, USA. Photograph by David Levene 8/10/16 Photograph: David 
Levene for the Guardian 
 * Muncie, Indiana, USA — Photograph David Levene 
A week before the election, the police chief in Muncie – who also served as 
the chairman of the county Democratic party until late last year – abruptly 
announced his resignation after 31 years on the force. In his resignation 
letter, he singled out the actions of the mayor, who heads the city government 
currently being investigated by the FBI, as the reason for his sudden departure.

Muncie is now bracing itself for criminal indictments. People lower their 
voices a little and roll their eyes when they mention the FBI investigation. 
They are embarrassed, but not really surprised. What I heard over and over 
again in the city, in many different ways – in matters national and local, 
political and personal – was ordinary people feeling that they were not getting 
a fair shake. That the news they get is tainted, that politicians are lining 
their own pockets and getting away with it; that nobody in power really cares 
about them and there’s not a damn thing they can do about it.

Trump’s allegations of potential voter fraud were patently ridiculous. More 
people in America are struck by lightning than impersonate other people at the 
polls. Trump’s claim that the FBI had soft-pedalled its investigation into 
Clinton’s emails was clearly bluster: he withdrew it when they appeared to be 
reopening the case and renewed it again when they said there was no case to 
answer. But his incessant complaint that “the system is rigged” rang true. 
Americans no longer have faith in the institutions that govern them. They may 
differ on why and in whose interests it is rigged. But the trust has gone.

In places such as Muncie, where the recovery has been glacial by comparison to 
Washington or New York, the legacy of the economic crisis is more than just a 
distant memory. “My parents lost everything in 2008,” says Cathy Day, an 
English lecturer at Ball State University. “They remortgaged their home to put 
three kids and my mum through college. All of that work they put in and they’re 
left with nothing.”

“It was brutal,” Dave Ring recalled. He set up the Down Town Farm Stand, 
selling organic produce, much of it from local farms including their own, just 
before the financial crisis. “The first few years were very, very hard. We just 
got through it. Every dollar that we have, we put into this little store. We’re 
not wealthy. We were totally undercapitalised when we started the store. It was 
half this size. We didn’t have the deli. Just a few things on the shelves.”

And then, earlier this year, the City of Muncie announced that it was 
partnering with a major regional supermarket chain to help bring a new organic 
grocery store to town. “A competitor wants to come here that’s one thing,” says 
Ring. “But to subsidise a competitor? We live here. Our profits are here. We 
pay our taxes here.”

It’s just one story. But it’s the sort of story that I was told more often 
than any other in Muncie. And when enough voters have their own versions of 
this same story – of grievances real and exaggerated – their sentiments don’t 
have to be firmly grounded in facts for them to be keenly felt and fervently 
acted upon. When a tiny conspiratorial minority believes the system is rigged, 
that’s their problem. But when a majority believes it, then the system has a 
problem.

Producing in-depth, thoughtful, well-reported journalism is difficult and 
expensive - but supporting us isn’t. If you value this approach to covering 
politics, please help to fund our journalism bybecoming a Guardian Supporter 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/uk/supporter?INTCMP=gdnwb_copts_editorial_mem_garymuncielongread_footer>
 ormaking a contribution 
<https://contribute.theguardian.com/uk?INTCMP=co_footer_younge_tma>. 


Main picture by David Levene

• Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread 
<https://twitter.com/@gdnlongread>, or sign up to the long read weekly email 
here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/jul/20/sign-up-to-the-long-read-email>.
 