
Are Rio de Janeiro’s military and civil police really the world’s most 
violent? That is the conclusion of separate studies released byAmnesty 
International <https://www.amnesty.org/en/documents/amr19/2068/2015/en/> and 
Human Rights Watch 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2016/07/07/brazil-extrajudicial-executions-undercut-rio-security>
 earlier this year. They are accusing Rio de Janeiro’s police forces of 
routinely torturing and killing citizens – especially young black men – during 
arrest. They also say the problem isgetting much worse 
<http://www.citylab.com/crime/2016/07/disturbing-new-data-on-police-violence-in-rio-de-janeiro/490694/>
 as the Olympics approach.

The scale of Rio de Janeiro’s military and civil police involvement in the 
excessive use of force is chilling. And it ishardly a new phenomenon 
<http://acnudh.org/en/un-special-rapporteur-finds-that-killings-by-brazilian-police-continue-at-alarming-rates-government-has-failed-to-take-all-necessary-action/>
. In 2003 they were responsible for 1,195 civilian deaths across Rio de Janeiro 
state, most of them young black men. In 2007, 1,330 citizens reportedly died in 
the course of police action. These numbers are breathtaking when you consider 
that in 2015, across the whole of the US (a country with a population more than 
50% larger than Brazil’s) an estimated1,134 people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/31/the-counted-police-killings-2015-young-black-men>
 were killed by police.


But those numbers don’t tell the whole story. In fact, although the situation 
is dire, overall numbers of killings involving police – “auto-resistance 
deaths” in the sanitised language of law enforcement – have declined over the 
past decade. Between 2003 and 2015 they actually fell by 46% across the entire 
state ofRio de Janeiro <https://www.theguardian.com/world/rio-de-janeiro>, and 
62% in the capital. In 2013, for example, there were just 416 civilians killed. 
This is not to excuse the police – violence is intolerably high – but to put 
the statistics in historical perspective.

So what explains the long-term drop in police killings? Researchers first 
detectedsizeable improvements 
<http://www.lav.uerj.br/docs/rel/2012/RelatUPP.pdf> after 2009 in the wake of a 
new police strategy in Rio de Janeiro. Auto-resistance killings dropped bymore 
than 85% 
<http://www.jb.com.br/rio/noticias/2015/05/11/isp-cai-em-855-homicidios-por-auto-de-resistencia-em-areas-de-upps-em-5-anos/>
 in areas where the approach was introduced. The initiative consisted of newly 
trained pacification police units who were permanently deployed to many parts 
of the city, often for the first time. A key ingredient of the programme’s 
early success was the emphasis on rewarding reductions in violent crime.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Frio-police-violent-killing-olympics-torture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7cbf33d90c715f4252a067e7d4022da110ffe7b%2F0_0_4000_2666%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20did%20Rio's%20police%20become%20known%20as%20the%20most%20violent%20in%20the%20world%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Frio-police-violent-killing-olympics-torture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20did%20Rio%27s%20police%20become%20known%20as%20the%20most%20violent%20in%20the%20world%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Frio-police-violent-killing-olympics-torture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7cbf33d90c715f4252a067e7d4022da110ffe7b%2F0_0_4000_2666%2F4000.jpg>
 Residents appear unconcerned during a police operation against drug 
traffickers in the ‘pacified’ Jacarezinho slum in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. 
Photograph: Felipe Dana/AP 
Unfortunately, these improvements were short lived. Starting in 2014, the 
numbers started creeping up. In 2014 there were 584 people killed during the 
course of arrest; in 2015, the numberrose again 
<https://public.tableau.com/profile/instituto.de.seguran.a.p.blica.isp#%21/vizhome/LetalidadeViolenta/Resumo>
 to 645. So far in 2016, this upward trend continues. From January to May, 322 
civilians were killed as a result of police interventions in the state of Rio 
de Janeiro, a 13% increase over the same period last year according to the 
state’s Institute for Public Security.

A survey of Rio's military police officers found roughly 18% of respondents 
witnessed a homicide as a child

So what makes Rio de Janeiro’s police so violent? At least one reason is the 
officers’ personal exposure to violence, a taboo subject in law enforcement 
circles. A2014 Stanford-University-led survey 
<http://cddrl.fsi.stanford.edu/crimelab/research/understanding-police-use-force-rio-de-janeiro>
 of Rio’s military police officers found that many experienced high levels of 
violence during childhood. Roughly 18% of respondents witnessed a homicide as a 
child. Another 25% were victims of a violent assault at a young age and 32% 
said they had a friend or family member murdered. It is widely known that 
previous exposure to violence can reproduce aggressive behaviour.

There are several other factors driving the recent spike in police violence. 
For one, the many political and economic crises wracking Brazil – and Rio de 
Janeiro in particular – are contributing to a spike in crime and significant 
reductions in spending in public security. The state’s public security budget 
wascut by more than 30% in 2016 
<http://espn.go.com/olympics/story/_/id/15476645/rio-de-janeiro-security-secretary-says-cuts-affect-olympics-safety>
. As a result, innovative programmes – including UPP intervention – have ground 
to a halt. Police morale has plummeted,partly because they are rarely paid on 
time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/28/rio-olympics-safety-security-budgets-cut>
, if at all.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Frio-police-violent-killing-olympics-torture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa658cb26486ee736ce059f929cdf53d1f45395e3%2F0_274_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20did%20Rio's%20police%20become%20known%20as%20the%20most%20violent%20in%20the%20world%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Frio-police-violent-killing-olympics-torture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20did%20Rio%27s%20police%20become%20known%20as%20the%20most%20violent%20in%20the%20world%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Frio-police-violent-killing-olympics-torture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa658cb26486ee736ce059f929cdf53d1f45395e3%2F0_274_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 Police patrol on the Copacabana promenade in Rio de Janeiro. Photograph: Nic 
Bothma/EPA 
Another key turning can be traced back to mid-2013 following the torture, 
disappearance and killing of a young man named Amarildo de Souza 
<http://www1.folha.uol.com.br/cotidiano/2016/02/1735774-justica-do-rio-condena-8-policiais-pelo-desaparecimento-e-morte-de-amarildo.shtml>
 by police officers in Rocinha, the city’s largest favela. Thehighly publicised 
murder 
<http://www.economist.com/blogs/americasview/2014/03/police-violence-brazil> 
triggered a “Rocinha effect”, similar to the so-called Ferguson effect, or “
viral video effect 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2016/05/27/opinions/viral-video-ferguson-effect-opinion-alexander/>
” in the US. There have been astring of flagrant incidents of police violence 
in Rio de Janeiro 
<http://www.citylab.com/crime/2016/07/disturbing-new-data-on-police-violence-in-rio-de-janeiro/490694/>
 over the past few years, often caught on video. As evidence of abuses
circulated in social media 
<http://observers.france24.com/en/20160622-police-violence-brazil-amateur-video>
, officers became much less proactive in high-risk neighbourhoods. Local 
residents also became less inclined to report crimes or ask for police help, 
often taking justice into their own hands instead.

Rio de Janeiro: 'It's a deep injustice that gun violence is tolerated'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/aug/20/rio-de-janeiro-its-a-deep-injustice-that-this-violence-is-tolerated>
There is a real danger that Rio de Janeiro’s police resorting to the 
repressive tactics of the past. Brazilian police have a martial history. Before 
independence in 1822, law and order duties were the preserve of state-led 
armies. Reforms in the late 30s led to the creation of state-led police forces, 
though most retained their military culture. It was not until the creation of 
the 1988 constitution –Article 144 
<http://presrepublica.jusbrasil.com.br/legislacao/91972/constituicao-da-republica-federativa-do-brasil-1988#art-144>
 in particular – that military and civil police were subordinated to state 
governors.

It is easy to forget that before democracy in 1985 the military police served 
as the clenched fist of the Brazilian state. During the dictatorship, military 
police were regularly deployed to crush opposition and undertake clandestine 
operations, including targeted killings, disappearances and torture. 
Notwithstanding some reform, the legacy endures. The risk now is that with the 
crisis of policing in Rio de Janeiro, even the incremental gains could be lost.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 