
A landmark moment of the long Hillsborough inquests came six months in, when a 
police officer who had spread stories that Liverpool supporters had stolen from 
victims, notoriously published bythe Sun under the headline The Truth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/oct/10/hillsborough-inquest-police-admit-sun-report-fans-looted-corpses-false>
, admitted they were false.

Hillsborough disaster: deadly mistakes and lies that lasted decades
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/26/hillsborough-disaster-deadly-mistakes-and-lies-that-lasted-decades>
Gordon Sykes, a South Yorkshire police inspector on duty at the Leppings Lane 
end on the day of the disaster, had never previously retracted the allegation 
that supporters picked the pockets of dead people. When first questioned at the 
inquests, Sykes maintained that what he had said in an official Police 
Federation meeting on 19 April 1989, the day the Sun published its stories, was 
true: that he had been responsible for 10 dead bodies and “the bodies had 
nothing on them at all, not even a handkerchief”.

In that meeting, which was attended by the then South Yorkshire police chief 
constable, Peter Wright, Sykes also spoke to confirm another infamous 
allegation, that one of the people who died at Hillsborough had “numerous 
wallets” on him, so was “one of the Liverpool pickpockets”.

On Tuesday, the jury at the new inquests into the deaths exonerated fans by 
ruling they did not contribute to the disaster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/26/hillsborough-inquests-jury-says-96-victims-were-unlawfully-killed>
 at the FA Cup semi-final between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest. Jurors also 
decided the 96 victims had been unlawfully killed.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fhillsborough-inquiry-anatomy-of-a-disaster-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hillsborough%3A%20anatomy%20of%20a%20disaster%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fhillsborough-inquiry-anatomy-of-a-disaster-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hillsborough%3A%20anatomy%20of%20a%20disaster%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fhillsborough-inquiry-anatomy-of-a-disaster-video&media=>
Hillsborough: anatomy of a disaster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2016/apr/26/hillsborough-inquiry-anatomy-of-a-disaster-video>
The minutes of the 19 April Police Federation meeting, which the bereaved 
families were unaware of for 23 years, were published as part of the 
Hillsborough Independent Panel disclosure process in 2012.Sykes’s appearance in 
the witness box at the inquests on 10 October 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/oct/10/hillsborough-inquest-police-admit-sun-report-fans-looted-corpses-false>
was the first time he had been questioned publicly on his spreading of those 
claims.

When challenged by Michael Mansfield QC, representing 77 families whose 
relatives died in the crush on the Leppings Lane terrace, Sykes accepted a 
police log from the night of the disaster showed none of the 10 bodies he was 
referring to had been stripped of possessions.

During Sykes’s evidence, it became clear not only that these stories were 
untrue, but that South Yorkshire police had the evidence all along that this 
was the case and yet had encouraged the stories and never corrected them. As a 
routine practice, its officers compiled lists of any money or other items found 
on people who had died. Mark George QC, representing 22 families, told Sykes 
that research of all the property logs showed nobody had “multiple wallets”. 
One person had a wallet and a separate small holder for his bank card. These 
deeply damaging stories, which had been maintained for a quarter of a century, 
crumbled in moments.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fhow-the-suns-truth-about-hillsborough-unravelled%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F289f83ae236894b79330cfae4259d34f7ec9e802%2F673_28_975_1220%2F975.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20Sun's%20'truth'%20about%20Hillsborough%20unravelled&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fhow-the-suns-truth-about-hillsborough-unravelled%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20Sun%27s%20%27truth%27%20about%20Hillsborough%20unravelled&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fhow-the-suns-truth-about-hillsborough-unravelled%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F289f83ae236894b79330cfae4259d34f7ec9e802%2F673_28_975_1220%2F975.jpg>
 Kelvin MacKenzie in 1989. Photograph: Rex Features 
Mansfield told Sykes the story was “a long-term allegation” that had been 
“remembered by generations of people”. Sykes said he had not known before that 
day that the stories were false. He said he had only repeated internally what 
other officers had told him and maintained he was not a source for their 
publication by the Sun.

Asked by Mansfield “as a matter of conscience” whether he would say he 
regretted maintaining those false stories, Sykes, in a courtroom full of 
families whose relatives died, said: “Yes, I regret that.”

Sykes agreed that the allegation of “pilfering” attracted the Sun, whose 
front-page story on Hillsborough on 19 April 1989 remains a notorious low point 
of British journalism.


The newspaper, edited at the time by Kelvin MacKenzie, who was personally 
responsible for the headline The Truth, ran claims from anonymous police 
officers that, as people were dying at Hillsborough, their fellow supporters 
stole from them, urinated on police officers and beat up “brave cops” trying to 
help. The stories were initially defended by the paper as vital reporting of 
the truth, but it emerged in 2012 that they were sent by a Sheffield news 
agency, White’s, and run by the Sun almost verbatim.

BBC footage of the chaos on the Hillsborough pitch, played repeatedly as 
evidence at the inquests, showed not a single instance of supporters attacking 
or urinating on policemen. The claim that supporters higher up the Leppings 
Lane terrace had urinated on police pulling bodies out of the crush appeared to 
have roots in the fact that those who were dying or sustaining serious injuries 
suffered compression asphyxia and many involuntarily urinated, vomited and 
emptied their bowels as they were crushed.

The court heard and saw on film that Liverpool supporters, including doctors, 
nurses and police officers, came out of the crowd to help victims of the 
disaster, and saved lives as a result. Hundreds of supporters were seen 
carrying injured and dead people, using advertising hoardings as makeshift 
stretchers, while the response by the police and ambulance service was 
inadequate.

Many police officers did help greatly, but there was a lack of organisation 
and minimal direction from senior officers, and news footage from the time 
shows many officers standing around, not helping. The stories subsequently sent 
by White’s to the Sun and several other newspapers stated that “angry police 
hit back” at Liverpool fans “who hampered life-saving attempts”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fhow-the-suns-truth-about-hillsborough-unravelled%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faccddfa5016d4f3587208133c222ab1eae28b5a2%2F22_72_676_406%2F676.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20Sun's%20'truth'%20about%20Hillsborough%20unravelled&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fhow-the-suns-truth-about-hillsborough-unravelled%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20Sun%27s%20%27truth%27%20about%20Hillsborough%20unravelled&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fhow-the-suns-truth-about-hillsborough-unravelled%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faccddfa5016d4f3587208133c222ab1eae28b5a2%2F22_72_676_406%2F676.jpg>
 Footage released by the Hillsborough coroner shows supporters trying to help 
the injured. 
Sykes admitted in his evidence that he had approached the Conservative MP 
Irvine Patnick in the police’s Niagara club on the night of the disaster, 
offering to tell him “the truth”, and that officers then told Patnick the 
stories of supporters “pissing on us while we were pulling the dead and injured 
out”, and of being kicked and punched. Sykes agreed that he knew the then prime 
minister, Margaret Thatcher, was arriving the following day, so the allegations 
would go to “the highest level”.

Trevor Kavanagh, the Sun’s political editor at the time, told the Guardian he 
was briefed by Charles Powell, Thatcher’s adviser, the following Tuesday, that 
South Yorkshire police officers had told Thatcher those same stories. Powell 
denies that such a conversation with Kavanagh took place. Sir Bernard Ingham, 
Thatcher’s press secretary, confirmed to the Guardian that the police told 
Thatcher the fans were “a tanked-up mob” and did not admit any failings of 
their own, but Ingham did not recall being told the more lurid stories.

The Independent Police Complaints Commission is investigating 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/oct/12/hillsborough-disaster-new-evidence-ipcc>
 how the stories that found their way into the Sun were spread, as part of its 
investigation into whether South Yorkshire police perverted the course of 
justice after the disaster. Peter Moxon, of White’s news agency, and MacKenzie 
declined to comment.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fjustice-for-those-that-never-went-home-families-react-to-hillsborough-disaster-verdict-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Justice%20for%20those%20that%20never%20went%20home%E2%80%99%3A%20families%20react%20to%20Hillsborough%20disaster%20verdict%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fjustice-for-those-that-never-went-home-families-react-to-hillsborough-disaster-verdict-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Justice%20for%20those%20that%20never%20went%20home%E2%80%99%3A%20families%20react%20to%20Hillsborough%20disaster%20verdict%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fjustice-for-those-that-never-went-home-families-react-to-hillsborough-disaster-verdict-video&media=>
‘Justice for those that never went home’: families react to Hillsborough 
disaster verdict – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/apr/26/justice-for-those-that-never-went-home-families-react-to-hillsborough-disaster-verdict-video> 