
Bryan Singer, director 

Chris McQuarrie rang me up after he’d written about 50 pages of the script and 
said: “What if the villain pulls the whole story off a bulletin board?” And I 
replied: “Now that’s a reason to make the damned movie!”

A lot of the inspiration for Keyser Söze, the villain, came from the character 
of Yuri in the 1980s thrillerNo Way Out <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0093640/> 
– a spy within the Pentagon who may or may not exist. Söze was written with 
Kevin Spacey in mind: he’d approached me at a screening and asked to work with 
us. He wasn’t so famous back then and we thought he’d be great, since we’d 
loved him inGlengarry Glen Ross 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/sep/14/glengarry-glen-ross-classic-dvd-philip-french-review>
. There’s something sly and fun about him that’s perfect for a trickster 
mastermind like Verbal.

I sent the script to over 50 studios and potential funders, all of whom 
rejected it. We had some financing, but that fell through, too. I remember we’d 
all got together to do some early preparations in Arnold Schwarzenegger’s 
building in LA, the one that housed his restaurant Schatzi – and they just shut 
the power off. The thing that saved us wasChazz Palminteri 
<http://www.chazzpalminteri.net/>. He agreed to play the cop, but he had a very 
tiny window in his schedule, just two weeks. So the studios knew they had to 
move fast if they wanted the chance to fund a film with such a bankable star. 
PolyGram and Spelling Films ended up giving us $6.5m and we shot the whole 
thing in 35 days: 33 in LA, two in New York.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjan%2F04%2Fhow-we-made-the-usual-suspects-bryan-singer-gabriel-byrne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa425e979189a0991038dfc322ea4282cd9a72780%2F207_203_2677_1605%2F2677.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20we%20made%20The%20Usual%20Suspects&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjan%2F04%2Fhow-we-made-the-usual-suspects-bryan-singer-gabriel-byrne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20we%20made%20The%20Usual%20Suspects&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjan%2F04%2Fhow-we-made-the-usual-suspects-bryan-singer-gabriel-byrne%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa425e979189a0991038dfc322ea4282cd9a72780%2F207_203_2677_1605%2F2677.jpg>
 ‘It soon became clear we had a phenomenon on our hands’ … Bryan Singer on the 
set of The Usual Suspects. Photograph: Rex 
Benicio del Toro <https://www.theguardian.com/film/beniciodeltoro> had been 
watching an old Stanley Kubrick film calledThe Killing 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0049406/?ref_=nv_sr_3>. There’s a character in it 
who speaks with his teeth clenched throughout and he thought it would be 
interesting if he made Fred Fenster, the crook he was playing, hard to 
understand. I thought Chris and he were playing a joke on me, but then I said 
to myself: “Is there anything Fred says that we need to know? No – he’s just 
here to die!” So I said: “Go for it.”

While we were filming the climactic scene around the docks after dark, the 
authorities received an anonymous call saying there were either drugs or guns 
on the boat we were using, a 220ft minesweeper once owned by the Kennedys. So 
the ATF – the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives – raided the 
boat and shut down the movie. I decided to just go for a walk and rewrite the 
entire third act in my head. But one of the producers woke up the mayor and we 
got permission to carry on.

We finished editing two weeks early, but the film kind of died at the end, 
during the big reveal. Then I had an epiphany while lying by the editing 
machine in my sleeping bag. You finally understood that Kevin, not Gabriel, was 
Söze – but you didn’t feel it viscerally. So I said to my editor: “Find me 
images and sounds that show Kevin is Söze. Cut them into a montage and run it 
just as Chazz’s cop looks at everything on the bulletin board and realises.”

Gramercy, the distributor, had no idea what they had. The film was only shown 
in about 900 cinemas and, in terms of box office, only did about $60m. But it 
soon became clear we had a phenomenon on our hands. The Usual Suspects was on 
hundreds of Top 10 lists and, after winning two Oscars in 1996, became a video 
hit and a cult classic. Bill Clinton was a huge fan, because Chelsea loved it. 
He kept a copy on Air Force One.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjan%2F04%2Fhow-we-made-the-usual-suspects-bryan-singer-gabriel-byrne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F99167a3f7ef59340a0a2a639a85a1cf49ad22dda%2F263_20_2855_1712%2F2855.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20we%20made%20The%20Usual%20Suspects&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjan%2F04%2Fhow-we-made-the-usual-suspects-bryan-singer-gabriel-byrne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20we%20made%20The%20Usual%20Suspects&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjan%2F04%2Fhow-we-made-the-usual-suspects-bryan-singer-gabriel-byrne%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F99167a3f7ef59340a0a2a639a85a1cf49ad22dda%2F263_20_2855_1712%2F2855.jpg>
 Gabriel Byrne: ‘I was laughing all the time.’ Photograph: Rex 
Gabriel Byrne, actor

We did the lineup scene in a post-lunch, giggly kind of atmosphere. Bryan kept 
losing his temper with us, coming over all schoolmasterish, and we tried to get 
serious. But Benicio farting broke the tension, as farts tend to do. And fair 
play to Bryan: he left the camera rolling and kept it all in the film. What 
works brilliantly about the scene is the camaraderie, the sense of a shared 
past between the characters.

I was laughing all the time, every day of shooting. I used to film my own 
footage: I’d get about two hours of Spacey andKevin Pollak 
<http://www.kevinpollak.tv/>, who played wisecracking Hockney, acting the goat 
every day. They’re brilliant impressionists and would be duelling away, hogging 
the limelight. Myself and Benicio were a little quieter, thoughStephen Baldwin 
<http://www.stephenbaldwin.com/>, who played McManus and was still in his 
pre-born-again days, was a rampant eccentric, a hilarious nutjob.

When I first read the script, I found it a page-turner. That’s always a good 
sign with a thriller. But when I got to the end, I thought: “I dunno. The guy 
reads the plot off a wall and then walks away without a limp? Hmmm.” But Bryan 
persuaded me. I did actually pull out of the film a little before shooting, 
though. My marriage had just broken up and I was pretty exhausted. I just 
wanted to be with my kids.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjan%2F04%2Fhow-we-made-the-usual-suspects-bryan-singer-gabriel-byrne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07ee94da601f3f949e72d0307884db3d324426f5%2F0_186_3328_1995%2F3328.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20we%20made%20The%20Usual%20Suspects&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjan%2F04%2Fhow-we-made-the-usual-suspects-bryan-singer-gabriel-byrne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20we%20made%20The%20Usual%20Suspects&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjan%2F04%2Fhow-we-made-the-usual-suspects-bryan-singer-gabriel-byrne%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07ee94da601f3f949e72d0307884db3d324426f5%2F0_186_3328_1995%2F3328.jpg>
 ‘How could a film we’d had such a good time shooting be any good?’ … Byrne, 
Pollak, Baldwin and Spacey. Photograph: Rex 
When you’re in a thriller, you have to know the rules – then forget them and 
just react to what’s happening. There’s a scene where a thug flicks a cigarette 
and it hits McManus right in the eye. That wasn’t planned. And in the lineup, a 
policeman says to Hockney: “We can put you in Queens on the night of the 
hijacking.” He replies: “Really? I live in Queens. Did you put that together 
yourself, Einstein?” All improvised.

I pulled out of the film a little before shooting began – my marriage had just 
broken up and I was exhausted

Afterwards, I think everyone felt a bit sceptical: how could a film we’d had 
such a good time shooting be any good? But we just knew from the silence 
throughout the screening at the Cannes film festival that people were 
absolutely engaged. We were the toast of the town. It was a very heady feeling, 
with all the guys competing to see who’d got the most phone numbers slipped 
into their pockets.

It’s amazing the effect the film still has. Even people who have seen it five 
or six times say to me: “I know who did it, but I still get a surprise.” I was 
filming in New York last year and this guy came up to me and introduced his 
friend, who was blind. The blind guy started to recite all the dialogue from 
the film. I said: “You know the lines better than we did.” And his friend said: 
“That was the last film he saw before he went blind.”
 