
The first time Aaron Rodgers completed a Hail Mary touchdown pass in the NFL 
his throw almost hit the ceiling of Detroit’s Ford Field.Videos shot from the 
stands 
<http://www.cbssports.com/nfl/news/look-this-is-how-close-rodgers-hail-mary-came-to-hitting-the-rafters/>
 andfield <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v-fLoQMnZoc> show the Packers 
quarterback firing the ball so high it nearly grazed a support rafter before 
landing in the arms of tight end Richard Rodgers 66 yards away.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dv-fLoQMnZoc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dv-fLoQMnZoc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dv-fLoQMnZoc&media=>
“I love how Aaron can get it into the end zone, but with that much height I 
was a little concerned,” Packers coach Mike McCarthy said that night in 
December 2015 after Rodgers’s Hail Mary gave Green Bay a last-second victory 
over the Detroit Lions.

And yet the fact Rodgers can propel the ball to such heights, launching it 
like a pigskin rocket, might be what has made him an expert at what is supposed 
to be a prayer of a pass. Three times in 13 months he has thrown Hail Marys for 
touchdowns making him, perhaps, the greatest Hail Mary quarterback in the 
history of pro football. Not that there is much competition for the title.His 
half-time Hail Mary in Sunday’s wildcard win over the New York Giants 
<https://twitter.com/NFL/status/818234000120516609?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw> pushed 
him out of a four-way tie with Cincinnati’s Andy Dalton, former Browns 
quarterback Tim Couch and former Falcons star Steve Bartkowski for most Hail 
Mary touchdowns in NFL history.

Pity the Cowboys: No1 Dallas are facing the NFL's most dangerous team
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/09/green-bay-packers-dallas-cowboys-nfl>
Then again the word precise should not be used in conjunction with Hail Mary. 
The play’s name itself is a plea for a miracle, originally used by Notre Dame’s 
legendary Four Horsemen to describe anylong, seemingly hopeless pass 
<http://agatetype.typepad.com/agate_type/2010/10/hail-mary.html> but has come 
to mean one final desperate throw of at least half-a-field with zeros on the 
clock. When the Hail Mary works, it is one of the most exciting plays in 
sports. It is also the most deflating for the team that gives it up because the 
touchdown usually comes at the end of the game or the end of a half. Rodgers’ 
pass on Sunday came just before half-time giving Green Bay an unexpected 
eight-point lead that broke the Giants.

With Rodgers and the Packers hitting so many in such a short time it’s easy to 
wonder if somehow they have discovered a Hail Mary secret.

In a sense they have.

Following Sunday’s victory over the Giants both Rodgers and receiver Randall 
Cobb, who caught the half-time Hail Mary, used an interesting word. Watching 
Rodgers pass fall toward the end zone it seemed as if New York’s players had
misjudged the ball, they said. The slight error in predicting where it would 
land had allowed Cobb to slip undetected into the back of the end zone where he 
caught the ball so easily it looked as if he had been waiting for it all along.

“He’s throwing it and [opponents] are misjudging it,” Cobb said.

But it might be the very way Rodgers throws his Hail Marys that is causing 
confusion among other team’s defensive backs. In all three of his Hail Marys – 
the Detroit game, the end-of-regulation pass at Arizona in last year’s playoffs 
and on Sunday – the opposing players looked slightly off in their leaps for the 
ball. Rodgers said Sunday he throws his Hail Mary passes higher than other 
quarterbacks. The Ford Field heave is a great example. The balls go so high in 
the air they are more like punts than passes and catching a punt is hard enough 
without having to jostle with other players for position in the end zone.

“When it’s that high, it’s difficult to judge for receivers and defensive 
backs,” Rodgers said Sunday. “As there was a cluster, Randall slipped to the 
back.”

The difference between the Packers receivers and the teams they play is that 
the Green Bay receivers are used to Rodgers’s Hail Mary passes, having seen 
them in practice. Their opponents haven’t. That slight deviation is enough to 
let his team-mates make seemingly easy catches as defenders leap in the wrong 
place.

NFL divisional round: the teams best placed to score an upset
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/11/nfl-divisional-round-cowboys-steelers-patriots>
How high does Rodgers fling his Hail Mary? A few days after the 2015 
game-winner in Detroit, Mike Reuter of the siteCheeseheadtv 
<http://cheeseheadtv.com/> used math to explain 
<http://cheeseheadtv.com/blog/the-numbers-behind-the-hail-mary> the mechanics 
of Rodgers game-winning pass. He calculated that Rodgers threw the ball at an 
arm angle of 53 degrees, sending it flying at 57mph to a peak of 78 feet, 
travelling a total of 105 yards when accounting for the arc for 4.15 seconds. 
It’s hard to imagine another quarterback who can throw a ball as high or as far 
with similar accuracy.

As chaotic as they might seem, Hail Mary passes are not disorganized scrambles 
with the ball heaved into the middle. Teams actually script plays to score on 
such throws as well as design schemes to stop them defensively. McCarthy said 
the team works on Hail Marys each Saturday in their final practice of the week, 
though Rodgers said he hadn’t actually thrown a Hail Mary in practice since 
October.

“We practice it once a week but it’s more for the defense to try and break it 
up,” Cobb said.

Most coaches teach their defenders to knock passes to the ground rather than 
attempt an interception. The thinking is that when a defensive player tries to 
catch the ball he runs the risk of having it slip through his hands or bounce 
off his fingertips giving receivers a chance to grab the ball for a score.

When the Packers offensive players run Hail Mary drills they do so with 
assigned roles. Some drift to the middle of the end zone but one usually has 
the assignment of trying to get to the back of the end zone in case a pass goes 
over the defenders as Rodgers’s did on Sunday. Another player stands just in 
front of the goal line in case the ball goes slightly short of the pack. This 
is where Richard Rodgers was that 2015 night in Detroit.

On Sunday, Cobb’s job was to box-out Giants defenders and give receiver 
Davante Adams - the designated leaper - room to catch the pass. Instead, Cobb 
moved behind the players who misjudged the throw and found the ball dropping 
into his hands.

It might have looked like luck, but even good fortune can be the product of 
science.

Or a just a matter of watching a Hail Mary fly so high it must seem like it 
touches the heavens.
 