
History <https://www.theguardian.com/education/historyandhistoryofart> shows 
that cities have tended to embrace international opportunities in waves and 
cycles. They rarely break out into global activity by themselves. Cities 
participate in collective movements or networks to take advantage of new 
conditions, and often their demise or withdrawal from a global orientation is 
also experienced jointly with other cities as circumstances change, affecting 
many at once.


The world’s first great market-driven cities were established more than 4,000 
years ago in the early bronze age, and their rich history is only now beginning 
to be understood. An urban revolution was taking place, with most residents of 
what is today southern Iraq living in cities, and this process of urbanisation 
was accompanied by trade on a new scale.

Farther east, the cities of Mohenjo-daro and Harappa, in modern-day Pakistan 
along the Indus River valley, were among the first cities with diversified 
economies and societies. They were located on trade routes that specialised in 
gemstones and spanned the whole of central Asia.

The story of cities, part 1: how Alexandria laid foundations for the modern 
world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/mar/14/story-cities-day-1-alexandria-egypt-history-urbanisation-foundations-modern-world>
These cities formed the epicentre of a vast trade network based on a common 
cultural and linguistic community, and built infrastructure to provide good 
standards of living for residents. With their deep-rooted cultures and external 
orientation, they exhibited many of the hallmarks of what are now considered to 
be global cities.

One important lesson to be drawn from the early waves of urbanisation and the 
long distance activities of cities is that prized assets and luxury possessions 
have often been drivers of interconnection and collaboration. As China began to 
expand its horizons, the trade in horses, silk, bamboo, rice and wine was 
vigorous and often used in diplomacy to guarantee peace between empires and 
cities. Silk even became an international currency.

Within a few hundred years, the world had been effectively shrunk by the 
growing sophistication of the trade network. As historian Peter Frankopan, 
author ofThe Silk Roads 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/29/silk-roads-peter-frankopan-review>
, notes: “We think of globalisation as a uniquely modern phenomenon, yet 2,000 
years ago it was a fact of life – one that presented opportunities, created 
problems, and prompted technological advance.”

The first European city to develop networks akin to those of a modern global 
city wasRome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/mar/15/story-cities-part-2-secret-ancient-rome>
. Its empire came to consist of a federation of cities – stretching from Spain 
and Scotland in the west, to the Euphrates river in the east – each of which 
had a territory attached. Rome provided the administration, the stability, the 
monetary regime, and the tax structure for cities to thrive amid a huge spike 
in population mobility and mercantile activity.
 Video by Max Galka <http://metrocosm.com/history-of-cities/> 
By the mid-Roman era, most contemporaneous historians perceived the world to 
have been globalised. Polybiusin his Histories remarked 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=aM2IgwXXYb8C&pg=PT115&lpg=PT115&dq=Polybius+from+this+point+onwards+history+becomes+an+organic+whole:+the+affairs+of+Italy+and+Africa+are+connected+with+those+of+Asia+and+of+Greece,+and+all+events+bear+a+relationship+and+contribute+to+a+single+end&source=bl&ots=Xv7y5kGofp&sig=o4YZLXP5zhlUwVgVPH6e8m9HVSI&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwig9ZLa5dDQAhWJDcAKHdqkBoEQ6AEIGzAA#v=onepage&q=Polybius%20from%20this%20point%20onwards%20history%20becomes%20an%20organic%20whole%3A%20the%20affairs%20of%20Italy%20and%20Africa%20are%20connected%20with%20those%20of%20Asia%20and%20of%20Greece%2C%20and%20all%20events%20bear%20a%20relationship%20and%20contribute%20to%20a%20single%20end&f=false>
 that “from this point onwards history becomes an organic whole: the affairs of 
Italy and Africa are connected with those of Asia and of Greece, and all events 
bear a relationship and contribute to a single end.”

Among the lasting features of this wave of globalisation of trading cities was 
a much larger and more diverse trading of goods across continents. This trade 
fuelled a new commercial zone in the Indian Ocean and direct trade with India. 
The Roman urban network also helped spread religion, and cities in the Roman 
system later became centres of Christian authority. This era was perhaps the 
first time that one city’s power and influence became the fundamental driver of 
intercontinental trade.

But while the rise and fall of Rome as a global city is well documented, 
others have resumed global roles whenever the geopolitical opportunity has 
presented itself.

Istanbul, for example, has experienced many cycles of global exchange over the 
last two millennia because of its unique strategic location as a bridge between
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and Asia. Formerly named 
Byzantium, the city was transformed by Emperor Constantine in the fourth 
century AD and renamed Constantinople because it was close to Rome’s economic 
and political interests in the eastern empire.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-cities-took-over-the-world-a-history-of-globalisation-spanning-4000-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4addb76fd49ac5e25ab1ec1d65aac4ace8782446%2F0_0_5184_3456%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20cities%20took%20over%20the%20world%3A%20a%20history%20of%20globalisation%20spanning%204%2C000%20years&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-cities-took-over-the-world-a-history-of-globalisation-spanning-4000-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20cities%20took%20over%20the%20world%3A%20a%20history%20of%20globalisation%20spanning%204%2C000%20years&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-cities-took-over-the-world-a-history-of-globalisation-spanning-4000-years%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4addb76fd49ac5e25ab1ec1d65aac4ace8782446%2F0_0_5184_3456%2F5184.jpg>
 Contemporary historians of the mid-Roman era believed that the word had been 
globalised. Photograph: Andrew Medichini/AP 
Roman leaders needed an open city located close to Rome’s supply market along 
the Silk Roads, across the Black Sea, through rich Anatolia and into the wheat 
producing areas of the Nile. As a result, Constantinople assumed command and 
control functions, and drew ambitious Roman citizens and traders from around 
the world.

As a cultural melting pot, Constantinople facilitated the spread of 
Christianity across the Roman Empire. Despite the collapse of the western Roman 
empire, Constantinople later resumed its role as a vibrant trade hub in the 
eighth and ninth centuries. Under a tight system of state control over 
factories, workshops, wages and tariffs, the city processed trade from Russia, 
India, China and Africa, with merchants attracted by its gold and silk 
commodities. It transported goods to and from Venice, Pisa, Genoa and all over 
Europe, and at one point is said to have been home 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=y-1fwix23zMC&pg=PR3&dq=Robert+Clifford+Ostergren+and+Mathias+Le+Bosse,+The+Europeans:+A+Geography+of+People,+Culture,+and+Environment+(London:+Guildford+Press,+2011).&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjz17D25tDQAhXrCMAKHdkVD28Q6AEIGzAA#v=onepage&q=Robert%20Clifford%20Ostergren%20and%20Mathias%20Le%20Bosse%2C%20The%20Europeans%3A%20A%20Geography%20of%20People%2C%20Culture%2C%20and%20Environment%20(London%3A%20Guildford%20Press%2C%202011).&f=false>
 to 60,000 Italians.

Much later, under the Ottomans, Constantinople became Istanbul. Its leaders 
grasped the new opportunities of European trade and actively invited the 
intelligentsia of the Islamic world. While Istanbul’s influence has waxed and 
waned, its strategic position has repeatedly proved an asset to outward-looking 
leaders, and has created an enduring appeal to immigrant entrepreneurs and 
innovators.

Europe’s commercial wave

A new wave of cities developing international roles took place in the 11th and 
12th centuries, as part of what is sometimes called the “commercial 
revolution”. As population and urbanisation grew, a two-pronged system of 
cities emerged: the lucrative trade in the Baltic Sea and the North Sea of 
Europe was gathering pace in some, while many Italian city-states were becoming 
prosperous through shipping, commerce and banking.


This was a time when many systems of rule and governance coexisted. As cities 
grew, they became independent or semi-autonomous entities with their own 
military capability. This wave of globalisation was also characterised by a 
powerful merchant class that dominated the market economy and had an active 
role in city leadership.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-cities-took-over-the-world-a-history-of-globalisation-spanning-4000-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f771b97927fa7e86b74cb61569fa62e091697c6%2F0_0_3520_2504%2F3520.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20cities%20took%20over%20the%20world%3A%20a%20history%20of%20globalisation%20spanning%204%2C000%20years&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-cities-took-over-the-world-a-history-of-globalisation-spanning-4000-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20cities%20took%20over%20the%20world%3A%20a%20history%20of%20globalisation%20spanning%204%2C000%20years&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-cities-took-over-the-world-a-history-of-globalisation-spanning-4000-years%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f771b97927fa7e86b74cb61569fa62e091697c6%2F0_0_3520_2504%2F3520.jpg>
 Italian women spinning silk and heating silkworms on the fire – engraving by 
Stradanus (1523-1605). Illustration: De Agostini Picture Library/Getty Images 
Italian cities took advantage of geopolitical opportunity during the Crusades 
<http://www.history.com/topics/crusades> to expand their trading and banking 
services for the military campaigns. Venice in particular gained privileges in 
the Byzantine empire and extended relations with the pope.

With Italian success came influence. By the late 1200s, Florence and Genoa 
were minting gold coins, and Florence’s own currency became dominant in 
European commercial and financial markets.

This wave marked the first time that so many regions and religions had come 
into sustained contact. In her book Before European Hegemony, sociologistJanet 
Abu-Lughod identified eight regional circuits 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books/about/Before_European_Hegemony.html?id=rYlgGU2SLiQC>
 in operation, stretching from north-western Europe all the way to modern-day 
Malaysia and Philippines.

It was also a time in which cities achieved great cultural, artistic and 
intellectual advances, spawning both trade and knowledge exchange. The circuits 
Abu-Lughod described thus fostered interregional contact through cultural 
gateway cities such as Venice in the west and Malacca in the east. In between, 
the geopolitical opportunity for peace after the 13th-century Mongol invasions 
was also a catalyst for ports and caravan cities in the Middle East to develop 
and globalise.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-cities-took-over-the-world-a-history-of-globalisation-spanning-4000-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F90a2ab7f8e2ec2242d9fc8d51cc4bdbad7b4bc18%2F0_909_6674_4003%2F6674.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20cities%20took%20over%20the%20world%3A%20a%20history%20of%20globalisation%20spanning%204%2C000%20years&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-cities-took-over-the-world-a-history-of-globalisation-spanning-4000-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20cities%20took%20over%20the%20world%3A%20a%20history%20of%20globalisation%20spanning%204%2C000%20years&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-cities-took-over-the-world-a-history-of-globalisation-spanning-4000-years%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F90a2ab7f8e2ec2242d9fc8d51cc4bdbad7b4bc18%2F0_909_6674_4003%2F6674.jpg>
 The Blue Mosque in Tabriz, once described as the most cosmopolitan city in the 
world. Photograph: Alamy 
One example was Tabriz, in modern-day Iran, which attracted a large number of 
European merchants and was described as the most cosmopolitan city in the world 
in the 13th century. It specialised in gold and silk cloth-weaving, and in 
trade in precious stones. Five hundred years later, the city was still noted 
for its independent merchant class.

The Black Death devastated many of the leading cities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/may/23/eye-watering-scale-of-black-deaths-impact-on-england-revealed>
 in this wave, but the advanced network of the Hanseatic League and the 
globalising cities in southern Europe endured into the 15th century, brought 
together by a shared desire to conduct free trade. This wave is thus often seen 
as vital to the later spread and success of modern capitalism.

The post-Columbus wave

Beginning in around 1500, cities that had globalised in the previous wave 
began experiencing multiple and long-lasting setbacks. Agriculture was earning 
diminishing returns, and religious warfare gripped many cities. Italian and 
Iberian cities began to experience deindustrialisation, uncompetitive wages, 
and loss of market share to cities in the east. A shift in favour of northern 
European cities began to take place.

Globalisation <https://www.theguardian.com/world/globalisation> had taken on 
new characteristics, with new roles for cities in a system where sovereign 
states were stamping their authority. Advances in map-making and ship-building 
helped improve communications and reduce transaction costs for cities. One 
change was in the nature of consumption: a new class of consumers appeared with 
a shared goal to signal position and status, driving major growth in production 
and retail sectors.

Gradually a much better connectivity emerged, characterised by an enlarged and 
integrated global market, new notions of a single world, and a sense of 
cosmopolitan identity. Northern European cities profited the most from this 
wave of globalisation.

At this point, the beginnings of what became known as the “great divergence”  
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=hSxACQAAQBAJ>between Europe and Asia 
appeared. Many arguments have been put forward to explain it. One factor was 
that merchants and bankers in northern European cities were able to protect 
their investments by legal means and to separate their capital from personal 
risk, which was not possible in Asian cities. A higher pace of urban growth, 
greater self-government for cities, and a strong trade focus in urban public 
policy have all also been suggested as key factors explaining the divergence.

European cities are often described as the globalising cities of this era, but 
Islamic conquests were also enabling a new group of cities to go global. From 
the early 1500s, northern Indian cities in particular were brought into a vast 
Muslim sphere of influence under theMughal empire 
<https://www.britannica.com/topic/Mughal-dynasty>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-cities-took-over-the-world-a-history-of-globalisation-spanning-4000-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63be824df968cb44586116ee34a6f302e84a5f33%2F0_0_4500_3095%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20cities%20took%20over%20the%20world%3A%20a%20history%20of%20globalisation%20spanning%204%2C000%20years&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-cities-took-over-the-world-a-history-of-globalisation-spanning-4000-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20cities%20took%20over%20the%20world%3A%20a%20history%20of%20globalisation%20spanning%204%2C000%20years&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-cities-took-over-the-world-a-history-of-globalisation-spanning-4000-years%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63be824df968cb44586116ee34a6f302e84a5f33%2F0_0_4500_3095%2F4500.jpg>
 English grandee rides in an Indian procession, ‘Company Style’ (East India 
Company). Illustration: Universal Images Group/Getty Images 
The unification of commercial practices, common customs and beliefs allowed 
cities such as Delhi to become tightly integrated into Eurasian trade routes, 
especially for the export of textiles. Ahmedabad and Agra also thrived, aided 
by factory investment from the English East India Company – and, along with 
Delhi, reached a peak population of 400,000 people. Meanwhile Surat, nearly 200 
miles north of Mumbai, became possibly the world’s largest port, home to 
150,000 people and at one point the richest city in India.

Many assessments place these Indian cities’ output at least on a par with 
leading European centres of the time – of which Antwerp and Amsterdam stand out 
as the two foremost world cities in continental Europe during this wave of 
globalisation.

Antwerp rose to prominence by cannily exploiting its gateway location at the 
heart of a rapidly expanding Habsburg empire. Thefall of Constantinople in 1453 
<https://www.historytoday.com/judith-herrin/fall-constantinople> had weakened 
Venice and Genoa, and the Scheldt river made the city a gateway to navigable 
inland waterways reaching far into western Europe. When nearby Bruges’ own port 
silted up, Antwerp’s merchants made incremental gains in the wool and fabric 
trade, and Portuguese spices from the East Indies started passing through the 
port.

By the mid-15th century, Antwerp had become a preferred trading hub between 
the Baltic, the North Sea, northern Italy, France, and the Holy Roman empire. A 
few decades later, the city’s stock exchange and banking sector had become the 
largest in Europe.

Antwerp benefited from geopolitical advantage when it was absorbed into the 
Spanish Hapsburg Empire. This gave the city privileged access to a large 
unified market, and it became an entry point for silver and other precious 
goods shipped from Spanish American possessions. At its height, 40% of the 
world’s trade was channelled through Antwerp. It was Europe’s truly global 
city, with an ambitious and enlightened merchant class.

The phenomenal wealth generated saw urbanisation in the region reach 30%. The 
city’s population peaked at 100,000 by the 1560s, but then the city suffered 
from Spanish insistence that Atlantic trade go through Seville – a way of 
diverting wealth to Spain. Entanglement in the Dutch revolt and religious 
conflicts saw the city sacked and repeatedly besieged. While it retained a 
merchant ethos, it never recovered its mantle as a global city, although its 
port is today resurgent.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-cities-took-over-the-world-a-history-of-globalisation-spanning-4000-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1c1dc46a55543377feab47c77174bb950edc457%2F0_266_4064_2438%2F4064.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20cities%20took%20over%20the%20world%3A%20a%20history%20of%20globalisation%20spanning%204%2C000%20years&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-cities-took-over-the-world-a-history-of-globalisation-spanning-4000-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20cities%20took%20over%20the%20world%3A%20a%20history%20of%20globalisation%20spanning%204%2C000%20years&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-cities-took-over-the-world-a-history-of-globalisation-spanning-4000-years%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1c1dc46a55543377feab47c77174bb950edc457%2F0_266_4064_2438%2F4064.jpg>
 In the late 15th century, Antwerp had built the largest financial centre in 
Europe. Photograph: Don McPhee for the Guardian 
Amsterdam took over the mantle from Antwerp and Genoa as Europe’s major 
commercial city during the 1600s, and it developed many of the technologies 
that underpin today’s global cities. The overthrow of the Spanish elite, which 
had hampered the interests of powerful local merchants, granted more freedom to 
Dutch traders. Soon after, the blockade of Spanish Antwerp triggered a flight 
of capital and talented entrepreneurs to Amsterdam.

The protestant city became prized for its safe port, political stability and 
access to inland waterways. It maximised its appeal by guaranteeing equal 
protection to all merchants, wherever they came from, while developing 
standardised institutional norms. A relaxed attitude toward interest-bearing 
loans spurred the development of modern finance in Amsterdam, including 
maritime insurance, making the city both the logistical hub and the trade 
financier of Europe.

The establishment of the Dutch East India Company and a powerful navy helped 
Amsterdam secure control over trade routes and outposts as far away as Japan, 
Indonesia, India and theAmericas <https://www.theguardian.com/world/americas>. 
The city’s shipbuilders pioneered new materials and produced cheap cargo 
vessels, which considerably lowered transport costs. Amsterdam gained 
sufficient leverage over supply chains to wage price wars, prioritising volumes 
over margins to eliminate weak competition and secure a monopoly over pepper, 
tea and sugar imports.

The impact of European wars and the rise of British naval supremacy in the 
18th century meant that London eventually took Amsterdam’s mantle. However, 
much of the know-how and assets acquired during Amsterdam’s era of supremacy 
remain relevant today.

The industrial wave

For many observers of urban history, the modern era of globalisation began 
with industrialisation, whose effects occurred at a pace and on a scale not 
previously seen. Although the globalisation of traded goods long preceded the 
industrial era, industrialisation really reshaped whole societies, not just the 
tastes of upper-income groups.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-cities-took-over-the-world-a-history-of-globalisation-spanning-4000-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F144f41d9e3467727a55d0f970d0d7f5985e984f5%2F0_0_5933_3520%2F5933.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20cities%20took%20over%20the%20world%3A%20a%20history%20of%20globalisation%20spanning%204%2C000%20years&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-cities-took-over-the-world-a-history-of-globalisation-spanning-4000-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20cities%20took%20over%20the%20world%3A%20a%20history%20of%20globalisation%20spanning%204%2C000%20years&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-cities-took-over-the-world-a-history-of-globalisation-spanning-4000-years%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F144f41d9e3467727a55d0f970d0d7f5985e984f5%2F0_0_5933_3520%2F5933.jpg>
 The trading post of the Dutch East India Company in Hooghly, now a district in 
west Bengal, 1665. Illustration: History Archive/Rex/Shutterstock 
By this point in history, national governments had become much more effective 
at managing global trade and reducing the dangers involved in carrying it out, 
while transport was becoming ever more reliable. These were the preconditions 
for successive waves of cities to become substantially more global in their 
traded specialisations, to diversify their populations, and to increase their 
capacity for commercial innovation.


Story of cities #9: Kingston, Jamaica – a city born of 'wickedness' and 
disaster
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/mar/24/story-cities-9-kingston-jamaica-richest-wickedest-city-world>
A turning point in globalisation occurred in the late 18th century owing to a 
confluence of geopolitics and technological innovation. The victory of Britain 
in the Seven Years’ War enhanced British power in India, and a more 
comprehensive system of colonial government was installed. This situation 
favoured British industrial development, and in 1771 the first water-powered 
cotton spinning model was invented. At the same time, colonial disputes in 
North and Central America intensified.

As a result, a new wave of cities globalised as part of the British Empire. 
The slave trade, managed from London, was undoubtedly critical in financing 
British imperialism and industrialisation, and cities such as Bridgetown, 
Barbados and Kingston, Jamaica became subject to the empire’s needs.

As the empire extended its reach east, Cape Town, Calcutta and Hong Kong all 
became globally engaged cities, with Calcutta (now Kolkata) subject to a system 
of mercantilism, while Hong Kong became an instrument for promoting free trade. 
In east Africa, Mombasa grew into an important trade entrepôt with strong 
maritime business links to India and the Arabian Peninsula, as well as the 
long-distance caravan trade across east Africa. Another city that became open 
to global flows was Canton.

The British empire likely had a greater impact on global cities than any of 
its rivals, and many of the cities enrolled in the imperial project remain 
highly influential actors on the global stage today. London, New York, Hong 
Kong, Singapore, Sydney, Mumbai, Shanghai, Toronto, Cape Town and Boston each 
developed their global roles and reach within the British Empire.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-cities-took-over-the-world-a-history-of-globalisation-spanning-4000-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4357162ac182ff39a2e8b0b8d2685c7f95554ec%2F0_419_2976_1785%2F2976.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20cities%20took%20over%20the%20world%3A%20a%20history%20of%20globalisation%20spanning%204%2C000%20years&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-cities-took-over-the-world-a-history-of-globalisation-spanning-4000-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20cities%20took%20over%20the%20world%3A%20a%20history%20of%20globalisation%20spanning%204%2C000%20years&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-cities-took-over-the-world-a-history-of-globalisation-spanning-4000-years%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4357162ac182ff39a2e8b0b8d2685c7f95554ec%2F0_419_2976_1785%2F2976.jpg>
 During the 19th century, Manchester emerged as the world’s first global 
industrial city. Photograph: The Art Archive/Rex/Shutterstock 
Infrastructure connectivity was often the catalyst. One of the clearest 
examples of this was in New York. In 1825, a growth coalition between New 
York’s city leaders and businesses began the construction of theErie Canal 
<http://www.eriecanal.org/>, connecting the city to the Great Lakes and the US 
midwest. The availability of this water route resulted in a phenomenal surge in 
local manufacturing and trade and new financial and insurance industries 
supplying the growth of a young America. New York moved ahead of Philadelphia 
in financial power as a result of its enhanced connectivity.

In Britain itself, cities such as Liverpool, Bristol and Birmingham prospered 
from having access to imperial markets 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=hOrJAgAAQBAJ&printsec=frontcover&dq=%E2%80%8B12%E2%80%8B.+Tristram+Hunt,+Ten+Cities+That+Made+an+Empire+(London:+Penguin,+2014).&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjL9PPs8tDQAhVKFMAKHeVvAYAQ6AEIGzAA#v=onepage&q&f=false>
 and from the global reach they afforded. Manchester emerged as the world’s 
first global industrial city, while London, the city at the centre of it all, 
surpassed Beijing’s all-time population record, reaching two million by 1840.

Across Europe, a wave of cities benefited from unprecedented urban growth and 
industrial expansion. The European cities that globalised in this wave had in 
common a specific set of assets: historical trading knowledge, locations on 
major rivers or seas, and the ready availability of natural resources such as 
coal, iron and water.

Drawing on this asset base, places such as Bilbao, Bremen, Leipzig, Sheffield 
and Turin were able to build exceptional manufacturing economies, specialising 
in engineering, machine tools, ships and other industrial areas. They attracted 
a huge manufacturing labour force, and became pioneering cities in terms of 
their public services, education and civic institutions.

Economic globalisation expanded massively in the decades leading up to the 
first world war. One of the main groups of cities to globalise in this wave was 
in the United States. American cities became substantially differentiated and 
specialised at this time, with their own mix of industrial enterprises and the 
“second wave” of immigration giving them very different social and cultural 
characters.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-cities-took-over-the-world-a-history-of-globalisation-spanning-4000-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91b1106e854236e83e7bd33f3d93296185b03915%2F0_0_5170_3503%2F5170.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20cities%20took%20over%20the%20world%3A%20a%20history%20of%20globalisation%20spanning%204%2C000%20years&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-cities-took-over-the-world-a-history-of-globalisation-spanning-4000-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20cities%20took%20over%20the%20world%3A%20a%20history%20of%20globalisation%20spanning%204%2C000%20years&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-cities-took-over-the-world-a-history-of-globalisation-spanning-4000-years%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91b1106e854236e83e7bd33f3d93296185b03915%2F0_0_5170_3503%2F5170.jpg>
 Two men survey the construction of the Brooklyn Bridge with Manhattan in the 
background, 1877. Photograph: Museum of the City of New York/Getty Images 
New York specialised in advanced services and consumer products, Chicago 
became a centre for heavy industrial plants, while Los Angeles moved into oil 
and the creative industries. Diverse and entrepreneurial populations played an 
indispensable role: New York was the main US gateway for immigrant labor. Tens 
of millions of immigrants, mainly Europeans, came to the city, and many settled 
there in search of a better life, making New York a cosmopolitan city on a 
scale never previously seen.

Infrastructure was a critical enabler for this wave of American city 
globalisation. The installation of canals, railroads, water systems, highways 
and sewerage systems helped to provide the conditions for a half-century of 
extraordinary growth.

The postwar wave

A major wave of cities taking on global roles unfolded in the aftermath of the 
second world war. Changing geopolitics and American investment support provided 
opportunities for many commercially minded cities to become highly specialised. 
Often benefiting from sound city leadership, cities in this wave of 
globalisation were successful in restoration and in planning ahead to avoid the 
worst in congestion.

Munich, Toronto and Tokyo are all prominent examples of cities in this wave. 
These cities were able to achieve intensive clustering and organisational 
modernisation in a supportive political environment among higher tiers of 
government. For this wave, it was key for corporate proficiency to partner with 
a strong knowledge platform in order to develop successful products for export.

Cities in this wave of globalisation were prominent well into the mid-1970s, 
by which time they had acquired many of the core assets that make them 
competitive today. Although these cities have experienced slowdowns and 
setbacks in the last 25 years, they have successfully preserved a culture of 
knowledge and innovation to support specialisations with global reach.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-cities-took-over-the-world-a-history-of-globalisation-spanning-4000-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa7ead012e986f7e84f0b5360478b11e799874675%2F106_0_3123_1875%2F3123.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20cities%20took%20over%20the%20world%3A%20a%20history%20of%20globalisation%20spanning%204%2C000%20years&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-cities-took-over-the-world-a-history-of-globalisation-spanning-4000-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20cities%20took%20over%20the%20world%3A%20a%20history%20of%20globalisation%20spanning%204%2C000%20years&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-cities-took-over-the-world-a-history-of-globalisation-spanning-4000-years%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa7ead012e986f7e84f0b5360478b11e799874675%2F106_0_3123_1875%2F3123.jpg>
 Migrant workers on their day off in Singapore. Photograph: Tim Chong/Reuters 
Perhaps the most remarkable example during this wave was Singapore, the only 
global city also to be a fully autonomous city-state. Prior to independence in 
1965, Singapore’s economic prospects were uncertain. Its traditional entrepôt 
trade industries had declined, manufacturing was stagnant, and housing and 
roads were in urgent need of modernization.

Story of cities #27: Singapore – the most meticulously planned city in the 
world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/21/story-cities-singapore-carefully-planned-lee-kuan-yew>
But its first prime minister, Lee Kuan Yew, was not deterred by geographic 
limitations and immediately pursued a labour-intensive industrialisation policy 
that was open to overseas capital. Emphasis was placed on tax incentives for 
industrial investors, improved labour discipline, technical education and 
foreign expertise, in order to specialise in industrial technologies. Singapore 
immediately tried to build trade and connectivity roles by leveraging its 
position as a multilingual city, with links to east and west, and a strong 
western legal model.

Since achieving global status, Singapore has continued to adapt to the global 
marketplace through state-led policies and programmes that encourage light 
manufacturing and high-tech research investment. Its economic development board 
and housing development board, in particular, have been able to leverage the 
scale of large public institutions to create effective systems at a citywide 
scale.

The postwar wave of globalisation was also striking for the process of 
decolonisation, which saw many cities lose their imperial roles. In the past, 
many global cities fell along with the empires that spawned them. Indeed, for 
London, this period coincided with a challenging postwar process of 
deindustrialisation, port decline and outdated regulation in its stock 
exchange, banking and insurance sectors.

Although London attracted immigrants from the Commonwealth diaspora, the city 
continued to lose population until the mid-1980s, when it resumed the journey 
toward becoming a quintessential global city.

The IT-powered wave

The decade after the 1973 oil crisis and the subsequent global slowdown was a 
period of great flux in the global economy. Older models became discredited and 
new ideas and solutions came to the fore. By the mid-1980s, a new wave of 
globalisation was under way, led initially by a small group of cities but with 
an increasing number of smaller cities also becoming globally engaged and 
globally oriented for the first time.

For a small, elite group of financial centres, the mid-1980s started a wave of 
resurgence when these cities began to re-attract people, business and capital. 
London and New York began to reverse their population decline, and in London 
the 1986 “Big Bang” in financial services marked the start of a new generation 
of international banks and surrounding business services firms setting up shop.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-cities-took-over-the-world-a-history-of-globalisation-spanning-4000-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6857718b4b7d359492bcc3a142359938bdfb0d59%2F0_197_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20cities%20took%20over%20the%20world%3A%20a%20history%20of%20globalisation%20spanning%204%2C000%20years&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-cities-took-over-the-world-a-history-of-globalisation-spanning-4000-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20cities%20took%20over%20the%20world%3A%20a%20history%20of%20globalisation%20spanning%204%2C000%20years&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-cities-took-over-the-world-a-history-of-globalisation-spanning-4000-years%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6857718b4b7d359492bcc3a142359938bdfb0d59%2F0_197_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 The New York Stock Exchange in Lower Manhattan. Photograph: Spencer 
Platt/Getty Images 
For Asian members of this group, such as Tokyo and Singapore, this wave was 
characterised by a more selective and tactical globalisation. It promoted 
internationalisation of financial and business sectors through liberalisation 
reforms, while also protecting against over-exposure to western cultural 
influences.

In this wave of globalisation, cities also re-established themselves as 
information and media capitals in their respective regions. This period was 
notable for significant governance changes in some cities – such as the 
abolition and then the recreation of a metropolitan government system in 
London; the new “one country, two systems” policy in Hong Kong, which sought to 
guarantee that it would maintain a capitalist system for 50 years after the 
1997 British handover to China; and the increasing withdrawal of federal 
government from its role in New York City.

Story of cities #39: Shenzhen – from rural village to the world's largest 
megalopolis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/may/10/story-of-cities-39-shenzhen-from-rural-village-to-the-worlds-largest-megalopolis>
At the same time, the new wave of globalisation was showcasing a set of cities 
that until then had not been globally oriented. The global geopolitical context 
had changed considerably as a result of the fall of communism in Europe, the 
unification of Germany, the opening up of China beginning in 1980, andthe Oslo 
peace accords 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/sep/12/oslo-israel-reneged-colonial-palestine>
, part of the Arab-Israeli peace process, in 1993.

The agreements of new trade arrangements – such as the European Economic Area 
and the North American Free Trade Association, and the establishment of the 
World Trade Organisation in 1995 – ushered in an era of multilateralism that 
allowed many countries and cities to globalise. These factors created a climate 
of opportunity for the growth of leading cities in the Brics (Brazil, Russia, 
India, China and South Africa) and the smaller Mints (Mexico, Indonesia, 
Nigeria, Turkey) economies, as well as in eastern Europe, the Middle East and 
Australasia. Among the most notable cities coming to global prominence in this 
wave were Bangalore, Barcelona, Cape Town, Sydney, and Tel Aviv.

New tradable specialisations associated with the information and 
communications technology revolution precipitated the unexpected globalisation 
of many cities.Bangalore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/jun/13/insider-guide-bangalore-silicon-valley-india>
 is one of the most striking examples: its electronics specialisation took off 
in 1985 after the arrival of Texas Instruments. This prompted other 
multinational firms to relocate and boosted the local software design 
environment, laying the platform for successive climbs up the value chain.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-cities-took-over-the-world-a-history-of-globalisation-spanning-4000-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a2534df34e7da00763c4aab3b14259b7ad99f33%2F0_78_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20cities%20took%20over%20the%20world%3A%20a%20history%20of%20globalisation%20spanning%204%2C000%20years&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-cities-took-over-the-world-a-history-of-globalisation-spanning-4000-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20cities%20took%20over%20the%20world%3A%20a%20history%20of%20globalisation%20spanning%204%2C000%20years&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-cities-took-over-the-world-a-history-of-globalisation-spanning-4000-years%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a2534df34e7da00763c4aab3b14259b7ad99f33%2F0_78_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 The Infosys Technologies headquarters in Bangalore, India’s tech hub. 
Photograph: Bloomberg/Getty Images 
Another striking example of innovation driving a city’s globalisation in this 
wave comes from Tel Aviv. This young city’s spirit of commerce and 
entrepreneurial capitalism translated into an open and horizontal concentration 
of skills in finance, optics, communications, information systems, medicine, 
and software. This strong technological base was reinforced by the Israeli 
military’s investment in the city’s advanced defence industries, which produced 
a regular flow of highly proficient talent.

With its tech cluster benefiting from a supportive early stage investor 
arrangement and a positive attitude to risk, Tel Aviv is noted for its numerous 
tech inventions. The city’s leadership has since sought to reinforce this 
global potential by emphasising Tel Aviv’s pluralism, tolerance and investment 
readiness.

This wave of globalisation was distinctive for a more intentional approach by 
city governments and the rise of strategic planning for globalising cities. For 
cities like Barcelona and Tel Aviv, city governments designed strategic 
approaches to infrastructure, quality of life, and architecture in order to 
build a profile that would attract global talent. Many also converted their 
commercial land into use by more innovation-led activity. In nearly all cases, 
these cities witnessed an unprecedented wave of population diversification, 
fuelled by immigration and mobile talent. By the climax of this wave in 2007-8, 
these cities had a totally different global proposition – and new problems that 
had appeared alongside growth.

The current wave

The most recent cycle of globalisation has seen the start of a new wave of 
distinctive, specialised and globally aspirational cities. Many of them are 
higher-income cities within their respective regions and seek to leverage their 
efficient infrastructure, improved quality of life, and better security and 
environmental performance compared to the larger megacities.

Cities in this wave are less likely to have major political or institutional 
functions. Rather, they are competing in more dynamic and fast-moving global 
industries where opportunities have arisen for greater market share. Among this 
group are Brisbane, San Diego, Shenzhen, Santiago de Chile and Stockholm.

In the aftermath of the global financial crisis and its impact on public 
sector finances, the ability of cities to find new sources and tools for 
investment has been a key enabler for globalising cities since 2008. Brisbane 
is an example of a city that has been able to globalise with the help of a 
large and financially astute city government, which has used the surplus from 
its recent commodities boom to erect a more international model of economic 
development.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-cities-took-over-the-world-a-history-of-globalisation-spanning-4000-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c269abe04fe829de50b1657be29dc5a35905660%2F0_0_3800_2533%2F3800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20cities%20took%20over%20the%20world%3A%20a%20history%20of%20globalisation%20spanning%204%2C000%20years&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-cities-took-over-the-world-a-history-of-globalisation-spanning-4000-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20cities%20took%20over%20the%20world%3A%20a%20history%20of%20globalisation%20spanning%204%2C000%20years&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-cities-took-over-the-world-a-history-of-globalisation-spanning-4000-years%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c269abe04fe829de50b1657be29dc5a35905660%2F0_0_3800_2533%2F3800.jpg>
 Brisbane has been helped to ‘globalise’ by support from local government. 
Photograph: Jeff Greenberg/UIG via Getty Images 
The Brisbane city council has pursued a wide range of joint ventures, 
sponsored business conventions and sporting events, and convinced its state 
government to prioritise Brisbane for road and rail infrastructure funding. It 
has also experimented with public-private partnerships and toll roads, with 
some success.

Much of the city’s investment attractiveness owes to its reputation in Asia, 
where its ambassadors programme has boosted expatriate investment connections 
and reached out much more successfully to Chinese, Japanese and Malaysian 
commodities firms. The ability to attract a new generation of immigrants and 
entrepreneurs has been central to many cities’ success in this wave.

The ability to convey opportunity and appeal to the world, whether to talent, 
investors, or visitors, has also been very important. London is an example of a 
city that has been successful in this area since 2008. Through a unified 
organisation, London & Partners, it has delivered a consistent message to the 
world that it is open for business and investment and has made substantial 
strides in becoming a city that welcomes new technology and science industries.

In medicine, media, and digital industries, the ingredients of leading sector 
innovations, combined with an open city with deep labour markets and 
cosmopolitan liveability, have created a winning formula. The city’s advocacy 
organisations have helped maintain its appeal by successfully lobbying for a 
competitive business and tax climate.

Lessons for future cities

A comparison of the waves of globalisation in the last two centuries with the 
earlier waves shows clearly that the duration of each wave is becoming shorter. 
Where waves once lasted a century or more, they now appear to run their course 
in as little as 15-to-20 years, and in the future this duration may be even 
shorter. As the global economy becomes ever more integrated, globalising city 
waves increasingly come to resemble global economic cycles, and the windows of 
opportunity for cities to participate close quickly.

Although there are vast differences between the networks of cities along the 
ancient Silk Roads and the 21st-century system of global value chains and 
competitive advantage, there are also striking parallels. Today’s cities can 
learn much from how those in previous waves built and sustained their 
competitive attributes, and how to avoid becoming locked into unsustainable or 
unproductive cycles of development.

A history of cities in 50 buildings – interactive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/ng-interactive/2015/jun/05/history-cities-50-buildings-interactive>
Not all of today’s leading cities were destined to play key roles in the 
global economy. Many started out from an unpromising or uncompetitive situation 
because of either internal weaknesses or external disadvantages. Sometimes 
cities have endured long periods of global isolation, and begin to 
internationalise only when geopolitical changes occur and foreign investment 
arrives. This was certainly the case in the 20th century, and in the 21st 
century it is visible in many other cities outside the established west.

Equally, the ebb and flow of cities’ fortunes means that some cities we take 
for granted today as global will likely be much less globally oriented in 
future. History shows this is a risk if cities lose competitiveness in traded 
sectors, fail to embrace innovation or to project influence, are closed to 
immigration and entrepreneurship, or are unable to adapt to a changing 
geopolitical or geoeconomic centre of gravity.

The ingredients of today’s most successful cities are sometimes hard for other 
cities to emulate directly, and so alternative strategies and pathways to 
global engagement have arisen. Over time, these alternative pathways result in 
very different kinds of global cities.

This extract was reprinted with permission from Global Cities: A Short History 
<https://www.brookings.edu/book/global-cities-a-short-history/> by Greg Clark 
(Brookings Institution Press, 2016). Clark is a city advisor, mentor and senior 
fellow at theBrookings Institution <https://www.brookings.edu/>

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion

 