
Matt Busby, Ally McCoist, Alex Neil and Lee McCulloch are just a few of the 
famous (and not so famous) footballers who have emerged from the small Scottish 
town of Bellshill. Sitting just 16km from the centre of Glasgow, Bellshill has 
produced more than its fair share of top level footballers given its modest 
population of just over 20,000. The town also gave us a football manager who 
went to Italy for one season and came home with a rather unfortunate record in 
the Turin derby.

William “Billy” Chalmers was born in July 1907 and had a successful if rather 
understated playing career both north and south of the border. In his 21 years 
as a player, Chalmers represented no fewer than seven different clubs. Three of 
them – Newcastle United, Grimsby Town and Notts County – played in black and 
white stripe jerseys. Indeed Notts County’s colours even inspired Chalmers’ 
future club,Juventus <https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus>, to take 
on their now famous strip.

Milan v Internazionale: the game that made Mark Hateley a Rossoneri hero
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-gentleman-ultra/2016/nov/20/milan-internazionale-mark-hateley-serie-a-derby>
As Chalmers’ playing career wound down, he gradually segued into management, 
although he did maintain a playing role when in his first job, at Aldershot 
Town. After spending the formative years of the second world war managing in 
Hampshire, he moved on for a short spell in Wales with Ebbw Vale. It was only 
then, after these initial forays into management, that Juventus came calling, 
in what remains one of the most surprising appointments ever made by the Turin 
giants.

How did Chalmers end up on their radar? Well, an article from the Motherwell 
Times gives us a clue. With the 1948-49 season approaching, the club were in 
need of a head coach after Renato Cesarini had stepped down from the role. The 
story goes that the Juventus president at the time, Gianni Agnelli, was set on 
bringing in a British manager after he had watched theAzzurri lose 4-0 to 
England in Turin earlier that year.

Of all the potential candidates, Juventus plumped for Chalmers, a decision 
that remains a mystery. Again, the Motherwell Times provides a small hint as to 
why he may have been given the job. Apparently, Billy had once scored for 
Newcastle againstAmbrosiana Inter 
<https://it.wikipedia.org/wiki/Associazione_Sportiva_Ambrosiana-Inter> in Milan 
back in 1929. This seems to be his only connection with Italy throughout his 
playing career. Admittedly, it seems highly unlikely that such a match would 
have caught the interest of Agnelli and, even if it had, it seems a little 
far-fetched to suggest that this goal would have inspired the Juve president to 
appoint Chalmers as a head coach.

Nevertheless, for whatever reason, Chalmers was given the job. Unfortunately 
for the Scotsman, however, it was to last just a single season. Juventus 
finished fourth, while neighbours Torino –who were devastated by the Superga 
tragedy later that season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-gentleman-ultra/2016/jan/06/torino-fans-home-stadium-turin-crowdfund>
 – claimed their fifth consecutive title. Chalmers’ time with the club is not 
remembered with great fondness, as his eccentric training methods did little to 
endear himself to the players.

Chalmers’ season in Turin left him with a rather unfortunate record, which 
still stands to this day. On 28 October 1948, Juventus hostedIl Grande Torino 
in the first of the two derbies that season. Franco Ossola gaveTorino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/torino> the lead on 25 minutes, before an 
own goal by Aldo Ballarin drew the Old Lady level just before the break. As the 
match reached its conclusion, Torino magisterial captain, Valentino Mazzola, 
scored the decisive second and gave the visitors the victory.

Juventus had their chance for revenge four months later at Torino’s iconic 
Filadelfia stadium. Sadly for Chalmers, the match once again went against him. 
With only 17 minutes on the clock, Torino took the lead through Guglielmo 
Gabetto. Juve pegged their rivals back early in the second half but two goals 
from Ezio Loik gave Torino another victory.

Any Juventus coach can lose a derby – and many did during the era of Il Grande 
Torino – but Chalmers holds the unenviable record of being the only Bianconeri 
manager in history to have taken charge of two or more derbies and lost all of 
them. Thus, the man from Bellshill has gone down inDerby della Mole history. 
Unfortunately for Chalmers and Juventus, it is for the wrong reasons. As fate 
would have it, Juventus won the league the next season.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dkpm0Mjf0xsQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dkpm0Mjf0xsQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dkpm0Mjf0xsQ&media=>
• This blog first appeared on The Gentleman Ultra 
<http://www.thegentlemanultra.com/>
• Follow Kevin Nolan <https://twitter.com/KevinNolan11> and The Gentleman Ultra
 <https://twitter.com/GentlemanUltra> on Twitter
 