
Former New York City mayor Michael Bloomberg once called the New York Police 
Department “the seventh biggest army in the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/jan/02/occupy-wall-street-where-next>
”. Whether or not that stat is true, there’s no doubt the NYPD is a large and 
powerful organisation – and, as current mayor Bill de Blasio learned last year, 
it does not alwaystake criticism well 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jan/05/bill-de-blasio-says-nypd-disrespectful-for-turning-backs>
.


Enter Ben Wellington <https://about.me/benwellington>, a Brooklyn-based 
quantitative analyst who runs the storytelling-through-data websiteIQuantNY 
<http://iquantny.tumblr.com/>. The map above comes from a recent IQuantNY post 
<http://iquantny.tumblr.com/post/144197004989/the-nypd-was-systematically-ticketing-legally>
 examining New York City’s parking ticket data, which isfreely available online 
<https://data.cityofnewyork.us/dataset/Parking-Violations-Issued-Fiscal-Year-2015/c284-tqph>
. The red circles represent millions of dollars in erroneous parking tickets, 
issued by NYPD officers to vehicles that were in fact parked legally.

The rise and fall of great world cities: 5,700 years of urbanisation – mapped
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/jun/27/rise-fall-great-world-cities-5700-years-urbanisation-mapped>
Before posting the analysis online, Wellington reached out to the NYPD to 
report his findings. A few weeks later he received the response below: a 
thoughtful, polite note from the NYPD acknowledging the error and listing the 
steps they’ve taken to correct it.

Mr Wellington’s analysis identified errors the department made in issuing 
parking summonses. It appears to be a misunderstanding by officers on patrol of 
a recent, abstruse change in the parking rules. We appreciate Mr Wellington 
bringing this anomaly to our attention.

The department’s internal analysis found that patrol officers who are 
unfamiliar with the change have observed vehicles parked in front of pedestrian 
ramps and issued a summons in error ...As a result, the department sent a 
training message to all officers clarifying the rule change and has 
communicated to commanders of precincts with the highest number of summonses, 
informing them of the issues within their command.

Thanks to this analysis and the availability of this open data, the department 
is also taking steps to digitally monitor these types of summonses to ensure 
that they are being issued correctly.

It’s incredible to consider that one person analysing numbers on their home 
computer has the power to influence an organisation as large and powerful as 
the NYPD, something successive mayors have struggled to do.

As Wellington said: “This is what Open Data is all about. This was coming from 
the NYPD, not generally celebrated for its transparency, and yet it’s the most 
open and honest response I have received from anyNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> City agency to date. Imagine a 
city where all agencies embrace this sort of analysis, instead of deflecting 
and hiding from it.”

The story certainly underscores the power of open government data. It also, 
perhaps, illustrates why some government agencies may be reluctant to open up 
their data for public inspection – and why public involvement is crucial in 
making sure they do.

Mapping microbes in the world’s subway systems

Last year, researchers at Weill Cornell Medicine College used DNA samples from 
each of New York City’s subway stations to producethe city’s first pathogen map 
<http://www.pathomap.org/>. Nearly half the DNA sequenced did not match any 
known organism, highlighting just how much we have yet to learn about the 
bacteria that subway commuters come into contact with every day.

In one of its most shared graphics of 2015, the Wall Street Journal used the 
study’s results to build aninteractive map, <http://graphics.wsj.com/patho-map/>
 which let New Yorkers explore their subway system and see exactly which 
pathogens were found in each station.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fplayer.vimeo.com%2Fvideo%2F171773795&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fplayer.vimeo.com%2Fvideo%2F171773795>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fplayer.vimeo.com%2Fvideo%2F171773795&media=>
Video: the MetaSUB project 
Soon, 54 other cities around the world may be able to do the same. The team of 
researchers behind PathoMap have gathered together an international consortium 
of laboratories to conduct a similar analysis for subway systems around the 
world. The project, calledMetaSUB <http://metasub.org/> (Metagenomics and 
Metadesign of the Subways and Urban Biomes), kicked off last month with a 
Global City Sampling Day: with the help of “citizen scientists”, the event 
brought in more than 4,000 DNA samples worldwide.

With billions of people passing through the world’s subways each year, MetaSUB 
aims to improve our understanding of infectious disease and help the world 
build smarter, healthier cities. The project is scheduled to last five years, 
so don’t expect to see results any time soon. But you can keep track of 
MetaSub’s progress:this map <http://metasub.org/interactive-map/> tracks the 
number of samples collected in each of the 54 participating cities.

How Germany commutes

 Sleep until 7am, calmly eat some Frühstück, walk to the office. For many 
Germans, this is but a dream – or so saysZeit Online 
<http://www.zeit.de/feature/pendeln-stau-arbeit-verkehr-wohnort-arbeitsweg-ballungsraeume>
 in its recent analysis of how Germany commutes to work.

As is the case in many countries, an increasingly specialised labour market 
along with a rising cost of living in city centres has caused many Germans to 
live far from their places of work. As a result, 27% of German workers now 
commute for 30 minutes or more each way.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEVKSR2ypkbA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEVKSR2ypkbA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEVKSR2ypkbA&media=>
Video: how Germany commutes. Source: Zeit Online 
 Zeit analyses the commuting patterns in each of Germany’s 402 districts. And 
with a series of beautifully designed animated maps, it shows what these 
characteristic “ant trails” reveal about each region’s social structure.

In the Rhein-Main district, Frankfurt is clearly the dominant destination. But 
cities such as Mainz, Darmstadt and Aschaffenburg also attract many workers, 
keeping the commuters reasonably spread out. In direct contrast to Rhein-Main 
is theBerlin district, where all roads lead to one location: Berlin.

Munich boasts the largest number of inbound commuters of any German district. 
As Zeit highlights, the beauty of Munich’s landscapes and its high cost of 
living give workers two strong incentives to live outside the city centre.

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 