
There is a law of unintended consequences that, naturally, also applies to 
lawmaking itself: the prohibition on the sale of alcohol in the US from 
1920-33, for example, led to a massive increase in organised crime: manna from 
heaven for gangsters. Or, to take another example, thefirst amendment 
<https://www.law.cornell.edu/constitution/first_amendment> to the US 
constitution guarantees freedom of speech. But in theCitizens United 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Citizens_United_v._FEC> case of 2010, the US 
supreme court interpreted it as guaranteeing the freedom of corporations to 
spend as much money as they liked in support of political campaigns. 
Corporations, apparently, are legal “persons” entitled to the same rights as 
citizens (which led Lawrence Lessig, a noted US lawyer, to declare that he 
would only believe corporations were people when the state of Texas executed 
one).

But the same fictions apply over here too. In 2008, British American Tobacco 
argued that companies’ freedom of speech was “protected by article 10 of the 
European convention on human rights, which recognises free speech (including 
commercial free speech) as a fundamental right”. The moral – for lawmakers 
anyway – is: be careful what you legislate for. You never know where a statute 
will wind up or whom it might eventually benefit.

Here’s a cautionary tale to illustrate that. In 1996, two US congressmen, 
Chris Cox (Republican, California) and Ron Wyden (Democrat, Oregon), drafted a 
law that they felt was essential if the nascent internet was to grow and 
prosper. The clause they wrote eventually found its way on to the statute book 
as section 230 of the Communications Decency Act, part of thesprawling 
Telecommunications Act 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Telecommunications_Act_of_1996>, which Bill 
Clinton signed into law in 1996.

Cox and Wyden had been troubled by the rise of libel suits against internet 
service providers (ISPs) for defamatory content posted on websites that they 
hosted. The key sentence in the clause that they eventually drafted read: “No 
provider or user of an interactive computer service shall be treated as the 
publisher or speaker of any information provided by another information content 
provider.”

This single sentence provided the legal underpinning for how the world wide 
web has evolved. It says that companies that provide services on the internet 
are not publishers, but conduits or intermediaries, and therefore cannot be 
held legally responsible for any content that passes through their servers. 
It’s why companies such as Twitter, Google andFacebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> continue to maintain that 
they are not really responsible for the stuff that they host: they’re merely 
conduits – tech companies, not publishers.

This is outrageous, but to counteract the smugness of hindsight we should 
acknowledge that the Cox/Wyden clause seemed wise and judicious when it was 
composed. Without it, the growth of the web (and therefore of the internet as a 
whole) might have been significantly slower, with ISPs and entrepreneurs 
cautious or paralysed by the spectre of the endless lawsuits to be expected in 
a litigious society such as the US.

Would we have had Wikipedia, for example, if Jimmy Wales and his collaborators 
had lived in fear of every mail delivery? Or many of the campaigning and 
empowering websites that have challenged unscrupulous corporations, 
authoritarian leaders, corrupt officials, censors and sundry bad actors that 
pollute the social and economic world? Without Cox/Wyden, cyberspace would be a 
poorer, less diverse, less interesting place.

But in the last decade, we have also seen an astonishing rise in hate speech, 
harassment, bullying, revenge porn, fake news and other abuses of digital 
technology. And, except for some limited exceptions, notably child pornography, 
the platforms that relay this stuff have been able to avoid taking 
responsibility for what they are hosting – by using section 230 of the 1996 act 
as their legal backstop. So it turns out that the freedom that the two 
congressmen were trying to protect is a double-edged sword.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fhow-two-congressmen-created-the-internets-biggest-names%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8ce872114288b3a5a648561e7bed41f65733a76%2F0_308_4607_2764%2F4607.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20two%20congressmen%20created%20the%20internet%E2%80%99s%20biggest%20names%20%7C%20John%20Naughton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fhow-two-congressmen-created-the-internets-biggest-names%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20two%20congressmen%20created%20the%20internet%E2%80%99s%20biggest%20names%20%7C%20John%20Naughton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fhow-two-congressmen-created-the-internets-biggest-names%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8ce872114288b3a5a648561e7bed41f65733a76%2F0_308_4607_2764%2F4607.jpg>
 Airbnb and others have profited from the protection afforded by section 230. 
Photograph: Alamy 
Now, courtesy of a terrific article 
<https://backchannel.com/the-most-important-law-in-tech-has-a-problem-64f5464128b6#.jd3jjzx3d>
 by tech journalist Christopher Zara, we discover that the reach of section 230 
extends into really unexpected places, such as the “sharing economy”, for 
example. The current seeker of its protection isAirbnb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/airbnb>, the platform that enables 
people to list or rent short-term lodging in their homes at rents set by the 
property owner. Airbnb takes a cut on the resulting transactions.

It transpires that not all of these property owners are angels and some post 
(shock, horror!) illegal or misleading ads on the site. So city officials in a 
number of places are now going afterAirbnb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/airbnb>, on the grounds that if it 
takes a commission from the proceeds of illegality, then it must take 
responsibility (and pay fines) for the alleged misdeeds.

Airbnb, naturally, demurs: it is, after all, only an intermediary. “See 
section 230”, its lawyers say. Memo to Cox/Wyden: be careful what you legislate 
for. You might just get it.
 