
Swansea <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/swansea> High Street is a jumble of 
deserted, crumbling buildings, fast food restaurants and charity shops. It is 
routinely branded one of the worst high streets in Britain; a toxic combination 
of rising rents, shiny new shopping centres and online retailers has sucked 
economic activity from the area.

From Penzance to Inverness, towns and cities across Britain have been blighted 
by a similar fate. The proportion of empty shops in Britain is climbing – 10.1% 
of premises lie vacant, according toan August report from the British Retail 
Consortium and Springboard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/15/fall-in-pop-up-shops-pushes-uk-retail-vacancy-rates-above-10>
.

But Swansea’s high street is fighting back and may provide a blueprint for 
others to follow, according to Mary Portas, retail expert and author of a2011 
government report on how to revive Britain’s high streets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/dec/13/portas-high-streets-disapper>
. This wasteland, which links the train station to the town centre, has been 
adopted by a tribe of artists, actors and entrepreneurs who are breathing new 
life into the street.

Art galleries, dance studios, a theatre and pubs – like The Last Resort, which 
is about to be opened by Matt “The Hat” Lawton, who is behind Cardiff’s 
successfulStreet Food Circus <http://www.streetfoodcircus.co.uk/> – are 
starting to take root. Portas says: “The initiative has to come from the people 
living in these communities to make it happen. It makes my heart leap to hear 
things like this, but some towns just don’t have these people to make it 
happen.”

Fixing the high street by attracting creative industries was the brainchild of 
Huw Williams, commercial manager atCoastal Housing 
<http://www.coastalhousing.co.uk/Pages/default.aspx>, a not-for-profit social 
housing organisation. “I wrote a paper in 2004 that suggested engaging with the 
creative sector in order to improve the area,” he says. Coastal has bankrolled 
the regeneration, pumping in £25m: it snapped up empty buildings, built flats 
and renovated shop and office space.

Gareth Davies, director of development at Coastal, says: “We bought our first 
parcel of land around here in 1998. We are now starting to see the benefits of 
the work that began 20 years ago, and that’s how long regeneration takes.”

He says the easy option would be to go for big retailers. But Coastal has 
stuck to its plan to establish a “creative quarter”. “We turned away some of 
the chains – the Subways and the Greggs – because that’s not what we want to 
be,” he says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fart-restarts-heart-swansea-high-street%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34f11eb1762b1eeb79ed23cc3e7758087c34019c%2F0_276_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20art%20restarted%20the%20heart%20of%20Swansea%E2%80%99s%20high%20street&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fart-restarts-heart-swansea-high-street%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20art%20restarted%20the%20heart%20of%20Swansea%E2%80%99s%20high%20street&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fart-restarts-heart-swansea-high-street%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34f11eb1762b1eeb79ed23cc3e7758087c34019c%2F0_276_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 High Street art: We Are Here, by Sean Puleston, commissioned by Locws 
International. Photograph: Dimitris Legakis/Athena Pictures 
Coastal’s plan was simple – offer attractive rents to creative businesses and 
hope they would attract other, similar ventures. It worked.Elysium Gallery & 
Studios <http://www.elysiumgallery.com/> and Volcano Theatre 
<http://www.volcanotheatre.co.uk/> were two of the first of this new breed to 
find a home on the high street. Elysium opened in 2006 and now rents out 
studios to about 100 artists across three sites, as well as hosting exhibitions.

Jonathan Powell, director and curator at the gallery, says: “We were here when 
it was really bad. It was derelict: there were only three or four shops and 
most of them were off-licences. It was a forgotten place, really.

“There are still problems, don’t get me wrong. But there are now a group of 
people putting energy back into the street – it’s going to take time.”

As well as attracting the arty crowd, Coastal has targeted young entrepreneurs 
by signing upTechHub Swansea <https://swansea.techhub.com/>, which rents office 
space to 20 startup businesses.

One of these is Veeqo <http://www.veeqo.com/>, founded by Matt Warren, who 
grew up in nearby Llanelli. Veeqo has developed a software platform that 
performs back-office functions for the likes of Amazon and eBay. It has 30 
employees, has already raised £1.4m from investors and is in the process of 
raising a further £4m.

Perhaps the most visible sign of a renaissance is the giant mural by 
sought-after artist Pure Evil of the film star Elizabeth Taylor, emblazoned 
across the Volcano Theatre building. Pure Evil,aka Charles Uzzell-Edwards 
<http://pureevilgallery.virb.com/who-is-pure-evil>, said he wanted to “play my 
part” in the street’s makeover, as it held good memories for him.

Taylor’s visage glares down at a gang of art college students across the 
street, who chatter excitedly as they push the immaculately painted red door to 
enter Galerie Simpson.

Inside the elegant Aladdin’s cave of paintings and sculptures, Jane Simpson 
greets the budding artists. Simpson grew up in Swansea, but studied at the 
Chelsea College of Art and the Royal Academy of Art in London.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fart-restarts-heart-swansea-high-street%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c654a0e1cd0422f958c06e8b3e97a59aed344c2%2F0_0_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20art%20restarted%20the%20heart%20of%20Swansea%E2%80%99s%20high%20street&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fart-restarts-heart-swansea-high-street%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20art%20restarted%20the%20heart%20of%20Swansea%E2%80%99s%20high%20street&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fart-restarts-heart-swansea-high-street%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c654a0e1cd0422f958c06e8b3e97a59aed344c2%2F0_0_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Jane Simpson, owner of Galerie Simpson. Photograph: Dimitris Legakis/Athena 
Pictures 
Simpson quit London just over three years ago to return home. She has been 
pleasantly surprised by the newfound confidence that is coursing through her 
hometown.

“I think Swansea is a very different place now – there is a lot of energy. We 
are not Cardiff, which is good because big towns have to deal with big 
expectations. There’s always been that grit in the oyster in Swansea. We can be 
a bit more maverick here.”

Portas reckons this nascent regeneration will show other towns that change is 
possible. “The truth is, you can make regeneration happen,” the retail expert 
says. “If you have a community of people that want to make change happen. 
However, there are councils that just can’t see a way out of it.

“You need vision – these people who are doing it are obviously rooted in that 
community. If you have people living there, that’s when change happens. Good 
for them.”
 