
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> lies like he 
tweets: erratically, at all hours, sometimes in malice and sometimes in 
self-contradiction, and sometimes without any apparent purpose at all. The 
Guardian has catalogued more than 100 falsehoods made by the Republican nominee 
over the last 150 days, and sorted them according to theme.

Hillary Clinton has been caught in more than a dozen falsehoods of her own, 
for instanceabout her email practices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/06/hillary-clinton-email-investigation-fact-check>
 andher past support 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/19/third-presidential-debate-fact-check-trump-clinton>
 for the Trans-Pacific Partnership. But Clinton often makes her falsehoods in 
dense legalese, making them hard to pin a motive on: many could as easily be 
errors as lies, careless exaggeration or deliberately misleading claims.

Trump, on the other hand, will say “wrong 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b2Ec_oHjEFM>” when he hears his own quotes. 
His own lawyers methim in pairs 
<https://twitter.com/nycsouthpaw/status/783914466379464704?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw> 
to counteract his lying, courtdocuments 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/graphics/politics/2016-election/trump-lies/> 
show. He has invented false statistics, fictional videos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/03/trump-attacks-clinton-scandal-us-400-million-iran-nuclear-deal>
 and sex tapes and a nonexistent man named “John Miller” to talk about his sex 
life.Months of fact-checking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/series/lyin-trump-a-weekly-fact-check>, 
however, reveal methods and, whether he means to or not, Trump’s guide to 
success through lying.

FBI director: new Hillary Clinton emails show no criminal wrongdoing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/06/fbi-director-hillary-clinton-email-investigation-criminal-james-comey>
Degrade and destroy

For decades, Trump has described America and its leaders in apocalyptic terms. 
He thought Ronald Reaganweak 
<http://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2015/10/donald-trump-ronald-reagan-213288>
 and “a disaster 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/trump-reagan-tax-cuts_us_56cf5c95e4b03260bf75fcbd>
”, helambasted 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/andrewkaczynski/trump-spoke-against-nafta-at-1993-convention>
George HW Bush 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/inside-the-trump-bush-melodrama-decades-of-tension-and-discomfort/2015/08/27/419b0686-4be6-11e5-902f-39e9219e574b_story.html>
 and Bill Clinton’s policies, and after supporting George W Bush’s Iraq 
invasion, quickly dismissed that war as “a mess 
<http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/statements/2016/sep/07/donald-trump/trump-repeats-wrong-claim-he-opposed-iraq-war/>
”.

In Trump’s world, crime is always rising (the national rate fell for decades 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/26/rate-murder-fbi-increase>), 
and African Americans are “living in hell” (they are not 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/26/debate-fact-check-trump-clinton-live-quotes-hofstra>
). Migrants are flooding in (more Mexicans are leaving than arriving 
<http://www.pewhispanic.org/2015/11/19/more-mexicans-leaving-than-coming-to-the-u-s/>
), and they bring violence (there is no evidence 
<https://www.factcheck.org/2016/08/factchecking-trump-on-immigration/> that 
they do). Civilian and military leaders are always clueless (Trump receivedfive 
deferments 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/02/us/politics/donald-trump-draft-record.html?_r=0>
 from Vietnam), except when they love him. We have no idea who refugees or 
undocumented migrants are, and they take our jobs (we know very well 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/02/donald-trump-syria-refugees-us-immigration-security-terrorism>
 who they are;they include his wife 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/melania-trump-modeled-in-u-s-prior-to-getting-work-visa/>
).

Trump’s vision of the US has been, for decades, one of dystopia – he even 
described the 1990sas a crisis worse than the Great Depression 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/donald-trump-lies-this-week-taxes-bankruptcy>
. But amid all this desolation Trump gains three things. He fuels doubt and 
fear, leaving people vulnerable; he denigrates his opposition en masse, blaming 
the world on them; and he raises himself up above the nonexistent wreckage.

Embiggen big league

Like a man who once took a joke 
<http://money.cnn.com/2016/03/04/media/donald-trump-fingers-hands/> about the 
size of his hands too hard, Trump spends a lot of time trying to look as large 
as possible, from his never-proven $10bn worth (Forbesestimates 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/jenniferwang/2016/09/28/the-definitive-look-at-donald-trumps-wealth-new/#3d4c500d7e2d>
 $3.7bn) to crowds at his rallies and his success inmeaningless 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/30/donald-trump-fact-check-debate-polls-us-jobs>
 internet polls.

This self-inflation is pierced throughout by paperwork. In March, the Guardian 
found that Trump valued a New York golf courseat $50m in one document and at 
$1.4m in a court filing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/12/donald-trump-briarcliff-manor-golf-course-tax>
 (he sued to pay lower taxes). On Thursday, the New York Timesreported 
similarly huge discrepancies 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/04/us/politics/donald-trump-money.html?hp&action=click&pgtype=Homepage&clickSource=story-heading&module=first-column-region&region=top-news&WT.nav=top-news&_r=0>
 in his reported income. The Washington Post hasshown repeatedly 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/trump-foundation-lacks-the-certification-required-for-charities-that-solicit-money/2016/09/29/7dac6a68-8658-11e6-ac72-a29979381495_story.html>
 that Trump’s boasts of charitable giving have virtually nothing behind them.

He has also falsely 
<http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/statements/2016/oct/10/donald-trump/trump-says-ice-endorsed-him/>
 bragged of endorsements from federal agencies and claimed “many environmental 
awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/14/donald-trump-lies-this-week-fact-check-climate-change-crime>
”, and tried the ploy in reverse: he has called themillions his father gave him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/26/debate-fact-check-trump-clinton-live-quotes-hofstra>
 as “a small loan” and portrayed his$916m loss in 1995 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/02/us/politics/donald-trump-taxes.html> as an 
example of “smart” tax avoidance.

This sort of exaggeration is a common sales technique: overstate the value of 
a product to make it more attractive and assume it will be bargained downward. 
In February Trump confessed “everything’s negotiable 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2016/02/29/trump-on-nyt-interview-leak-everythings-negotiable/>
” about his statements, then quickly said building a wall on the southern 
border was “not negotiable” – the equivalent of a liar saying: “Everything I 
say is false, but not that.”

Shout at the messenger
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fdonald-trump-fbi-hillary-clinton-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Donald%20Trump%20on%20Hillary%20Clinton%20and%20the%20FBI%3A%20%E2%80%98She%E2%80%99s%20protected%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fdonald-trump-fbi-hillary-clinton-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Donald%20Trump%20on%20Hillary%20Clinton%20and%20the%20FBI%3A%20%E2%80%98She%E2%80%99s%20protected%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fdonald-trump-fbi-hillary-clinton-video&media=>
Donald Trump on Hillary Clinton and the FBI: ‘She’s protected’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/06/donald-trump-fbi-hillary-clinton-video>
Whenever in doubt, Trump attacks what he calls “the dishonest media”, accusing 
reporters (without evidence) of bias, inaccuracy and a failure to show the size 
of his rallies. He ignores that reporters quote him extensively, call his 
campaign for comment, interview his supporters, his rival’s campaign and 
independent voters and experts. He often cites news stories about Clinton, and 
even praised fact-checkers in a presidential debate for catching her in a 
falsehood.

At every rally, Trump says the cameras refuse to show his audience, even 
though his campaignforces cameras to stay within a small pen 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/kyleblaine/how-donald-trump-bent-television-to-his-will>
, where they pan to show the crowd – as anyone at his rallies or watching 
online can see. Only one camera at each event stays fixed on Trump: the shared 
“pool” camera, whose footage networks share and which stays on Trump so as not 
to miss his speech.

Last week, NBC’s Katy Tur, a target for criticism from the podium, noted 
<https://twitter.com/chrisgolden/status/794024376496553985> that Trump “has 
joked in private with reporters about how he understands how the pool camera 
works”.

“This is a shtick that he does to rile up his base,” she said, “to give them 
an excuse for polls that might not be in his favor, to give them an excuse to 
berate someone that’s not Donald Trump.”

Trump’s scorched earth insults, like his attacks on other institutions, try to 
delegitimize authority and leave only himself in its place. But while most 
Americans still respectother institutions 
<http://www.gallup.com/poll/7177/americans-respect-military-honor-veterans.aspx>
 thatTrump 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/09/trump-suggests-fire-the-generals-227862> 
has 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/19/donald-trump-john-mccain-vietnam-prisoner-of-war>
demeaned 
<http://abcnews.go.com/Politics/donald-trump-father-fallen-soldier-ive-made-lot/story?id=41015051>
, the press was vulnerable. Decades of cable news punditry had already
diminished opinion 
<http://www.gallup.com/poll/185927/americans-trust-media-remains-historical-low.aspx>
 of the press, and the internet has sapped major newspapers of their powers to 
compete with openly partisan sites, fake news and social media networks. Trump 
tried to fill the vacuum.

Conspiracy smoke, fire not required

Trump’s most famous false conspiracy, about Barack Obama’s birthplace and who 
started birtherism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/09/presidential-debate-fact-check-donald-trump-hillary-clinton>
, is only one of many.

There was Ted Cruz’s father and JFK’s assassin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/29/donald-trump-lies-this-week-russia-ted-cruz-dnc>
, drawn from a tabloid with ties to Trump 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/national-enquirer-shielded-donald-trump-from-playboy-models-affair-allegation-1478309380>
; the climate change “hoax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/14/donald-trump-lies-this-week-fact-check-climate-change-crime>
” that was “invented by the Chinese 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/14/donald-trump-lies-this-week-fact-check-climate-change-crime>
”; theMuslims who cheered September 11 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/11/donald-trump-9-11-comments-since-2001>
; thevaccines that cause autism 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/185734595864563712?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
; the Miss Universe “sex tape <http://www.snopes.com/alicia-machado-adult-star/>
”; thepolitical correctness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/19/trump-fact-check-iraq-war-san-bernardino-nato>
 of San Bernardino; thesecret Muslim  
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/251382918960783361?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
 president and hissecret terror agenda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/13/trump-obama-secret-agenda-pulse-nightclub-shooting-orlando>
; andthe antisemitism-tinged plot of bankers and the media 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/14/us/politics/trump-comments-linked-to-antisemitism.html>
.

This category includes what the Toronto Star’s Daniel Dale calls “pointless 
<http://www.cnn.com/videos/tv/2016/10/30/the-man-who-fact-checked-trump.cnn>” 
lies, the oddest of Trump’s falsehoods. These claims includean invented letter 
from the NFL 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/early-lead/wp/2016/07/30/nfl-refutes-trump-claim-that-it-sent-him-a-letter-bashing-debate-schedule/>
 about debates, the authorship of the poemThe Snake 
<http://www.cbc.ca/radio/asithappens/as-it-happens-tuesday-edition-1.3769348/oscar-brown-jr-s-daughter-wants-trump-to-stop-reading-her-dad-s-snake-lyrics-at-rallies-1.3771185>
, and that Frank Sinatradidn’t hate 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB124389543795174079> My Way his entire life. 

Trump himself seems to get lost in the intrigue, and sometimes slips into a 
Dadaist jumble of anti-Clinton allusions –Whitewater 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2016/10/tracking-the-clinton-controversies-from-whitewater-to-benghazi/396182/>
,cattle futures 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/news/2016/06/clinton-scandals-donald-trump>, Benghazi
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/29/benghazi-report-finds-no-smoking-gun-and-hillary-clinton-happy-to-move-on>
,uranium <http://www.snopes.com/hillary-clinton-uranium-russia-deal/>, 
Blumenthal 
<http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/article/2016/sep/20/hillary-clinton-and-birther-movement-still-no-ther/>
, “bleaching 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/28/donald-trump-lies-this-week-fact-check-mosul-clinton-emails>
”33,000 emails 
<http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/statements/2016/oct/09/donald-trump/donald-trump-says-hillary-clinton-deleted-33000-em/>
 – that sound sinister when put together. This is apparently the desired 
effect: a haze of noxious sentiment, even if no one has found fire for all that 
smoke.

For more than 20 years, journalists and congressional Republicans have tried. 
The latter have spent tens ofmillions 
<http://benghazicommittee.com/benghazi-by-the-numbers/> of taxpayer dollars 
<http://edition.cnn.com/ALLPOLITICS/stories/1999/04/01/counsel.probe.costs/> 
investigating the Clintons’ associations andcareless email practices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/06/fbi-director-hillary-clinton-email-investigation-criminal-james-comey>
 but have yet to find criminal conduct.

Arguably Trump’s worst conspiracy is his insistence that voter fraud has 
“rigged” the election, which merges his fringe claims with his attack on 
institutions. No evidence supports the claim of widespread fraud and the
decentralized electoral college makes such a conspiracy functionally impossible 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/21/donald-trump-fact-check-rigged-election-voter>
 – but the claim gives Trump something to blame failure on besides himself. 
Like his other conspiracies, it sows doubt and distrust, diminishing the nation 
so that Trump can portray himself as an authority.

Trump’s favorite escape from this maze is the phrase “there’s something going 
on 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/video/politics/trump-suggests-theres-something-going-on-with-obama/2016/06/13/4b10e990-317f-11e6-ab9d-1da2b0f24f93_video.html>
”, which lets Trump suggest malevolence, claim ignorance and say nothing of 
substance at all.

Deny everything

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fdonald-trump-jay-z-language-tampa-rally-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%3A%20I%E2%80%99ve%20never%20used%20language%20as%20bad%20as%20Jay%20Z%E2%80%99s%20in%20my%20life%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fdonald-trump-jay-z-language-tampa-rally-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%3A%20I%E2%80%99ve%20never%20used%20language%20as%20bad%20as%20Jay%20Z%E2%80%99s%20in%20my%20life%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fdonald-trump-jay-z-language-tampa-rally-video&media=>
Trump: I’ve never used language as bad as Jay Z’s in my life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/05/donald-trump-jay-z-language-tampa-rally-video>
When cornered by his own quotes or something he doesn’t know, Trump often lies 
with blunt denials – “wrong!” – or variations of the phrases “that’s very 
important” or “we’ll look into it”.

Inside a Donald Trump rally: good people in a feedback loop of paranoia and 
hate
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/30/donald-trump-voters-rally-election-crowd>
He also tries to wriggle out of uncomfortable situations with this tactic, 
most notably when he claimed ignorance of David Duke, the former Ku Klux Klan 
leader who has professed approval for his policies, and white supremacists. 
Trump had disavowed Duke a few days earlier anddenounced him in 2000 
<http://partners.nytimes.com/library/politics/camp/021400wh-ref-trump.html>, 
but in February he refused to condemn like-minded supporters,saying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/28/donald-trump-former-kkk-leader-david-duke>
: “I don’t know anything about what you’re even talking about with white 
supremacy or white supremacists.”

On the edge of pointless self-inflation and denial is Trump’s fixation with 
Vladimir Putin, whom he has claimed to know “very well 
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2016/07/watch-trump-brag-of-speaking-to-vladimir-putin>
”, to have spoken with “indirectly and directly 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?time_continue=2909&v=dKkKQmbyECw>”, and to have 
never met and “know nothing” about. Trump also falsely insists that Putin 
called him “a genius” (Putin called him “flamboyant” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/18/vladimir-putin-donald-trump-striking-america-superpower>
).

Distortions

Not all Trump’s falsehoods are exotic. Like Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/26/debate-fact-check-trump-clinton-live-quotes-hofstra>
 and many career politicians, he sprinkles misleading statistics into speeches, 
including on the murder rate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/14/donald-trump-lies-this-week-fact-check-climate-change-crime>
, African Americanunemployment 
<http://www.politifact.com/virginia/statements/2016/jun/20/donald-trump/trump-misleadingly-puts-black-youth-unemployment-r/>
,poverty among Hispanic Americans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/16/lyin-trump-fact-check-deplorables-flint-refugees-clinton>
, thedeficit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/01/donald-trump-fact-check-trade-immigration-campaign>
 andtaxes 
<http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/statements/2016/may/08/donald-trump/donald-trump-us-not-highest-taxed-nation-in-world/>
.

Trump also takes the tactic a step further, condensing whole arguments into 
outrageous soundbites. This is how a conservative argument about military 
presence in Iraq transformed intothe claim that Obama “founded” Isis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/12/donald-trump-fact-check-obama-isis-veterans-hillary-guns>
 and how Clinton’s support for immigration reform became “open borders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/19/third-presidential-debate-fact-check-trump-clinton>
” .

Clinton has similarly oversimplified arguments into claims, for instance 
linking Bush-era tax cuts to the financial crisis 
<http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/statements/2016/oct/02/hillary-clinton/hillary-clintons-base-linkage-tax-cuts-and-great-r/>
.
 