
At 10am on 1 October 1964, with less than a week and a half to go before the 
start of the Tokyo Olympic Games, the two inaugural Hikari Super Express 
Shinkansen, or “bullet trains,” arrived at their destinations, Tokyo and Osaka. 
They were precisely on time. Hundreds of people had waited overnight in each 
terminal to witness this historic event, which, like the Olympics, heralded not 
just Japan’s recovery from the destruction of the second world war, but the 
beginning of what would be Japan’s stratospheric rise as an economic 
superpower. The journey between Japan’s two biggest cities by train had 
previously taken close to seven hours. The Shinkansen had made the trip in four.

 The world’s first high-speed commercial train line, which celebrates its 50th 
anniversary on Wednesday, was built along the Tokaido, one of the five routes 
that connected the Japanese hinterland to Edo, the city that in the mid-1800s 
became Tokyo. Though train lines crisscrossed the country, they were inadequate 
to postwar Japan’s newborn ambitions. The term “shinkansen” literally means 
“new trunk line”: symbolically, it lay at the very centre of the huge 
reconstruction effort. All previous railways were designed to serve regions. 
The purpose of the Tokaido Shinkansen, true to its name, was to bring people to 
the capital.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F30%2F-sp-shinkansen-bullet-train-tokyo-rail-japan-50-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F29%2F1411991377087%2F79ae82e0-7c61-4e57-b9c3-6db333f43a87-2060x1406.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20Shinkansen%20bullet%20train%20made%20Tokyo%20into%20the%20monster%20it%20is%20today&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F30%2F-sp-shinkansen-bullet-train-tokyo-rail-japan-50-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20Shinkansen%20bullet%20train%20made%20Tokyo%20into%20the%20monster%20it%20is%20today&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F30%2F-sp-shinkansen-bullet-train-tokyo-rail-japan-50-years%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F29%2F1411991377087%2F79ae82e0-7c61-4e57-b9c3-6db333f43a87-2060x1406.jpeg>
 A couple say goodbye as he leaves on the Tohoku Shinkansen bullet train from 
Tokyo. Photograph: Kimimasa Mayama/EPA 
 After the war Tokyo was in ruins, but its rebuilding progressed without any 
master plan. As industries gravitated to the city, young people flocked to 
Tokyo to work; and as they started families they were encouraged to buy homes. 
The only land they could afford, however, was outside the already densely 
populated city. Property prices skyrocketed in the 1970s, and even more during 
the “bubble era” of the 1980s, forcing newer families even further from the 
city centre. Tokyo swelled to elephantine proportions. The Greater Tokyo 
Metropolitan Area, composed of four prefectures, became the world’s pre-eminent 
megalopolis – some 35 million people by 2010, or 27% of Japan’s total 
population. It isn’t unusual for commuters to spend two hours getting to work 
every day on trains that exceed 150% of capacity.

This “rush hour hell” has been made famous worldwide by images of station 
employees stuffing stragglers into packed train cars – potent symbols of the 
superhuman forbearance of the Japanese worker, but also the dogged efficiency 
of Japan’s railways. All foreign visitors toJapan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> invariably ride the trains and come 
away with the same impression: Japan’s public transportation is the cleanest, 
most courteous in the world, run by uniformed, be-gloved men and women who 
still epitomise a hallowed Japanese work ethic that most companies struggle to 
maintain in an economy that has remained sluggish for two decades.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F30%2F-sp-shinkansen-bullet-train-tokyo-rail-japan-50-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F29%2F1411991208893%2Fcdfbc538-4293-4dde-8d5e-1b489cbae82c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20Shinkansen%20bullet%20train%20made%20Tokyo%20into%20the%20monster%20it%20is%20today&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F30%2F-sp-shinkansen-bullet-train-tokyo-rail-japan-50-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20Shinkansen%20bullet%20train%20made%20Tokyo%20into%20the%20monster%20it%20is%20today&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F30%2F-sp-shinkansen-bullet-train-tokyo-rail-japan-50-years%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F29%2F1411991208893%2Fcdfbc538-4293-4dde-8d5e-1b489cbae82c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Crown prince Naruhito on board a Shinkansen bullet train in 1968. Photograph: 
Asahi Shimbun/Getty Images 
But the most vital aspect of this efficiency is that trains run on time, all 
the time. This is not just a point of pride. It is a necessity, given the huge 
number of people that have to be moved. Transfers are timed to the split 
second, and the slightest delay has the butterfly effect of delaying 
connections. The Shinkansen is no exception, as exemplified by the “angels”: 
teams of pink-attired women who descend on a train as soon as it arrives at its 
terminal and in five minutes leave it spotless for the return trip.

 The first Shinkansen skirted the Pacific coast through the huge industrial 
corridor that links the capital with Osaka. This is a nearly unbroken stretch 
of urbanisation: it has few parallels on the planet. By the early 1950s the 
conventional train that ran on this route was crammed. Taking a hint from the 
private Odakyu Electric Railway, which launched a train that could reach speeds 
of 145km/hr, Japan National Railways (JNR) decided to develop an even faster 
train, and in April 1959 construction of the Tokaido Shinkansen commenced with 
an initial budget of ¥200bn (£1.1bn), though the eventual cost would be double 
that.

 The high-speed network now reaches all the way west to the island of Kyushu 
and north to Akita, at the northern tip of the main island, Honshu. Next March, 
the Hokuriku Shinkansen will be extended to Kanazawa near the Japan Sea; there 
are plans to build a new line connecting Honshu to the northernmost island of 
Hokkaido. Each line is under the authority of one of four JR (Japan Railways) 
companies that formed when JNR was privatised in 1987. But the central 
government has overseen the construction of all new Shinkansen lines, usually 
covering 35% of the cost (JR companies pay 50% and local governments 15%). That 
means the construction ministry makes the relevant decisions about where lines 
go, or which cities get stations.

In an interview in the Tokyo Shimbun newspaper last week, Takashi Hara, a 
political scholar and expert on Japanese railroads, said the policy of 
extending the Shinkansen was promulgated by Kakuei Tanaka, Japan’s prime 
minister from 1972 to 1974. “The purpose was to connect regional areas to 
Tokyo,” Hara said. “And that led to the current situation of a national 
Shinkansen network, which completely changed the face of Japan. Travel times 
were shortened and vibration was alleviated, making it possible for more 
convenient business and pleasure trips, but I have to say that the project just 
made all the [connecting] cities part of Tokyo.”

And where the Shinkansen’s long tentacles go, other services shrivel. Local 
governments in Japan rely heavily on the central government for funds and 
public works – it’s how the central government keeps them in line. Politicians 
actively court high-speed railways since they believe they attract money, jobs 
and tourists. In the early 1990s, a new Shinkansen was built to connect Tokyo 
to Nagano, host of the 1998 Winter Olympics. The train ran along a similar 
route as the Shinetsu Honsen, one of the most romanticised railroads in Japan, 
beloved of train buffs the world over for its amazing scenery – but also 
considered redundant by operators JR East because, as with almost all rural 
train lines in Japan, it lost money. There were only two profitable stations on 
the line – Nagano and the resort community of Karuizawa – and both would be 
served by the new Shinkansen. A large portion of the Shinetsu Honsen closed 
down; local residents who relied on it had to use cars or buses.

 Meanwhile, the bullet train has sucked the country’s workforce into Tokyo, 
rendering an increasingly huge part of the country little more than a bedroom 
community for the capital. One reason for this is a quirk of Japan’s famously 
paternalistic corporations: namely, employers pay their workers’ commuting 
costs. Tax authorities don’t consider it income if it’s less than ¥100,000 a 
month – so Shinkansen commutes of up to two hours don’t sound so bad. New 
housing subdivisions filled with Tokyo salarymen subsequently sprang up along 
the Nagano Shinkansen route and established Shinkansen lines, bringing more 
people from further away into the capital.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F30%2F-sp-shinkansen-bullet-train-tokyo-rail-japan-50-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F29%2F1411991619411%2F978dbf60-d3fd-4294-be31-cc9bb7a9e6e3-2060x1330.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20Shinkansen%20bullet%20train%20made%20Tokyo%20into%20the%20monster%20it%20is%20today&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F30%2F-sp-shinkansen-bullet-train-tokyo-rail-japan-50-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20Shinkansen%20bullet%20train%20made%20Tokyo%20into%20the%20monster%20it%20is%20today&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F30%2F-sp-shinkansen-bullet-train-tokyo-rail-japan-50-years%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F29%2F1411991619411%2F978dbf60-d3fd-4294-be31-cc9bb7a9e6e3-2060x1330.jpeg>
 A Shinkansen bullet train passes through central Tokyo. Photograph: Prisma 
Bildagentur/Alamy 
 The Shinkansen’s focus on Tokyo, and the subsequent emphasis on profitability 
over service, has also accelerated flight from the countryside. It’s often 
easier to get from a regional capital to Tokyo than to the nearest neighbouring 
city. Except for sections of the Tohoku Shinkansen, which serves northeastern 
Japan, local train lines don’t always accommodate Shinkansen rolling stock, so 
there are often no direct transfer points between local lines and Shinkansen 
lines. The Tokaido Shinkansen alone now operates 323 trains a day, taking 140 
million fares a year, dwarfing local lines. This has had a crucial effect on 
the physical shape of the city. As a result of this funnelling, Tokyo is 
becoming even denser and more vertical – not just upward, but downward. With 
more Shinkansen passengers coming into the capital, JR East has to dig ever 
deeper under Tokyo Station to create more platforms.

Deepest of all is the new Tokyo terminal for the latest incarnation of the 
bullet train – the maglev, or Chuo (“central”) Shinkansen, which is supposed to 
connect Tokyo to Nagoya by 2027 and is being built 40m underground. The maglev 
is the next technological stage in the evolution of high-speed rail travel. It 
is meant to be a morale booster for Japan’s railway industry, which no longer 
boasts the fastest trains or the biggest ridership in the world, distinctions 
that now belong to Japan’s huge neighbour to the west.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F30%2F-sp-shinkansen-bullet-train-tokyo-rail-japan-50-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F29%2F1411991485699%2Feefa4336-e59f-45d8-a89e-3516ed27b4b8-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20Shinkansen%20bullet%20train%20made%20Tokyo%20into%20the%20monster%20it%20is%20today&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F30%2F-sp-shinkansen-bullet-train-tokyo-rail-japan-50-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20Shinkansen%20bullet%20train%20made%20Tokyo%20into%20the%20monster%20it%20is%20today&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F30%2F-sp-shinkansen-bullet-train-tokyo-rail-japan-50-years%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F29%2F1411991485699%2Feefa4336-e59f-45d8-a89e-3516ed27b4b8-1360x2040.jpeg>
 A passenger in traditional dress on board a Japanese Hikari Shinkansen bullet 
train in 1965. Photograph: Three Lions/Getty Images 
It is being built by JR Tokai, the company that runs the original 
super-profitable Tokaido Shinkansen, though experts assume the central 
government will eventually have to contribute money due to snowballing costs. 
The Chuo Shinkansen will cut the time it takes to get to Nagoya to 40 minutes, 
theoretically putting the central Japanese capital within commuting distance of 
Tokyo – in much the same way that the proposedHS2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/hs2> will make Birmingham a bedroom community 
of London. “The Chuo Shinkansen will make Nagoya feel like a suburb of Tokyo,” 
said Hara.

If you have any doubt about that, consider that the maglev – short for 
“magnetic-levitation”, and known in Japanese as “linear motor car” – has to 
move in as straight and as level a line as possible in order to reach the 
speeds that will make it the fastest train on Earth. But since Japan’s 
topography is mostly mountainous, 86% of the journey will be underground. (The 
technology probably makes more sense on a flat, open terrain, and JR Tokai is 
trying to sell it abroad.) In other words, the maglev will essentially be a 
very long subway ride. Certainly few tourists will find it appealing.

Plans are to extend the maglev to Osaka by 2045, by which time potential 
ridership will have declined by a third, due to Japan’s shrinking population 
and more efficient air travel due to new regional airports. The Shinkansen is 
expensive; with the rise of low-cost carriers, any train trip that takes more 
than two hours from Tokyo is less cost-effective than flying. The development 
of the Shinkansen can’t be separated from geography. China’s faster, vaster 
high-speed rail service isn’t all focused on Beijing, because the country 
itself is huge; in Japan, however, until recently the Shinkansen was the best 
way to get to Tokyo from almost anywhere. Like the first Shinkansen, the maglev 
is a national project, even if the central government hasn’t spent any money on 
it (yet), but national priorities aren’t as clear as they were in the 1950s. 
Tokyo can’t get any bigger. Other areas of Japan are barely hanging on. Japan’s 
high-speed rail system may end up being the victim of its own success.

 