
I first met Jane Jacobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/oct/14/jane-jacobs-death-and-life-rereading>
 in the early 90s. She was sitting in the front row of a large Toronto 
auditorium as I delivered a one-hour lecture. I did not know who she was.


When I was done, the first hand up – sharply so – belonged to this elderly 
person. How wonderful, I thought, a citizen who has never stopped being 
engaged. What came out of her mouth, though, was one of the sharpest critiques 
of my way of analysing the city that I’d ever heard – and probably ever will.

She pursued a line of questioning quite different from what I usually get. She 
continously returned to the issue of “place”, and its importance when 
considering the implementation of urban policies – notably the loss of 
neighbourhoods and erasure of local residents’ experiences. Her input made me 
shift my thinking to more “micro” levels; I am still doing quite a bit of work 
today on the need to relocalise pieces of national and city economies.

So perhaps now, on the 100th anniversary of her birth, we should all be 
asking: what is it that Jane Jacobs made us want to see in the city?

Thinking about this question leads me to focus on the conditions that make a 
metropolis – the enormous diversity of workers, their living and work spaces, 
the multiple sub-economies involved. Many of these are now seen as irrelevant 
to the global city, or belonging to another era. But a close look, as 
encouraged by Jacobs, shows us this is wrong.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fjane-jacobs-100th-birthday-saskia-sassen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff61f2d11082eccbc3b20890af16c9c3615eda68c%2F0_245_4027_2415%2F4027.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Jane%20Jacobs%20changed%20the%20way%20we%20look%20at%20cities%20%7C%20Saskia%20Sassen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fjane-jacobs-100th-birthday-saskia-sassen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Jane%20Jacobs%20changed%20the%20way%20we%20look%20at%20cities%20%7C%20Saskia%20Sassen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fjane-jacobs-100th-birthday-saskia-sassen%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff61f2d11082eccbc3b20890af16c9c3615eda68c%2F0_245_4027_2415%2F4027.jpg>
 Jacobs and fellow campaigners stand outside New York’s Penn Station to protest 
its planned demolition in 1963. Photograph: Walter Daran/Getty Images 
She would ask us to look at the consequences of these sub-economies for the 
city – for its people, its neighbourhoods, and the visual orders involved. She 
would ask us to consider all the other economies and spaces impacted by the 
massive gentrifications of the modern city – not least, the resultant 
displacements of modest households and profit-making, neighbourhood firms.

How do we see those aspects that are typically rendered invisible by modern 
narratives of development and urban competitiveness? In the early 1900s, the 
city was a lens for understanding larger processes – but half a century later, 
it had lost that role. It was Jane Jacobs who taught us again to view the city 
in a deeper, more complex way.

She helped us re-emphasise dimensions that were usually excluded – no, 
expelled – from general analyses of the urban economy. Indeed, I can imagine 
she would have affirmed without a quiver of doubt that, no matter how 
electronic and global the city might one day become, it still has to be “made” 
– and therein lies the importance of place.

The city has long been a strategic site for the exploration of major subjects 
confronting society. In the first half of the 20th century, the study of cities 
was at the heart ofsociology <https://www.theguardian.com/education/sociology> 
– evident in the work of Simmel, Weber,Benjamin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/sep/21/walter-benjamin-marseille-moscow-cities>
, Lefebvre and theChicago School 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chicago_school_(sociology)>. These sociologists 
confronted massive processes: industrialisation,urbanisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/urbanisation>, alienation, and a new 
cultural formation they called “urbanity”. Studying the city meant studying the 
major social processes of an era.

But by the 1950s, the study of the city had gradually lost this privileged 
role as producer of key analytic categories. The social sciences, we might say, 
lost their capacity to “see” the city and all that it made visible. But not 
Jacobs.


For her, the barricades – both figurative and literal – played a role not 
merely as part of the battle topreserve one of the oldest parts of Manhattan 
<http://www.planetizen.com/node/66846>, but in her entire analysis of the urban 
economy. Jacobs’ passionate fight to protect “the Village” in Lower Manhattan 
was about much more than preserving an old urban landscape (though this in 
itself was enough to warrant a fight in a city like New York – where the 
developers ruled, and basically did not care about legacy or visual orders).

Story of cities #32: Jane Jacobs v Robert Moses, battle of New York's urban 
titans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/28/story-cities-32-new-york-jane-jacobs-robert-moses>
Talking with Jacobs, it became clear that community battles were, for her, 
simply part of a wider inquiry as she sought to better understand, and develop 
concepts for, the role of cities in the economy.Richard Sennett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/nov/27/delhi-electronic-market-urbanist-dream>
, who was often on the “picket lines” with Jacobs, talks of her calm ferocity; 
she was relentless, and stood up to anyone – no matter her smallish frame and, 
eventually, her elderly condition.

Why is it so important to recover the sense of place, and production, in our 
analyses of the global economy, particularly as these are constituted in major 
cities? Because they allow us to see the multiplicity of economies and working 
cultures in which regional, national and global economies are embedded.


But Jacobs went much further than this. What she showed us, crucially, is that 
urban space is the key building block 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/18/lost-science-building-cities-joan-clos-un-habitat?CMP=share_btn_tw>
 of these economies. She understood it is the weaving of multiple strands that 
makes the city so much more than the sum of its residents, or its grand 
buildings, or its corporate economy.

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 