
David Torrance <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/david-torrance>: The SNP’s 
announcement was an exercise in buying time


It seems the SNP’s definition of “summer” is as flexible as its concept of 
independence. An“initiative” on another referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/12/nicola-sturgeon-snp-to-resume-drive-for-scottish-independence>
 was promised as far back as March, but has only now been unveiled as autumn 
arrives. And given there’s been such a long wait,Nicola Sturgeon’s speech in 
Stirling today 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/02/nicola-sturgeon-snp-listening-exercise-europe-brexit-scottish-independence>
 was pretty thin gruel, largely a restatement of standard SNP debating points 
about independence, Brexit and, of course, the wickedness of the Tories at 
Westminster.

Its central announcement, meanwhile, was essentially an exercise in buying 
time. The National Survey will serve to identify potential yes voters, gather 
their concerns and form the basis of a renewed push for independence. It’ll 
also keep restless sections of the party membership busy until St Andrew’s Day. 
Perhaps more significant was the announcement of a party growth commission, for 
SNP strategists realise that economic credibility remains central to winning 
another referendum, and of course the previous oil-based prospectus is now 
pushing up the daisies. It’ll also deal with the similarly important currency 
question.

None of this, however, implies any degree of urgency. My understanding is that 
even when the prime minister formally triggers article 50, perhaps early next 
year, the Scottish government will still be in no rush to set out a more 
concrete referendum timescale.

Nicola Sturgeon needs to keep Scotland in the EU. But how? | Lesley Riddoch
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/24/nicola-sturgeon-keep-scotland-eu-independence>
So the goalposts appear to be shifting. A few months ago Sturgeon also made it 
clear another referendum would have to take place within what she called the
“Brexit window” 
<http://www.heraldscotland.com/opinion/14682169.David_Torrance__SNP_fell_into_the_trap_of_believing_its_own_hype_over_a_second_independence_referendum/>
, ie the two-year period following article 50. That now looks much too 
restrictive, not least in the absence of any real movement in support for 
independence.

The latest YouGov survey 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-scotland-scotland-politics-37254078> show things 
pretty much where they’ve been for the past two years: a modest but clear 
majority still favouring – even post-Brexit – Scotland’s place in the UK. On 24 
June the first minister said another referendum washighly likely 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/alex-salmond-second-scottish-independence-referendum-is-certain>
; now it seems to be more a case of “let’s wait and see”, and I suspect a few 
more seasons will pass before the SNP are any clearer about what’s likely to 
happen next.

Vonny Moyes <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/vonny-moyes>: The SNP should 
be wary of those who don’t wear their political allegiances publicly


Few can argue with the leadership Nicola Sturgeon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicola-sturgeon> has shown in recent 
times. Her sangfroid during the Brexit campaign fallout was a much needed salve 
to the Scottish people – and beyond – who found themselves facing a future the 
majority didn’t vote for. With that said, the SNP should be cautious not to 
misinterpret this far-reaching appreciation of Sturgeon’s diplomatic skills as 
support for the party’s desire for a second referendum. Scotland is still 
licking its wounds – twice over– in the aftermath of several years of 
impassioned political squall. Most people, however they voted, are tired of 
being the collateral in a constant tug of war.

The silent no-voters were the kingmakers in the independence referendum. Their 
victory came as a shock to many independence campaigners who had little 
realisation of how deep in the echo chamber they were. Brexit has been a litmus 
test for such big political change, and has likely crystallised opinions on 
both sides of the debate. The SNP should be wary of those who don’t wear their 
political allegiances so publicly – it’s tremendously naive to assume any 
personal shift in allegiance has been one-directional. Plenty who feel the 
sting of Brexit may find themselves unexpectedly and newly cautious at the 
prospect of further political upheaval.

Reducing Scotland’s future to a simple yes-or-no debate glosses over the work 
still to be done. The SNP would do well to remember that there is plenty of 
work to be done on the ground before running headlong into another campaign. 
Social deprivation is still rife in parts ofScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, and the SNP has to continue to 
deliver for those that the UK government has failed. Scotland’s living present 
is not a project the government can afford to neglect in pursuit of their 
ultimate goal of independence. There are real people who will feel the sharp 
end of the party’s split loyalties between serving the public now and reshaping 
Scotland’s future. Doggedly pursuing a second referendum so soon throws the 
perils of a single-party parliament into sharp relief – if they want to do it, 
they will. There is a great amount of hubris in offering another referendum as 
an opening salvo to a beleaguered people.

Mike Small <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/mikesmall>: Sturgeon is right 
not to focus on 2014’s arguments 


The reality is that “the UK Scotland voted to stay in doesn’t exist any more”, 
as Sturgeon herself put it 
<http://blogs.spectator.co.uk/2016/06/uk-scotland-voted-remain-within-doesnt-exist-anymore/>
, the weekend after the EU referendum. In this sense, and facing the remarkable 
inertia and confusion ofTheresa May’s cabinet’s hapless incompetence on Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/02/theresa-may-bleak-future-outside-single-market-eu-trade>
, Sturgeon is quite right to engage in a survey and listening process over 
independence.

But Brexit isn’t the only driver. The hauntingly stupid process over Hinkley 
Point,Trident renewal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/13/renew-trident-dads-army-jeremy-corbyn-labour>
, and the botched and divisive HS2 link to the Northern Poorhouse are as much 
in people’s minds as the Tories’ ongoing European mess.

Sturgeon has been quite right to focus on the process as a reflective one – 
and to not assume that the same arguments put forward in 2014 just need to be 
reiterated, this time with more passion. There are key elements of the yes 
campaign that failed and will need to be completely re-thought out.

The Guardian view on a second Scottish referendum: Sturgeon has no choice but 
caution | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/28/the-guardian-view-on-a-second-scottish-referendum-sturgeon-has-no-choice-but-caution>
The latest YouGov polls shows votes moving to the Greens and the SNP, and, 
perhaps unsurprisingly, away from the Labour omnishambles. When Jeremy Corbyn 
wins the leadership contest, Kezia Dugdale will go.

This week also saw the publication of the Scottish Index of Multiple 
Deprivation 2016 <http://simd.scot/2016/#/simd2016/BTTTFTT/9/-4.0000/55.9000/> 
and there are many on the left who want to see the focus and energy onthis 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-scotland-37231695>, rather than the constitution. 
There are also questions about whether the SNP survey will actually be filled 
in or ignored by the more recalcitrant no voter. But whether the methodology is 
right or wrong, the depth of Westminster ineptitude and the deepening of the 
democratic deficit will continue to drive the case for self-determination. But 
issues around the currency need to be resolved, and the indy movement must 
mature if the case can be won.

The last time we had a referendum we started on 30% and ended on 45%. This 
time we start from a base position of 46%. Reflect on that.
 