
Re your article (We need spaces to live but we also need places to make things 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/07/housing-demand-london-industry-business-spaces-to-live-crush-creativity>
, 7 January): twenty years ago Richard Rogers’ Towards an Urban Renaissance 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Towards_an_Urban_Renaissance> put sustainability 
at the core of a vision of compact cities where people worked, rested and 
played with minimum car use. Residential densification of central London and 
other large English cities would be delivered through regeneration and the 
judicious imposition of tall buildings. The result was a tall building frenzy 
driven by international capital, with many central London flats used as vacant 
safety deposit boxes. Meanwhile, a new population was sucked in to join 
Londoners who no longer wished to leave the thriving capital, and the housing 
crisis deepened.

In desperation, successive mayors have identified over 40 “opportunity areas” 
for intensive housebuilding, involving a land grab of thousands of hectares. 
Unfortunately these are all key industrial areas where the nuts and bolts of 
the city are manufactured and many thousands of Londoners employed. For 
example, one company in the Vauxhall “opportunity area” – employing 100 “low 
skill” workers who live close by and work through the night preparing raw fish 
to supply many West End restaurants – is threatened with yet another tall 
speculative residential building. In the name of sustainability, we are 
building a city where ordinary people have nowhere to live and nowhere to work.
Michael Ball
Reclaim London

• While MPs and peers were away on their Christmas break the Resolution 
Foundation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/27/home-ownership-figures-are-exaggerated-says-thinktank-resolution-foundation>
 showed that half the UK population do not own their own homes, when properly 
counted. The housing crisis festered. Politicians return to parliament with no 
immediate plans to relieve those renters suffering now from overcrowding, debt, 
eviction, homelessness, hunger and ill health.

That crisis has grown out of the 30 years’ total failure, both practical and 
moral, of the market to provide enough affordable homes to rent or to buy. 
200,000 new homes in 14 new villages in an unreformed UK housing market will 
guarantee more and ever bigger housing crises.

Recycling these announcements does not address the immediate crisis. The 
emergency response now required from government is to freeze all rent 
increases, prior to reintroducing rent controls, and to tax all unused land, 
like the 600,000 unused plots owned by the big builders.
Rev Paul Nicolson Taxpayers Against Poverty, Dr Stephen Battersby, Fred 
Harrison Land Research Trust, Dr Duncan Pickard, Liz Davies

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 