
Traffic lights with rain sensors to give quicker priority to cyclists on wet 
days … Heated cycle paths so cyclists won’t slip during bouts of frost … This 
might sound like science fiction to you, but in the Dutch city of Groningen it 
will soon be everyday reality.

The inhabitants of this lively northern university city regard their homestead 
as the cycling capital of the Netherlands. They might very well be right: 61% 
of all trips in Groningen are made by bicycle, rising to more than 70% fortrips 
made to educational institutions 
<http://translate.google.com/translate?hl=en&sl=nl&tl=en&u=http%3A%2F%2Fgemeente.groningen.nl%2Fmobiliteit%2Fgroningen-geeft-ruimte-aan-de-fiets&sandbox=1>
.

You might think the city authorities would be satisfied with these statistics. 
But apparently it’s not enough, and new plans are in the pipeline to push 
cycling even more.

Intelligent traffic lights and heated cycle paths are only part of the plan. 
New “park and bike” areas with bike rental services will emerge on access roads 
to encourage commuters to leave their cars behind and enter the city by bike. 
Five thousand new parking places for bikes will be built near the main train 
station – next to the existing 10,000 that, believe it or not, have proved 
themselves insufficient. And a “bicycle effect analysis” will be obligatory for 
each territorial development project to ensure that provisions are made for 
bikes right from the start. These are just a few of the new, bicycle-friendly 
measures.

We wanted to adjust the car to the city. It was a tough fight. The shopkeepers 
were livid
Jacques Wallage  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F29%2Fhow-groningen-invented-a-cycling-template-for-cities-all-over-the-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F23%2F1437650193162%2F07ac3d1c-b429-4b02-a89d-8b0587c44afe-2060x1333.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Groningen%20invented%20a%20cycling%20template%20for%20cities%20all%20over%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F29%2Fhow-groningen-invented-a-cycling-template-for-cities-all-over-the-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Groningen%20invented%20a%20cycling%20template%20for%20cities%20all%20over%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F29%2Fhow-groningen-invented-a-cycling-template-for-cities-all-over-the-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F23%2F1437650193162%2F07ac3d1c-b429-4b02-a89d-8b0587c44afe-2060x1333.jpeg>
 Bikes outside Groningen university. Photograph: Peter Horree/Alamy 
“The bike is the number-one mode of transport in the centre of Groningen,” 
says local politician Paul de Rook, who rides his bicycle daily to the city 
hall, “but we have to make an effort to keep it that way, because our 
population is growing and public space is severely under pressure. We want 
cycling to really become part of our local pride.”

The city of Groningen has a long history as a trading town and fortress. It 
boasts canals and ancient warehouses as well as some conspicuous modern 
architecture. And it has an amazingly young population: almost 18% of its 
200,000 inhabitants are students. The young population is one of the reasons 
why cycling is so popular – along with the mild climate and the absence of 
hills – but there’s much more to it than that.
 A young Max van den Berg: ‘It was a clash between generations’ 
The history of Groningen as a bicycle city par excellence goes back to the 
1970s, when a left-wing council wanted to make a change. In the 60s, the number 
of cars was growing rapidly and they were severely clogging up Dutch cities. 
The common response was to tear down old neighbourhoods and build motorways 
right through the centre of town. However, in Groningen, local politician Max 
van den Berg decided on a revolutionary policy. Van den Berg, who was 24 when 
he became responsible for the city’s traffic and urban development policy, 
dreamed of expelling cars from the centre and creating space for pedestrians 
and cyclists. In those days, it was totally unheard of.

“Instead of destroying old neighbourhoods, we wanted to restore them and 
convert them into pleasant areas for people to live in. The idea was to 
discourage motorised traffic and to give priority to pedestrians, bikes and 
public transport,” remembers Van den Berg. “All this was feasible because 
Groningen is a relatively small, compact city. The distances are short and can 
easily be covered by foot or by bike.”

When he first revealed his bold intentions, it caused fireworks in the city 
council. “I was accused of being a problematic administrator. I was under 
constant attack. Even in my own party there were people who strongly disagreed 
with me. But, to me, they were just lagging behind. I think it really was a 
clash between generations.”

In the end, the younger generation won. Four local politicians resigned saying 
it was impossible to work with Van den Berg. Their successors were very young 
and very left-wing, and they shared his vision.

The essence of Van den Berg’s traffic circulation plan, as it came to be 
called, was that the centre of Groningen would be divided in four sections. For 
motorists, it would become impossible to go from one section to the other: cars 
had to take the ring-road around the inner city, whereas cyclists could move 
freely about on new cycle paths constructed to accommodate them. Driving a car 
would become a time-consuming affair in the centre of Groningen. In the future, 
travelling by bike would be a much quicker option.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F29%2Fhow-groningen-invented-a-cycling-template-for-cities-all-over-the-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F22%2F1437571608867%2Fd2075b73-dee3-4fb8-a3a6-be75d6167970-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Groningen%20invented%20a%20cycling%20template%20for%20cities%20all%20over%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F29%2Fhow-groningen-invented-a-cycling-template-for-cities-all-over-the-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Groningen%20invented%20a%20cycling%20template%20for%20cities%20all%20over%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F29%2Fhow-groningen-invented-a-cycling-template-for-cities-all-over-the-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F22%2F1437571608867%2Fd2075b73-dee3-4fb8-a3a6-be75d6167970-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The average Groningen household owns 3.1 bikes. Photograph: Alamy 
“Many people who lived in the old neighbourhoods were enthusiastic about our 
ideas. They saw we were changing things on a great scale. But there was also 
fierce opposition, especially from businessmen and shopkeepers who were 
convinced it would mean the end of their business if cars could no longer cross 
the centre. We tried to explain that we wanted to create a pleasant urban 
environment that eventually would attract more people to the centre and to 
their shops. But they were convinced they would go bankrupt if customers would 
not be able reach their shop by car,” says Van den Berg. “In the end, it turned 
out they were wrong.”

Angry shopkeepers painted slogans on their store windows, collected signatures 
and demonstrated at the city hall – to no avail. In 1977, the traffic 
circulation plan was implemented over a single night. Hundreds of new signs 
were put up to create one-way streets or change their direction. Overnight, the 
centre of Groningen became impenetrable for cars. The next morning, hostesses 
greeted confused motorists with flowers and leaflets that explained the new 
situation.

“We were simply ahead of our time,” says Jacques Wallage who, as the local 
politician who took over the traffic portfolio from Van den Berg, was 
responsible for implementing the controversial traffic plan. “In the 70s, the 
general idea in theNetherlands <https://www.theguardian.com/world/netherlands> 
was that cities needed to adjust to the car. What we wanted was to adjust the 
car to the city. It was a tough fight. The shopkeepers were livid. I, 
personally, received threats. People said: ‘We know were you live.’” he adds. 
“I’ve had a long career in politics – I have been a minister with a politically 
sensitive portfolio – but [that was] the only time I have needed police 
protection.’’

Instead of destroying old neighbourhoods, we wanted to restore them into 
pleasant areas for people to live in
Max van den Berg  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F29%2Fhow-groningen-invented-a-cycling-template-for-cities-all-over-the-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F22%2F1437571341324%2F59229e95-2fb5-45a5-ae98-92830c174036-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Groningen%20invented%20a%20cycling%20template%20for%20cities%20all%20over%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F29%2Fhow-groningen-invented-a-cycling-template-for-cities-all-over-the-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Groningen%20invented%20a%20cycling%20template%20for%20cities%20all%20over%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F29%2Fhow-groningen-invented-a-cycling-template-for-cities-all-over-the-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F22%2F1437571341324%2F59229e95-2fb5-45a5-ae98-92830c174036-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The young population in Groningen is one of the reasons why cycling is so 
popular, along with the mild climate and the absence of hills. Photograph: Alamy
After the traffic plan was implemented, new cycle paths were constructed and 
trees were planted in the centre. The Vismarkt, a central square – which for 
years had been a huge parking place – regained its historical function as a 
market. And the much-feared commercial disaster simply didn’t take place. The 
majority of the shopkeepers survived and some of them even thrived.

Of course, it took some time before motorists got used to the situation and 
those who don’t know the city still stand a fair chance of getting frustrated. 
ButGroningen now boasts the cleanest air of all big Dutch cities 
<http://translate.google.com/translate?hl=en&sl=nl&tl=en&u=http%3A%2F%2Fkpvvdashboard-5.blogspot.nl%2F2011%2F07%2Fgezondheidseffecten-luchtverontreinigin.html&sandbox=1>
 and many streets in the centre are amazingly quiet.

Today, Van den Berg is governor of the province of Groningen. “Our vision was 
a colourful, compact city,” he says. “We wanted to keep institutions like the 
hospital and the university in the heart of the city, so people would be able 
to reach those by bike. The result of this policy is a lively, vibrant city. 
Groningen attracts more visitors than before, even from outside the province 
and from Germany. I, myself, live in the centre and I now reap what I once 
sowed.”

Can traffic-choked Moscow become a more cycle-friendly city?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jun/11/can-traffic-choked-moscow-become-a-more-cycle-friendly-city>
Nowadays, the inhabitants of Groningen possess an average of 1.4 bikes per 
person 
<http://www.os-groningen.nl/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=293>. 
The average number of bikes per household is 3.1. And, while the number of cars 
is declining, the use of bicycles in the city is still growing. So much so 
that, according to Wallage, a new discussion has arisen about the predominance 
of the bike. “There is some tension between pedestrians and cyclists. Cyclists 
are considered too domineering by some people. There are complaints that they 
throw down their bikes virtually everywhere and that pedestrians occasionally 
get run over by cyclists.”

Be that as it may, few people in Groningen seem to doubt that the traffic 
circulation plan is beneficial. “In the 70s, the plan was seen as an anti-car 
measure. Now we see it as a pro-bike plan,” says de Rook.

He is now creating cycle paths outside of the city of Groningen, to make it 
possible to reach neigbouring villages and towns by bike safely and 
comfortably. And he has launched a new idea: to remove the buses from the city 
centre and have them use the ring-road in the future, to make even more room 
for pedestrians and cyclists, and to create more public space with trees and 
benches. According to de Rook, this means that the bus stops in the centre will 
have to be moved 200 or 300 yards further away. Interestingly enough, there is 
hardly any debate about it. Even the shopkeepers seem to think it’s a good idea.

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion










 