
Tottenham travel to Monaco for their crucial Champions League clash buoyed by 
a dramatic late win over West Ham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/19/tottenham-hotspur-west-ham-united-premier-league-match-report>
, but their task remains very tricky. Mauricio Pochettino’s men really need to 
beat the group leaders to have any chance of progressing into the knockout 
stages and Monaco – who pulled offa deserved 2-1 victory at Wembley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/14/tottenham-hotspur-wembley-monaco-champions-league>
 in September – are in fine form in Ligue 1.

Leonardo Jardim was criticised for being too cautious when he first took over 
at Monaco in 2014. The club scored just 51 goals in the manager’s first season, 
in 2014-15, and only push up that figure to 57 last season. That’s all changed 
this year though. Jardim’s team has always been well drilled but, given their 
newfound record in front of goal, they now appear capable of winning theLigue 1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ligue1football> title. Their tally of 39 
goals in 13 matches – three per game – is comfortably the highest in Europe’s 
big leagues and is 13 more than reigning champions Paris Saint-Germain.

You could be forgiven for assuming that one of their strikers is well into 
double figures for the season, but that isn’t the case. Monaco’s three leading 
marksmen – Thomas Lemar, Radamel Falcao and Fabinho – have five goals apiece in 
Ligue 1 this season.
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
All three players have been crucial. Fabinho set up the first goal against 
Spurs and went on to win the man of the match award that night. Lemar scored 
the winner and he was also on the scoresheet at the weekend in what was 
ultimately a convincing win over Ligue 1’s bottom club Lorient.Monaco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/monaco> won the game 3-0 but they had 
been struggling before Jardim introduced Falcao from the bench in the second 
half. Lorient had enjoyed most of the chances when Falcao came on in the 63rd 
minute but he scored with his first touch and set them on their way to victory.

Falcao may not strike fear into the hearts of the travelling fans but Spurs 
need to be wary as he seems to be finding his feet once more after two dire 
years in the Premier League. Falcao was returning from a serious knee injury 
when he arrived in England, but the expectation was that he would prove just 
how prolific a finisher he is. He never really hit peak fitness – he was on the 
pitch for just 22% of the possible minutes he could have played while in 
England – and his tally of five league goals in thePremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> was extremely 
underwhelming.

Tottenham must halt Falcao’s revival to keep Champions League hopes alive | 
Paul Doyle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/22/monaco-radamel-falcao-tottenham-champions-league>
He has already matched that figure this season from just 338 minutes of Ligue 
1 action, making him the most frequent scorer in the league. Indeed, with a 
goal every 67 minutes, his strike-rate is higher than it has been since he 
moved to Atlético Madrid in 2011. His stunning goals-per-minute ratio is also 
the best of any player in Europe’s top leagues to have scored at least five 
goals this season.

His record this season of scoring from 45.5% of his shots is unsustainable but 
it shows that his confidence has been restored. He scored twice in Monaco’s 
last match in the Champions League –a 3-0 win at home to CSKA Moscow 
<http://int.soccerway.com/matches/2016/11/02/europe/uefa-champions-league/association-sportive-monaco-fc/cska-moskva/2348367>
 – and will feel he has a point to prove against English opposition. Tottenham 
should be prepared to face the Falcao who never materialised in the Premier 
League, a man who is aiming to show that he can still play at his sensational 
best.

Premier League team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
La Liga team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Bundesliga team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Serie A team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Ligue 1 team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
• Follow WhoScored on Twitter <https://twitter.com/WhoScored> and Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/WhoScored>
• Follow Martin Laurence <https://twitter.com/martinlaurence7> on Twitter
 