
It was a nightmare day for US House of Representatives speaker Paul Ryan. With 
almost 300 ceremonial swearings in of new congressmen to get through on 
Tuesday, the full reality of his chilly relationship with president-elect 
Donald Trump must have been weighing on him. More embarrassingly, he was shown 
to be ignorant of the works ofSkippa Da Flippa 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lT7gqhfeaoM>, Migos, Bow Wow and OG Maco.

Paul Ryan prevents Roger Marshall's son from dabbing during swearing-in
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/04/paul-ryan-prevents-roger-marshalls-son-from-dabbing-during-swearing-in>
As Ryan was swearing in Kansas congressman Roger Marshall in a mock ceremony, 
Marshall’s teenage son, Cal, put his nose to his elbow, and pointed his other 
arm in the opposite direction.

“You sneezing?” Ryan asked. Seventeen-year-old Marshall sheepishly agreed he 
was. But more sophisticated observers had already recognised that this was not 
a sternutation, but the dab, a dance craze that has long since slipped its 
faddish origins to become a dance staple.

Everybody dabs now. Tom Hanks has dabbed 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tLah9zn-Y84>, as have LeBron James 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i-IaKgn02YA>, Golden Girl Betty White 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ue28AJMqz4A> and Bill Gates 
<http://www.dailydot.com/unclick/bill-gates-hit-the-dab/> (though his was less 
of a dab, more of a wipe). Even Ryan’s foeHillary Clinton managed to go in for 
a dab on The Ellen DeGeneres show <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WkNL_cfVyWU> 
a full year before she was cast into the dustbin of history.

Like the origins of human language, the true starting point of the dab is 
hotly disputed. Many date it to Atlantan trap rap crew Migos’s 2015 hit Look At 
My Dab (Bitch Dab), but it certainly existed in a more subdued, wavy form in a 
Skippa Da Flippa’s How Fast Can You Count It, back in late 2014.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fshortcuts%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fhow-the-dab-made-it-from-atlanta-hip-hip-to-the-us-congress%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47c0a8c6cf650748984e9065174af63b5fd90f08%2F0_17_2070_1242%2F2070.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20dab%20made%20it%20from%20Atlanta%20hip-hop%20to%20the%20US%20Congress&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fshortcuts%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fhow-the-dab-made-it-from-atlanta-hip-hip-to-the-us-congress%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20dab%20made%20it%20from%20Atlanta%20hip-hop%20to%20the%20US%20Congress&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fshortcuts%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fhow-the-dab-made-it-from-atlanta-hip-hip-to-the-us-congress%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47c0a8c6cf650748984e9065174af63b5fd90f08%2F0_17_2070_1242%2F2070.jpg>
 Paul Pogba does the dab. Photograph: Francisco Leong/AFP/Getty Images 
Either way, in August 2015, XXL magazine reported: “What started as a regional 
down South adlib is quickly becoming a masterful manoeuvre in clubs and on 
street corners.” In November, Cam Newton, quarterback of the Carolina Panthers, 
had sent it overground, and by mid-2016he had officially announced his 
retirement from it 
<http://www.espn.co.uk/american-fb/story/_/id/16070034/cam-newton-carolina-panthers-retiring-dab>
.

In the UK, footballers in search of goal celebration memes were the usual 
Typhoid Marys: Manchester United’s Paul Pogba and Jesse Lingard and Everton’s 
Romelu Lukaku have all used it as goal celebration fodder. Just recently, 
Cristiano Ronaldo’s son did it as his dad took home his fourth Ballon d’Or.

It has a longevity most dance moves would cut off their right arm for. In the 
chronology of silly dancing,its immediate predecessor, the nae nae 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/18/juju-on-that-beat-the-power-of-music-memes>
 – as popularised in We Are Toonz’s Drop That NaeNae - was a low-slung 
pelvis-rotator that required suspension of dignity in all but a select few. 
Like a nae nae or a whip, dabbing looks cool when lots of people do it 
simultaneously. But unlike those two, the magic of the dab is that it’s easy. 
As easy as sneezing into your elbow pit.
 