
When Milan’s teenage sensation Manuel Locatelli scored the goal that condemned 
Juventus to a second defeat of the season, it restored some faith in the idea 
that theSerie A <https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> season 
might not be as straightforward as feared. The result also opened up the 
opportunity for another club to take Juventus’ spot as the most successful in 
Europe’s top leagues this season.

That club wasn’t Bayern Munich, or Paris Saint-Germain, who have both enjoyed 
domestic dominance comparable to that of their Italian counterparts in recent 
years. Instead, OGC Nice became the team with the most points per game this 
season, astheir 4-2 win in Metz <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3B-1iJXsdvI> 
ensured they remained four points clear at the top of Ligue 1, with eight wins 
and two draws from their first 10 matches.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fnice-ligue-1-mario-balotelli-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f5f3421148f66b246b4264cb19cf80ca8427298%2F0_0_650_616%2F650.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Nice%20became%20Europe's%20in-form%20team%20%7C%20Martin%20Laurence&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fnice-ligue-1-mario-balotelli-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Nice%20became%20Europe%27s%20in-form%20team%20%7C%20Martin%20Laurence&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fnice-ligue-1-mario-balotelli-europe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f5f3421148f66b246b4264cb19cf80ca8427298%2F0_0_650_616%2F650.jpg>
 Infographic:WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Their nickname – Les Aiglons – is indicative of the club’s status. Aside from 
an imperious period during the 1950s when they won their four Ligue 1 titles to 
date, The Eaglets have never found themselves soaring among the nation’s elite. 
They performed well above expectations to finish fourth inLigue 1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ligue1football> last season but, after 
the summer of change that followed, it looked like that achievement would be a 
one off.

Like many European clubs of their size, Nice followed up a successful season 
by losing key players and a manager in Claude Puel who had an immediate impact 
upon his arrival in 2012. Puel took the club to a fourth-place finish in his 
first season, but his influence appeared to wane as they finished just two 
points and one place above the drop in 2013-14. A mid-table finish the 
following season showed decent progress, but few forecast a return to the top 
fourlast time around 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2015%E2%80%9316_OGC_Nice_season>.

While Puel deserves much credit for their excellent performance last season, 
the spotlight was focused on a player who was trying to reignite his stagnating 
career.Hatem Ben Arfa 
<https://www.whoscored.com/Players/10194/Show/Hatem-Ben-Arfa> produced the form 
of his career, thriving in a central role as he scored 17 goals and registered 
six assists, while completing the most dribbles in Europe (152). It was no 
shock that he earned the club’s highest rating (7.58), or that PSG came 
calling, taking the dazzling playmakeron a free transfer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/18/hatem-ben-arfa-18-clubs-sign-me>
. Nice’s chances of repeating last season’s success were all but written off.

When Puel left for the Premier League, the two most important men in Nice’s 
season had been stripped away. However, Nice, like Southampton, are developing 
that enviable ability to regenerate every season and improve their standards 
while doing so. Ben Arfa, after all, wasn’t the only high-profile departure 
from the playing squad this summer.Valère Germain 
<https://www.whoscored.com/Players/93917> – 14 goals and six assists – returned 
to Monaco following a superb season on loan;Nampalys Mendy 
<https://www.whoscored.com/Players/90278> - who started every league game and 
produced the third most accurate passes in Europe (2,717) – made a£10m move to 
Leicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/03/leicester-city-nampalys-mendy-football-transfer-signing-nice>
; and right-backJérémy Pied <https://www.whoscored.com/Players/42248> followed 
Puel to St Mary’s.

Losing their best players was not a new experience for Nice. The summer before 
they had lostJordan Amavi 
<https://www.whoscored.com/Players/134902/Show/Jordan-Amavi> – the highest 
rated player in Ligue 1 that season – to Aston Villa, along with their two top 
scorers,Carlos Eduardo 
<https://www.whoscored.com/Players/27830/Show/Carlos-Eduardo> and Éric Bauthéac 
<https://www.whoscored.com/Players/90106>.

After two tough summers, Nice had to bring in the right manger to reinvest in 
the squad. The club pulled off something of a coup when they appointed Lucien 
Favre. The Swiss manager’s time at Borussia Mönchengladbach had ended in bitter 
disappointment, but he had made the club a consistent threat to the European 
places in Germany and will be aiming to do the same in the south of France. 
Gladbach were at the foot of theBundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> when Favre was 
appointment in February 2011 and they finished fourth, eighth, sixth and third 
in his four full seasons.

Favre had great success with a back-three formation that continues to increase 
in popularity and – like Antonio Conte with Chelsea – he has been able to 
implement the tactical shift in his short time at his new club. He has also 
been able to bring the best out of players all over the pitch. While Mario 
Balotelli’s return of five goals in his first four league appearances attracted 
the most attention from afar, he is just one part of what is becoming a very 
impressive young side.

Goalkeeper Yoan Cardinale <https://www.whoscored.com/Players/140569> is just 
22. He plays behind the experiencedPaul Baysse 
<https://www.whoscored.com/Players/27756>, summer signing Dante 
<https://www.whoscored.com/Players/6683> – who emerged from nowhere to become a 
real star under Favre at Gladbach – and 17-year-oldMalang Sarr 
<https://www.whoscored.com/Players/322747/Show/Malang-Sarr> in a back three. 
Sarr <https://www.whoscored.com/Players/322747/Show/Malang-Sarr> is the only 
Nice outfielder to have started every league game and, with an 89% pass 
accuracy and 3.3 interceptions per game, he looks like an absolute gem.

The 20-year-old midfielder Vincent Koziello is attracting attention from some 
of the country’s biggest clubs, while 21-year-old summer signingWylan Cyprien 
<https://www.whoscored.com/Players/123873> has proven an inspired acquisition 
from Lens, with two goals and two assists so far.

The club’s highest rated player this season is the versatile Ricardo Pereira 
<https://www.whoscored.com/Players/120763/Show/Ricardo-Pereira>, whose two-year 
loan from Porto covered for the loss of Amavi at left-back last season. Now 
playing further forward on the right wing, the Portugal international is 
excelling once more, with one goal, two assists and 3.6 tackles per game enough 
to secure the highest rating in Ligue 1 (7.89). At 23, he is a relatively 
experienced head in this side and one who will need to be replaced next summer 
when his loan spell comes to an end.

Then there is the team’s top scorer, 23-year-old Alassane Pléa 
<https://www.whoscored.com/Players/108585>, whose hat-trick against Metz took 
his tally to six for the season, and chief creator, 25-year-oldJean Seri 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jean_Seri>, who already has four assists to his 
name. While it might be a stretch to brand Balotelli a mature member of the 
squad, at 26 he is among the most experienced.

Younes Belhanda – whose position and career trajectory make him the Ben Arfa 
of this team – has returned to France having slipped into obscurity in recent 
seasons after a move to Dynamo Kyiv. Still only 26, the Moroccan has valuable 
knowledge of the league and what it will take to win the title. He was a 
pivotal player forMontpellier when they defied the odds to win Ligue 1 in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/09/europe-leicester-claudio-ranieri-premier-league>
, scoring 12 and providing five assists. With one goal and three assists in 
seven league appearances so far this season, he’s looking close to his old self.

PSG have dominated Ligue 1 since Montpellier’s shock success in 2012 so Nice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nice> face a massive challenge. They are 
currently six points in front of the champions but there is a long way to go 
and winning a title remains highly unlikely. The real challenge for the club 
will come over the next few seasons as they try to develop their prized assets 
without having them prized away. Nevertheless, for now they are bringing joy to 
a league that has needed it.

Premier League team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
La Liga team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Bundesliga team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Serie A team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Ligue 1 team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Liga NOS team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
• Follow WhoScored on Twitter <https://twitter.com/WhoScored> and Facebook
 <https://www.facebook.com/WhoScored>• Follow Martin Laurence 
<https://twitter.com/martinlaurence7> on Twitter
 