
The Irish province of Connacht has never been far from adversity. 
Economically, it has been challenged with unemployment over the years; 
geographically, it is isolated from the larger cities of Cork, Dublin and 
Belfast; and, in rugby, it has often been an afterthought in Ireland. Earning a 
place in the Pro12 final in Edinburgh againstLeinster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leinster> on Saturday represents the 
realisation of a dream for their hardy group of players and supporters: the 
opportunity to compete on a level playing field.

Operating on a fraction of the budget of Ulster, Leinster and Munster, Connacht
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/connacht> were on the brink of being shut 
down altogether as the Irish Rugby Football Union sought to cut costs in 2003. 
The team’s success today is due to the resilience of supporters and players who 
have created a unique atmosphere in the west that is hard to replicate.

Galway is a beautiful county that has rarely held rugby close to its heart. 
The warmth of the locals compensates for its often harsh maritime climate and 
the sporting obsession of the area is undoubtedlyGaelic games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/sep/21/in-praise-of-gaelic-sports>
. Galway is relatively rare in Ireland, in that it can compete strongly most 
years in hurling and Gaelic football. The surrounding counties of Leitrim, 
Roscommon, Sligo and particularly Mayo, are Gaelic football infused. With the 
majority of the province’s talented young athletes dreaming of playing for 
their county at Croke Park, developing rugby players and fans in Galway and the 
surrounding counties of Connacht has always been a challenge.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fbehind-the-lines%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Fconnacht-pro-12-final-rugby-union-leinster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F56db86121397e5cd13a848555372ddf1452004b2%2F0_0_4360_2616%2F4360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Connacht%20overcame%20the%20odds%20to%20beat%20Glasgow%20and%20reach%20the%20Pro12%20final&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fbehind-the-lines%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Fconnacht-pro-12-final-rugby-union-leinster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Connacht%20overcame%20the%20odds%20to%20beat%20Glasgow%20and%20reach%20the%20Pro12%20final&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fbehind-the-lines%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Fconnacht-pro-12-final-rugby-union-leinster%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F56db86121397e5cd13a848555372ddf1452004b2%2F0_0_4360_2616%2F4360.jpg>
 Bundee Aki celebrates with his team-mates. Photograph: INPHO/Rex/Shutterstock 
Rugby has been played in the western province since 1885, but it has struggled 
since then to gain any kind of meaningful foothold in the affections of the 
Connacht public. Since the professional era, foreign coaches have come and 
gone, including Warren Gatland, who spent two seasons in Galway before coaching 
Ireland in 1998. The spartan crowds that watched Connacht struggle on the field 
were matched by their meagre funds, leaving them fighting to keep their balance 
sheet in the black. The sight of Connacht players huddled under the posts in 
their baggy green jerseys awaiting a conversion attempt from the opposition was 
common in the late 1990s.

Michael Bradley arrived as coach in 2003, just as Connacht were facing 
extinction. A former international scrum-half from Cork, he was used to working 
against the odds – after all, he had played scrum-half for Ireland behind a 
forward pack that was most comfortable going backwards. In his seven seasons 
leading Connacht, he faced the difficulty of trying to make a silk purse out of 
a sow’s ear.

In Bradley’s last year as coach, in 2010, the team upset the odds and reached 
the semi-finals of the European Challenge Cup, hosting Jonny Wilkinson and his 
team of galacticos from Toulon. Bradley had brought increased crowds and 
interest to the humbleGalway Sportsgrounds 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Galway_Sportsgrounds>, and finally laid a 
foundation.

If Bradley brought much-needed stability, former Samoa international Pat Lam 
brought a belief that Connacht could compete with any team in Europe. The 
gregarious Samoan arrived in Galway fresh from a spell in the Super Rugby 
competition with the Auckland Blues. He took time to understand the province 
and its people – to understand the psychology of a province that had so often 
been left kicking its heels, waiting for an opportunity to shine.

Five Nations memories: when rugby was amateur and Ireland (nearly) always lost
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/behind-the-lines/2016/feb/19/five-nations-memories-rugby-amateur-ireland>
For many years, Connacht has had to be clever in its recruitment of players. 
It does not boast large salaries, huge crowds or even many days of sunshine. 
What it can offer is an opportunity to make an impact at a professional club, 
when opportunities were not forthcoming at the player’s former club. Players 
that have found themselves on the periphery of Leinster, Ulster and Munster 
have moved to Connacht and reinvigorated their careers.

The difficulty of providing such an ample launchpad for players in Europe is 
that, after their development at Connacht, like ripened fruit, they are ready 
to be picked up by larger provinces. Robbie Henshaw, a true homegrown star from 
Athlone who was developed as a centre for Connacht before shining on the 
international stage for Ireland, will leave for Leinster next season. Connacht 
have been fighting with one hand held behind their back for many years and now 
face the the challenge of their academy being regularly raided for treasure by 
teams with more resources.

Lam has managed to steer the ship through choppy waters and develop players 
from disparate backgrounds. Two of the heroes from theirPro12 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/pro12> semi-final in Galway took the scenic 
route to stardom. AJ MacGinty, the team’s out-half, grew up in Dublin, before 
studying in the USA, representing the Eagles in the 2015 World Cup and finding 
himself back home in Ireland kicking his adopted province to victory against 
Glasgow. Niyi Adeolokun, the winger who scored Connacht’s only try in their 
16-11 win on Saturday, spent his early years in Nigeria before moving to Dublin 
and taking up rugby. Two years ago he was throwing a ball around the muddy 
pitch of College Park for Trinity College Dublin, refuelling after games with a 
curry and a pint. Today, he is a hero in Galway to a growing fanbase.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fbehind-the-lines%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Fconnacht-pro-12-final-rugby-union-leinster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3358f7b0fd6e9deb291fb521f4ad3aa45397e5db%2F0_0_4618_3275%2F4618.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Connacht%20overcame%20the%20odds%20to%20beat%20Glasgow%20and%20reach%20the%20Pro12%20final&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fbehind-the-lines%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Fconnacht-pro-12-final-rugby-union-leinster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Connacht%20overcame%20the%20odds%20to%20beat%20Glasgow%20and%20reach%20the%20Pro12%20final&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fbehind-the-lines%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Fconnacht-pro-12-final-rugby-union-leinster%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3358f7b0fd6e9deb291fb521f4ad3aa45397e5db%2F0_0_4618_3275%2F4618.jpg>
 Niyi Adeolokun scores Connacht’s try against Glasgow. Photograph: Stephen 
McCarthy/Getty Images 
Glasgow arrived in Galway confident of victory, but they faced a team that was 
hewn out of adversity. It was apt that Connacht were once again captained by 
one-club man John Muldoon, a grizzled and battle-worn back row who has been 
playing for Connacht since 2004. He has seen the tumult and fear of those 
barren years in Galway, when interest in the team was low and the players found 
it difficult to compete on an even footing.

As the final whistle blew on Saturday he had to negotiate his way through 
thousands of emotional fanswho gathered on the field to sing The Fields of 
Athenry <https://twitter.com/connachtrugby/status/734320154386006016>. Times 
have finally changed. Victory against Glasgow has given them a place in the 
final against Leinster, an Irish team synonymous with domestic and European 
success. Muldoon and his team-mates will hope to remind them that Connacht’s 
day has finally come.

• This article is from Behind the Lines <https://jdrennan13.wordpress.com/>
• Follow Jonathan Drennan <https://twitter.com/jwdrennan> on Twitter
 