 Rick Astley’s debut hit Never Gonna Give You Up, started a five-week run at No 
1 on the UK singles chart this week in 1987. But which of the following does he 
promise he will never do?  Run around and desert you  Kick you out  Stare you 
out The most memorable moment of 2003’s MTV Video Music awards was the kiss 
between titans of pop Madonna, Britney Spears and Christina Aguilera. Whose 
face did producers famously decide to cut to during Britney’s lip-lock?  Justin 
TimberlakeBritney's ex-boyfriend. He remained emotionally vacant throughout.  
Jamie Spears  Sean Penn This week in 1989, Izzy Stradlin from Guns N’ Roses was 
arrested for making a public disturbance on a US Airways flight. What did he do?
 Punched two of his fellow passengers before locking himself in the toilets for 
three hours  Was found in possession of a smuggled pet turtle  Urinated on the 
floor, verbally abused a stewardess and smoked in the non-smoking section of 
the aircraftAfter his arrest, Stradlin decided to go sober. He later said of 
his time in Guns N’ Roses: “Once I quit drugs, I couldn’t help looking around 
and asking myself, ‘Is this all there is?’” The Ronettes first entered the US 
singles chart with Be My Baby this week in 1963. Which of the below songs with 
“baby” in the title did not feature in the best selling singles of this year?  
Ruby Baby - Dion  Baby, No, Baby, Yes - The Little Ladies Made it up. Probably 
really good though.  Baby Workout - Jackie Wilson  On 30 August 1999, Lou Bega 
went to No 1 on the UK singles chart with his hit summer smash Mambo No 5. In 
its lyrics, the German star rattles off the names of women he flirts with. 
Which of the below is not on Bega’s flist (flirt list)?  Mary  Tina  Helga A 
lucky escape for fictional character Helga. In 1984, the movie of Purple Rain 
opened at cinemas across the UK, and would gross more than US $80m at the box 
office. Which of Prince’s former girlfriends was supposed to play the leading 
role before the couple split?  Vanity  Post-Vanity, the role was offered to 
Flashdance’s Jennifer Beals, who turned down the role, before Apollonia 6 was 
hired.  Pride  Verity On 31 August 1957, Squeeze vocalist Glenn Tilbrook was 
born. But what is his middle name?  Trystan  Martin  Ally Ally Oi Oi Oi Tina 
Turner had her first solo No 1 single in the US with What’s Love Got to Do With 
It this week in 1984. In the song’s lyrics, what reaction does “the touch of 
your hand” have on her?  It makes her feel like a real woman  It makes her 
pulse react  It makes her sweat from the knees In 2002, Coldplay scored their 
second UK No 1 album with A Rush Of Blood to the Head. Of their artistic 
evolution and progression, which of the following statements did the NME 
proclaim?  It’s like discovering a precocious nipper has grown into a handsome, 
questing adult  It’s like discovering your dad has a secret passion for extreme 
sports and eyeball tattoo art  It’s like discovering your boring mate is an 
alien sent to planet earth to promote a message of peace, self-love and making 
trade fair On 1 September 1960, Cass Lewis, bassist in Skunk Anansie was born. 
Everyone knows who frontwoman Skin is. But who is the rock group’s drummer?  
Lou Bega  Mark Richardson Richardson first played a drum kit aged six at his 
friends house. It was a Ludwig Junior.  Richard Marks  You got…  Challenge your 
friends Submit answers  