
As August draws to a close and the transfer deadline nears with each passing 
minute, Premier League managers will be looking back on their first three games 
of the new season. Pep Guardiola, José Mourinho and Antonio Conte can reflect 
on 100% records, a feat that was nearly matched by newly appointed Everton boss 
Ronald Koeman. His unbeaten team go into the international break in fourth 
place after their best start to aPremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> season for a decade. They 
haven’t started this well since David Moyes took the team on a seven-match 
unbeaten run at the start of the 2006-07 season.

Koeman has made the ideal start as he tries to take the club back into Europe 
following a period of regression under Roberto Martínez. They were a tad 
fortunate to secureall three points against Stoke City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/27/everton-stoke-city-premier-league-match-report>
 on Saturday – a Shay Given own goal helped Everton to victory – but winning 
only breeds confidence.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Fronald-koeman-everton-premier-league%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f75e968e1f15130fa4539cc7022b738ab8e8102%2F0_0_650_567%2F650.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Ronald%20Koeman%20led%20Everton%20to%20their%20best%20start%20to%20a%20season%20for%20a%20decade&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Fronald-koeman-everton-premier-league%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Ronald%20Koeman%20led%20Everton%20to%20their%20best%20start%20to%20a%20season%20for%20a%20decade&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Fronald-koeman-everton-premier-league%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f75e968e1f15130fa4539cc7022b738ab8e8102%2F0_0_650_567%2F650.jpg>
 Infographic:WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Koeman’s first job was to strengthen the defence and he made goalkeeper 
Maarten Stekelenburg <https://www.whoscored.com/Players/4065> his first 
signing. The 33-year-old may not be the most inspiring import, but he has the 
trust of the manager after a good working relationship at Ajax and then 
Southampton. Picking upIdrissa Gueye <https://www.whoscored.com/Players/80464> 
for a modest £7m was an even more astute signing. After making an indifferent 
start at Aston Villa at the beginning of last season, the Senegalese midfielder 
established himself as a key man for the club and earned himself a move back to 
the Premier League when Villa were relegated.

He has rapidly become a vital cog in Koeman’s side, with his rating (7.46) 
better than any other player at the club this season. No player has made more 
tackles (16) than the 26-year-old, with Gueye providing the necessary shield to 
the defence. WithJames McCarthy <https://www.whoscored.com/Players/31281> and 
Mo Besic <https://www.whoscored.com/Players/90983> sidelined due to injury, 
Gueye’s capture has proved all the more important.

Everton close to club record £35m deal for Porto forward Yacine Brahimi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/31/yacine-brahimi-everton-club-record-deal-porto-forward>
As a former defender himself, Koeman was always likely to start his work at 
the back. WhileAshley Williams <https://www.whoscored.com/Players/8408> was 
bought to cover the departure of John Stones to Manchester City, Koeman was 
early to identify the Wales captain as a top target. The £12m fee is hefty for 
a player who turned 32 this month, but Williams brings a wealth of top-flight 
experience. Everton conceded the third most shots per game (14.6) in the league 
last season and that statistic is down to 10.7 this season. It may be a small 
sample size but they are also conceding fewer goals: they shipped an average of 
1.45 per match last season and that statistic has fallen significantly to 0.67.

Refinements are still required at the back and up front. Of the four goals 
Everton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> have scored this season, 
one was the aforementioned own goal by Given and another was a teasing 
free-kick from Ross Barkley against Tottenham on the opening day that was more 
of a cross than a shot.

Nevertheless, with Koeman able to call on Gerard Deulofeu 
<https://www.whoscored.com/Players/98317>, Romelu Lukaku 
<https://www.whoscored.com/Players/78498> and summer arrival Yannick Bolasie 
<https://www.whoscored.com/Players/69844>, the Everton attack should click soon 
– especially ifYacine Brahimi joins from Porto as the club’s record signing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/31/yacine-brahimi-everton-club-record-deal-porto-forward>
. Martínez built his team on a weak foundation, tried to outscore opponents and 
lost his job when it failed. Koeman has instead focused his efforts on the 
defensive side of Everton’s game and it has contributed to their bright start 
to the campaign.

Premier League team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
La Liga team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Bundesliga team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
Serie A team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Ligue 1 team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
• Follow WhoScored on Twitter <https://twitter.com/WhoScored> and Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/WhoScored>
• Follow Ben McAleer <https://twitter.com/benmcaleer1> on Twitter
 