
Russia

Russia has played an unexpectedly prominent role in this year’s US election, 
although the extent of the Kremlin’s involvement inhacking Democratic servers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/16/putin-russia-us-democrats-hacking-cyber-attacks>
 and the WikiLeaks disclosures will probably never be known.

What is clear is that Moscow has enjoyed making trouble. Vladimir Putin has a 
personal dislike ofHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> going back to her time as 
secretary of state, while Trump fits perfectly into the mould of “chaos 
candidates” that Russia has supported in other western countries.

It would take a conspiracy theorist to believe Trump is actually a Kremlin 
stooge rather than simply a “useful idiot”, and some inRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> believed a Trump presidency could 
actually have more potential for conflict than a Clinton one.

Entire US political system ‘under attack’ by Russian hacking, experts warn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/14/hillary-clinton-email-hack-russia-cybersecurity>
Under Clinton, relations would be unlikely to be rosy but would probably stay 
within a long-established paradigm of mutual distrust and limited cooperation 
on certain issues.


US politics <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-politics> tends to be 
portrayed as driven by geopolitical interests rather than personalities, and so 
most ordinary Russians assume that little will change, whoever wins. Still, the 
warm words about Putin from Trump, and the slightly more positive tone of 
television coverage relating to the real estate tycoon, have both left their 
mark. A poll over the summer found that 22% of Russians had a positive opinion 
of Trump, compared with just 8% for Clinton.

Shaun Walker <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/shaun-walker> in Moscow

Mexico

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fworld-opinion-us-election-russia-china-mexico-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9627f0fe26cf54f29da898518b68b329ab98ad7%2F0_41_4312_2588%2F4312.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20world%20views%20the%20US%20elections%2C%20from%20Israel%20to%20North%20Korea&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fworld-opinion-us-election-russia-china-mexico-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20world%20views%20the%20US%20elections%2C%20from%20Israel%20to%20North%20Korea&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fworld-opinion-us-election-russia-china-mexico-europe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9627f0fe26cf54f29da898518b68b329ab98ad7%2F0_41_4312_2588%2F4312.jpg>
 Mexicans watch the presidential candidates debate on television in Mexico 
City. Photograph: Alfredo Estrella/AFP/Getty Images 
Trump’s rise has stirred more unease and indignation in Mexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/23/donald-trump-mexico-government-erique-pena-nieto>
 than perhaps any other country. He launched his campaign by describing Mexican 
migrants as rapists and robbers and promised to build a border wall, with 
Mexico paying.

Trump’s wall and his pledges to rip up the North American Free Trade 
Agreement, or Nafta, and slap tariffs on Mexican-made products have also caused 
preoccupation in business circles, which over the past 25 years have bet on 
closer US relations.

Mexicans have responded by mocking Trump with memes, lampooning him with 
piñatas andburning him in effigy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/25/mexicans-donald-trump-effigy-easter-judas>
, but ironically the candidate may have ceded the position of most-hated 
political figure to Mexico’s own president. Enrique Peña Nieto was widely 
rebuked for sharing a platform with Trump at the presidential palace in August 
and failing to challenge his anti-Mexican comments.

Meanwhile, Trump has frequently been compared to Mexico’s own perennial 
outsider, Andrés Manuel López Obrador, a leftwing populist who has twice 
refused to accept election results which went against him.

Other parts of Trump’s discourse sound eerily familiar to Mexicans, such as 
his pledge to lock up his opponent.

Some have even mused that Trump has finally cracked the idea that the US is a 
model forMexico <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico>. “I’ve never felt so 
third world as when I saw the gringos in crisis because things could happen 
there that already happened here,” tweeted Esteban Illades, editor of the 
Mexican magazine Nexos.

David Agren <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/david-agren> in Mexico City

Iran

In Tehran, one thing is certain: no matter which candidate wins the US 
presidential race, Iran will face a tougher time ahead. Even Hillary Clinton – 
seen in Tehran as the lesser of two evils – has consistently been more hawkish 
onIran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> than Barack Obama.


But Iranians have been amused by the bitter rivalry been Clinton and Trump and 
in an unprecedented move, state TV broadcast the last presidential debate.

Trump’s talk of election-rigging gave hardliners a sense of schadenfreude, 
reminding them of Washington’s accusations that Iran’s 2009 vote was rigged. 
Meanwhile, the tycoon’s toxic rhetoric and use of the media remind many of 
their own former president Mahmoud Ahmadinejad.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-iran-nuclear-deal-stupid-people-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20on%20Iran%20deal%3A%20%E2%80%98We%20are%20led%20by%20very%20stupid%20people%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-iran-nuclear-deal-stupid-people-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20on%20Iran%20deal%3A%20%E2%80%98We%20are%20led%20by%20very%20stupid%20people%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-iran-nuclear-deal-stupid-people-video&media=>
Trump on Iran deal: ‘We are led by very stupid people’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2015/sep/09/donald-trump-iran-nuclear-deal-stupid-people-video>
Although Clinton served as secretary of state under Obama, she is mainly seen 
as the architect of the economic sanctions that brought Iran back to the 
negotiating table, rather than the person who secured last year’s nuclear deal. 
Credit for the landmark deal goes to her successor, John Kerry.


Iranian view of Donald Trump: familiar but no atomic challenger
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/iran-blog/2016/apr/29/iran-view-donald-trump-ahmadinejad-us-presidential-race-nuclear-deal-hillary-clinton>
Iranians have not forgotten Clinton’s past comments on Iran, and an extract 
from a 2008 interview with ABC has been shared widely on social media. In the 
clip, she says: “I want the Iranians to know that if I’m the president, we will 
attack Iran … we would be able to totally obliterate them.” The comments came 
after a question about a hypothetical Iranian attack againstIsrael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> but have been circulated more 
recently out of context.

Analyst Ahmad Shirzad told the reformist newspaper Shargh that Obama had been 
“Iran’s best choice” to avoid confrontation – and that it was unlikely that 
Clinton would match him.

Saeed Kamali Dehghan <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/saeedkamalidehghan>, 
Iran correspondent

China
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fworld-opinion-us-election-russia-china-mexico-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd4e1aa10b964d9fc55e361602c7469bb051c9152%2F0_90_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20world%20views%20the%20US%20elections%2C%20from%20Israel%20to%20North%20Korea&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fworld-opinion-us-election-russia-china-mexico-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20world%20views%20the%20US%20elections%2C%20from%20Israel%20to%20North%20Korea&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fworld-opinion-us-election-russia-china-mexico-europe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd4e1aa10b964d9fc55e361602c7469bb051c9152%2F0_90_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Masks of Donald Trump are seen in boxes at the Shenzhen Lanbingcai Latex 
Crafts Factory, which produces Halloween costumes and masks, in Shenzhen, 
China. Photograph: Anthony Kwan/Getty Images 

The rulers of one-party China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> are 
not known for asking the masses what they think of their political masters, and 
there have been no official polls on the US elections.

But the Communist party has made no attempt to disguise its own delight at the 
political turmoil unfolding on the other side of the Pacific.

“For a long time, many Americans regarded US democracy as the gold standard,” 
one prominent scholar mused <http://www.globaltimes.cn/content/1012141.shtml> 
in the party-run Global Times newspaper. “But more and more Americans feel 
shame about this kind of democracy, and this year’s election.

“Chinese people can evaluate the US system of democracy when watching its 
general election.”

A study released last month by the Pew Research Center 
<http://www.pewglobal.org/2016/10/05/2-china-and-the-world/> suggested that if 
China could vote, Hillary Clinton would come out on top.

Pew said 37% of Chinese held a positive view of Clinton compared with just 22% 
for her Republican rival. Forty per cent viewed Trump unfavourably against 35% 
for Clinton.

Those figures may reflect a distaste for the way in which Trump has made 
China-bashing a recurrent feature of his campaign, accusing it of “raping” the 
US and creating global warming as a “hoax”.

They might also speak to approval for Clinton’s outspokenness on civil rights 
issues. Chinese feminists still revere Clinton for a 1995 speech she gave at a 
UN conference in Beijing in which she declared: “Human rights are women’s 
rights – andwomen’s rights are human rights 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xXM4E23Efvk>.”

But if the people prefer Clinton, some suspect the party itself is secretly 
hoping a Trump presidency would boost China’s quest for superpower status by 
dealing a severe blow to its main rival.

Tom Phillips <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/tomphillips> in Beijing 


Canada

The American election has been closely watched north of the border, with many 
inCanada <https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada> nervously wondering who 
will end up at the helm of Canada’s largest trading partner.

The US accounted for 60% of Canada’s global trade in 2014, a relationship 
underpinned by Nafta.Trump, who has described the agreement as “the worst trade 
deal in history”, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/29/obama-trudeau-pena-nieto-ottawa-trump-brexit>
 has vowed to renegotiate the terms and would move to withdraw the US from the 
deal if Canada and Mexico refuse.

Polls suggest Canadians overwhelmingly support Hillary Clinton, with up to 80% 
of Canadians saying they would cast their vote for her. But Trump has attracted 
a smallbut loyal legion of fans in Canada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/22/canadians-4-donald-trump-us-election-politics>
 who say his promise to green-light the Keystone XL pipeline shows that a Trump 
presidency could benefit to Canada.

Little about Clinton’s campaign has been discussed in Canada. Instead her 
candidacy has come to be defined by who she is not: Trump. Canadian politicians 
on both the left and right have voiced concerns over the Republican nominee, 
but Justin Trudeau, Canada’s prime minister, has repeatedly shied away from 
offering his views on the candidates. “I’m not going to pick a fight with 
Donald Trump right now. I’m not going to support him either, obviously,”he told 
a forum in early March. 
<http://www.cbc.ca/news/politics/trudeau-huffington-post-town-hall-1.3479722>

It was a softening of the stance he took in December when he described Trump’s 
proposal to bar foreign Muslims as “ignorant [and] irresponsible”.

But Trudeau has since become increasingly tight-lipped, heeding advisers who 
warn that Canada must not be perceived to be interfering in the American 
election.

Ashifa Kassam <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/ashifa-kassam> in Toronto

Israel

No foreign relationship is more important to Israelis than the relationship 
with the US, and the scrutiny of potential occupants of the White House has had 
allthe passionate intensity of the weighing of a potential prom night date. 
<http://www.jpost.com/Opinion/US-elections-Who-is-best-for-Israel-America-and-the-world-447273>

After the Obama-Netanyahu years, which have been marked by a frosty and 
difficult relationship, the question – boiled to its crude simplicities –is 
whether Hillary would be more friendly than Obama 
<http://www.timesofisrael.com/leaked-emails-show-hillary-keen-to-patch-things-up-with-netanyahu/>
 and whether Trump, despite his pro-Israel noises, is tainted by the 
antisemitism of some of his supporters.

Oddly, given the history of Obama’s relationship with the Israeli prime 
minister and Benjamin Netanyahu’s controversialspeech to Congress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/03/netanyuahu-congress-iran-nuclear-deal-path-to-bomb>
 opposing the Iran deal, Netanyahu has been unexpectedly cautious on the 
elections.

Of more immediate concern to Netanyahu and his allies in recent weeks has been 
whether, in the time between election day and the inauguration, Obama might 
launch or support a new initiative on the Israel-Palestine peace process.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fworld-opinion-us-election-russia-china-mexico-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f20fbc32e126a95853753c1154ce8fdc4c55c1c%2F0_123_1485_891%2F1485.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20world%20views%20the%20US%20elections%2C%20from%20Israel%20to%20North%20Korea&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fworld-opinion-us-election-russia-china-mexico-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20world%20views%20the%20US%20elections%2C%20from%20Israel%20to%20North%20Korea&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fworld-opinion-us-election-russia-china-mexico-europe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f20fbc32e126a95853753c1154ce8fdc4c55c1c%2F0_123_1485_891%2F1485.jpg>
 Hillary Clinton, then the US secretary of state, meets Benjamin Netanyahu in 
2010. Photograph: GPO/Getty Images 
Netanyahu met both candidates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/23/benjamin-netanyahu-israel-trump-clinton-meeting>
 during his visit to the UN general assembly but otherwise has been discreet – 
although Israel Hayom, the free mass distribution paper nicknamed the “Bibiton” 
for its support of Netanyahu, has seemed most sympathetic of the Israeli media 
to Trump.

Donald Trump links Mexico border wall plan to Israel's 'successful' separation 
barrier
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/26/donald-trump-links-mexico-border-wall-plan-to-israels-successful-separation-barrier>
If there has been less interest in Hillary Clinton it is because she is seen 
as a known quantity, cautiously regarded as more supportive of Israel than 
Obama.

Trump, however, is seen as a different issue. Although he has said he “would 
be great for Israel” and has pointed to his Jewish son-in-law Jared Kushner, 
others remember earlier comments where he said he would be neutral on the 
Israel-Palestine issue.

The reality is that despite his sometimes strongly pro-Israel statements (and 
the apparent support of one of Netanyahu’s biggest backers, the casino magnate 
Sheldon Adelson) Trumpalarms many Israelis. 
<http://www.haaretz.com/opinion/1.700648>

Where they see in Clinton a continuation of a status quo and experience of the 
region, Trump’s approach to foreign policy is seen as wayward, imprecise at 
best, and contradictory.

His comments in December to the Republican Jewish Coalition, in which he said 
he suspected many members wouldn’t back him because he was rich and didn’t want 
their contributions, was seen by some in the Israeli media as reinforcing 
stereotyping of Jews.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-israel-aipac-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clinton%20attacks%20Trump's%20neutral%20stance%20on%20Israel%20at%20Aipac%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-israel-aipac-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clinton%20attacks%20Trump%27s%20neutral%20stance%20on%20Israel%20at%20Aipac%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fhillary-clinton-donald-trump-israel-aipac-video&media=>
Clinton attacks Trump’s neutral stance on Israel at Aipac 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/mar/21/hillary-clinton-donald-trump-israel-aipac-video>
His stance on other issues, including immigration, and his racist remarks 
about Mexican migrants were also seen as deeply uncomfortable.


More serious still has been the kind of people that Trump has attracted and 
the views of people and groups Trump himself has retweeted.

The liberal daily Haaretz framed the question in a bald but careful headline: 
Donald Trump an anti-Semite? Israel’s Top GOP Supporter Insists Otherwise. 
<http://www.haaretz.com/world-news/u-s-election-2016/.premium-1.748122>

Peter Beaumont <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/peterbeaumont> in Jerusalem

Middle East 

In the Middle East, many are wary of what a new president in the Oval Office 
will mean for American policy in the region. Washington’s traditional allies 
are eager for a more hawkish leader than Obama, whose nuclear deal with Iran 
and reluctance to deploy US forces against the regime of Bashar al-Assad in 
Syria have fueled fears of an American realignment towards Tehran and away from 
the Gulf states.

While Clinton is often seen as a known quantity in the region – and one who is 
more likely to defend America’s longtime allies and clients – most see Trump as 
an unknown whose unpredictability could further destabilize the region.

Trump’s incendiary comments on banning Muslims from entering the country have 
also aroused disbelief and mockery, but social media users often note that 
Trump’s populist demagoguery matches that deployed by Arab despots.

Others in the region see the Trump candidacy as a symbol of western democracy 
and values gone awry, hinting at a more profound global realignment.

“From our point of view, the revolutions of the Arab spring were an inflection 
point to measure the west’s strength in defending democracy, and they failed,” 
wrote Jamil Matar, a columnist in the Lebanese newspaper Assafir. “What hope 
now do we have in a west that is in constant decline?”


Kareem Shaheen <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/kareem-shaheen> in Beirut 

North Korea

Kim Jong-un is hoping Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> will be the next occupant of 
the White House. The North Korean leader has not publicly commented on the US 
presidential election, but if state media are to be believed, Trump represents 
his best hope of engagement with the west.
The DPRK Today newspaper has described the billionaire property mogul as a 
“wise politician” and “prescient presidential candidate”.

“It turns out that Trump is not the rough-talking, screwy, ignorant candidate 
they say he is, but is actually a wise politician and a prescient presidential 
candidate,” Han Yong-muk wrote in a column.

Donald Trump on North Korea going to war: 'Good luck, enjoy yourself folks'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/02/donald-trump-north-korea-war-nuclear-weapons>
Residents of the North Korean capital, Pyongyang, believe Trump would be more 
open to dialogue – a key regime demand that would allow it to use its nuclear 
programme to secure a no-first-strike guarantee from the US and the resumption 
of international aid.

Keisuke Fukuda, a Japanese journalist with Toyo Keizai magazine, said he had 
interviewed North Korean citizens who were “looking forward to change” in 
Washington’s political direction.

The desire to talk appears to be reciprocal. In June, Trump said he would 
welcome a visit to the US by Kim Jong-un, although he would stop short of 
honouring the dictator with an official state dinner.

Despite North Korea’s growing isolation, eight years of the Obama presidency 
have not been all bad for the country. Clinton’s approach to the regime is not 
expected to differ significantly from Obama’s policy of sanctions and 
international isolation – measures she supported as secretary of state and 
which have failed to dent Kim’s missile and nuclear weapons programmes.

Trump has called on China to do more to rein in Pyongyang’s nuclear ambitions 
– perhaps the onlyNorth Korea <https://www.theguardian.com/world/north-korea> 
initiative on which he and Clinton agree.

Justin McCurry <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/justinmccurry> 

Japan and South Korea
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fworld-opinion-us-election-russia-china-mexico-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb5ea8fcd98688f6bd8784aafd99e15ff8d2c4ac%2F0_100_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20world%20views%20the%20US%20elections%2C%20from%20Israel%20to%20North%20Korea&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fworld-opinion-us-election-russia-china-mexico-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20world%20views%20the%20US%20elections%2C%20from%20Israel%20to%20North%20Korea&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fworld-opinion-us-election-russia-china-mexico-europe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb5ea8fcd98688f6bd8784aafd99e15ff8d2c4ac%2F0_100_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Students attend an event to watch the US presidential debate on television in 
Tokyo. Photograph: Issei Kato/Reuters 
North Korea’s apparent enthusiasm for a Trump presidency could be connected to 
his desire to dismantle the postwar arrangements that many believe have ensured 
the security of the US’s most important allies in the Asia-Pacific, Japan and
South Korea <https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-korea>.

In a campaign speech late last year, Trump described Japan, where 47,000 US 
troops are based, as a security freeloader. “If somebody attacks Japan, we have 
to immediately go and start World War III, OK? If we get attacked,Japan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> doesn’t have to help us,” he said. 
“Somehow, that doesn’t sound so fair.”

Trump’s frequent claim that Japan is taking advantage of US largesse is 
inaccurate. Tokyo contributes ¥192bn ($1.84bn) a year towards maintaining the 
US military presence. US bases in Japan cost about $5.5bn a year, according to 
the Pentagon, about half of which goes on salaries and other personnel costs.

South Korea, meanwhile, contributes $850m a year – about half the cost of 
maintaining 28,500 troops on the southern side of the heavily fortified border 
that divides the Korean peninsula.

Yet Trump has returned to the theme throughout the campaign: “As far as Japan 
and other countries, we are being ripped off by everybody in the world,” he 
said at an event in Las Vegas. “We’re defending other countries, we’re spending 
a fortune doing it. We have to tell Japan, in a very nice way, we have to tell
Germany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>, all these countries, South 
Korea, we have a say, ‘You have to help us out.’”

More alarming than Trump’s claim that Japan is not pulling its weight on 
bilateral security ties is his suggestion that Japan and South Korea should end 
their dependence on the US nuclear umbrella and develop their own nuclear 
deterrents.

That, many analysts agree, could spark an Asia-Pacific arms race that would 
further destabilise an already tense region.

Justin McCurry <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/justinmccurry> in Tokyo

Afghanistan 

Just as Afghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> has been 
almost entirely absent from the two presidential campaigns, neither are the US 
elections a topic of debate in Afghan media, where the war with the Taliban and 
domestic political chaos take up most of the bandwidth.

To the extent the elections are discussed by ordinary Afghans, conversations 
centre around Trump, particularly his demonization of Muslims, which gathered 
pace after the Orlando nightclub shooting in June. The perpetrator, Omar 
Mateen, was of Afghan origin, and Trump’s explicit linking of Afghans to 
terrorism earned him widespread contempt.


Afghans in general seem unsure of what either candidate has in store for their 
country, apart from two indications from the Trump campaign: his proposed ban 
on Muslims from entering America; and his calls to pull American troops home, 
or at least limit their role in Afghanistan, which would likely have a 
destabilising effect on the country. Neither is popular with Afghans.


Recently, though, Afghans have mostly treated the US elections with a certain 
sarcastic distance. After the third presidential debate, Trump’s refusal to 
accept the election results if he did not win led to a wave of snarky 
commentary on social media. Some suggested that perhaps the Afghan president, 
Ashraf Ghani, would need to fly to Washington to broker a national unity 
government deal, as the US secretary of state, John Kerry, did after the 
divisive 2014 Afghan election.


Sune Engel Rasmussen <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/sune-engel-rasmussen>
 in Kabul

Germany 

If Hillary Clinton were to run against Donald Trump for the German presidency, 
she would win by a landslide. An October survey run by the polling institute 
Infratest Dimap found that 86% of Germans would vote for the former US 
secretary of state. An earlier poll discovered that even among supporters of 
the rightwing populists Alternative für Deutschland, only one in four could 
imagine voting for Trump.

The widely held view is that a Trump presidency would add further turmoil to 
an increasingly unstable global economy, a development which Germany, as an 
exporting nation, would suffer particularly strongly. “Donald Trump could 
endanger our prosperity,” wrote Die Welt.

Germany believes Trump presidency would batter US economy, report says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/01/germany-donald-trump-us-economy>
But Der Spiegel also noted a distinct lack of enthusiasm for Clinton’s 
presidency among the German public. “The fact that Clinton’s public appearances 
can be wooden should not lessen our faith in her. How often has Angela Merkel 
been accused of a lack of passion? And now she is the most respected leading 
politician in the world.”

The German chancellor herself has barely commented on the presidential race. 
Having been attacked by Trump for “ruining Germany”, Merkel has consistently 
passed on the opportunity to retaliate, though her dislike of political 
grandstanding is well-known.

Germany’s foreign minister, on the other hand, has been more outspoken, doing 
away with diplomatic protocol when he described Trump in August as a “hate 
preacher”. Frank-Walter Steinmeier openly stated he was “not neutral” on the 
question of the US presidency, and that listening to the Republican candidate’s 
tirades made him “frightful of what will happen to this world” if he came to 
power.

Philip Oltermann <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/philip-oltermann> in 
Berlin

Italy
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fworld-opinion-us-election-russia-china-mexico-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b0162090f969669edc0a476a02818d49c0dce51%2F0_238_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20world%20views%20the%20US%20elections%2C%20from%20Israel%20to%20North%20Korea&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fworld-opinion-us-election-russia-china-mexico-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20world%20views%20the%20US%20elections%2C%20from%20Israel%20to%20North%20Korea&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fworld-opinion-us-election-russia-china-mexico-europe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b0162090f969669edc0a476a02818d49c0dce51%2F0_238_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 The Italian land artist Dario Gambarin has used his tractor to transform a 
field near the Italian city of Verona into a giant portrait of Donald Trump. 
Photograph: Dario Gambarin/AP 
In Italy <https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy>, a country that 
traditionally has great affection for the US, support for Hillary Clinton runs 
high, with polls showing that about 63% of Italian voters would support the 
former secretary of state over Donald Trump.


Italians are well aware that the Republican candidate has been compared to two 
of the country’s own former leaders: the fascist Benito Mussolini, and Silvio 
Berlusconi, the billionaire media mogul who won three elections but who was 
ultimately brought down by a series of tax and sex scandals.

With the wisdom of hindsight, Trump has been labelled “America’s Berlusconi”. 
In La Repubblica, the columnist Vittorio Zucconi said that, notwithstanding the 
obvious similarities between the two men – their hair, their treatment of women 
as sexual objects, their alleged avoidance of tax – both had captured the 
hearts of a certain class of voters who hate the political establishment. Among 
these voters, stories about the candidates’ foibles did nothing to dent their 
popularity. Both could only be brought down by their own self-destructive 
tendencies, Zucconi concluded.

Gianni Riotta, the former editor of Il Sole 24 Ore, said that – despite being 
a “disastrous” prime minister – Berlusconi was a more astute politician than 
Trump has proven to be, having counted both George W Bush and Vladimir Putin as 
friends. Berlusconi – a confirmed billionaire with vast media holdings – was 
also a better businessman, Riotta said.

In Italy, the race for the White House is almost always interpreted through 
the lens of the country’s own fractured political landscape, and Italy’s 
political leaders have not shied away from choosing sides. True to his own 
centrist instincts, prime minister Matteo Renzi, head of the Democratic party, 
publicly sided with Hillary Clinton even before she won the Democratic 
nomination.

On the right, the xenophobic head of the Northern League, Matteo Salvini, 
travelled to the US to lend his support to Donald Trump, while a top official 
of the anti-establishment Five Star Movement said he would side with Jill 
Stein, the Green party candidate.

Stephanie Kirchgaessner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/stephanie-kirchgaessner> in Rome

United Kingdom

The Foreign Office is already preparing to breathe a sign of relief if its 
favoured candidate, Hillary Clinton, romps home: it would mean a reliable 
president who is more emotionally engaged withEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, the renewed threat posed by 
Russia, and a solution to the Syria crisis.


Britain sees its relationship with the US as key to countering the perception 
that Brexit will lead to a more isolationist UK foreign policy.

Relations between the UK and the US under David Cameron and Barack Obama were 
never poor, but they were punctuated by bumps: the Commons failure to back 
military action against Syria’s use of chemical weapons in 2013, Cameron’s 
risky and ultimately disastrous pledge to stage a referendum on Brexit, and 
Obama’s criticism that the UK and France took their eye off the ball in Libya, 
allowing the country to descend into chaos. Above all, Obama never seemed able 
to grasp the impact of the refugee crisis caused by the Syrian war.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fworld-opinion-us-election-russia-china-mexico-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc325bd356f64de35a045c3d59d91c12e93dbe1c1%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20world%20views%20the%20US%20elections%2C%20from%20Israel%20to%20North%20Korea&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fworld-opinion-us-election-russia-china-mexico-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20world%20views%20the%20US%20elections%2C%20from%20Israel%20to%20North%20Korea&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fworld-opinion-us-election-russia-china-mexico-europe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc325bd356f64de35a045c3d59d91c12e93dbe1c1%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Donald Trump officially opens his Ayrshire hotel and golf resort, with his 
son, Donald Jr, by his side. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian 
As the UK negotiates its departure from the European Union, Clinton will hope 
that it does not lead to an acrimonious divorce that destabilises the world 
economy. The softer the Brexit, the happier the White House will be. A 
President Clinton would also hope Brexit does not lead to a downgrade of Nato, 
or duplication with a more assertive EU foreign and defence policy. 
Increasingly Clinton may find herself needing to choose between Britain and 
Europe, something that will make the Foreign Office distinctly queasy.

Foreign secretary Boris Johnson has already been manoeuvring to show his 
personal support for a more muscular Syrian policy in line with Clinton’s own 
long-stated support for a no-fly zone. Britain will also be at the front of the 
queue if she chooses to take a more assertive line with Putin. At present, 
Britain has been the rhetorical outrider, but it may get some practical backing 
from the White House. The UK will hope stabilisation of its defence budget, the 
renewal of Trident nuclear submarines, and its willingness to send troops to 
the Baltic states will ensure that it remains at the front of the queue when it 
comes to security cooperation, if not a trade deal.

Patrick Wintour <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/patrickwintour> in London 

Iraq

Iraq is currently consumed by the battle to retake Mosul from Isis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/29/iraqi-shia-militias-tighten-noose-on-isis-with-mosul-offensive>
, and preparing for its own elections next year, so the US election has 
received relatively little attention – even though the outcome is likely to be 
critical to Iraq’s future.

Renewed American military and financial support has been key to the fight 
against Isis, particularly in the current campaign to retake Mosul, the jihadi 
group’s last major stronghold in the country.


Over $1.6bn was provided for training and equipping Iraqi forces in 2016 
alone. US special forces troops and air power are providing key support to the 
broad coalition now marching on the city.


How will new fighting in Iraq affect Trump v Clinton? Probably not much
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/17/battle-mosul-iraq-isis-donald-trump-hillary-clinton>
The US also sends hundreds of millions of dollars to Iraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> for non-military aid, which will be 
particularly needed in Mosul.


The US defence secretary, Ash Carter, has said he is already in talks about 
possible support for reconstruction 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-mideast-crisis-iraq-usa-idUSKCN12M03U>. But 
Trump has criticised the Mosul operation, and long made clear he wants to 
reduce foreign aid, particularly to countries he thinks “hate” the United 
States.


Resentment about the 2003 invasion and its fallout would probably put Iraq on 
that list. Clinton by contrast is expected to continue backing Iraq in its 
fight against Isis, and more broadly.


So Iraqis who are following the election closely are most likely to back a 
Clinton victory. Even in northern Kurdistan, where Republicans are generally 
popular, there is little support this year for a man seen locally as “a bigot 
and uncontrollable”.


Emma Graham Harrison <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/emma-graham-harrison>
 in Irbil
 