
On the field, the US women’s soccer team has followed up a thrilling NWSL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nwsl-national-womens-soccer-league> final 
with a couple of smashing debuts in friendlies against Switzerland. Off the 
field, the sport is bogged down in the courts and at the negotiating table.

The talent pipeline is still intact, a fact US coach Jill Ellis celebrated by 
calling in astaggering 11 uncapped players 
<http://www.ussoccer.com/stories/2016/10/06/15/24/161006-wnt-ellis-names-24-players-for-usa-matches-vs-switzerland>
 for camp. Lynn Williams, fresh from winning the NWSL Golden Boot and posting 
clutch performances to lift Western New York to the league title,scored just 49 
seconds 
<http://www.teamusa.org/News/2016/October/19/Making-Her-International-Debut-Lynn-Williams-Makes-Womens-Soccer-History-For-Team-USA>
 into her debut on 19 October. That was a new record for the fastest debut goal 
in US history –until Kealia Ohai scored 48 seconds 
<http://www.teamusa.org/News/2016/October/23/Kealia-Ohai-Scores-A-Record-Breaking-48-Seconds-Into-US-Soccer-Debut>
 after taking the field four days later.

But the NWSL, which has given Williams, Ohai and many other players important 
years to develop and bridge the gap between college soccer and the 
international game, still faces uncertainty. The league itself is stable, 
having already outlasted the two previous US professional leagues by playing a 
fourth season. Yet players are living on meager wages, and efforts to organize 
players to speak with a unified voice are slow.

And within the fractious US women’s soccer community 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/25/nwsl-us-womens-soccer-team-dispute>
, many fans and journalists (and players) treat the NWSL less as an earnest 
effort to expand the sport’s footprint and more as a punching bag for 
complaints of inequality, rife with comparisons of salary and playing 
conditions to Major League Soccer. US players ridiculed the league this summer 
after a game proceeded on a small field in Western New York. Hope Solo took 
advantage of the occasionto present a laundry list of NWSL complaints 
<http://hopesolo.com/2016/07/12/time-for-change/> – some outdated and some 
curious, but some serious.

Carli Lloyd's memoir explodes myth that US women's soccer is all fun and 
friends
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/27/carli-lloyd-memoir-us-women-soccer>
Yet the league’s capacity to address the salary issue has actually been 
limited bythe US women’s labor agreement with US Soccer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/11/uswnt-womens-soccer-pay-gamble-gender-equality>
, which manages the NWSL and pays salaries of USA internationals who play in 
the league. That agreement includes clauses limiting the pay of players who 
aren’t on the US women’s team, and it restricts US Soccer’s ability to change 
the pool of players currently on the national team.

That labor agreement, the focus of legal action and a threatened strike over 
an Olympic summer, is expiring at the end of the year. US Soccer has confirmed 
that the sides met on 26 October in New York and will meet again Tuesday in an 
effort to agree to a new deal before the end of the year, but neither side is 
eager to share particulars of what’s on the table.

The lame-duck agreement has limited the league’s ability to sign and keep 
strong players outside the US women’s talent pool. Each offseason, several 
players who are consistent starters in the league retire in their mid-20s, 
exhausted from taking additional jobs to make ends meet. Strong European clubs, 
who aren’t particularly concerned with league parity, have managed to keep most 
of their best players away from the NWSL.

Already in this offseason, European clubs have taken back some of the top 
international talent in the NWSL. Kim Little, the 2014 NWSL MVP, left Seattleto 
rejoin her old club 
<http://www.seattletimes.com/sports/reign/kim-little-transfers-from-seattle-reign-to-arsenal-ladies/>
, Arsenal. Washington’s Estefania Baniniwill play in Spain 
<http://www.blackandredunited.com/washington-spirit-womens-soccer/2016/10/19/13331316/estefania-banini-washington-spirit-nwsl-re-entry-wire>
, though the door is open for a midseason return to the league runner-up Spirit 
next year.

The European clubs may also may be targeting USA internationals who aren’t 
satisfied with their training and living conditions in the NWSL. Olympique 
Lyonnais have made no secret of their desire to sign Alex Morgan,frequently 
reaching out 
<http://www.foxsports.com/soccer/story/olympique-lyons-owner-really-really-wants-to-sign-alex-morgan-090916>
 to the striker on Twitter.

Another player possibly headed overseas: Hope Solo. She’s out of the picture 
with the national team, at least for the immediate future. She left her NWSL 
team andhas talked about playing overseas 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/sports/soccer/2016/10/15/hope-solo-hints-at-overseas-move/92133840/>
, though she said in a documentary series she co-produced this year that she 
and her husband are building a house somewhere in North Carolina and plan to 
relocate (althoughher current legal issues  
<http://www.foxsports.com/soccer/story/hope-solo-s-assault-case-headed-for-trial-now-what-for-the-uswnt-060816>
may tie her up in the US for the immediate future).

So far, NWSL business is proceeding quietly but normally. Some players have 
been waived, some have re-signed with their current clubs, some have been 
loaned to Australia for a W-League season that conveniently falls within the 
NWSL offseason.

But the quiet isn’t likely to continue.
 