
The Holocaust did not happen. At least not in the world of Google, it seems. 
One week ago, I typed “did the hol” into a Google search box and clicked on its 
autocomplete suggestion, “Did the Holocaust happen?” And there, at the top of 
the list,was a link to Stormfront 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/11/google-frames-shapes-and-distorts-how-we-see-world>
, a neo-Nazi white supremacist website and an article entitled “Top 10 reasons 
why the Holocaust didn’t happen”.

On Monday, Google confirmed it would not remove the result: “We are saddened 
to see that hate organisations still exist. The fact that hate sites appear in 
search results does not mean thatGoogle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> endorses these views.”

The Independent ran the story. As did Fortune. And the Daily Mail. And the 
Jerusalem Post. And the Drudge Report. But Google held firm. David Duke 
<http://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2016/nov/19/david-duke-former-klan-leader-applauds-trumps-cabi/>
, former imperial wizard of the Ku Klux Klan, tweeted his support for the 
decision. And over on Stormfront – the website whereAnders Breivi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/22/anders-breivik-massacre-one-of-us-anne-seierstad>
k nurtured his ideas – members celebrated.

And still, anyone searching for information about the Holocaust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/holocaust> – if it was real, if it happened, 
if it was a hoax, if it was fake – was being served up neo-Nazi propaganda as 
the top result.

Until Friday. When I gamed Google’s algorithm. I succeeded in doing what 
Google said was impossible. I, a journalist with almost zero computer knowhow, 
succeeded in changing the search order of Google’s results for “did the 
Holocaust happen” and “was the Holocaust a hoax”. I knocked Stormfront off the 
top of the list. I inserted Wikipedia’s entry on the Holocaust as the number 
one result. I displaced a lie with a fact.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fholocaust-deniers-google-search-top-spot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf43f4a9f036e7c6b0854e81aa6be40b407a3dcb%2F0_4_1010_606%2F1010.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20bump%20Holocaust%20deniers%20off%20Google%E2%80%99s%20top%20spot%3F%20Pay%20Google&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fholocaust-deniers-google-search-top-spot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20bump%20Holocaust%20deniers%20off%20Google%E2%80%99s%20top%20spot%3F%20Pay%20Google&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fholocaust-deniers-google-search-top-spot%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf43f4a9f036e7c6b0854e81aa6be40b407a3dcb%2F0_4_1010_606%2F1010.jpg>
 Google search screengrab. Photograph: Google 
How did I achieve this impossible feat? Not through writing articles. Or 
shaming the company into action. I did it with the only language that Google 
understands: money. Google has shown that it will not respond to outrage or 
public sentiment or any sense of morality or ethics. It does not accept that 
leading people with a genuine inquiry about whether the Holocaust happened to a 
neo-Nazi website is grossly irresponsible or that it demeans the memory of the 
six million Jews who died. But it was prepared to take my cold, hard cash. A 
Google spokesman said: “We never want to make money from searches for Holocaust 
denial, and we don’t allow regular advertising on those terms.”

Google is not ‘just’ a platform. It frames, shapes and distorts how we see the 
world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/11/google-frames-shapes-and-distorts-how-we-see-world>
And yet, it has already made £24.01 out of me. (This was the initial cost – it 
has since risen to £289.) Because this is what I did: I paid to place a Google 
advert at the top of its search results. “The Holocaust really happened,” I 
wrote as the headline to my advert. And below it: “6 million Jews really did 
die. These search results are propagating lies. Please take action.”

I did this via Google’s AdWords programme. This is the bedrock of everything 
that Google does, its core business: selling ads against search results. It’s 
this that contributes the bulk of the $5bn (£4.07bn) profit that Google makes 
per quarter.

AdWords helpfully suggested possible “Ad group ideas” and search terms that 
included: “holocaust hoax”, “was the holocaust fake” and “did the holocaust 
happen”. And it told me how many searches a month are made for these terms: all 
in, 9,480. Or 113,760 a year. Or the population of Cambridge.

All of whom are being informed by Google that the Holocaust didn’t happen. And 
are being directed to Stormfront, the website where Anders Breivik used to hang 
out online and whose members celebrated the death ofJo Cox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/16/labour-mp-jo-cox-shot-in-west-yorkshire>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fholocaust-deniers-google-search-top-spot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa95d06c9f876610222bfa9e178bd14bc5ca2e9d%2F0_263_4205_2523%2F4205.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20bump%20Holocaust%20deniers%20off%20Google%E2%80%99s%20top%20spot%3F%20Pay%20Google&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fholocaust-deniers-google-search-top-spot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20bump%20Holocaust%20deniers%20off%20Google%E2%80%99s%20top%20spot%3F%20Pay%20Google&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fholocaust-deniers-google-search-top-spot%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa95d06c9f876610222bfa9e178bd14bc5ca2e9d%2F0_263_4205_2523%2F4205.jpg>
 Jewish children, survivors of Auschwitz, Poland, February 1945. Photograph: 
Getty Images 
Lilian Black, chair of The Holocaust Survivors Friendship Association 
<http://holocaustlearning.org/>, and the daughter of a Holocaust survivor, 
called it appalling. “I’m so shocked. Google has a responsibility for its 
actions. It’s almost like saying we know that the trains are running into 
Birkenau, but we’re not responsible for what’s happening at the end of it. They 
shape people’s thinking and are disparaging the memory of people like my 
grandparents who were gassed.

“More than that, it’s where this leads. It’s about its relevance today as much 
as the past. Our learning centre is in Kirklees, where Jo Cox was murdered. 
What is the matter with people? Can’t they see where this leads? And to have a 
huge worldwide organisation refusing to acknowledge this. That’s what they 
think their role is? To be a bystander? To just stand by? They’re committing a 
hate crime, in my view.”

How to contact the Guardian securely
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/help/2016/sep/19/how-to-contact-the-guardian-securely>
A Google spokesman said: “The goal of search is to provide the most relevant 
and useful results for our users. Clearly, we don’t always get it right, but we 
continually work to improve our algorithms.

“This is a challenging problem, and something we’re thinking deeply about in 
terms of how we can do a better job. Search is a reflection of the content that 
exists on the web. The fact that hate sites appear in search results in no way 
means that Google endorses these views.”

Frank Pasquale, professor of law at Maryland University, a leading expert on 
“algorithmic accountability”, called it “gross hypocrisy”. “They frequently say 
that Google search is not just about giving you a list of sources, but rather 
to answer your question. And empirically speaking, people tend to treat Google 
like an authority. So this is an appalling shirking of responsibility. It’s 
about money. It always is. The commercial imperative trumps all other aims at 
the company, including moral ones.”

The issue is not that Google is refusing to “edit” the results about the 
Holocaust, the deeper question is about why Stormfront is number one. Google 
said: “We handle billions of queries every day and our goal is to give you the 
most relevant answer to your query as quickly as possible. The issue you have 
raised is one where we are very unhappy with the quality of the results.

“While it might seem tempting to fix the results of an individual query by 
hand, that approach does not scale to the many different variants of that query 
and the queries that we have not yet seen. So we prefer to take a scaleable 
algorithmic approach to fix problems, rather than removing these one by one.”

But Danny Sullivan, editor of Search Engine Land <http://searchengineland.com/>
, and a leading expert on search, in an article that was largely sympathetic to 
the challenge facing Google, still noted: “It’s bizarre that something like 
that Holocaust denial post is showing tops in Google. It has no great number of 
links pointing at it, according to a Moz tool I used [a method of examining 
where a website links to]. The Wikipedia page below it should carry far more 
authority.”

And he suggests a reason why it doesn’t: that Google has changed its algorithm 
to reward popular results over authoritative ones. For the reason that it makes 
Google more money.

• If Stormfront is back at number one when you read this, it’s because I’ve 
run out of funds. Each click through costs £1.12 and I have a £200 per day 
limit. @carolecadwalla on Twitter for more information.
 