We know and love it as the Reading and Leeds festival. And before that as the 
Reading festival. But it wasn’t always at Reading. Which of the following sets 
of venues were among the previous hosts of the event?  Windsor racecourse, 
Kempton Park racecourse, Plumpton racecourseThe very first festival in 1962, 
took place at Richmond Athletic Ground, before moving to the racecourses.  
Swindon Town FC, Oxford United FC and Reading FC  Wasps RFC, Richmond RFC, 
London Irish RFC  Windsor Great Park, Richmond Park, Bushy Park Which act was 
reported to be the first in the festival’s history to be pelted with coins by 
disgruntled fans?  Daphne and Celeste  Bonnie Tyler  The Herd Peter Frampton’s 
band suffered the indignity at the hands of people waiting for Jerry Lee Lewis 
in 1969.  L7 Which unlikely figure roadied for George Melly with John Chilton’s 
Feetwarmers in 1973?  Hugh Cornwell of the Stranglers  George Harrison of the 
Beatles‘Nobody in the crowd recognised him,’ Chilton remembered in his memoirs. 
 Frank Bough of Grandstand  David Coverdale of Deep Purple The Reading festival 
stopped for two years in 1984 and 1985. What event caused its return in 1986?  
Peter Gabriel buying the festival site and declaring it must host live music 
every year  The promise that it would also act as a commemoration of the 20th 
anniversary of the 1966 World Cup  The discovery that the land it had been held 
on had turned fallow from years of pollution, and it had no use for farming  A 
Labour council being elected and promising to return the festival to ReadingThe 
cancelled years denied Marillion, who had been booked for 1984, their chance to 
headline Reading. According to rock legend, what unlikely item did Incubus 
demand to be supplied with when they appeared at Reading?  A complete range of 
chemical tests on 20 different places on the site, to prove there was no urine 
contamination  Two fully tuned air guitars, with new strings, signed by Jimmy 
PageWhich is stupid, because everyone knows Jimmy Page is reluctant to sign 
guitars, for fear they will be resold.  A trip to Readers’ Digest HQ in 
Swindon, with a meal at Greek Olive, the town’s top restaurant  Their own horse 
and carriage for travelling around the site The 1988 festival is remembered for 
the number of acts who were pelted with bottles – Meat Loaf and Bonnie Tyler 
among them – but who were that year’s headliners?  Meat Loaf, Bonnie Tyler and 
Ramones  Iggy Pop, Starship and Squeeze This was the last year before the 
festival ‘went indie’.  New Order, the Mission and the Pogues  Michael Schenker 
Group, Whitesnake and Motörhead At the 1989 festival, how much would one pint 
of lager and one pint of cider have cost you?  £2.60 £1.40 for the lager, £1.20 
for the cider.  £3.00  £3.40  £3.80 The festival gained a Leeds leg in 1999, 
but the 2002 Leeds event was marred by what?  An organised protest by Leeds 
United fans, unhappy their team had failed to qualify for the new season’s 
Champions League  A series of guerrilla gigs by Chumbawumba, who were 
eventually knocked down by security, and didn’t get up again  What were widely 
reported as riots, with toilets being burned downThe moral: don’t give kids 
matches and chemical toilets.  The presence, as main stage compere, of TV’s Les 
Dennis How long did it take for tickets to the 2006 festival to sell out?  Two 
hoursThere was no Glastonbury that year, so Reading was the big draw. Franz 
Ferdinand were among the headliners.  Two days  Two weeks  Two months Among the 
headliners this year are Red Hot Chili Peppers. After this weekend, how many 
times will they have headlined Reading/Leeds?  Once  Three times And yet it 
feels like so many more times.  Five times  Seven times  You got…  Challenge 
your friends Submit answers  