
Anyone who has ever tried to make their way through the centre of Amsterdam in 
a car knows it: the city is owned by cyclists. They hurry in swarms through the 
streets, unbothered by traffic rules, taking precedence whenever they want, 
rendering motorists powerless by their sheer numbers.

Cyclists rule in Amsterdam and great pains have been taken to accommodate 
them: the city is equipped with an elaborate network of cycle-paths and lanes, 
so safe and comfortable that even toddlers and elderly people use bikes as the 
easiest mode of transport. It’s not only Amsterdam which boasts a network of 
cycle-paths, of course; you’ll find them in all Dutch cities.

The Dutch take this for granted; they even tend to believe these cycle-paths 
have existed since the beginning of time. But that is certainly not the case. 
There was a time, in the 1950s and 60s, when cyclists were under severe threat 
of being expelled from Dutch cities by the growing number of cars. Only thanks 
to fierce activism and a number of decisive events would Amsterdam succeed in 
becoming what it is, unquestionably, now: the bicycle capital of the world.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F05%2Famsterdam-bicycle-capital-world-transport-cycling-kindermoord%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F24%2F1429872372114%2F2b780485-9d03-465c-b9a8-3fa00614cff2-1020x582.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Amsterdam%20became%20the%20bicycle%20capital%20of%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F05%2Famsterdam-bicycle-capital-world-transport-cycling-kindermoord%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Amsterdam%20became%20the%20bicycle%20capital%20of%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F05%2Famsterdam-bicycle-capital-world-transport-cycling-kindermoord%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F24%2F1429872372114%2F2b780485-9d03-465c-b9a8-3fa00614cff2-1020x582.png>
 The share of trips made by bicycle in Amsterdam plunged from 80% to 20% 
between the 1950s and 70s. Source: Bruheze and Veraart 
At the start of the 20th century, bikes far outnumbered cars in Dutch cities 
and the bicycle was considered a respectable mode of transport for men and 
women. But when the Dutch economy began to boom in the post-war era, more and 
more people were able to afford cars, and urban policymakers came to view the 
car as the travel mode of the future. Entire Amsterdam neighbourhoods were 
destroyed to make way for motorised traffic. The use of bikes decreased by 6% 
every year, and the general idea was that bicycles would eventually disappear 
altogether.

The streets no longer belonged to the people who lived there, but to huge 
traffic flows
Maartje van Putten, former MEP 
All that growing traffic took its toll. The number of traffic casualties rose 
to a peak of 3,300 deaths in 1971. More than 400 children were killed in 
traffic accidents that year.


This staggering loss led to protests by different action groups, the most 
memorable of which wasStop de Kindermoord (“stop the child murder”). Its first 
president was the Dutch former MEP, Maartje van Putten.

“I was a young mother living in Amsterdam and I witnessed several traffic 
accidents in my neighbourhood where children got hurt,” van Putten, 63, 
recalls. “I saw how parts of the city were torn down to make way for roads. I 
was very worried by the changes that took place in society – it affected our 
lives. The streets no longer belonged to the people who lived there, but to 
huge traffic flows. That made me very angry.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F05%2Famsterdam-bicycle-capital-world-transport-cycling-kindermoord%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F29%2F1430314299650%2F5658cc5a-3b42-402a-bbf6-5408c13ef950-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Amsterdam%20became%20the%20bicycle%20capital%20of%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F05%2Famsterdam-bicycle-capital-world-transport-cycling-kindermoord%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Amsterdam%20became%20the%20bicycle%20capital%20of%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F05%2Famsterdam-bicycle-capital-world-transport-cycling-kindermoord%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F29%2F1430314299650%2F5658cc5a-3b42-402a-bbf6-5408c13ef950-1020x612.jpeg>
 In the 1960s planners viewed the car as the travel mode of the future, and 
swaths of the city were destroyed to make way for motorised traffic. 
Photograph: Fotocollectie Anefo/Society for the Nationaal Archief 
The 1970s were a great time for being angry in Holland: activism and civil 
disobedience were rampant.Stop de Kindermoord grew rapidly and its members held 
bicycle demonstrations, occupied accident blackspots, and organised special 
days during which streets were closed to allow children to play safely: “We put 
tables outside and held a huge dinner party in our street. And the funny thing 
was, the police were very helpful.”

Van Putten remembers the 70s as a time when Dutch authorities were remarkably 
accessible: “We simply went to tea with MPs – and they really listened to what 
we had to say. We cycled with a group of activists and an organ grinder to the 
house of the prime minister, Joop den Uyl, to sing songs and ask for safer 
streets for children. We didn’t get beyond the hallway, but he did come out to 
hear our plea.”

We had a great fighting spirit and we knew how to voice our ideas. And in the 
end, we would get our bicycle lane
Tom Godefrooij 
Stop de Kindermoord became subsidised by the Dutch government, established its 
headquarters in a former shop, and went on to develop ideas for safer urban 
planning – which eventually resulted in thewoonerf 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/04/28/automobiles/where-share-the-road-is-taken-literally.html?_r=0>
: a new kind of people-friendly street with speed bumps and bends to force cars 
to drive very slowly. Nowadays thewoonerf has gone out of fashion, but it can 
still be found in many Dutch cities.

Two years after Stop de Kindermoord was established, another group of 
activists founded the First Only Real Dutch Cyclists’ Union to demand more 
space for bicycles in the public realm – organising bike rides along dangerous 
stretches of road, and compiling inventories of the problems encountered by 
cyclists.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F05%2Famsterdam-bicycle-capital-world-transport-cycling-kindermoord%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F29%2F1430314366122%2F86ef9b1f-ce57-4d0e-884e-c30859fb62bb-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Amsterdam%20became%20the%20bicycle%20capital%20of%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F05%2Famsterdam-bicycle-capital-world-transport-cycling-kindermoord%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Amsterdam%20became%20the%20bicycle%20capital%20of%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F05%2Famsterdam-bicycle-capital-world-transport-cycling-kindermoord%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F29%2F1430314366122%2F86ef9b1f-ce57-4d0e-884e-c30859fb62bb-2060x1236.jpeg>
 An estimated 38% of all trips in Amsterdam are made by bike – compared with 2% 
in London. Photograph: Tony Burns/Getty Images/Lonely Planet Image 
“Somehow we managed to strike a chord,” says Tom Godefrooij, 64, who got 
involved with the Cyclists’ Union as a young man. He remembers noisy mass 
demonstrations with tricycles and megaphones, and nightly ventures to paint 
illegal bicycle lanes in streets the union considered dangerous.

“First we would be arrested by the police, of course, but then the whole thing 
would be in the newspapers and municipal politicians would eventually listen. 
We had a great fighting spirit and we knew how to voice our ideas. And in the 
end, we would get our bicycle lane. Even in the 70s, you know, there were 
politicians who understood that the general focus on cars would eventually 
cause problems.”

The activists of Stop de Kindermoord and the Cyclists’ Union were resourceful 
and undaunted, but there were other forces helping to create a fertile soil for 
their ideas. TheNetherlands <https://www.theguardian.com/world/netherlands> – 
possessing few hills and a mild climate – had a great tradition of cycling to 
begin with and the bike was never completely marginalised as it was in some 
other countries. The intolerable number of traffic deaths really was a serious 
concern for politicians, and there was a nascent awareness of the pollution 
caused by vehicle emissions.


The 1973 oil crisis – when Saudi Arabia and other Arab oil exporters imposed 
an embargo on the US, Britain, Canada, Japan and the Netherlands for supporting 
Israel in the Yom Kippur war – quadrupled the price of oil. During a television 
speech, prime minister Den Uyl urged Dutch citizens to adopt a new lifestyle 
and get serious about saving energy. The government proclaimed a series of 
car-free Sundays: intensely quiet weekend days when children played on deserted 
motorways and people were suddenly reminded of what life was like before the 
hegemony of the car.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F05%2Famsterdam-bicycle-capital-world-transport-cycling-kindermoord%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F29%2F1430314733418%2F01191bf2-2597-4993-b094-d35066e321bf-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Amsterdam%20became%20the%20bicycle%20capital%20of%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F05%2Famsterdam-bicycle-capital-world-transport-cycling-kindermoord%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Amsterdam%20became%20the%20bicycle%20capital%20of%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F05%2Famsterdam-bicycle-capital-world-transport-cycling-kindermoord%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F29%2F1430314733418%2F01191bf2-2597-4993-b094-d35066e321bf-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Amsterdam is now home to an estimated 881,000 bicycles. Photograph: Timothy 
Clary/AFP/Getty 
On one of these car-free Sundays, Maartje van Putten, together with a group of 
other parents and children, rode her bike through a tunnel to the northern part 
of Amsterdam, in which no provisions for cyclists had been made. “We didn’t 
realise that what we did was dangerous, because there were still some cars on 
the road. Our trip ended at the police station, but we made our point.”

Gradually, Dutch politicians became aware of the many advantages of cycling, 
and their transport policies shifted – maybe the car wasn’t the mode of 
transport of the future after all. In the 1980s, Dutch towns and cities began 
introducing measures to make their streets more cycle-friendly. Initially, 
their aims were far from ambitious; the idea was simply to keep cyclists on 
their bikes.

The Hague and Tilburg were the first to experiment with special cycle routes 
through the city. “The bicycle paths were bright red and very visible; this was 
something completely new,” says Godefrooij. “Cyclists would change their routes 
to use the paths. It certainly helped to keep people on their bikes, but in the 
end it turned out that one single bicycle route did not lead to an overall 
increase in cycling.”

Subsequently, the city of Delft constructed a whole network of cycle paths and 
it turned out that this did encourage more people to get on their bikes. One by 
one, other cities followed suit.

Nowadays the Netherlands boasts 22,000 miles of cycle paths. More than a 
quarter of all trips are made by bicycle, compared with 2% in the UK – and this 
rises to 38% in Amsterdam and 59% in the university city of Groningen. All 
major Dutch cities have designated “bicycle civil servants”, tasked to maintain 
and improve the network. And the popularity of the bike is still growing, 
thanks partly to the development of electric bicycles.

The Cyclists’ Union has long ceased to be a group of random activists; it is 
now a respectable organisation with 34,000 paying members whose expertise is in 
worldwide demand.

End of the car age: how cities are outgrowing the automobile
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/apr/28/end-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile>
“We have achieved a lot, but we’re facing many new challenges,” says their 
spokesman, Wim Bot. “Many old cycle paths need to be reconstructed because they 
do not measure up to our modern standards – some are used by so many people 
that they are no longer wide enough. We have the problem of parking all those 
bikes, and we are thinking of new ways to create even more space for cyclists 
and pedestrians. What our cities really need is a totally new kind of 
infrastructure. They’re simply not fit for so much car traffic.”

“The battle goes on,” says Godefrooij. “The propensity of urban planners to 
give priority to cars is still persistent. It’s easy to understand: an extra 
tunnel for cyclists means you have to spend extra money on the project. We’ve 
come a long way, but we can never lower our guard.”

 * Which are the most cycle-friendly cities in the world? Share your photos 
and stories with GuardianWitness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/may/05/world-cycle-friendly-cities>
 