
Twenty-five years ago, the Midlands villages of Moira, Donisthorpe and Overseal
 
<http://www.ramblers.org.uk/route-detail?routeuid=6476-YHA-National-Forest-Overseal-Moira-Donisthorpe-Circuit>
 overlooked a gruesome landscape. The communities were surrounded by opencast 
mines, old clay quarries, spoil heaps, derelict coal workings, polluted 
waterways and all the other ecological wreckage of heavy industry.

The air smelt and tasted unpleasant and the land was poisoned. There were next 
to no trees, not many jobs and little wildlife. Following the closure of the 
pits, people were deserting the area for Midlands cities such as Birmingham, 
Derby and Leicester. The future looked bleak.

Today, a pastoral renaissance is taking place. Around dozens of former mining 
and industrial communities, in what was the broken heart of the old Midlands 
coalfield, a vast, splendid forest of native oak, ash and birch trees is 
emerging, attractingcyclists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/jul/31/cycling-family-forest-trail-national-forest>
, walkers, birdwatchers, canoeists, campers and horse-riders.

Britain’s trees have come under increasing attack from exotic diseases, and 
the grants for planting woodland are drying up, so the 200 sq miles of the 
National Forest come as a welcome good news story. The new woodland in the 
Midlands is proving that large-scale tree planting is not just good value for 
money, but can also have immense social, economic and ecological benefits.

In this one corner of the Midlands, more than 8.5m trees have been planted in 
25 years, hundreds of miles of footpath have been created and 500 abandoned 
industrial sites have been transformed. The landscape and ecology of 
semi-derelict Britain has been revived and rewilded with trees.

“I came here from Staffordshire 62 years ago,” says Graham Knight, a former 
coalface engineer who lives near Moira and now works for a retraining charity. 
“It was clay pits, quarries, coal mines, chimneys, sewer pipes, and kilns then. 
It was very unhealthy, pretty grim. It was a hard life and it toughened people 
up. The area went into steep decline when the industry closed and almost 
everything disappeared. It has changed from a wasteland to an environment that 
we envied.

“People love trees. They like to see forests and woods. In those days you 
would go to a place like this for holidays. People are moving in and 
communities are growing.”

Many of the young trees in the National Forest are little more than whips 
because hundreds of hectares are being planted every year as more derelict 
sites are taken over. But the trees that were dug in 25 years ago now stand 
30ft tall and need to be thinned.

Along with the maturing trees have come buzzards and red kites, skylarks, 
butterflies, otters, bats and owls.

This is the first major forest planted in England for 1,000 years. We have 
taken a black hole and given it new life

As the trees continue to grow, insects, small mammals and flora will come too, 
says John Everitt, director of the not-for-profitNational Forest company 
<http://www.nationalforest.org/>, which has taken over many of the area’s old 
industrial workings and also advises landowners and farmers about switching 
from low-grade farmland to forest and woodland.

“This is one of the largest landscape transformations in the United Kingdom, 
the first major forest to have been planted in England for 1,000 years. We have 
taken a black hole and given it a new lease of life; given people a new 
landscape they can identify with. We can say that air pollution is better, the 
rivers are cleaner, the water is being retained better and soil is being better 
conserved.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Fnational-forest-woodland-midlands-regeneration%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a0feb35cf1054833a448dde425c7f95951a6d05%2F69_0_4470_2682%2F4470.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20millions%20of%20trees%20brought%20a%20broken%20landscape%20back%20to%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Fnational-forest-woodland-midlands-regeneration%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20millions%20of%20trees%20brought%20a%20broken%20landscape%20back%20to%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Fnational-forest-woodland-midlands-regeneration%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a0feb35cf1054833a448dde425c7f95951a6d05%2F69_0_4470_2682%2F4470.jpg>
 Hicks Lodge is now a lakeside haven for wildlife Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
“We are a typical piece of Middle England,” he adds. “This is not closed 
canopy, wall-to-wall forest, but forest in the medieval sense with a mosaic of 
habitats, of trees, open grassland, pastures, and communities. We are roughly 
half way there. We have planted about 8.5m trees and we expect to plant 16-17m.”

The idea of recreating a new national forest was born in the old Countryside 
Commission in the late 1980s and was backed first by Tory politicians such as 
Michael Heseltine and John Gummer and then by Labour ministers, including 
Michael Meacher, says the National Forest’s director of operations, Simon Evans.

“The first trees were planted in 1991 when the ambition was for 33% of the 200 
sq miles to be forested from a starting point of 6- 7%. The idea was to take an 
area that had very few trees and bring it up to the level of somewhere like 
Surrey. There were remnants of ancient forest but at the core there were no 
trees at all,” he says.

This pioneering regeneration experiment has had a low profile and has gone 
largely unnoticed by environment groups, possibly because it has cost so little 
and, for many years while the trees were so small, there was very little to see.

Only £60m of public money has been spent in the first 25 years and most of 
that has come from European Union farm subsidies which would have gone to 
landowners anyway.

Everitt says: “£60m is the equivalent of just two miles of three-lane 
motorway, or one mile of HS2 [rail link]. It is peanuts, incredible value for 
money.” He argues that the forest has already attracted nearly £1bn of inward 
investment, created many hundreds of jobs, stimulated house prices in the area 
and led directly to hundreds of new tourism, leisure and wood-based businesses 
starting up.

“It is one of the very few long-term projects for which a government had a 
vision and that successive ones have followed through and supported. It’s very 
hard to argue against it. Why would you not do this? It has cost just £2.5m a 
year and brings in so manybenefits in health and economics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/jan/26/many-benefits-planting-trees>
. It shows that the principle of using the environment and trees to regenerate 
a place and stimulate growth can work anywhere.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Fnational-forest-woodland-midlands-regeneration%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc5fd69444e7e6ca8345e6b746152eb624c03904d%2F0_107_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20millions%20of%20trees%20brought%20a%20broken%20landscape%20back%20to%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Fnational-forest-woodland-midlands-regeneration%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20millions%20of%20trees%20brought%20a%20broken%20landscape%20back%20to%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Fnational-forest-woodland-midlands-regeneration%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc5fd69444e7e6ca8345e6b746152eb624c03904d%2F0_107_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 John Everitt, Chief Executive of The National Forest Photograph: David 
Sillitoe for the Observer 
Conservationists and regeneration experts now claim that the National Forest 
is absolute proof that tree planting on a large scale can increase wealth, 
change the identity of a place and pay for itself hundreds of times over.

A second major new forest has now been proposed for elsewhere in Britain, 
possibly south Wales or a rural area of northern England.

“People understand the economic and aesthetic benefits of trees,” says 
Everitt. “They are very popular. They can be a backcloth to many other 
activities. People prefer a wooded landscape. I do not understand why the idea 
is not used more. I thinkpoliticians may not be environmentally literate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/jan/09/6m-government-funding-plants-4-million-new-trees>
.

“There was an active demand by local people for the forest to come here. It 
did not need to be imposed on people, but it took some time before the farmers 
embraced the idea fully,” he says. “All the surveys done in the past 20 years 
suggest that the transformation of the landscape has been popular, giving 
communities a new sense of place and identity.”

I do not understand why the idea is not used more. I think politicians may not 
be environmentally literate

The challenge is to ensure that the flourishing of the National Forest is not 
an isolated success. Elsewhere, Britain’s tree planting is grinding to a halt. 
Figures last month from theForestry Commission 
<http://www.forestry.gov.uk/statistics> showed that only 700 hectares of new 
woodland was planted last year, instead of a goal of 5,000. Woodland areas 
damaged by storms and other extreme weather are not being replaced and ancient 
woodland is under threat from infrastructure projects such as the high-speed 
train line HS2 and airport expansions.

Grant schemes have been cut and those that still exist are said to be 
confusing, and hard to access.

“We have to present tree planting as a solution; people have to understand 
that it is a good thing to plant trees,” says Andrew Heald, technical director 
of forest industry body ConFor (Confederation of Forest Industries).

Government committed last year to the planting of 11m trees by 2020, but 
Britain is likely to remain near the bottom of the European league table for 
tree cover, with around 13%. In addition, Britain’s forests are threatened with 
devastation by tree diseases. Recent academic analysis has warned that all the 
ash trees in the UK and across Europe are likely to be wiped out by a “double 
whammy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/23/ash-dieback-and-beetle-attack-likely-to-wipe-out-all-ash-trees-in-uk-and-europe>
” of a bright green borer beetle and the fungus that causes ash dieback.

“Between ash dieback and the emerald ash borer, it is likely that almost all 
ash trees in Europe will be wiped out, just as the elm was largely eliminated by
Dutch elm disease 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/11/butterfly-white-letter-hairstreak-elm-trees-disease>
,” said Peter Thomas, a tree ecologist at Keele University whose analysis was
published in March’sJournal of Ecology. 
<http://www.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1365-2745.12566/abstract>

The same problems face the National Forest, says Everitt. “There are grants 
available for tree planting, but they are not that attractive now. Good 
woodland schemes are not available now.

“But the National Forest is protected because it has so many species. Last 
year, we had our cases of dieback and it is now spreading quite rapidly; 15-20% 
of the trees that have been planted are probably ash. Many of them will be 
replaced naturally. But there may not be huge die-off here because we are 
thinning around 20% of the trees. We must understand that this forest is not 
just about its trees. Trees are important, of course, but they are the setting 
for everything else.”
 