
Papua New Guinea and Australia must move swiftly to close the Manus Island 
detention centre, nine months after thePNG supreme court ruled it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/26/papua-new-guinea-court-rules-detention-asylum-seekers-manus-unconstitutional>
illegal and unconstitutional 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/04/26/PNG_SC_judgement.pdf>, Human Rights 
Watch has said.

Human Rights Watch released its annual report card 
<https://www.hrw.org/world-report/2017> on more than 90 countries on Friday, 
assessing the state of human rights in individual nations, including progress 
made on specific issues including women’s health and safety, police brutality, 
and legislative protection of human rights.

Globally, HRW’s executive director, Kenneth Roth, argues in the report, 
fundamental human rights are under threat from a “new generation of 
authoritarian populists” who regard rights not as a check on official power but 
as a barrier to the will of the majority.


Offshore detention: Australia's recent immigration history a 'human rights 
catastrophe'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/13/offshore-detention-nauru-immigration-history-human-rights>
“The rise of populism poses a profound threat to human rights,” Roth writes in 
the report. “Trump and various politicians in Europe seek power through appeals 
to racism, xenophobia, misogyny, and nativism.

“They all claim that the public accepts violations of human rights as 
supposedly necessary to secure jobs, avoid cultural change, or prevent 
terrorist attacks. In fact, disregard for human rights offers the likeliest 
route to tyranny.”

The PNG supreme court demanded last April that the government work with its 
Australian counterpart to close the controversialManus Island 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/manus-island> immigration detention 
centre, where Australia forcibly sends asylum seekers who arrive in the country 
by boat.

Despite the court’s order, the detention centre remains in operation, albeit 
with limited freedom of movement for detainees. The two governments appear at 
an impasse, refusing responsibility for the more than 800 men held inside.


Human Rights Watch found neither country had taken any steps to close it: 
“Many refugees are afraid to leave the center due to acts of violence in the 
community. For instance, in August,Manus locals robbed and assaulted three 
refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/15/manus-refugee-says-he-thought-he-would-die-after-being-attacked-by-locals>
; one of the locals attacked them with an iron bar.”

Human Rights Watch called for the centre’s closure and for the immediate 
resettlement of detainees in Australia or a third country. “Refugees and asylum 
seekers on Manus have suffered enough, it’s time to let them move on with their 
lives in safety and dignity.”

The HRW report criticised Australia’s policy  
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2017/01/11/World_Report_Chapter_Australia.pdf>of 
offshore detention for asylum seekers who arrive in the country by boat as 
“draconian”, saying people are held in abusive and dangerous conditions.

Manus refugee says he thought he would die after being attacked by locals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/15/manus-refugee-says-he-thought-he-would-die-after-being-attacked-by-locals>
The report also highlighted the continuing disproportionately high rate of 
Indigenous incarceration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/17/indigenous-disadvantage-mental-health-domestic-violence-incarceration>
, the ban on same-sex marriage (including theabortive attempt at a plebiscite 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/07/marriage-equality-plebiscite-bill-set-to-fail-as-nxt-vows-to-block-it-in-senate>
 on the issue), as well as apush to wind back protections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/29/conservatives-flex-muscle-over-marriage-equality-and-18c>
 under the Racial Discrimination Act.

Proposed counter-terrorism laws introduced by Malcolm Turnbull’s government 
were condemned as overly broad. HRW saida bill introduced in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/12/coalition-focuses-on-security-as-labor-tries-to-build-pressure-on-turnbull>
 that would allow for ongoing detention of terrorist offenders who have 
completed custodial sentences could amount to arbitrary and indefinite 
detention, based on a low standard of proof and secret evidence. Another bill
extends control orders to 14-year-olds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/13/age-limit-control-orders-terrorism-suspects-reduced-14>
.

Human Rights Watch found little had changed for the better in PNG 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2017/01/11/World_Report_Chapter_Papua_New_Guinea.pdf>
, which in 2016 remained one of the most dangerous places in the world for 
women and girls. Police and prosecutors continued their track record of rarely 
prosecuting cases against perpetrators of family violence,despite a government 
focus on reform 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/03/peter-oneill-surprised-to-hear-png-child-welfare-law-remains-uncertified>
.

Sorcery-related violence continued, with horrific acts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/27/woman-accused-of-sorcery-reportedly-hacked-to-death-in-papua-new-guinea>
 committed against women accused of being witches, and the country’s judicial 
system recorded its first conviction under a 1975 law outlawing abortion.

Homosexuality remained illegal and punishable by up to 14 years in prison, and 
the death penalty has not been abolished, despite both issues being subject to 
recommendations at the UN periodic review. The PNG government saidLGBT rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/lgbt-rights> were not a priority.

The Human Rights Watch report does not include a chapter on Nauru, the island 
state that hosts Australia’s other offshore processing centre, but HRW’s 
Australia director, Elaine Pearson, told Guardian Australia: “Nauru has seen 
backsliding on human rights in the past year.”

“There has been an absence of accountability for violence and harassment faced 
by refugees and asylum seekers on Nauru, and in fact senior officials have 
simply denied such abuses took place rather than investigating the allegations. 
More broadly, there has been an erosion of democracy and rule of law.

“Nauru imposes severe limits on freedom of expression and the media – it 
continues to block foreign journalists from entering the country. Institutions 
like the judiciary are deeply politicised and political opponents have faced 
intimidation, threats and travel bans.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAEreEj_qrWE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAEreEj_qrWE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAEreEj_qrWE&media=>
 Human Rights Watch Executive Director Kenneth Roth presents a summary of the 
NGO’s 2017 Human Rights World Report Card  