
Dictators and human rights abusers who buy luxury property in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> and use the UK to conceal their wealth 
could have their assets seized under an MPs’ initiative.

A group of backbenchers are seeking to amend the government’s criminal 
finances bill <https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/criminal-finances-bill>
 andintroduce a clause 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/bills/cbill/2016-2017/0097/amend/criminal_rm_rep_1128.1-5.html>
 targeting those guilty of human rights abuses outside Britain. It would allow 
officials and organisations such as Amnesty International to apply for an order 
to freeze their UK assets.

The amendment is named after the Russian lawyer Sergei Magnitsky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/mar/08/sergei-magnitsky-posthumous-trial-russia-corruption>
, who died in prison in Moscow in 2009 after exposing an alleged $230m (£181m) 
fraud carried out by leading Kremlin officials.

The initiative enjoys unusually wide cross-party support. Labour’s Chris 
Bryant said the chances of it becoming law were “quite positive”.

The bill, which could come into force as early as spring 2017, is designed to 
clean up London’s reputation as ahaven for “dirty money”. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/13/properties-seized-assets-corrupt-cash-crackdown-criminal-finances-bill-tax-haven>
 Its existing provisions target corrupt politicians and international criminals 
who launder money through the capital’s banks and plough stolen cash into 
high-end real estate.

The National Crime <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ukcrime> Agency estimates 
that up to £100bn of dubious money passes through the UK a year. The Magnitsky 
amendment, which will be tabled on Monday, could result in high court judges 
passing two-year freezing orders on human rights abusers. There will be a right 
to appeal.

The Conservative MP Dominic Raab, who tabled the amendment, said: “People with 
blood on their hands for the worst human rights abuses should not be able to 
funnel their dirty money into the UK. This change in the law will protect 
Britain from becoming a safe place for despots and dictators to hide their 
money.”

The former Labour MP Denis MacShane said going after the London assets of 
state functionaries was “an updated version of getting Al Capone on tax evasion 
charges because it was not possible to bring him to justice for murder”.

“It will sow panic in the ranks of Putin apparatchiks who want to own flats 
and hide money in London, and send children to private schools in the UK,” he 
said.

Supporters of the proposal include the Green party co-leader Caroline Lucas, 
the SNP and the Ukip MP Douglas Carswell. The Labour MP and formerpublic 
accounts committee chair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/may/20/margaret-hodge-stands-aside-public-accounts-committee>
 Margaret Hodge said Britain had been “a safe haven for foreign kleptocrats and 
their ill-gotten gains” for too long, adding: “We hope this legislation will 
end this.”

The Home Office says the bill, introduced in October, will significantly 
improve the government’s ability totackle money laundering and corruption 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/criminal-finances-bill>, recover the 
proceeds of crime and impact upon terrorist financing. It follows an
anti-corruption summit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/11/david-cameron-corporate-money-laundering-offence-anti-corruption-summit>
 hosted by the then prime minister David Cameron in May and revelations in the
Panama Papers <https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/panama-papers> that 
foreign autocrats and their familiesused offshore structures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/05/panama-papers-london-law-firm-helped-azerbaijan-first-family-set-up-secret-offshore-firm>
 to buy London property.

Under the Magnitsky amendment, the names of individuals who have been involved 
in, or profited from, human rights abuse would be published. Ministers would be 
obliged to apply for an order if they are presented with compelling evidence of 
abuse and it is in the public interest to do so.

The amendment is the latest in a series of legislative initiatives around the 
world to end the impunity of those involved in the Magnitsky case and other 
human rights abuses. In 2012, the US Congresspassed a Magnitsky act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/may/25/us-act-aimed-at-curbing-impunity-for-journalist-murderers>
, which sanctioned the Russian officials involved and provoked a furious 
backlash from the Russian president, Vladimir Putin.
 