
Papua New Guineans took to the streets to protest against government 
corruption and were met by gunfire, Human Rights Watch has said in a scathing 
assessment of Australia’s nearest neighbour.

In its annual assessment of more than 90 countries, Human Rights Watch has 
warned of the rise of populist leaders threatening the protection of human 
rights. It says PNG has failed to protect women and children, or to respond to 
corruption and police violence.

Anger against the Peter O’Neill government – linked to numerous and 
high-profile corruption scandals and allegations over recent years – became the 
focus of student protests, culminating in the march on parliament in Port 
Moresby in June calling for O’Neill’s resignation.

The students, who had boycotted classes, were stopped from boarding buses to 
parliament where O’Neill was set to face a vote of no-confidence. Policeopened 
fire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/09/papua-new-guinea-shootings-at-least-eight-gunshot-casualties-but-no-fatalities-confirmed>
, and 23 people were injured.

Human Rights Watch report card gives Australia a fail for offshore detention
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2017/jan/13/human-rights-watch-report-card-gives-australia-a-fail-for-offshore-detention>
O’Neill was defiant, and blamed “agitators” funded by the opposition for the 
protests, which spread and escalated across the country.

“People took to the streets to voice concerns about corruption, and the only 
government response was gunfire,” said Elaine Pearson, Australia director at 
Human Rights Watch.


“Corruption and abuse will only end when abusive officials are held 
responsible for their crimes.”

O’Neill, who continues to avoid an arrest warrant over a long-running 
corruption investigation,survived a no-confidence motion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/24/papua-new-guinea-oneill-tells-parliament-to-move-on-after-no-confidence-vote-fails>
 in parliament the next month.

Internal tensions within police also came to a head 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/18/papua-new-guinea-police-barricade-anti-fraud-squad-heads-office-say-reports>
 when the police commissioner, Gari Baki, sacked the head of the 
anti-corruption directorate following his department’s arrest of a supreme 
court judge, the attorney general and the prime minister’s lawyer.

In January 2016, Baki declared he would crack down on abuse by police officers 
– there had been 1,600 complaints between 2007 and 2014. However, Human Rights 
Watch said it was unclear “how many, if any, resulted in criminal convictions 
of police officers”.

Papua New Guinea shootings: university wins injunction banning further protests
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/09/papua-new-guinea-shootings-at-least-eight-gunshot-casualties-but-no-fatalities-confirmed>
“Police abuse, including of children, continues to be reported with little 
accountability even for fatalities or egregious physical abuse.”

The report found little else had changed for the better 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2017/01/11/World_Report_Chapter_Papua_New_Guinea.pdf>
, and said Papua New Guinea remained one of the most dangerous places in the 
world for women and girls. Police and prosecutors continued their track record 
of rarely prosecuting cases against perpetrators of family violence,despite a 
government focus on reform 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/03/peter-oneill-surprised-to-hear-png-child-welfare-law-remains-uncertified>
.

The family protection legislation of 2013 was yet to be acted on, and Pearson 
accused the government of “failing miserably to protect women and girls from 
discrimination and family violence”.

Sorcery-related violence continued, with horrific acts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/27/woman-accused-of-sorcery-reportedly-hacked-to-death-in-papua-new-guinea>
 committed against women accused of being witches, and the country’s judicial 
system recorded its first convictions under a 1975 law outlawing abortion, the 
report highlighted.

Homosexuality remained illegal and punishable by up to 14 years in prison, and 
the death penalty had not been abolished, despite both issues being subject to 
recommendations at the UN periodic review. The PNG government has said LGBT 
rights are not a priority.

Papua New Guinea: O'Neill tells parliament to 'move on' after no-confidence 
vote fails
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/24/papua-new-guinea-oneill-tells-parliament-to-move-on-after-no-confidence-vote-fails>
The assessment on Papua New Guinea was part of a report on more than 90 
countries, including Australia, which wascriticised for its continuing poor 
record on Indigenous incarceration and its treatment of asylum seekers and 
refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2017/jan/13/human-rights-watch-report-card-gives-australia-a-fail-for-offshore-detention>
. Human Rights Watch called for PNG and Australia to work to immediately close 
the Manus Island detention centre.

The Human Rights Watch director, Kenneth Roth, said the world was seeing the 
rise of a new generation of populist leaders 
<https://www.hrw.org/world-report/2017/country-chapters/dangerous-rise-of-populism>
 treating human rights as “an impediment to their conception of the majority 
will”.

“We forget at our peril the demagogues of yesteryear—the fascists, communists, 
and their ilk who claimed privileged insight into the majority’s interest but 
ended up crushing the individual. When populists treat rights as an obstacle to 
their vision of the majority will, it is only a matter of time before they turn 
on those who disagree with their agenda.”
 