
The government is facing fresh questions about Britain’s aid strategy after it 
emerged that a controversial multi-million pound programme of support for 
Bahrain’s security and justice system is being bolstered this year, even as the 
Gulf state reverses reforms to a key intelligence agency accused of torture.


Data provided under the Freedom of Information Act reveals that Bahraini 
authorities will this year receive a further £2m of British funding, including 
aid money drawn from the Conflict, Stability and Security Fund, a pot of aid 
money currently thefocus of an investigation by UK MPs 
<https://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/joint-select/national-security-strategy/news-parliament-2015/cssf-launch-16-17/>
.

Related: UK moves a step closer to dramatic rise in aid funding to private 
sector 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2017/jan/11/uk-step-closer-dramatic-rise-aid-funding-to-private-sector-cdc-group-dfid>

Human rights <https://www.theguardian.com/law/human-rights> campaigners have 
expressed concerns that funding projects through the CSSF raises the risk of UK 
complicity in abuses, or involvement in the whitewashing of those abuses.

Last year, Britain spent £2.1m on a package of “reform assistance” to the 
Bahraini security sector, overseen by the Foreign Office. Programmes funded by 
the CSSF were titled “reform and rehabilitation system” and “sharing UK 
experience and best practice”, according to details published online by the 
Foreign Office but subsequently deleted. A £500,000 component listed under the 
category “public order” has alarmed rights activists, who have been heavily 
critical ofBahraini riot police’s suppression of pro-democracy activists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/13/british-police-trainers-ignore-human-rights-abuses-bahrain>
.

MPs probing the CSSF, a financial pool worth more than £1bn a year, expressed 
frustration after anevidence session 
<http://www.parliamentlive.tv/Event/Index/ed194936-e2b5-4209-bc42-c668ce4e7805> 
with the national security strategy committee in which they questioned Mark 
Lyall Grant, the national security adviser to the prime minister. The MPs said 
he provided scant details about how the money is spent.

During the session, Labour MP Julian Lewis said there was “a high degree of 
ambiguity” about the status of the fund. He asked: “Shouldn’t we make up our 
minds … that either the expenditure of £1.1bn in this financial year will be 
disclosed in full to this committee, or shall we tear up the fiction that we 
are in any way able to hold you to account as to how you are spending this very 
large sum of money?”

Lyall Grant replied: “I understand exactly what you’re saying and it may be 
that if we meet in private then it will be possible to share more information 
with you.”

The CSSF, which operates in more than 40 countries, is overseen by the 
National Security Council, a cabinet committee including senior ministers, 
military chiefs and secret service heads.

The Labour party has claimed that the fund offers further evidence of the 
“militarisation” of Britain’s development budget, while NGOs have privately 
expressed reservations about the lack of transparency surrounding how the 
reserves are spent. One international NGO described the funding as “a black 
hole”.


The programme was launched in April 2015 to replace a fund known as the 
conflict pool <https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/conflict-pool>, which 
was also subject toaccusations 
<http://www.conscienceonline.org.uk/the-conflict-pool-2/the-conflict-pool-3/> 
of a lack of transparency. The pool wascriticised by the Independent Commission 
for Aid Impact 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2012/jul/13/uk-fund-prevent-conflict-impact>
 forperforming poorly.

Human rights group Reprieve said of UK aid to Bahrain: “It’s troubling that 
the government sees fit to keep spending taxpayers’ money on these programmes, 
given such apparently poor results – and given the clear risk of complicity in 
abuse. If ministers are determined to wave through more security aid toBahrain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bahrain>, then they must urgently make that 
funding conditional on an end to the worst abuses – including the politically 
motivated use of the death penalty.”

The Bahraini government continues to curtail freedoms of expression, 
association and assembly and crack down on dissent, according to Amnesty 
International.

Torture and other abuses remain common, said Amnesty, with authorities 
frequently using excessive force against demonstrators. Dozens of people have 
been killed since February 2011, when Bahrain’s Shia majoritylaunched protests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/feb/19/bahrain-protesters-reclaim-city-centre-manama>
 aimed at securing a greater political voice in the Sunni-ruled kingdom.

Responding during the evidence session to a question from MPs about the 
assessment of human rights risks in projects in Bahrain, Lyall Grant said: 
“There will be occasions when the National Security Council decides that we 
should discontinue a programme. We did that with one of the prison programmes 
in Saudi Arabia earlier this year, for instance. But in Bahrain those 
programmes are seen to have some effect and we are continuing with them.”

Related: Department for Business 'failing to uphold human rights commitments' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/22/department-business-bis-failing-uphold-human-rights-commitments>

A Foreign Office spokesperson said: “The UK continues to work closely with the 
government of Bahrain to encourage progress on human rights, which includes 
building effective and accountable institutions, strengthening the rule of law, 
and police and judicial reform. Any assistance we give to the government of 
Bahrain complies with the UK’s domestic and international human rights 
obligations.”

Fahad A al-Binali, first secretary at Bahrain’s embassy in the UK, said 
cooperation with Britain had focused on areas of police and security reform as 
well as the justice system. Bahrain had drawn on the UK’s experience to meet an 
urgent need to establish institutions that could gain public confidence, he 
added.

“There is an acknowledgement that more needs to be done, but, at the same 
time, there is demonstrable evidence from the reports of these institutions 
that a lot of progress has been made,” said al-Binali.

He added that Bahrain’s security forces were operating against a backdrop of 
rising attacks on the police and large quantities of bomb-making material being 
recovered.

Sayed Alwadaei, director of advocacy at the Bahrain Institute for Rights and 
Democracy, said a new environment for abuse was being created after the 
Bahraini government moved last week to returnthe powers of arrest to its 
National Security Agency <http://www.adhrb.org/2017/01/11571/>. An independent 
inquiry commission <http://www.bici.org.bh/BICIreportEN.pdf> backed by the UK 
had called for the agency, accused of being central to torture at the height of 
the 2011 Arab spring protests, to be deprived of those powers.

“We have been saying for a long time now that the UK should suspend its 
technical assistance to Bahrain until guarantees including the visit by the UN 
special rapporteur on torture are enforced,” said Alwadaei.

“Without such guarantees, the UK’s work with the ombudsman and police is just 
window-dressing. The UK continues to be part of the human rights problem in 
Bahrain, when it should be a part of the solution.”

Kate Osamor, Labour’s shadow international development secretary, said: “The 
militarisation of the foreign aid budget sets an alarming precedent whereby an 
increasing proportion of aid money is being delivered to middle-income conflict 
states. The backdrop to all of this is an ever decreasing level of transparency 
and oversight.”
 