
Hundreds of refugees have tried to jump a high double fence between Morocco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/morocco> and the Spanish enclave of Ceuta, 
resulting in violent clashes with police.

A group of 1,100 people from sub-Saharan Africa trying to reach Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> attempted to climb the border 
fence just after 4am (0300 GMT) on New Year’s Day in an “extremely violent and 
organised” way, said the central government’s representative office in Ceuta.

Melilla: Europe's dirty secret | Spain | Morocco | EU
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/apr/17/melilla-migrants-eu-spain-morocco>
Only two refugees managed to get over the wall. The men were badly injured and 
taken to hospital in Ceuta, the office said in a statement. A similar incident 
on 9 December saw more than 400 migrants enter the tiny enclave.

The group tried “to force open some of the doors in the external fence, using 
iron bars, wire cutters and large stones with which they assaulted Moroccan 
forces and (Spanish) Guardia Civil (police) agents,” the statement said.
Ceuta locator 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/maps/embed/jan/2017-01-02T02:20:03.html> 
Five Spanish policemen and 50 members of the Moroccan forces were injured, 
including one who lost an eye, it said.

A Moroccan interior ministry statement said that 10 of its forces were in a 
serious condition.

Ceuta and Melilla, another Spanish territory in North Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/08/melilla-fences-spain-morocco-migration-europe>
, have the European Union’s only land borders with Africa.

They are one of the entry points for African migrants seeking a better life in 
Europe, who get there by either climbing over the border fence, swimming along 
the coast or hiding in vehicles.

On Monday, a French national was arrested for trying to board a ferry out of 
Ceuta with a camper van where 12 Algerians were found hiding, “car sick and 
sweating,” police said.

According to local authorities, of the 1,100 migrants who stormed the border 
Sunday, just over 100 managed to climb up the external fence and stayed on top 
for hours.

Footage shot by the local Faro TV shows one man perched at the top of the 
six-metre (20-foot) high fence, sitting uncomfortably near rolls of barbed 
wire, his head hanging down onto his chest.

Eventually as darkness turns to light, he slowly climbs down to a space 
between both fences and lies down as a Spanish policeman fetches him a bottle 
of water before taking him to an entry back into Morocco.

Separately, coastguards said they had rescued 52 people who were packed onto a 
small boat at sea south of Malaga on Spain’s southern coast.
 