Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FPyDfi3MNyMg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FPyDfi3MNyMg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FPyDfi3MNyMg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on mobile? Click here to watch Bloody Beans trailer 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PyDfi3MNyMg>

"It is better to be than to obey," runs a line by the French poet Antonin 
Artaud <http://www.poetryfoundation.org/bio/antonin-artaud> at the end of 
Bloody Beans <http://cphdox.dk/en/screening/bloody-beans>, the Algerian film 
that walked away at the weekend with the top prize at this year'sCPH:DOX 
festival <http://cphdox.dk/en> in Copenhagen. That quote could refer to the 
festival itself: although it officially ended Sunday, the event took the 
unusual step of presenting its prizewinners to the public for three more days, 
wrapping on Wednesday after nearly three weeks of screenings, concerts and 
YouTube mashup shows. Indeed, now in its 11th year, CPH:DOX looks very little 
like any other film festival on the calendar; it lists parties in its 
catalogue, and for the last three years has held a forum, importing film-makers 
from all over the globe to pitch their projects – the odder the better.

The festival's unorthodox approach reflects its content: despite its name, 
CPH:DOX is arguably the world's foremost platform for "hybrid" documentaries, a 
new sub-strand of the genre best exemplified by last year's winner,The Act of 
Killing <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/155489/act-of-killing> by 
Joshua Oppenheimer <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joshua_Oppenheimer>. Though it 
lacks Oppenheimer's sense of outrage, Narimare Mari's Bloody Beans is just as 
surreal in its approach to history, as a group of children – mostly boys – act 
out a cryptic metaphor for Algeria's quest for independence. It looks unlike 
any documentary you're ever likely to have seen, using pounding techno and 
shadowplay to extraordinary effect, like a hallucinogenicLord of the Flies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/sep/17/lord-of-the-flies-golding-centenary>
.

In a similar vein, the festival also hosted The Reunion 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2402091/> by Anna Odell, a powerful piece of work 
in which, annoyed at being left out of her 20-year school reunion, the Swedish 
director films her own fictional version of events. This plays out like a 
shorter and more polished version ofFesten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/77262/festen>, in which Odell, playing 
herself, confronts fictional classmates with accusations of bullying. Odell 
then meets her real classmates to record their reactions, using actors to 
reconstruct these encounters for the second half of the film. It sounds 
narcissistic, but The Reunion is actually a rather brave and quite timely film 
about human behaviour. Most of those confronted say simply: "We were just kids 
being kids." But for Odell, that's not good enough.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FzgU075MR9T4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FzgU075MR9T4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FzgU075MR9T4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Watching on mobile? Click here for Stop the Pounding Heart trailer 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zgU075MR9T4>

Not everything was so extreme in this year's competition: Hanne Myren's Love Me
 <http://www.nfi.no/english/norwegianfilms/search/Film?key=103634> took the 
mild step of telling the story of a girl, her father and an illicit love affair 
by having the three protagonists play themselves. Similarly,Petr Hatle 
<https://www.festivalscope.com/director/hatle-petr>'s haunting mood piece The 
Great Night offered a non-judgmental study of Prague nightlife that did the 
opposite of what most docs do, dipping in and out of the stories of its various 
characters – drinkers, clubbers, hookers – without much in the way of authorial 
comment. Toughest of all was Magnum photographerAntione D'Agata's Atlas 
<http://cphdox.dk/en/screening/atlas>, a disturbing study of prostitution and 
drugs, showing fear and desperation in its artful tableaux.

Otherwise, there were plenty of more conventional documentaries in the 
selection, including Roberto Minervini's Special Mention winnerStop the 
Pounding Heart <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zgU075MR9T4>, which takes a 
surprisingly sympathetic look at a religious family in the Texas Bible belt. 
Meanwhile, from China came a film by artist Ai Weiwei, whose presence was felt 
strongly at the festival. Called, with some irony,Stay Home! 
<http://cphdox.dk/en/screening/stay-home>, it tells the story of a rural woman 
who contracted Aids at the age of 10. Not surprisingly, given the 
circumstances, it was not a particularly polished production, but Stay Home 
offered a surprisingly intimate portrait of a social injustice – quiet and 
low-key but somehow intense.

In fact, although the lineup was quite explicitly political, there was nothing 
especially indignant in anyone's tone. In fact, the mood of optimism was 
captured rather thoughtfully by theRiahi brothers' Everyday Rebellion 
<http://www.everydayrebellion.com/the-riahi-brothers/>, a slick, cheerful film 
about non-violent protest throughout the world, from Occupy Wall Street to 
Syria. The film makes an unlikely heroine ofInna Shevchenko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/nov/08/femen-leader-inna-shevchenko-interview>
, exiled leader of protest group Femen. Though the film's points are serious 
and worthwhile, Everyday Rebellion is not without its moments of humour – 
whenever a world leader enters the frame, we know a topless Shevchenko can't be 
far away. In the real world, such antics may be scorned as naive, but as this 
intelligent film proves – much like CPH:DOX itself – it is the smaller, more 
personal stance that may ultimately make the bigger difference.
 