
On paper, Sam Shepherd makes an unlikely dance-music trailblazer. There’s the 
PhD in neuroscience. There’s his gentle demeanour, more akin to a bookish vinyl 
nerd than a international 24-hour party boy. And there’s his handmade album 
artwork – drawn using aharmonograph 
<http://www.instructables.com/id/A-simple-Harmonograph/> that he built in his 
studio himself. The 29-year-old also likes to test his audience: his 
forthcoming live shows will feature an 11-piece orchestra; for arecent six-hour 
set at Berlin techno haven Berghain 
<http://www.factmag.com/2015/10/16/floating-points-interview/> – a booking that 
was “as much to my surprise as everyone else’s” – he played the albumHarvest 
Time <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ii63fKLTSuU> by spiritual jazz saxophonist
Pharoah Sanders <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2005/dec/16/jazz.shopping1> 
in its entirety.

In addition, Shepherd is, perhaps, the only musician to have been given a 
philosophy book during a DJ set. “A girl came up to me at a gig in San 
Francisco and said, ‘I think you might like this, you should read it,’” he 
recalls, sipping at a rhubarb gin that matches his top. “It was aDavid Eagleman 
book called Sum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/jun/13/sum-forty-tales-afterlives-david-eagleman>
, which is 40 short stories about what the afterlife might be and atomic 
reincarnation, where you get to heaven and God is presented to you as a 
bacteria, and of the absorbance of life …” I give him a look that suggests he 
has lost me. “I know,” he says, and laughs.

We’re in Brilliant Corners, a low lit DJ bar-restaurant in Dalston, east 
London, where discerning vintage sounds spill out of an expensive-looking 
speaker stack behind us. Shepherd, however, isn’t a tiresome chinstroker. Under 
the Zen-like moniker Floating Points, his DJ sets are brainy but banging; his 
own productions distil his spiritual jazz, classical, soul and broken-beat 
influences (by his hazy estimation, he owns 10,000 vinyl records) into sparky 
house and techno shufflers. He can release an EP with a string ensemble, but he 
can also entertain the face chompers at 6am.

Still, Shepherd finds it frustrating that he is often made out to be some sort 
of techno Einstein. “The worst question I get asked is the one where people try 
and draw a parallel between science and music,” he groans. “It is possible that 
the two exist exclusively of each other, but apparently that’s not a good 
enough answer.” As a young boy, Shepherd was a chorister at Manchester 
Cathedral and went on to study piano at Chetham’s School of Music. His father 
is a vicar and the family vicarage turned into a studio for musical 
experiments: “I could set up cellos in the kitchen, drum kits in my sister’s 
room,” he says mischievously. A teacher gave him some jazz records and it was 
then that he “stopped thinking of classical and jazz as two different things”, 
and started seeing them harmoniously. “Kenny Wheeler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/sep/19/kenny-wheeler> is so beautiful 
that [his music] could have been Rachmaninov,” he enthuses. “And Bill Evans is 
similar to the colourfulness ofDebussy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/03/debussy-early-piano-works-cd-review-the-real-star-is-the-piano>
.”

'A blueprint for perfection’: Plastic People remembered
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/jan/07/london-club-plastic-people-remembered-ade-fakile-floating-points>
Meanwhile, his appetite for records became serious. When he moved to London to 
study for his PhD, he would save up his student loan to travel around the US 
hunting for old music. “We’d go digging for weeks, stay in motels, and bring 
back as many records as we could find,” he says. “They were cheaper than CDs.” 
He learned how to DJ properly by watching the owners ofPeabody Records in 
Chicago <http://mrpeabodyrecords.blogspot.co.uk/>, which also perhaps inspired 
his love of the marathon set. “They would start playing tunes at 10am and go 
through the records that had been brought in all day. I saw it and thought, 
that’s how it’s done.”

Today, Shepherd has kindred spirits and close friends in Four Tet (Kieran 
Hebden) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/11/four-tet-kieran-hebden-morning-evening-plastic-people>
 andCaribou <https://www.theguardian.com/music/caribou> (Dan Snaith). They have 
a passion for obscure records, and enjoy throwing low-key parties on the fly, 
where the guilty blue glow of Shazam is always peeking out of someone’s pocket 
near the booth. Here, in Brilliant Corners’ intimate backroom, Shepherd and 
Hebden recently hosted an impromptu Sunday-night party – just for fun. The 
weekend after, all three played at Hebden’s Brixton Academy all-nighter where, 
in the face of inflated ticket prices, they only charged £5 to get in.

The place that most inspired their idealistic approach to club culture was 
Shoreditch’s Plastic People, which closed in January this year 
<http://www.factmag.com/2015/01/01/plastic-people-close-closing/>. The trio 
would often DJ there together 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/jan/07/london-club-plastic-people-remembered-ade-fakile-floating-points>
, holding that music heard on a decent sound system in pitch-black, with no 
distractions, had the power to take you somewhere else. “Everyone on the 
dancefloor was one body,” says Shepherd of the memorable nights in that rave 
basement. “You felt like something more than the music, something entirely 
transcendental, was happening. The ambience in the room and everything came 
together in a way that was more than the sum of its parts.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Ffloating-points-eleania-album-review-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F28%2F1446051793452%2FKP_573472_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Floating%20Points'%20Eleania%20is%20the%20one%20album%20you%20should%20hear%20this%20week%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Ffloating-points-eleania-album-review-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Floating%20Points%27%20Eleania%20is%20the%20one%20album%20you%20should%20hear%20this%20week%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Ffloating-points-eleania-album-review-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F28%2F1446051793452%2FKP_573472_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Why Eleania by Floating Points is the one album you should hear this week – 
video 
He could as easily be talking about his debut album, Elaenia 
<http://www.npr.org/2015/10/28/450599927/first-listen-floating-points-elaenia>. 
Comprised of seven “suites”, it builds delicately with strings, piano, dizzying 
time signatures, dappling synths and drones until it engulfs you. Silhouettes 
(I, II & III) starts with a restless drumbeat and blossoms into 10 cinematic 
minutes of romantic, careening strings and a steady swell of choir-like voices. 
The titular track – inspired by a poetic dream that Shepherd had about a bird 
trapped in a forest, after reading Eagleman’s Sum – is more abstract, a 
pearlescent piano melody caught in layers of static and synth. Some songs 
implode, others turn inside out.

Much of this experimental composition is filtered through a contemporary prism 
of influences, some more intentional than others. The final track,Peroration Six
 <https://soundcloud.com/floatingpoints/peroration-six>, is like something 
Radiohead <https://www.theguardian.com/music/radiohead> might have come out 
with during an unhingedKid A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2009/nov/28/album-decade-radiohead-kid-a>
 take. But Shepherd was particularly drawn to the recording of Talk Talk’s 1991 
albumLaughing Stock <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R7FxqsNO4-Y>. He tried 
many of its techniques, down to the oil projectors that the band used to create 
an intense studio atmosphere. “Listening to that record is where I started to 
realise that you can’t separate the music from the recording,” he explains. “So 
if you work hard at making records sound a certain way then it can enhance the 
music itself.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F29%2Ffloating-points-dj-sam-shepherd-elaenia-album-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8061a59e6553ab9e57b68facc420457197c7f58%2F0_0_1024_991%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%20DJ%2C%20therefore%20I%20am%3A%20Floating%20Points%20on%20musical%20experiments%20and%20marathon%20sets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F29%2Ffloating-points-dj-sam-shepherd-elaenia-album-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%20DJ%2C%20therefore%20I%20am%3A%20Floating%20Points%20on%20musical%20experiments%20and%20marathon%20sets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F29%2Ffloating-points-dj-sam-shepherd-elaenia-album-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8061a59e6553ab9e57b68facc420457197c7f58%2F0_0_1024_991%2F1024.jpg>
 Sam Shepherd, AKA Floating Points 
Like his favourite spiritual jazz records, Elaenia is improvisational and 
designed to be heard in one go. But Shepherd says he “finds it difficult to 
reconcile not being religious with being into spiritual music”. Instead, he 
admires the genre architecturally. “Spiritual jazz, for me, feels like building 
a space out of nothing and within that space [the musicians] build their house, 
their city, their entire universe through music,” he says excitedly. “They 
exist in this black hole and they create an amazing place without form, without 
structure, without harmonic beginnings …”

All of which, to be honest, is starting to sound a bit rollneck jumper. But 
Shepherd winces at the idea of anyone using the word “jazzy” to describe his 
music, as if it could be found on the kind of compilation that would’ve played 
in a hotel lobby in 1998. “It’s very sad to be misunderstood. You can press 
play and have prejudices about what jazz is or isn’t, but I like to imagine I 
make music that doesn’t require the listener to have any prior knowledge or 
reference points.” After all, he adds, “what kind of boring music is that?”

Elaenia is anything but boring; even in its chaos, it is beautiful. It builds 
like a hypnotic DJ set – a soothing balm after a hard day in the office; a 
respite from a packed train full of screaming children where you can’t sit 
down. Some people are angry Shepherd hasn’t made Floating Points: The Bangerz 
album, he says, but he hopes they will find Elaenia “inviting in some way” in 
spite of that. “I would like to feel that a person walks into an empty room and 
that, through listening to the record, the room is built for them without 
trying to push them out at any point,” he explains. “I’m trying to draw people 
in.”

You don’t need a thesis to enter Sam Shepherd’s lab – an open mind will do.

 * Elaenia is out on Pluto Records on 6 November. Floating Points plays live at
Islington Assembly Hall 
<http://www.islington.gov.uk/assemblyhall/events/Pages/live-music.aspx>, London 
N1, on 17 November.  