
Thinking back to the way we imagined our future in the 1960s, the striking 
thing is the small part money played in our utopias. Once nuclear war had been 
ruled out as a possibility, the big challenge that remained was what our 
teachers and essay questions called “the problem of leisure”. We would have 
lots of it. Automation would bring shorter working days without cutting wages. 
The zero-hours contract was unimaginable then, at least as part of the world to 
come rather than the dark past ofTolpuddle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/aug/28/we-will-be-free-tolpuddle-martyrs-review>
 andSpeenhamland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/jun/20/speenhamland-supporting-unemployed>
.

In future everyone would work in spotless white factories and offices – by 
housing its winding gear in glass and concrete, even a coalmine could be 
included in this bright picture – and knock off early to go home to leafy 
crescents innew towns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/06/seventy-years-on-new-towns-housing-crisis-stevenage>
. How would they fill their hours? In the fifth form, we wrote solemnly about 
making music, playing sport, reading books and painting. We didn’t mention 
drinking, or much consumption of any other kind. Our utopia was orderly, 
well-behaved, and remarkably free of material appetites.

King's Cross Pond Club – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/the-swimming-blog/gallery/2015/may/21/kings-cross-pond-club-in-pictures>
Last Sunday I thought I’d found it. In the late afternoon under a deep blue 
sky (the kind all utopias require), a couple of us walked aroundthe new 
development at King’s Cross 
<https://www.kingscross.co.uk/whos-developing-kings-cross>, where 67 acres of 
disused railway sidings, gasworks, warehouses and wharfs have been transformed 
into one of the capital’s most-fashionable districts. Our walk took us through 
quiet streets of Georgian houses and an old municipal estate where every pub 
had closed down, until we reached Regent’s canal and struck west along the 
towpath.

Geese moved silently across the water as narrow boats put-putted under 
bridges; once, one of them drew over to the bank to take aboard an elderly lady 
in a wheelchair who settled down beside the tiller as the boat nosed back to 
midstream. It was done without fuss: the canal had hardly a ripple, all motion 
on it looked effortless, everything glided, and nobody needed to shout.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Futopia-distant-dream-perfect-future-leisure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5051b94b7bd3c99c9cd7d2b4e972b67fdb29ff86%2F0_197_5906_3543%2F5906.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%20found%20utopia%20%E2%80%93%20it%20was%20in%20my%20mind%20%7C%20Ian%20Jack&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Futopia-distant-dream-perfect-future-leisure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%20found%20utopia%20%E2%80%93%20it%20was%20in%20my%20mind%20%7C%20Ian%20Jack&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Futopia-distant-dream-perfect-future-leisure%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5051b94b7bd3c99c9cd7d2b4e972b67fdb29ff86%2F0_197_5906_3543%2F5906.jpg>
 Regent’s canal: ‘There was hardly a ripple, all motion on it looked 
effortless, everything glided.’ Photograph: Alamy 
The quietness meant that we heard the secondhand bookshop before we saw it. 
The noise suggested a keyboard and an acoustic guitar, and there they were 
around the next bend: a couple of musicians playing melodious jazz and folk on 
the top deck of a barge: an old Dutch coal barge, as I learned later, whose 
owners had lined the cabins with shelves and set out more books on stalls that 
faced the towpath. Passersby stopped to browse in the sun. My friend and I were 
struck by the same thought – that the scene, for reasons we couldn’t completely 
fathom, represented an ideal of civilised life: that humanity had risen from 
the slime to reach this point and would climb no higher.

“It’s just like Paris,” I said, thinking of the bookstalls on the Left Bank 
with the river behind them.

“Paris-Schmaris!” my friend said. “This is much better.” Here was heaven on 
our doorstep.

Almost every trade found a home there that was banished elsewhere due to its 
villainous smells

We walked across a large square where railway tracks and wagon turntables had 
been artfully embedded in the pavement. Ahead of us lay the large Victorian 
warehouse that houses St Martin’s School of Art and several places to eat and 
drink. To the right in another series of brown-brick railway sheds stood a 
Waitrose, while to the left, circular apartment blocks had risen inside the 
ornate cast-iron frames of old gas holders. Here and there a functional sign 
from the railway era had been preserved as decoration: the gable end of a 
canal-side building still said COAL OFFICE in 19th-century capitals, while the 
blue and white enamel of British Railways continued to demand DRIVE SLOWLY. 
Crowds, mainly of young people, drifted about the square or sat with their 
faces raised to the sun on the canal banks and at café tables. We joined a long 
queue of them outside a restaurant and overheard Spanish, Italian, French, 
German, Arabic and Japanese, and other languages that were harder to identify. 
The food, when we eventually got in, was India-inspired, very good and 
delivered by waiters from eastern Europe.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Futopia-distant-dream-perfect-future-leisure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ba0cb3bc0c5fbcfb631bf20f13d2e2a282594fa%2F0_133_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%20found%20utopia%20%E2%80%93%20it%20was%20in%20my%20mind%20%7C%20Ian%20Jack&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Futopia-distant-dream-perfect-future-leisure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%20found%20utopia%20%E2%80%93%20it%20was%20in%20my%20mind%20%7C%20Ian%20Jack&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Futopia-distant-dream-perfect-future-leisure%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ba0cb3bc0c5fbcfb631bf20f13d2e2a282594fa%2F0_133_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 People relax on the grass near King’s Cross train station. Photograph: Daniel 
Leal-Olivas/AFP/Getty Images 
The history that enabled these scenes might be represented as an inevitable 
progression. Fields and cottages that lie on the city’s edge have a canal cut 
through them in 1820 – leading east to theLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> docks and north to the Midlands. The 
canal feeds coal to a gasworks that opens soon after; railways from the north 
reach King’s Cross and St Pancras, its neighbouring terminus, in the mid-19th 
century. Coal from Yorkshire and Nottinghamshire, potatoes from Lincolnshire, 
cold fish from Hull and Aberdeen, live cattle from Scotland to be sold and 
slaughtered: by the 1870s the landscape has been shaped entirely by London’s 
needs. And for anyone who doubts that these changes were improvements, there is 
the story of the vanished settlement of Belle Isle to reassure them.

Belle Isle <http://www.victorianlondon.org/publications4/strange-07.htm> was 
the site of some of the city’s celebrated dust heaps, great mounds of cinders, 
ash, bones, vegetation and dead animals that gave employment to people who were 
prepared to search for accidentally discarded valuables or sift the dust and 
sell it to brickworks.

The biggest of these heaps was removed to make way for the King’s Cross 
railway in the late 1840s – an event that drew the attention of Charles 
Dickens, who later made dust heaps a memorable feature ofOur Mutual Friend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/sep/23/charles-dickens-favourite-mutual-friend>
 – but the people of Belle Isle continued to make a living from smaller heaps 
and other obnoxious industries such as horse-killing, bone-boiling and 
fat-melting. In the words of one visitor, James Greenwood, almost every trade 
had found a home there that was elsewhere “banished from the haunts of men, on 
account of the villainous smells”.

Greenwood watched some boys playing cricket on “a tolerably level bit [of 
land] between two dust-heaps”. A pile of old hats and broken crockery served as 
the wickets and the leg of an old bedstead made do as the bat; while “for the 
ballthe head of a kitten [Greenwood’s italics]. This is not romance, but 
earnest fact.”

Stressed by the daily commute? Try 'canuting' - and travel by canoe | Peter 
Kimpton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/jul/14/stressed-daily-commute-travel-by-canoe-to-work-canuting>
That scene was witnessed in 1874. By then the gasworks had acquired all its 
gasholders, including numbers 10, 11 and 12, which were built between 1860 and 
1867, and number 8, the largest of them, built a decade earlier. If a man had 
stood on top of the easternmost of them and looked east, he might easily have 
seen some slum boys – “street Arabs”, Greenwood called them – playing cricket 
among the heaps, though he would have needed a good telescope to identify a 
kitten’s head.

The gasholders at King’s Cross stored gas until the year 2000. Today, the 
refurbished and re-erected frame of number 8, a Grade II-listed structure, 
holds a park and events space. Numbers 10, 11 and 12 surround apartment blocks 
designed with a communal roof garden, and spas, bars and dining bars in each of 
the three cylinders. Prices range from £810,000 for a studio flat to £5m for a 
penthouse with extensive views across the city and its parks and canals.

“Gasworks” and “penthouse” were unlikely words to have been found in the same 
sentence 50 years ago.

Our ideas of utopia change, and money often restricts access to the things we 
think of as ideal. Still, Belle Isle has vanished – it became in the end only a 
name on a signal cabin – and life is better than it was when the dust was being 
sifted. Sometimes the sights and sounds of a musical bookshop on a canal can be 
a little epiphany: this used to be a dream.
 