
The paediatricians who started a children’s medical education organisation 

Paediatricians Dr Kate Hersov and Dr Kim Chilman-Blair started Medikidz 
<http://www.medikidz.com/gb-en/>, a children’s medical education organisation, 
after becoming frustrated at the lack of resources to help explain health 
conditions to children.

“As a doctor, I could see this lack of knowledge was leading to fear, 
isolation, added anxiety and sometimes anger in children that already had the 
weight of the world on their shoulders,” Hersov says. “We did a lot of research 
and [decided to use] comic books and superheroes. It’s an amazing medium that 
spans age range and culture [and is] fantastic for low literacy.”

The first issue, which covered asthma, was published seven years ago. Today, 
the business has offices in London, New York and Sydney and has distributed 
more than 4.5m comics in 30 languages to hospitals and clinics across 50 
countries. They’ve covered hundreds of conditions that affect children and 
their loved ones. The most popular so far have been those that cover ADHD, 
autism and breast cancer.

Each title is written by a doctor on the Medikidz team and sponsored by a 
private healthcare company, such as Johnson & Johnson, Siemens or Pfizer, which 
enables the company to distribute the comics for free. Patient groups, leading 
physicians, nurses and patient families are all consulted on the content before 
it goes to print, an exercise that usually takes four months.

“It’s very much a collaborative process,” Hersov says. “We believe that to 
create the best content, you need the perspective of a lot of different voices.”

Although Hersov no longer works as a doctor, she still believes she’s making a 
real difference to healthcare as an entrepreneur. “The response has been 
fantastic. Really the best part of Medikidz for me is the feedback from the 
children and young people who are touched by what we do.”

The midwife who set up an app to help expectant mothers with health advice

Hannah Harvey, founder of the UK’s first health advice app run by midwives, 
has always been interested in using digital tools to make healthcare more 
accessible. She still works night shifts as an NHS midwife, but launchedAsk the 
Midwife <http://askthemidwife.co.uk/> in July 2016.

“There was a US study 
<https://bmcpregnancychildbirth.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12884-016-0856-5>
 that suggested 84% of pregnant women use the internet for health advice,” she 
says. “So I [wanted to] create something where they could ask questions, 
instead of using Google or parenting forums.”

The app already has 2,500 users, who can connect with 40 midwives across the 
UK for a small charge (starting at £1.99). Harvey has plans to expand the 
business’s offering to video and face-to-face consultations, and hopes to work 
in partnership with theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> in the 
future. “We are there to offer an advice service for non-urgent concerns [so] 
midwives working in clinical practice [can] focus on continuity of face-to-face 
care,” she says.

It’s a model the midwives are behind. When Harvey advertised for consultants 
online, she received more than 500 applications in three days. The midwives all 
have at least three years’ experience and get paid commission per question they 
answer. Many manage the work around their NHS shifts.

“I wanted a service for women and their families but it’s been beneficial for 
the midwives as well,” Harvey says. “Sometimes they need extra work 
[particularly after they’ve had children], and that’s hard to find outside of 
clinical practice. We’re really filling a gap there, which is fantastic.”

Related: Dragon's Den rejected me but my invention saves lives across the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/oct/12/dragons-den-rejected-invention-saving-lives-nhs-nurses>

The biggest challenge, she adds, has been making sure the service is compliant 
with midwifery regulations and data protection legislation. After months of 
discussion with lawyers, theNursing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nursing> and Midwifery Council and the 
Care Quality Commission, the advice service is regulated by the Federation of 
Antenatal Educators.

“‘I believe there is a big market for digital healthcare services,” Harvey 
adds. “We don’t want to replace triage and community services but rather run 
alongside them to alleviate the pressure on our NHS.”

The GP who set up a business available across six countries in 19 languages

Dr Mohammad al-Ubaydli saw the difference technology could make to medicine 
during his ward rotation while at university. After spending a year as a GP, 
al-Ubaydli went into research and wrote a number of books on IT and healthcare, 
the last of which proposed giving patients access to their medical records.

“That got me obsessed with the problem,” he says. “I spent a year trying to 
convince IT directors [to develop something]. But they weren’t doing it at the 
scale and the pace that I wanted. So I did it myself.”

Patients Know Best <https://www.patientsknowbest.com/>, is a platform that 
contains a patient’s medical records from various healthcare professionals 
including GPs, hospital staff, social workers and mental health providers. 
Patients can track symptoms, connect wearable activity devices and message 
their consultants securely. The business launched in 2008, and is now available 
across six countries, in 19 languages. Approximately half a million patients 
use the service.

The success of the business, which secured £5.7m of investment 
<https://www.ft.com/content/44844ee6-a7eb-11e5-9700-2b669a5aeb83> (paywall) in 
2015, lay in convincing institutions of the benefits and working 
collaboratively with them to overcome their initial reservations. The platform 
has been shown to save time on both sides of the consulting desk – doctors have 
found that“just in case” appointments 
<https://www.patientsknowbest.com/manchester.html> are reduced because patients 
can ask questions online. It empowers the patients – they invite doctors, 
nurses, carers and relatives to view their records, rather than the other way 
around. And it enables remote monitoring – anepilepsy team in Peterborough 
<https://www.patientsknowbest.com/peterborough.html>, for example, could view 
uploaded videos of seizures at home to produce better diagnoses.

Some may argue the business world is incompatible with medicine, but 
al-Ubaydli believes that everyone working in the healthcare sector has an 
obligation to make it better.

“A lot of people go through [medical training] thinking there’s only one way 
to do things and there’s only one way to make a contribution … [But] if you see 
a problem, you’ve got to fix it. Healthcare will not be fixed without people 
doing that every day, with every problem that they see.”

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more about issues like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 