
Last week’s riot at HMP Birmingham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/16/hmp-birmingham-prison-disturbance-winson-green>
 and unrest at Hull was not the only bad news for the prison service this year 
– 2016 has also seen arecord number of deaths 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/28/murders-and-suicides-in-prisons-in-england-and-wales-hit-17-year-high>
 behind bars, unprecedented levels of serious assaults and self-harm,rampant 
drug abuse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jun/01/prisoners-reveal-regular-spice-use-tripled-legal-high-violence-illness-debt>
 and aspectacular breakout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/07/one-hmp-pentonville-fugitive-matthew-baker-convicted-of-attempted-murder-escaped-with-james-whitlock>
.

Birmingham prison riot: government was warned two months earlier
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/18/birmingham-prison-riot-government-was-warned-two-months-earlier>
“If you don’t have safety, order and control in prisons you have nothing,” 
says Ian Acheson, 48, a former prison governor who earlier this year undertook 
thereview of Islamic extremism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/13/extreme-islamists-in-prisons-should-be-in-isolated-units-england-wales>
 in UK prisons. Acheson lays the blame for the crisis in our prison system 
firmly at the door of government. Since 2010, there has been a30% cut in prison 
officer numbers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/02/prisons-in-england-and-wales-given-boost-of-2500-new-staff-to-tackle-violence>
, and there were500 fewer frontline prison staff 
<http://www.prisonreformtrust.org.uk/Portals/0/Documents/Bromley%20Briefings/Autumn%202016%20Factfile.pdf>
 in 2016 alone.

“They should admit they got it wrong – that they cut frontline staff too far; 
that they understand that some of the consequences of those cuts have been this 
collapse in prison safety,” Acheson says.

The justice secretary, Liz Truss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liz-truss>, last month announced the 
recruitment of an extra2,500 prison officers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/02/prisons-in-england-and-wales-given-boost-of-2500-new-staff-to-tackle-violence>
 to tackle violence. But, says Acheson, “there ought to be a bit of humility 
from the government. It needs to accept the policy of removing so many staff 
was disastrous.”

During Acheson’s review of radicalisation in jails – commissioned by the then 
justice secretary,Michael Gove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/may/09/michael-gove-justice-chief-cabinet-conservatives-election>
 – he visited dozens of prisons in Britain and abroad, and concluded that the 
rise ofIslamic extremism in UK prisons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/22/the-guardian-view-on-islamist-extremism-in-prisons-above-all-dont-make-things-worse>
 was a “serious threat to national security”.

Recommendations included isolating those prisoners identified as presenting an 
“enduring risk to national security” in special units – “prisons within 
prisons” – away from the general prisoner population, as well as providing 
staff training, “with particular emphasis on distinguishing religious from 
cultural traditions”. These measures have both since been adopted by government.

The government got it wrong. They need to accept that they cut frontline staff 
too far

Acheson insists that the separated regime accepted by the UK government 
differs fundamentally from thescheme he observed in France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/17/are-french-prisons-finishing-schools-for-terrorism>
, which is now being abandoned, where prisoners deemed to be inspired by 
Islamic extremism were semi-segregated. “The conditions were extremely 
primitive, even by the poor standards we now see in UK prisons,” he says. “We 
envisaged a very small number of these prisoners being completely isolated in 
purpose-built units, where what I would call ‘enlightened’ separation occurs. 
These units should offer individualised treatment plans by highly trained staff 
– and the emphasis should be on humanising relationships between staff and 
prisoner to change their mindset.”

But surely you can’t contain or isolate an idea? “No. But you need to at least 
produce an alternative narrative – a counter narrative,” Acheson says. He 
suspects, however, that staff fear being accused of racism if they attempt to 
confront the problem.

“There is a legal obligation for institutions like prisons to promote British 
values 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/03/what-are-british-values-google>
. I don’t have any problem at all with British values, such as democracy, the 
rule of law and tolerance. When I was conducting my review, and spoke to people 
at senior level in the prison service about these values, some of them looked 
at me almost with disdain. One of them even said, ‘perhaps we’d call them 
European values’. That was one example of a cultural mindset that I observed in 
relation to Islamic extremism. There was what I call an institutional timidity, 
an unwillingness of the institution to directly confront this problem.”

He believes that the 12,500 Muslims in prison in England are probably most at 
risk from the threat of Islamic extremism. “They have mothers and daughters and 
sons and fathers outside, worrying about them being at risk in prison. But the 
prison service has frankly been asleep for the last six years in terms of 
understanding the nature and the extent of this problem, despite all of the 
evidence available to them to do something about it. But it went into the ‘too 
difficult’ box.

“If I was in prison I’d be making pragmatic decisions about my own safety; if 
there was a dominant gang that offered me protection, I would join them.”

There is no reason why the same principles of separation cannot apply to other 
extremists, Acheson believes, such as those peddling far-right views. “We 
cannot allow extremism of any kind to flourish in prisons,” he states.

For Acheson, however, anti-extremism training and separation have all been 
eclipsed by what he calls “the order and control crisis”.

“Short term we have to get stability back in prisons,” he says. “To borrow 
from the Iraq war, we need a ‘surge’ of staff into disordered prisons to 
restore control and get a decent regime going. Longer term, staff training 
needs a complete overhaul to equip them properly for the task ofmanaging 
prisoners with diverse needs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/05/prison-funding-cuts-are-putting-vulnerable-prisoners-at-risk>
 and characteristics.”

Over the six months that he and his team took evidence from staff, experts and 
former prisoners, he says he found staff who were on the edge. “I’ve seen 
scared staff, spoken to scared staff. Being in some prisons where you expect 
there to be control and seeing that there really isn’t any is something.” He 
says a way to lift morale would be to put prison governors in uniform. “The 
artificial distinction between management and shop floor has created a ‘them 
and us’ culture which must be ended,” he says. And the quality of the uniforms 
should be improved. “At the moment staff look like employees of a budget 
airline as opposed to professionals in a vital uniformed public service.”

Inside the special prison unit where rehabilitation rules the roost | Erwin 
James
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/24/special-prison-unit-where-rehabilitation-rules-hmp-new-hall>
Is there any hope that our prisons are ever going to work? “Prison does work 
because it incapacitates people who have committed crime. But if it’s only for 
that purpose, it will fail.” As a young prison officer in the 1990s, Acheson 
says he saw atHMP Grendon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/aug/05/hmp-grendon-victim-of-its-own-success>
 (the only therapeutic prison in the UK) what happens when you give people even 
a small degree of autonomy. “I’ve always believed that prisons ought to be 
places where we help peoplerescue their potential 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/24/special-prison-unit-where-rehabilitation-rules-hmp-new-hall>
. I think a very small number of people are irredeemably broken, who frankly 
need to be contained – and society needs to be protected from them. But the 
vast majority need help. It is important to get services to people who are in 
need, to help them help themselves, but also to prevent them from creating any 
more victims.”

He says it’s about time prisoners were given meaningful work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/08/prisoners-may-be-freed-day-jobs-justice-shakeup-david-cameron>
, paid the minimum wage and had a personal training and education voucher to 
let them select the training required for meaningful employment after release. 
And there should be a dramatic increase in in-cell access to remote learning 
and skills providers via a secure intranet.

Acheson says he loved working in prisons for nine years. “Being a prison 
officer is the career I am most proud of in my life. It was the making of me,” 
he explains. “I’ve always thought that prisons were places of possibility. In 
the 1990s there were lots of hopeful things happening. There was optimism. But 
if we want to solve the prison safety crisis we have now, we have to change the 
ratios. Either society decides that it has to have more prison officers, or 
fewer prisoners.”

Curriculum vitae

Age 48

Lives Dartmoor

Family Married, two children

Education Portora Royal school, Enniskillen; University of Durham

Career 2015-present: director of security programmes, Sampson Hall Ltd; 
2012-14: chief operating officer, Equality and Human Rights Commission; 
2009-12: senior civil servant at Home Office; 2003-09: head of region Youth 
Justice Board; 2001-03: executive director, Prisoners’ Abroad; 1992-2001: 
governor HM Prison Service (graduate accelerated promotion scheme from an 
officer at HMP Grendon, to principal officer HMP Durham, head of security HMP 
Wandsworth, deputy and then acting governor HMP Erlestoke, and finally director 
of research and planning at HMP Dartmoor).

Public life 2014-15, led independent review of Islamist extremism in prisons 
and probation, ordered by the then secretary of state, Michael Gove.

Interests Hill walking, poetry
 