
It happened for me three years ago in Turku: the moment I realised that 
cycling in the snow was going to become normal. I was winding my way up 
Finland, en route to the world’s first everWinter Cycling Congress 
<http://wintercyclingcongress2016.org/>, hosted by a city called Oulu some 400 
miles north. It had been snowing non-stop for a week.

I thought I had already found somewhere quite special. Earlier that afternoon, 
I had watched what I believed to be an impressive number of people riding their 
bicycles on Turku’s main shopping street in the falling snow. I remember 
thinking, as I ran around with my camera taking as many pictures as possible 
before sunset: “Oulu must be like this.”

When I arrived in Oulu that year, everything suddenly became clear. I had 
found it: a real winter in a real winter city. It was the kind of city I knew – 
a snowy one with just the right amount of ugly buildings, box stores and strip 
malls. It had American-style suburbs full of single family homes, it had the 
hockey rinks, it even had the right kind of trees. It was just like Winnipeg,
Canada <https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada> – except for the properly 
connected bike paths which stretched for miles in every direction and the 
thousands of people riding bicycles in the snow.

What good is relying on a painted bike lane in a white-covered world? The 
wisdom of protected bike lanes becomes obvious

What Oulu makes up for in moderation due to its proximity to the ocean 
<http://www.worldweatheronline.com/v2/weather-averages.aspx?q=oul&tp=1> it 
loses in lack of sunlight thanks to being 120 miles south of the Arctic Circle.
The mercury in Winnipeg is higher over the summer and dips lower in midwinter 
<http://www.worldweatheronline.com/v2/weather-averages.aspx?q=ywg&tp=1> but 
experiences average daytime winter temperatures within four degrees of Oulu. At
160–175 days of snow coverage each year 
<http://www.tut.fi/verne/wp-content/uploads/PykalaII_winter_maintenance_FINAL.pdf>
 (pdf), Oulu’s number of days with snow on the ground is higher than Winnipeg’s 
average of 132. Yet the differences in bicycle usage between the two cities are 
stark.

Measuring bicycle trips is not easy. Kids under 18, for example, are almost 
always left out. However, the most cited reports putOulu’s overall bicycle 
modal share <http://www.cityclock.org/urban-cycling-mode-share/#.VrtqNWThCcY> 
at around 22% (32% in summer, 12% in winter). If Oulu were located in North 
America, its winter bicycle share alone would make it a shoo-in for the 
continent’s most bike friendly city. It would leave the summer ridership 
numbers of places like Portland, Davis or Minneapolis trailing. By contrast, 
even though cycling is currently the fastest growing form of transportation in 
Winnipeg, the 2011 national census pegs us at 2.1%. Two winter cities, with two 
remarkably different stories.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fice-cycles-northerly-world-cities-winter-bicycle-revolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0d60c40f2b28cfa16ac9a5a1eb55424c5ebb167%2F0_0_4320_2592%2F4320.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ice%20cycles%3A%20the%20northerly%20world%20cities%20leading%20the%20winter%20bicycle%20revolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fice-cycles-northerly-world-cities-winter-bicycle-revolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ice%20cycles%3A%20the%20northerly%20world%20cities%20leading%20the%20winter%20bicycle%20revolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fice-cycles-northerly-world-cities-winter-bicycle-revolution%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0d60c40f2b28cfa16ac9a5a1eb55424c5ebb167%2F0_0_4320_2592%2F4320.jpg>
 In Oulu, Finland, cycling in the snow is seen as unremarkable. Photograph: 
Anders Swanson 
Snow is an identity issue. Winter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/winter> stakes out a special 
physiological and psychological space in those supposedly hardy people who 
think they are adapted to it. Some of the hype is fair – a really cold winter 
day can, after all, kill you fairly quickly. But some of us like to 
overemphasise our own bravery.


Most assumptions about winter cycling are based on the same myths no matter 
where you are from. Those -30C days do happen in Winnipeg, but they are pretty 
uncommon; yet we allow the deep freeze days to characterise an entire winter. 
We also conveniently forget that cycling keeps you warm – comfortably so. In an 
urban environment, the risk of being harmed by the weather while cycling is 
reduced to nil with a basic scarf and jacket. We assume that winter cycling is 
dangerous but somehow we forget that vehicle speeds are the real issue, and 
that they drop in the winter. It shouldn’t be surprisingwhen a study shows that 
cycling in the winter months with steady conditions is relatively safe compared 
to cycling in June <http://alk.tiehallinto.fi/julkaisut/pdf/3200652.pdf>.

In a city, the risk of being harmed by the weather while cycling is reduced to 
nil with a basic scarf and jacket

When we wonder out loud “why anyone would ever want to spend more than a few 
minutes outside in a place like this”, we forget about its beauty. Winter is a 
glorious spectacle of glittering fractals complete with a soundscape and 
atmosphere entirely its own. Some of us have forgotten the bright side of 
winter: the simplicity, the efficiency, the pragmatism. In transportation 
terms, winter is all smooth, clean lines and quiet sounds. Bikes fit right in. 
Perhaps sitting in cars has dulled our senses.

I still find it amusing that pictures of children cycling in the winter elicit 
amazement in Canada – even skepticism. You’d think that a country famous for 
winter sports, and which scores D- on its own children’s physical activity 
report card, would be about ready to see them outside getting a little 
exercise. In Oulu, where30% of children under 12 
<http://static1.squarespace.com/static/5328859ae4b074f7f8875997/t/54d92dd4e4b09527b1fb02ef/1423519188116/WinterFun_Perala_Final.pdf>
 (pdf) ride a bicycle to school year round, you will find packed bike racks 
outside primary schools in January. In Joensuu,50% of people of all ages 
continue riding once the leaves fall 
<https://twitter.com/SwansonAnders/status/695344600676864001>. A similar 
scenario will reveal itself to you in numerous cities in Sweden and Finland. 
Places like Linköping, Uppsala, Umeå, Örebro, Karlstad, Rovaniemi, Jyväskylä 
and Luleå demonstrate that cycling in the snow is not just possible but 
popular. It is enough to make any bike-friendly planner living in a city with 
cold winters completely rethink the idea of weather as a barrier.


Oulu’s longstanding planner Mauri Myllylä <https://youtu.be/nbStrnNvq5E?t=1m> 
sees nothing unusual in the stubborn fight for an extensive network of 
year-round pathways,peppered with stress-relieving and time-saving bicycle 
underpasses 
<https://www.google.com/maps/d/edit?mid=z-6EAXpUkKw4.kWjIpHHg4PTQ&usp=sharing> 
at almost every roadway intersection. What good is relying on a painted bike 
lane in a white-covered world? The wisdom of protected bike lanes becomes 
obvious.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fice-cycles-northerly-world-cities-winter-bicycle-revolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F876e45902021b7c9372d78529fe8430b7aefa0c1%2F0_0_4320_2592%2F4320.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ice%20cycles%3A%20the%20northerly%20world%20cities%20leading%20the%20winter%20bicycle%20revolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fice-cycles-northerly-world-cities-winter-bicycle-revolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ice%20cycles%3A%20the%20northerly%20world%20cities%20leading%20the%20winter%20bicycle%20revolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fice-cycles-northerly-world-cities-winter-bicycle-revolution%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F876e45902021b7c9372d78529fe8430b7aefa0c1%2F0_0_4320_2592%2F4320.jpg>
 Winter cycling in Winnipeg, Canada. Photograph: Anders Swanson 
The cold makes new things possible: frozen rivers transform themselves into 
one long continuous bike path, building temporary bridges everywhere. Winter 
changes the texture of the ground itself, making the surface of the Earth so 
hard that you can barely dent it with a shovel. Snow is also a wonderful method 
for tracking transportation habits. Thesneckdown concept 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-25788068> is becoming popular among 
planners, but imprints in the snow have been teaching us stories for millennia.

Winter also teaches frugality; it forces you to plan ahead and exposes human 
frailty like no other season. Road designers who ignore the ongoing operating 
costs of snowclearing do so at their peril – perhaps this will eventually push 
all cities to consider life-cycle costing in their design choices. In 
Scandinavia, true cost reckonings lead tobike paths that literally clean the 
snow off themselves <https://twitter.com/Tinkerlmatz/status/553083945257291778>.


A resident of Oulu knows that the bicycle will probably still be the most 
reliable form of transport in winter

Once you commit to it, it doesn’t take much to conquer winter. Oulu plans 
ahead. Its first proper bicycle plan,developed in the 1970s, was put into 
action in 1982 <http://www.epomm.eu/index.php?id=2771&lang1=en&study_id=3708> 
and since then, the bicycle network has grown by an average of 10 miles every 
year. Whatever Oulu builds, it maintains. In the autumn, when freezing 
temperatures approach, machines that spit gritty materials of carefully chosen 
diametershead out early to lay the groundwork for a sandpaper-like surface 
<https://twitter.com/Tinkerlmatz/status/522650224398204928> in time for the 
morning rush. It doesn’t take more than a centimetre of the white stuff to fall 
before equipment is unleashed to plough, remove, pack and texturise every 
single pathway <https://twitter.com/Tinkerlmatz/status/536785972349128704> that 
needs it.

In short, Oulu aims to have its cycling network ready and open for the people 
who want to use it. This not-so-revolutionary idea of caring about the needs of 
the basic users of the transportation system results in a populace that can 
rely on their city year round. Even in extreme weather, Oulu residents know 
that the bicycle will probably still be the most reliable form of transport 
since the pathways will usually be treated first.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fice-cycles-northerly-world-cities-winter-bicycle-revolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe19215cb35e53522e901a679334304ddb62cdeae%2F0_0_4320_3240%2Fmaster%2F4320.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ice%20cycles%3A%20the%20northerly%20world%20cities%20leading%20the%20winter%20bicycle%20revolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fice-cycles-northerly-world-cities-winter-bicycle-revolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ice%20cycles%3A%20the%20northerly%20world%20cities%20leading%20the%20winter%20bicycle%20revolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fice-cycles-northerly-world-cities-winter-bicycle-revolution%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe19215cb35e53522e901a679334304ddb62cdeae%2F0_0_4320_3240%2Fmaster%2F4320.jpg>
 Winter cycling in Oulu, Finland. Photograph: Anders Swanson 
The bikes you see embody the same kind of practical, time-honoured design used 
in all great cycling cities around the globe. Despite years of practice and the 
most choice in the world, the majority of Oulu residents haven’t embraced 
studded tires. Downtown bike parking lots are instead full of run-of-the-mill 
old city bikes, the kind that sport regular rubber, kickstands and mudguards to 
keep slush off your clothes. Even in winter, helmets are decidedly optional. 
Most people simply use whatever bike they used all summer, dress how they want 
and they expect their city’s maintenance regime to keep pace.

All of this is a recipe for moments that would be extraordinary elsewhere. I 
have been passed by six-year-olds in snowsuits cycling home from kindergarten, 
with dad trailing far behind. My friend Pekka Tahkola is fond of telling how he 
witnessed a gentleman in his 90s cycle to a local shop in -27C weather to 
enquire about a new bike for his girlfriend who was “only” in her 80s. 
Apparently, in Oulu, the people outlast the bikes.

Just five years ago, in Winnipeg, winter cycling was almost a taboo subject. 
Back then I would sometimes need to explain, even to otherwise bicycle-oriented 
people, why thisWinter Bike to Work Day <http://winterbiketoworkday.org/> idea 
we were toying with would not harm our chances of being taken seriously. This 
was despite all the people around me who I saw riding – in some cases having to 
ride – in winter.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fice-cycles-northerly-world-cities-winter-bicycle-revolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70699e17c99da45f0a58b829280e059750ffdf42%2F0_0_5432_3261%2F5432.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ice%20cycles%3A%20the%20northerly%20world%20cities%20leading%20the%20winter%20bicycle%20revolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fice-cycles-northerly-world-cities-winter-bicycle-revolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ice%20cycles%3A%20the%20northerly%20world%20cities%20leading%20the%20winter%20bicycle%20revolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fice-cycles-northerly-world-cities-winter-bicycle-revolution%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70699e17c99da45f0a58b829280e059750ffdf42%2F0_0_5432_3261%2F5432.jpg>
 A man cycles through the snow in Times Square in New York last month. 
Photograph: Gary Hershorn/Corbis 
Things are much different now. Watching Winter Bike to Work Day go from 500 
people the first year to 10,000 last year has been a lesson in how everything 
is possible. Winter cycling is undeniably growing.

Like waking up to an overnight snowfall, change can come very quickly. Forums 
like the WinterCycling <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/cycling> 
Conference and Winter Bike to Work Day have helped immensely. Once people find 
out that something is already popular somewhere, they want to learn what it 
takes to make it happen at home. Like William Gibson once remarked, the future 
is already here, it’s just not evenly distributed. When places like Joensuu and 
Oulu – where riding in the snow is so taken for granted that almost no one 
cares – get to talk to places like Montreal or Calgary who are seeing cycle 
tracks ploughed, connected and filling with people for the first time, 
confidence rises and opposition melts fast.

You see it happening already in some of the world’s most important cities. The 
five year trend forwinter cycling in New York has shown a steady upward climb 
<http://www.nyc.gov/html/dot/downloads/pdf/2013-nyc-cycling-in-the-city.pdf> 
(pdf), nearly doubling in five years with recent ridership “attributed to solid 
bicycle network expansion during 2012 and high ridership in cold days 
immediately after Hurricane Sandy”. They are still working on the storm 
response, but they’ll get it right soon enough. Moscow’s recent winter bicycle 
parade attracted 2,000 participants.

Europe's most liveable city? The secret of Odense's post-industrial revolution
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/jan/21/odense-post-industrial-city-liveable-hi-tech-hub-cycling>
Catherine McKenna, Canada’s new Minister of the Environment and Climate 
Change, took a ride to work last Friday and is poised to ride on Winter Bike to 
Work Day too. Calgary’s famous new network of downtown cycle tracks are 
retaining what would have once beensurprising numbers of summer riders 
<https://twitter.com/matt_sheldrake/status/694601409849765889> thanks to top 
notch reliability in the winter from day one 
<http://calgary.ctvnews.ca/mixed-reaction-to-snow-free-downtown-cycle-track-1.2177853>
. More importantly, developing a network of winter maintenance priority routes 
for cycling is now one of the “quick wins” inWinnipeg’s new $334m walking and 
cycling strategy 
<http://www.winnipeg.ca/publicworks/pedestriansCycling/strategiesActionPlan/pdf/strategy_implementation_monitoring.pdf>
.


Those cities that will make the shift most quickly will be the ones that 
figure out that the ideal design vehicle for their cycling network is an 
elderly couple wearing regular clothing, riding regular bikes having a quiet 
kindly conversation, regardless of the weather, anywhere in the city. The fact 
that they are able to ride side by side while doing so will be no more 
surprising than the passenger seat in a car. They will likely be wearing woolly 
hats, not helmets, and they will be riding upright, enjoying the view, basking 
in the beauty of winter.

Anders Swanson is an artist and sustainable transportation designer based in 
Winnipeg, Canada. He is the secretary of the Winter Cycling Federation, lead 
designer ofBikeWalkRoll <https://bikewalkroll.org/> and, with his brother 
Torrin, runs internationalWinter Bike to Work and School Day. 
<http://winterbiketoworkday.org/>
 