
Day three of Iceland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iceland> Airwaves 
kicks off with the president. That’s not the name of the latest laptop 
wunderkind or an ironic moniker for a new synth duo. No, all of the journalists 
and assorted media types who have come to cover the festival are taken out on a 
coach for an official audience with Guðni Thorlacius Jóhannesson, newly 
inaugurated as the sixth Icelandic head of state, unless you count Björk, which 
you always should.

“Welcome to Iceland,” Jóhannesson says, standing before us with the First 
Lady, Eliza Reid, in the grand drawing room of their house, which just happens 
to be white. He starts talking about the “Icelandic music scenery”, and how 
much Airwaves has done for the local economy. He even reads out some quotes 
from the world’s press, about how it’s “the hippest long weekend on the annual 
music-festival calendar” (courtesy of David Fricke of Rolling Stone, who is 
here), and how this year’s one “starts in a toilet”,a reference by yours truly 
to John Lydon’s inaugural address 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/nov/03/iceland-airwaves-john-lydon-reykjavik-hip-hop>
 on day one at the converted public convenience that is the Icelandic Museum of 
Punk. He proposes a toast to “music, cooperation, and having fun” and tells us 
to either “clap or rattle our jewellery”. You can’t imagine Theresa May opening 
the Great Escape with a John Lennon gag.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbHk4-GMsS78&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbHk4-GMsS78>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbHk4-GMsS78&media=>
From the president to King. When I wrote about these three Los Angelenos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/aug/13/new-band-king> back in 2012, 
they seemed mired, in the best possible way, in the 70s celestial soul ofMinnie 
Riperton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/jun/29/minnie-riperton-10-of-the-best>
 and her Rotary Connection. Tonight, they appear to have moved on a decade, the 
sound coming from Paris Strother’s panoply of keyboards and computers evoking 
the shimmering R&B of super-producersJam and Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/22/janet-jackson-superproducers-jimmy-jam-and-terry-lewis>
. It’s a very mid-80s electronic soul sound, with none of the murk or rhythmic 
idiosyncrasy of today’s avant-R&B. The actual songwriting could do with a bit 
of oomphing up – that’s an Icelandic phrase – but the sweetness of their female 
attitude, their dovetailing harmonies and the actual sonics are glorious.

Helsinki musician Ringa Manner, who operates as solo laptop artist the 
Hearing, draws a big crowd with her quirkily bleak, oblique, electronic 
melancholia. It’s nice to see Dolores Haze, morealumni of the Guardian’s new 
band of the week column 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/nov/13/new-band-of-the-week-dolores-haze-no-79>
, doing well with their girl-group goth-grunge. Dressed a little tardily for 
Halloween (one of them sports Elvira chic, another has on a skeleton mask), 
they cover all indie bases. Frontwoman Groovy Nickz whispers and screams as the 
band veer wildly between shoegaze and punk, emo and C86-style shambling indie. 
They even have a song named after Brit alternative rockers Placebo. But it’s 
all quite catchy and poppy.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DH-EKyj69gdU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DH-EKyj69gdU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DH-EKyj69gdU&media=>
Axel Flóvent is an Icelandic singer-songwriter masquerading as a band, with a 
guitarist, bassist, drummer and female backing singer bolstering his derivative 
but effective voice. It must be effective because his songs – think a solo 
Chris Martin – are being synced all over the shop, from the Vampire Diaries to 
European TV commercials. One minute it’s soaring high like a choirboy’s, the 
next it’s evincing a light rasp to suggest this 20-year-old native of fishing 
village Húsavík has had his share of hard-won experiences.

Lake Street Drive are a four-piece from Minneapolis configured like Abba (two 
male, two female); an Abba who play instruments: double-bass, guitar, drums, 
vocals, and play them well (they studied at the New England Conservatory of 
Music). And those vocals, courtesy of Rachael Price, are powerful and soulful, 
only utterly devoid of the intensity of someone like Amy Winehouse, but with a 
similar fondness for 60s R&B and Motown. Clearly, Price could go solo and have 
a career of sorts, but she would struggle because the world doesn’t need 
another big-voiced solo artist. But operating within a band context, one 
capable of such note-perfect homages to classic pop and soul, she stands out. 
Lake Street Drive are refreshingly unalternative, and accomplished on a variety 
of fronts.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcDTUchhBxWA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcDTUchhBxWA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcDTUchhBxWA&media=>
The highlight of the day – indeed, the highlight of the festival so far, give 
or take Dizzee Rascal on Friday night – are Thunderpussy. The Seattle band are 
a revelation, if not quite a revolution. That name suggests a near-novelty 
bunch of comedic pasticheurs, and there are references in their Airwaves 
brochure write-up to Madonna and Prince so I was expecting something 
pseudo-funky. But this is not that at all. An all-female outfit, the parts of 
their bodies not covered by tattoos are clothed in, variously, sparkly hot 
pants, tassly blouses, silver vests, black spandex pants and patent leather 
thigh- high boots. They resemble a glam Runaways, forgotten early-70s band 
Fanny, orthe Lemon Twigs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/13/meet-the-lemon-twigs-the-new-york-teens-who-grew-up-in-public-and-ended-up-in-1974>
’ slightly older sisters. The music, though, isn’t glitter rock; they just have 
some of the fashion trappings – you can picture them hanging out, during the 
post-Woodstock doldrums, at a US rock festival circa 1972, as honorary 
hard-nosed female drinking buddies of Steppenwolf and Skynyrd, surrounded by 
Hells Angels dropping ’ludes. No, this is straightahead, no-nonsense, 
unreconstructed vintage hard rock and tightly-constructed boogie, with all the 
trimmings – orgiastic grimaces, dirty riffing, and lashings of solos.

They writhe, they cavort, they strut - the whole lexicon of early-70s 
stage-craft. Meanwhile, lots of bearded men in the audience nod in appreciation 
– this could catch on. “If you don’t dance to this one, Molly might come and 
lick your face,” says guitarist Whitney Petty of frontwoman Molly Sides. Cue 
dozens of Icelanders shouting: “Nobody dance!”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DG_pMo1Hcn1I&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DG_pMo1Hcn1I>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DG_pMo1Hcn1I&media=>
Frankie Cosmos won New York magazine’s pop album of the year award for 2014, 
and they’re another 50/50 male-female outfit purveying a neat line in tightly 
rhythmic indiepop. Greta Kline – the singer/guitarist who goes by the name of 
Frankie Cosmos – is so preppy and collegiate, New York and shy, laconic and 
cool, she should be in Girls (but then, her mum and dad are Kevin Kline and 
Phoebe Cates). And they get extra points because the bassist is called David 
Mystery and he is wearing aPavo Pavo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/29/new-band-of-the-week-pavo-pavo-no-117-wistful-retro-pop-harks-back-to-the-70s>
 T-shirt.

Minor Victories is a veritable indie supergroup, featuring Rachel Gosling of 
Slowdive, guitarists Stuart Braithwaite (Mogwai) and Justin Lockey (Editors), 
and filmmaker James Lockey of Hand Held Cine Club, who play blisteringly, 
beautifully loud set at the art museum. Finally, there’s American-Swedish band
Fews 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/23/the-playlist-new-bands-fews-ulrika-spacek-nots-and-more>
, specialising in space/kraut rock and avant drones. Their motorik boogie, 
linear grooves and mantric repetitions – pure early-70s Detroit meets early-70s 
Düsseldorf – provide ample opportunities for wigging out in the early hours of 
Saturday morning.

 * Paul Lester’s trip to Iceland was paid for by Iceland Airwaves  