
The last day of Iceland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iceland> Airwaves 
is fairly quiet – the Harpa centre, the main venue, is closed – but there is 
still plenty happening on the outskirts. At the Hair, Beer & Whiskey Saloon, 
for example, on the bleak easternmost edge of town, Janina Aradóttir, a woman 
with an acoustic guitar, is singing her sad, solemn songs of experience. Backed 
by a keyboardist with tattooed forearms, a long silver beard and black 
wide-brimmed hat, she entertains in this retro-style barber’s with her highly 
TV sync-worthy material, sung in English because, as she explains, “writing in 
Icelandic seems cheesy”.

For the rest of the late afternoon and early evening this cool little shop, 
with its leather chairs, wooden floors and moose’s head on the wall, brings the 
noise. It starts withMercy Buckets 
<https://www.facebook.com/pg/MercyBuckets/about/>, an Icelandic hardcore band 
with a larynx-shredding vocalist who slip occasionally into southern boogie. 
They weren’t meant to appear (they’re filling in for a cancelled female comedy 
duo called Bergmál), but we’re glad they’re here, even as the four members 
assault us with their highly charged racket. Volcanova, a self-styled 
three-piece “stoner rock band” from Reykjavik, keep things hard and heavy – if 
you’d just arrived, you’d assume Airwaves was a metal festival. Only two of the 
band need a barber – the drummer is clean-shaven – but the singer/guitarist 
looks as though “greasy biker” was what he told his school careers advisers he 
wanted to be when he grew up. If this is stoner rock, the drugs aren’t working: 
one song moves at a Motörhead pace, another approaches thrash speed and 
intensity while a third is furious boogie, like a bad-tempered ZZ Top.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2ZnxdHyAf44&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2ZnxdHyAf44>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2ZnxdHyAf44&media=>
Over at the vast Valshöllin hall, in the small room upstairs, enter Hatari, a 
newly formed trio who cause jaws to drop with their “experimental punk dark 
ambient darkwave goth synth” (the tags on their Bandcamp 
<https://hidmyrkaman.bandcamp.com/album/myrkramakt-ii>). They apparently only 
got together in 2015, but they are fully formed. “The project aims to unveil 
the relentless scam that is everyday life,” says the Airwaves brochure, the 
shortest blurb of the hundreds of acts. “Prepare to dance. Dance or die.” They 
comprise a short bald man in a uniform that makes him look like a diminutive 
totalitarian dictator and another in a matching outfit who stands stock-still 
at the front of the stage, as the former dances and sings in a high, soaring 
tenor over insistent Teutonic beats. Meanwhile, a third gentleman, also 
standing at the front of the stage, wearing stormtrooper boots and a mask, 
bashes away at his drums. You don’t know whether to laugh or alert the 
authorities. Suddenly, the poker-faced one starts shouting – it’s more a series 
of guttural barks – over the clatter. It feels dodgy but presumably it’s a wry, 
or rather, angry and brilliantly pertinent, comment on the stupidity of 
demagoguery. The crowd look puzzled, if not a little afraid. The tiny singer 
puts the camp into camp commandant as he sashays around, and his partner 
continues to bark terrifyingly as the tyrannical beat approximates the martial 
strut of an army.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPCFoGrN46mk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPCFoGrN46mk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPCFoGrN46mk&media=>
Mystifyingly, RuGl, a sweet female indie duo (one on guitar, the other on an 
Electro 4 keyboard) who reached the final round of the 2016 Icelandic Battle of 
the Bands with their pallid indie and jejune vocals, are in the main hall 
downstairs when really it should be Hatari projecting to the masses. Back 
upstairs, facing the unenviable task of following Hatari, are RVK DNB, an 
Icelandic DJ collective whose focus is on keeping alive the sound of 
drum’n’bass. First up is Agzilla, using programmed sounds and old vinyl to 
reintroduce the word “skittering” into the dance lexicon, followed by Plasmic, 
veteran of the local drum’n’bass scene (and remixer of Sigur Rós on their album 
Von Brigði). Lastly, there is DJ Elvar, who gives the sound a reggae twist. 
Dub’n’bass, anyone?

Iceland Airwaves day one: John Lydon talks underwear, while Reykjavik goes 
hip-hop
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/nov/03/iceland-airwaves-john-lydon-reykjavik-hip-hop>
With his scruffy demeanour, lugubrious voice – not far off that of Lambchop’s 
Kurt Wagner – and mordant Reed/Dylan-indebted rock, Texan singer-songwriter 
Kevin Morby and his band belong in a bar, not an aircraft hangar. Surprisingly, 
some of his guitar-based tunes – mostly simple two-chord strums that would make 
the Modern Lovers’ Roadrunner seem baroque – receive whoops of recognition.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dk87tfZiZiRE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dk87tfZiZiRE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dk87tfZiZiRE&media=>
Five-piece (three women/two men) Mammút fill this space with ease. Airwaves 
veterans and winners of 2013’s Icelandic Music Awards for best album, they are 
local heroes. Their singer has a Björkish hiccup/chirrup, and their music moves 
in stately, majestic fashion, with unashamedly epic momentum. One of their 
songs could be Radiohead circa No Surprises with, well, Björk on vocals; it’s 
mid-tempo alt rock with mainstream appeal, or mainstream rock with indie cred. 
They’re a good example of a band who have grown through Airwaves. Next year, 
fully expect Hatari to be in this hall. Either that or they’ll be helping the 
police with their enquiries.

 * Paul Lester’s trip to Iceland was paid for by Iceland Airwaves.  