 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F28%2Fiestyn-davies-countertenor-farinelli-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F25%2F1435226631066%2Ff140f54e-60a8-4979-aa74-bc82d27b3e5b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Iestyn%20Davies%3A%20%E2%80%98Falsetto%20is%20like%20yodelling%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F28%2Fiestyn-davies-countertenor-farinelli-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Iestyn%20Davies%3A%20%E2%80%98Falsetto%20is%20like%20yodelling%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F28%2Fiestyn-davies-countertenor-farinelli-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F25%2F1435226631066%2Ff140f54e-60a8-4979-aa74-bc82d27b3e5b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 ‘Singing is about sensation’: Iestyn Davies. Photograph: Marco Borggreve/PR 
Iestyn Davies is one of the world’s leading countertenors. A choral scholar at 
St John’s College, Cambridge, where he read archaeology and anthropology, he 
studied at the Royal College of Music, making his operatic debut in 2005. This 
summer he will sing the role ofDavid in Handel’s Saul at Glyndebourne 
<http://www.glyndebourne.com/discover/artist-interviews-and-features/iestyn-davies-saul-q-and-a/>
; in the autumn he will again star alongside Mark Rylance in Claire van Kampen’s
Farinelli and the King when it transfers to the West End 
<http://www.shakespearesglobe.com/theatre/whats-on/west-end/farinelli-and-the-king>
. He can currently be heard on Radio 3’s In Tune special series Singers on 
Singing <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p02twrbd>, broadcast daily until 3 
July as part of its Classical Voice season. The conversations are also 
available as podcasts.

In Singers on Singing you say the countertenor voice resembles yodelling. Does 
it?
It’s a good way of explaining the countertenor voice to someone who’s never 
engaged with their falsetto range, which all men have. If you listen to 
yodelling, there’s a deliberate crack as he moves into falsetto, and what we do 
as countertenors is iron out that crack: we make the top bit of the yodel into 
our, well, occupation. Falsetto is just a word. What’s important is how that 
feels. Singing is so much about sensation.

How did you discover your countertenor?
I was singing bass in a school choir, and I got a bit bored, really. I was 
singing falsetto quietly in the background and someone next to me said: “That 
sounds OK; you should take it more seriously.” It wasn’t like it came naturally 
to me, but it was different from what other people were doing, which I liked. 
It is a voice some people love. But others think: oh God, a countertenor. When 
we were doingFarinelli and the King, people came who might not normally go to 
an opera: Daniel Craig, Woody Harrelson. I was singing to people who might 
never have heard a countertenor voice before. That was more nerve-racking than 
anything I’ve done.

How do you look after your voice? 
Sleep is important, a good seven hours, and drinking plenty of water. I had a 
hiatus hernia for a while, and had to avoid drinking coffee because of acid 
reflux. For a singer, acid reflux is a nightmare: your vocal cords are sort of 
marinating in acid overnight. But I had an operation and got it sorted out and 
now I’m very happy. I’m not avoiding anything. I’ll take everything. Coffee, 
champagne…

What was it like being involved in Farinelli and the King?
I was the only singer, and I wasn’t doing much acting. My role was somewhere 
between concert and opera. So it was very laid-back. I could just turn up. The 
other difference is doing it every night, though when it transfers I’m only 
able to do 56 performances. It was something I couldn’t have predicted I would 
do, and who knows where it will go… there’s talk of a film, and I’d love to do 
it on Broadway if that works out.
 