
In June 2011, it was revealed that Amina Abdallah Araf – the woman behind the 
A Gay Girl in Damascus blog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jun/13/syrian-lesbian-blogger-tom-macmaster>
 – did not exist. The person behind it was revealed to be an American student 
at Edinburgh University, Tom McMaster. The disappointment was palpable; 
authenticity – on the web, and elsewhere – is a prized attribute, and when it 
is eroded, people understandably get angry.

Now Australian film-maker Kitty Green has named Victor Svyatski 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/films/news/the-man-who-made-femen-new-film-outs-victor-svyatski-as-the-mastermind-behind-the-protest-group-and-its-breastbaring-stunts-8797042.html>
 as the wizard behind the curtain of Ukrainian feminist group Femen. Green 
alleges that Svyatski not only supports the group, as Femen had previously 
acknowledged, but actually founded the organisation, as well hand-selecting the 
"prettiest girls" for their topless protests. Love or loathe Femen – and it is
no secret that I am no fan of theirs 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/bim-adewunmi/2013/04/inconsistency-femens-imperialist-one-size-fits-all-attitude>
 – this is plain depressing.

For the documentary, Ukraine Is Not a Brothel 
<http://variety.com/2013/film/international/cinephil-takes-ukraine-is-not-a-brothel-1200590539/>
, which is being shown at the Venice film festival, Green recorded an interview 
with Svyatski in which he acknowledges he may have started the group to meet 
women. His reply is a masterclass in how to cop out: "Perhaps yes, somewhere in 
my deep subconscious."

Did we guess that something might have been going on? The clues were there. 
Topless protests featuring mostly skinny, "pretty" European women. The slogans: 
"Our mission is protest, our weapons are bare breasts", "Nudity is liberty" and 
"Better naked than in a burqa", gave off an unpleasant stench but didn't 
necessarily point to a male svengali figure in the background.

Women have proven themselves to be just as capable of insensitivity and 
bullish action: asking for a "topless jihad 
<http://www.thenation.com/article/175056/femens-topless-jihad>" could have 
easily been the idea of a man or woman. And the aggression and ferocity of 
their protests did not automatically raise red flags – aggression is not the 
sole preserve of men, and women have a lot to be angry about. (Have a read of 
the@EverydaySexism <https://twitter.com/EverydaySexism> Twitter feed if you 
don't believe me).

The Independent reports that Inna Shevchenko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/sep/22/femen-topless-warriors-global-feminism>
, the lead campaigner of the group, will be attending the premiere of the film 
at Venice today, along with other members of Femen. This seems a little fishy. 
How real is this story? Femen have been incredibly adroit users of the media – 
is this yet another way of gaining attention for their next campaign? It's more 
than a little worrying that some people think Femen capable of these 
machinations, rather than seeing them for their primary objective: being a 
credible feminist protest group looking to effect change.

If it is true, there emerges an over-arching Charlie's Angels narrative of the 
male impresario and the young women who need a guiding hand. It is a potent 
trope – we respond to it even as we rail against it. It persists in hip-hop, 
for example, where women rappers are routinely accused of being ghost written 
by men, and also in pop: from Phil Spector and the Ronettes to Simon Cowell and 
his X Factor empire.

In Green's film, Svyatski talks of the campaigners needing a firm hand as they 
lack strength of character – and he is the one who will teach it to them. "They 
show submissiveness, spinelessness, lack of punctuality, and many other factors 
which prevent them from becoming political activists. These are qualities which 
it was essential to teach them."

No one is saying men can't be involved in the feminist struggle. Allies are an 
important component in the march towards equality But if you have friends like 
this, who needs enemies?
 