
Gareth Southgate <https://www.theguardian.com/football/gareth-southgate> 
didn’t want to be considered for the England job before the FA appointed Sam 
Allardyce, but this week he has spoken passionately about leading his country 
while the search for a new permanent manager takes place. The England U21 boss 
will be in charge for four games and has named his first squad for the upcoming 
World Cup qualifiers against Malta and Slovenia.

Southgate has gone for experienced players. He even picked Glen Johnson, whose 
last game forEngland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> was their 
defeat to Uruguay at the 2014 World Cup. Johnson has been ruled out through 
injury but Southgate seems to be aiming for continuity. The stand-in manager 
says he is reluctant to veer from the side that “did very well” against 
Slovakia and his first squad has a familiar feel to it, aside from the 
inclusion of Jesse Lingard.

Gareth Southgate steps forward as England’s reluctant redeemer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/03/gareth-southgate-england-manager-reluctant-redeemer>
But what if the England team was picked on how the players have performed this 
season? Below is an English XI based on the players’ ratings, not including 
those who are injured or retired from the international game. The familiar 
faces are few and far between by comparison.

Jordan Pickford – 7.16 
<https://www.whoscored.com/Players/110189/Show/Jordan-Pickford>

The highest rated goalkeeper in the Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> so far, Jordan Pickford 
might have expected a call-up given his work with Southgate in the U21s. The 
Sunderland keeper has been a bright spark in an otherwise dismal few months 
under David Moyes. Their season would be even bleaker but for the 22-year old’s 
5.4 saves per game – a league high. With Joe Hart’s form for the national side 
leaving a lot to be desired and Jack Butland out injured, one would think 
Pickford can’t be too far away.

Kyle Walker – 7.40 <https://www.whoscored.com/Players/69778/Show/Kyle-Walker>

Walker is undoubtedly the first choice right-back in the absence of the 
injured Nathaniel Clyne. Southgate’s decision to bring Glen Johnson back into 
the squad was bizarre. The Stoke City defender has secured the lowest rating 
for any English defender with more than two appearances this season (6.59). 
Considering that John Stones, Chris Smalling and Michail Antonio can all play 
at right-back his inclusion was baffling to say the least.

Curtis Davies – 7.66 
<https://www.whoscored.com/Players/8484/Show/Curtis-Davies>

The highest rated Englishman in the Premier League this season, Curtis Davies’ 
performances for Hull so far have been exceptional. The 31-year old, who hasn’t 
received a call-up to the squad in a decade, has made at least 15 more 
interceptions (43) than any other player and is in far better form than Gary 
Cahill, who keeps his place despite a poor start under Antonio Conte.

John Stones – 6.93 <https://www.whoscored.com/Players/101374/Show/John-Stones>

The drop from Davies’ high rating to the next available English centre-back in 
the Premier League is vast. Scott Dann, who is out injured at present, would 
have made the cut ahead of Stones, though City’s summer signing has had a solid 
start to life at the Etihad, committing just one foul in seven games and 
completing 88.7% of his passes thus far.


Danny Rose – 7.61 <https://www.whoscored.com/Players/24711/Show/Danny-Rose>

Like Walker on the opposite flank, Danny Rose is another player who has 
improved markedly in recent seasons under Mauricio Pochettino, relishing his 
chances to push forwards and rely on his athleticism. His gung-ho approach 
means he can be caught out of position at times but it’s been another strong 
start to the campaign from the left-back – averaging the second most tackles 
per game in the Premier League (4.5) to pick up where he left off last season.

Injured Glen Johnson is replaced in England squad by Michael Keane
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/04/injured-glen-johnson-replaced-england-squad-michael-keane>
Andros Townsend – 7.50 
<https://www.whoscored.com/Players/71522/Show/Andros-Townsend>

Andros Townsend – who has been called up as a replacement for the injured 
Raheem Sterling – may be considered an unimaginative selection but he deserves 
a chance. The 25-year-old has made a strong start at Crystal Palace. He opened 
his account for the club against Stoke last month and has complemented an 
impressive 23 dribbles – the fourth highest in the league – with a notable 
three tackles per game to prove his worth.

Jason Puncheon – 7.61 
<https://www.whoscored.com/Players/9156/Show/Jason-Puncheon>

Jason Puncheon has never been capped at any level of international football 
but he is a player who has improved with age – unlike certain established 
England internationals. The 30-year-old has excelled in a central role in the 
Crystal Palace midfield. He has provided two assists and has created more 
chances (24) than any other Premier League player. That’s twice the tally of 
Wayne Rooney and, given England’s dire set pieces at Euro 2016, his ability 
over a dead ball wouldn’t go amiss.

Jordan Henderson – 7.40 
<https://www.whoscored.com/Players/68659/Show/Jordan-Henderson>

Jordan Henderson will be hoping to carry his strong club form on to the 
international stage. The 26-year old is likely to be the most experienced 
player in the England midfield for the upcoming qualifiers – unless you include 
Wayne Rooney – and he needs to start leading by example. He has stood out in an 
increasingly impressive Liverpool team this season, with one goal, one assist 
and 4.1 tackles per game.

Wilfried Zaha – 7.40 
<https://www.whoscored.com/Players/85059/Show/Wilfried-Zaha>

Having seen what promised to be a hugely exciting international career hit the 
rocks at Manchester United, Wilfried Zaha is rebuilding his reputation and must 
be in contention for an England recall before long – he last featured for the 
national side as a teenager in 2012. The winger, now 23, also has a goal and an 
assist to his name this season, while only Eden Hazard has completed more 
dribbles in the Premier League (27). Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain – who has started 
just 12 league games since the start of last season – was preferred this time 
around.

Theo Walcott – 7.52 <https://www.whoscored.com/Players/13796>

Theo Walcott has enjoyed something of a renaissance for Arsenal this season. 
He recently scored in three consecutive games for the first time in over three 
years, taking his tally for the season to five in all competitions. Walcott, 
who is now 27, hasn’t gone to a World Cup since Sven-Göran Eriksson gave him a 
call-up in 2006 when he was only 16. You get the sense that this season could 
be Walcott’s most important yet for both club and country.

Troy Deeney – 7.25 <https://www.whoscored.com/Players/25832>

He may not be a glamorous choice but Troy Deeney deserves some recognition for 
his talismanic performances as Watford captain. The 28-year old scored his 99th 
goal for the club at the weekend and his 16th – to go along with an impressive 
eight assists – since promotion to the Premier League last season. An 
intelligent player who is more than capable of dropping off and providing a 
foil for a No9, Deeney is an underrated talent who could help the pacier 
forwards in the squad.

Premier League team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
La Liga team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Bundesliga team of the week

 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Serie A team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Ligue 1 team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Liga NOS team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
• Follow WhoScored on Twitter <https://twitter.com/WhoScored> and Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/WhoScored>
• Follow Martin Laurence <https://twitter.com/martinlaurence7> on Twitter
 