
Who is the greatest artist of all time? Names like Rembrandt, Michelangelo and 
Picasso spring to mind. Yet a very strong contender has to beClaude Monet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/monet>.

That’s right, Monet. The soft and soppy, “chocolate box” impressionist, that 
painter of picnics and haystacks. Early in 2016, Monet’s water lily decorations 
revealed their reflective depths in the Royal Academy’s fine exhibitionPainting 
the Modern Garden 
<https://www.royalacademy.org.uk/exhibition/painting-modern-garden-monet-matisse>
. The year ends with an early Christmas present for the Scottish National 
Gallery, which has just unveiled a scintillating pastel by Monet that has been 
in a Scottish private collection since the 1920s and has now been given to the 
museum through theAcceptance in Lieu scheme 
<http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/tax-incentives/acceptance-lieu>.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fmonet-pastel-scottish-national-gallery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a3b24e1dd8ed64249a54af355408cbd4b431689%2F0_0_3430_5948%2F3430.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ignore%20the%20snobs%20%E2%80%93%20Monet%20is%20a%20contender%20for%20the%20greatest%20artist%20ever&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fmonet-pastel-scottish-national-gallery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ignore%20the%20snobs%20%E2%80%93%20Monet%20is%20a%20contender%20for%20the%20greatest%20artist%20ever&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fmonet-pastel-scottish-national-gallery%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a3b24e1dd8ed64249a54af355408cbd4b431689%2F0_0_3430_5948%2F3430.jpg>
 Full view of Claude Monet’s Etretat, L’Aiguille et La Porte d’Aval. 
Photograph: Jessie Maucor/© 2016 National Galleries of Scotland, 
Etretat, L’Aiguille et La Porte d’Aval 
<http://www.theedinburghreporter.co.uk/2016/12/monet-acquired-by-national-galleries-of-scotland/>
, a view of a spectacular stretch of the Normandy coast that Monet drew in 
pastels in about 1885, illuminates the case for Monet as an unbeatable, 
unequalled artist whose popularity alone stops art snobs admitting that he is 
their favourite, too.

It is a landscape on the edge of unreality. The artist, looking from high 
cliffs on to a twilit sea, captures a moment when the world seems to be 
simplifying itself into light and shadow, losing substance, becoming dreamlike. 
A streak of red on the horizon tells us this is the magical time when day sinks 
towards night, when an atmosphere of mystery envelops nature. Monet’s most 
famous paintingImpression, Sunrise 
<https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Impression,_Sunrise#/media/File%3AMonet_-_Impression%2C_Sunrise.jpg>
 (1872) dives into the half-light of dawn. This pastel, done more than a decade 
later, lingers in the similarly ambiguous light of late afternoon.

Yet it has a quality that makes it different from Monet’s impressionist 
masterpieces of the 1870s and shows him developing towards a new understanding 
of the relationship between art and nature. Impressionism was a way of showing 
reality. Just as Gustave Courbet and Edouard Manet painted the immediate 
reality of life, so Monet tries to catch the very flow of the real, as it 
actually looks, in radical paintings like his greatBathers at La Grenouillère 
<https://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/paintings/claude-monet-bathers-at-la-grenouillere>
 (1869) in the National Gallery, London. Impressionism is the ultimate climax 
of realism in painting – a fast and sensual response to the passing moment.

Etretat, L’Aiguille et La Porte d’Aval is not an impressionist work. It is 
something else. Consider the cliffs and pinnacles that rise out of the silver 
sea. In the softening light they have lost detail and become stark purple 
shapes. Is this really how they would look? Monet does not claim any such 
thing. Instead, he reveals or intuits a kind of Platonic ideal form of these 
rocks that is emerging in the dying light. They are turning into dream shapes, 
Rorschach blots. They linger in your mind like a musical theme, abstract and 
compelling.

The simplified and abstracted power of these rocks resembles the Leitmotiv in 
the music ofRichard Wagner 
<http://www.umich.edu/~umfandsf/symbolismproject/symbolism.html/Teutonic_Mythology/wagleit.html>
, whose influence on French late 19th-century culture cannot be exaggerated. 
Yet it also has a lot in common with the abstracted imagery in the Japanese 
woodblock prints that were revered in Paris at the time. Monet, in other words, 
is evolving in this exploratory masterpiece from a painter of reality into an 
artist of symbolism.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fmonet-pastel-scottish-national-gallery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F39e3d781ac25c55342796aaa849473efad4a253d%2F0_0_1181_830%2F1181.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ignore%20the%20snobs%20%E2%80%93%20Monet%20is%20a%20contender%20for%20the%20greatest%20artist%20ever&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fmonet-pastel-scottish-national-gallery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ignore%20the%20snobs%20%E2%80%93%20Monet%20is%20a%20contender%20for%20the%20greatest%20artist%20ever&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fmonet-pastel-scottish-national-gallery%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F39e3d781ac25c55342796aaa849473efad4a253d%2F0_0_1181_830%2F1181.jpg>
 Impression, Sunrise, 1872. Photograph: Heritage Images/Getty Images 
Monet’s symbolism, so poetic, so rhapsodic, makes his later art increasingly 
meditative and suggestive, culminating in his water lily paintings that are the 
greatest abstractions ever made. No wonder something peculiar happens when 
Monet is exhibited alongside other artists. I have seen shows that juxtaposed 
him with Turner, Whistler and Cy Twombly, always with the same result – Monet 
makes all other art seem slightly false. There is a depth to his lightness that 
creeps up on you and drowns you in mystery. Monet is a stupefying genius and 
Scotland has got hold of a dazzling insight into the growth of his unique 
vision.
 