
Immigration to Britain reached 650,000 – its highest ever annual level – in 
the runup to the EU referendum, fuelled by record numbers of European migrants 
coming to work in “the jobs factory of Europe”, official figures reveal.

The record level of immigration at the time of the Brexit vote was driven by a 
historically high inflow of 284,000 EU citizens, almost matching the number of 
those from outsideEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> 
(289,000).

The influx meant net migration remained at a near-record high of 335,000 in 
the 12 months to the end of June. It is more than three times the government’s 
target to reduce annual net migration to below 100,000 a year. However, the 
figures show that Theresa May’s drive to reduce overseas student numbers is 
continuing to bite, with 30,000 fewer international students compared with the 
previous year.
Student immigration 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-01T15:28:11/embed.html>
Some early data from after the Brexit vote suggest that some migration to the 
UK may be decreasing. New national insurance data suggests that thenumbers of 
Polish people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/25/polish-in-wakefield-brexit-vote-britain>
 and other eastern European migrants registering to work in Britain dropped by 
17% or 35,000 in the 12 months to September. But there was an 11% rise, or 
22,000 increase, in Romanians and Bulgarians registering for national insurance.


Work has proved the main attraction for the record levels of immigration, 
particularly from within the EU, accounting for 189,000 of the 311,000 who came 
to Britain for a job in the last year. More than 182,000 came to work in a 
definite job, but those looking for work jumped 23,000 to 130,000 in the latest 
figures.
Graph 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-01T11:31:06/embed.html>
The proportion of EU citizens coming to work in Britain without a specific job 
offer has now risen to a record high of 43% (82,000), while 57% had a definite 
job. May has strongly indicated that a new post-Brexit immigration system could 
be based on restricting access for European jobseekers to the UK labour market.

The ONS said that in 2015 Romania had for the first time become the most 
common country of last residence, displacing India and making up 10% of all 
immigrants.

The figures show a sixth successive annual increase in the number of asylum 
seekers claiming refugee status in Britain, to 41,280. But despite the 
intensification of the Europeanrefugee crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/refugees>, the number of Syrians claiming 
asylum in the UK fell by 317 to 2,298. The largest numbers were Iranians and 
Iraqis. A further 4,162 Syrians were directly resettled under the government’s 
commitment to take 20,000 over the next four years.


The latest Home Office figures show that the backlog of EU citizens who have 
applied to secure their right to residence in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/30/eu-citizens-in-uk-home-office-residency-applications-right-to-remain-before-brexit-talks>
 jumped by more than 23,000 to 113,000 in the three months immediately after 
the Brexit vote. The figures for applications for permanent residence cards 
alone jumped 83% during the six months bracketing the referendum campaign.


Net migration from the EU is at historically high levels and now matches net 
migration from outside the bloc. The record 650,000 level of immigration in the 
year to June 2016 was made up of 284,000 EU citizens coming to live and work in 
Britain, 289,000 coming from outside Europe, and 77,000 Britons returning to 
live in the UK. The most common reason they came to Britain was to work.

Nicola White, the ONS’s head of international migration statistics, said that 
net migration remained at record levels, but was stable compared with recent 
years. “Immigration levels are now among the highest estimates recorded; the 
inflow of EU citizens is also at historically high levels and similar to the 
inflow of non-EU citizens.

“These long-term immigration figures run up to the end of June, so it is too 
early to say what effect, if any, the EU referendum has had on long-term 
international migration.”
Graph 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-01T13:09:47/embed.html>
The immigration minister, Robert Goodwill, responded to the figures by saying 
the British people had sent a very clear message that they wanted more control 
of immigration. He renewed the government’s commitment to getting net migration 
down to sustainable levels in the tens of thousands.

 “There is no consent for uncontrolled immigration, which puts pressure on 
schools, hospitals and public services. That is why reducing the number of 
migrants coming to the UK will be a key priority of our negotiations to leave 
the EU,” he said. “Further to this, we continue to reform non-EU immigration 
routes to ensure we attract the best and brightest, who benefit and contribute 
to this country. But there is more to do as we build an immigration system that 
delivers the control we need.”

But immigration lawyers Laura Devine Solicitors highlighted a refusal of 49% 
of entrepreneur visa requests in the last quarter, many from India, and argued 
that this questioned Britain’s “open for business” reputation.


Labour will not win a general election as Ukip-lite, says Diane Abbott
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/26/labour-will-not-win-a-general-election-as-ukip-lite-says-diane-abbott>
The shadow home secretary, Diane Abbott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/26/labour-will-not-win-a-general-election-as-ukip-lite-says-diane-abbott>
, said the May and the Tories seemed determined to repeat their mistakes over 
the net migration target. She said: “We now know that at the same time she was 
cutting the border force, she tried to force schools into objectionable schemes 
that would hurt children in a failed effort to meet that target. We should 
welcome overseas students and the contribution they make to our universities 
and wider society, and yet the Tories seem determined to discourage them.”

She said it was a scandal that the number of asylum applications had gone down 
from Syria despite the deepening crisis and said it was time to provide 
certainty to EU citizens about their future in Britain.

Phoebe Griffiths of the Institute of Public Policy research said the surge in 
grants for permanent residence – up by 40% following the referendum – showed 
that Brexit was clearly causing concern among EU nationals living in Britain.

“When individuals already in the UK take steps to safeguard their status, 
barriers should not be put in their way. Brexit has created great uncertainty. 
If the government does not wish to guarantee the rights of all EU nationals at 
this point in the negotiations, it should at the very least prioritise 
streamlining the process for residence applications,” she said.

Marc Stears, of the New Economics Foundation, said: “This isn’t bad news for 
the economy: to take one example, according to the Office for Budget 
Responsibility’s forecast, a possible reduced immigration as a consequence of 
ending free movement – Brexit – would translate into lower GDP and lower tax 
receipts, resulting in an increase of public sector debt by £16bn to 2020-21. 
The fact immigration hasn’t gone down means more money to spend on things like 
the NHS, pensions and welfare.”


 * This article was amended on 2 December 2016 to correct details about 
refused visa requests highlighted by Laura Devine Solicitors. 


 