
In 2014, in Govan, I experienced something uplifting and inspirational during 
those final, febrile days of theScottish independence referendum campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2014/dec/16/-sp-real-story-scottish-referendum-final-days-fight-for-independence>
. A group of working-class women, most of whom were struggling with a host of 
social challenges, were debating the constitutional future of their country 
with passion and eloquence and in an atmosphere of mutual respect. Like many 
other women during that wonderful campaign, they had gone from being passive 
outsiders to active participants.

There were some adverse reactions to this awakening, though, and some of them 
are still with us. On social media, professional female commentators, as well 
as women who simply sought to participate in online debates, were being subject 
to a sickening slew of violent intimidation. Much of this was grotesquely 
carnal and included threats of rape, sexual assault and plain violence. Vile 
claims about women’s sexual history appeared amid disparaging comments about 
their appearance and their intelligence. Male commentators, too, receive 
threats and a measure of unpleasantness, but most of it is from indolent 
lurkers who couldn’t fight sleep. None of it is as sinister and deliberately 
designed to degrade as the filth aimed at some of our female colleagues.

It’s too easy to say that this was a disturbing by-product of an intensely 
divisive campaign. Rather, it points to the fact that many men are still 
resentful and, yes, intimidated by strong and articulate women trenchantly 
expressing opinions which are wiser and better informed than theirs. More than 
two years after the independence referendum, it has been evident in the UK and 
Scottish elections and during the EU referendum campaign.

A clutch of strong and committed female journalists such as Angela Haggerty 
<http://www.heraldscotland.com/opinion/14695505.Angela_Haggerty__I_m_immune_to_the_viciousness_of_trolls__At_least__I_think_I_am____/>
,Cat Boyd 
<http://www.thenational.scot/news/14901609.The_National___s_columnist_Cat_Boyd_is_targeted_by_Roosh_V___s_rape_advocate_mob/>
 and the columnist and Nationalist MSPJoan McAlpine 
<http://www.dailyrecord.co.uk/news/politics/unionists-need-tough-trolls-its-8878858>
 have attracted some of the worst online abuse, but many ordinary female voters 
were also threatened merely for having an opinion. It’s become symptomatic of 
the way in which social media has come to dominate political engagement in this 
country.

Distressingly, there is a view that holds that this is simply confined to 
politics, and that female journalists and commentators are somehow expected to 
have developed extra layers of emotional and psychological robustness to deal 
with the threats. Even if that were true, it would be unacceptable. It’s not 
true, though, for evidently there are more than just a small number of men who 
think that this sort of conduct is essentially harmless. It imprisons young 
women in the belief that this is just something to be endured. Consequently, 
some will be dissuaded from making a contribution to public life and many 
others will simply prefer to keep their mouths shut.

Last year the Guardian reported comments by Dunja Mijatović 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2015/aug/28/online-abuse-of-female-journalists-is-also-a-threat-to-press-freedom>
, the media freedom representative for the Vienna-based Organisation for 
Security and Co-operation in Europe. She said that although male journalists 
were also subject to hate speech and online abuse, research suggested that 
females suffered “a disproportionate amount of gender-based threats and 
harassment on the internet”.

She cited the example of a female colleague whose phone number was shared on 
sex-dating websites, and her email and other accounts hacked. She also received 
death threats. I know of two female Scottish journalists who have also 
experienced this.

In the House of Commons on Thursday, the Edinburgh West MP Michelle Thomson 
described 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/08/mp-michelle-thomson-says-she-was-raped-aged-14>
 how she was raped at 14. Thomson, an engaging woman, recounted the details 
with a quiet dignity that reduced the speaker, John Bercow, to tears. She 
divulged this during a debate on violence against women. Going purely by the 
television footage, it looked like it was attended by fewer than 20 MPs, a mere 
handful of whom were men.

Thomson’s intervention came a day after the Scottish journalist Vonny Moyes 
confronted a male tormentor who shared nude pictures of her. She named the man 
on Twitter, declaring: “What’s gone wrong here is an abuse of trust and 
something ending up in the wrong hands, I refuse to be sex-shamed by you or 
anyone else.”

I am acutely aware that when a man approaches a subject like this, he must 
tread warily

There were echoes of Michelle Thomson’s speech at Westminster when she said: 
“I’m not scared; I’m not a victim: I’m a survivor.” It was uncomfortable 
watching Thomson deliver her brave address, and not simply because I am a man. 
I began to realise, though, that this was the most appropriate place of all in 
which to share this intimate and shocking memory. By declaring it in the 
highest chamber in the land, she was ensuring its integrity, free from 
distortion or exaggeration. It also guaranteed widespread coverage. Her courage 
and that of Vonny Moyes will empower women and diminish the men who harbour 
warped views about them.

I am acutely aware that when a man approaches a subject like this, he must 
tread warily. Many of us lack the words and the sensitivity. No matter how 
sincere you think you are, it can be as dangerous as trying to cross a busy 
road howling with the drink. Every act of male sexual violence against women 
diminishes men, and not just because of the act.

Too often, our responses are inadequate. I felt shamed by Michelle Thomson’s 
courage because, if she hadn’t spoken up on Thursday, I wouldn’t have known 
that the debate had happened, save for a few cursory tweets by female 
colleagues.

Once more, this Christmas, I will light a candle for my daughters and for the 
daughters of fathers everywhere. And I’ll tell them that rape or sexual assault 
can never be the victim’s fault, and that there is never a point beyond which a 
woman can’t say no.

 * This article was amended on 16 December 2016. Michelle Thomson has 
currently withdrawn from the SNP whip while allegations of mortgage fraud, 
which she denies, are investigated.
 