
Donald Trump’s inauguration will be dominated by protests, with dozens of 
demonstrations planned in DC and across the country.

Women's March on Washington set to be one of America's biggest protests
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/14/womens-march-on-washington-protest-size-donald-trump>
Although the Women’s March on Washington has dominated the headlines, there 
are plenty of other protests planned by progressives preparing for the Trump 
administration – from queer dance parties at Mike Pence’s house to a legal 
conference with 1,000 lawyers expected.

Here’s your guide to all the inauguration protests.

#Trump420: 20 January

Marijuana advocates in Washington DC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/washington-dc> will take Michelle Obama’s 
“when they go low, we go high” slogan literally, handing out 4,200 free joints 
on the morning of the inauguration.

“It is a historic distribution of marijuana in the nation’s capital,” said 
Adam Eidinger, 43, co-founder of DCMJ, an activist group that helped lead the 
2014 legalization of weed for recreational use in DC.

On the west side of Dupont Circle, DCMJ volunteers will hand out thousands of 
legal joints <https://www.facebook.com/events/1890851974476868/> – expect two 
per person, says Eidinger – from 8am.

Then, four minutes and 20 seconds into the Trump presidency, people will be 
encouraged to light them up.

“This whole process has been about defending the initiative to allow DC to 
have legal marijuana,” said Eidinger, who says Trump’s attorney general 
nominee, Jeff Sessions, is the main focus of his protest.


The weed has been grown locally in DC, with Eidinger donating a pound of his 
own. Volunteers will come to his home to help roll the joints.


The joints will be a combination of two strands: DC Diesel, which is 
sativa-dominant (one of two species of cannabis plants) and tastes of 
grapefruit and blue cheese, and Rollex, which won the 2013 Cannabis Cup and has 
highest THC of any plant Eidinger has tested.

THC is short for tetrahydrocannabinol, the strongest psychoactive chemical in 
cannabis. Eidinger runs Capitol Hemp, a smoking accessory shop that tests THC 
levels in homegrown plants and also offers a “bong butler” service to clean 
bongs.

“THC is what is going to make you feel better about Trump being president, if 
you didn’t vote for him, because that’s what will make you feel euphoric,” said 
Eidinger.

DisruptJ20: 14-20 January

A week of scheduled demonstrations, from an LGBT dance party outside Mike 
Pence’s home in Chevy Chase to a protest of thealt-right’s Deploraball 
<http://deploraball.com/>, will make up DisruptJ20.

DisruptJ20 calls itself the “DC counter-inaugural welcoming committee”, and 
promises a very leftwing week of resistance.

Inauguration protests were planned regardless of who won the election but 
Trump’s victory saw events and expected attendances increase, said Lacy 
MacAuley, an organizer for DisruptJ20.

“It took on a whole new meaning and a whole new significance, because I think 
we are not alone in being concerned about the direction of our country,” said 
MacAuley, 38.

The week of events leads up to inauguration day, when a “Festival of 
Resistance” march will walk from Columbus Circle to McPherson Square, where 
they will meet protesters from the nearbyOccupy Inauguration march 
<https://www.facebook.com/events/332712360442504/> and hold a rally.

#InaugurateTheResistance

Just a few blocks away, the Answer (“Act now to stop war and end racism”) 
coalition will host a mass protest on inauguration day at Freedom Plaza, on the 
corner of 14th Street and Pennsylvania Avenue.

InaugurateTheResistance is calling for a political revolution, fighting 
against war, militarism, racism, anti-immigrant rhetoric and for workers’ 
rights.

The Facebook invite <https://www.facebook.com/events/1068785513242447/> notes 
that many in the Answer coalition hoped Bernie Sanders would lead that 
revolution, only for his “campaign [to be] largely suppressed”. More than 
11,000 people marked themselves on Facebook as attending.

Rise Above Conference: 21-22 January

Lawyers concerned about how Trump’s policies might violate the constitution 
are demonstrating in the most lawyerly way possible: by holding a conference in 
DC over inauguration weekend.

“We are a very organized and methodical bunch. What else would you expect?” 
said Traci Feit Love, founder of Lawyers for Good Government, an organization 
that started as a Facebook group the day after the election.

Feit Love initially hoped for 200 lawyers to join the group, mostly members of 
her 2014 Harvard Law class. Within 72 hours, 60,000 people had joined. Now it’s 
about 130,000, with a survey showing around 80% are practicing lawyers and the 
rest paralegals, legal secretaries and activists.

The Rise Above conference, <http://www.riseaboveconference.org/> co-hosted 
with RISE When We Fall, will host speakers on voter suppression and the 
electoral map, panels on protecting civil rights and examining supreme court 
justice nominations and a performance by Ani Di Franco.

It’s a chance for lawyers to build relationships and infrastructure in advance 
of likely legal challenges to Trump’s proposed policies such as a Muslim 
registry, deportations and possible freedom of the press restrictions, said 
Feit Love, a 39-year-old single mother from Atlanta, Georgia.

“A lot of the policies and proposals [he is] putting out there seem to be 
contrary to basic values and principles that the American government and 
experiment, so to speak, is based on,” she said.

We Are Here To Stay: 14 January 

The We Are Here To Stay rally 
<https://wearecasa.org/we-are-here-to-stay-rally-dc/> will take place this 
Saturday in DC, deliberately held while Barack Obama is still the president.

“We don’t know what’s going to happen after the inauguration,” Natalia 
Aristizabal ofMake the Road New York <http://www.maketheroadny.org/>, one of 
the groups behind the rally,told the New York Times 
<https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/11/nyregion/immigrants-head-to-washington-to-rally-while-obama-is-still-there.html?_r=0>
.

The DC rally, organized by a collection of pro-immigrant nonprofits, will take 
place at the Metropolitan AME church from 11am and includes immigrant and 
refugee speakers. It’s part ofa national day of action in support of immigrants 
and refugees <http://iamerica.org/events>, with rallies held across the country.


In Los Angeles, two pro-immigrant rallies will take place on inauguration day 
<http://www.laweekly.com/news/how-to-protest-trump-and-support-immigrants-on-inauguration-day-7791523>
. Their main focus is to call on Trump not to undo the Deferred Action for 
Childhood Arrivals, or Daca, the Obama executive order that protects 
undocumented immigrants who arrived in the US before their 16th birthday.

Four Women for All Women: 18-21 January

Last year, Alison Mariella Désir’s father died. Désir, 31, had assumed she’d 
have more time with him.

“This election cycle, I told myself I would do anything to get Hillary Clinton 
elected into office,” said Désir, an ultra-marathoner. “I did some things here 
and there. But I told myself, I’ll do more when she’s president. I assumed I 
had more time. Then, on 8 November, the unexpected happened and, once again, 
the time I thought I had was just gone.”


Now she’s running from Harlem, New York, to Washington DC with a group of 
women to raise money for Planned Parenthood. Their goal was $44,000 –they’ve 
already hit $56,000 <https://www.gofundme.com/4Women4AllWomen>.

The 252-mile journey is the equivalent of nine marathons. Initially just four 
women planned to run the distance, but now dozens of women are planning to join 
them for four-mile stints in a relay thatanyone interested can sign up to join 
<https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1e40TaPA9Uapj_gxXRJJQw6Pln8IWKlwzwH3_U1QzJq0/edit#gid=0>
.

The run kicks off at 6pm on Wednesday in Harlem and the women will arrive in 
Washington on Saturday morning, in time to join the Women’s March.

Women’s March on Washington: 21 January

The biggest protest of the inauguration will take place on the Saturday, with 
at least 200,000 people expected to attend the Women’s March on Washington.

Women’s march on Washington? I’d rather not be part of history, thanks | Emma 
Brockes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/15/women-march-washington-part-of-history>
While Trump is struggling to get any A-list stars to perform at his 
inauguration, the Women’s March has Hollywood heft thanks to singers Cher, Katy 
Perry and Zendaya, comedians Amy Schumer and Cristela Alonzo, TV host Padma 
Lakshmi, artist Kara Walker, and actresses Scarlett Johansson, Hari Nef, 
Amandla Stenberg, Frances McDormand, Uzo Aduba, America Ferrera and Julianne 
Moore.

Organizers say 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/27/womens-march-on-washington-dc-guide>
 they are not targeting Trump specifically but rather encouraging support on a 
range of social justice issues that affect women, from reproductive health to 
immigration, the environment, LGBTQ rights and stopping racism.

“We must create a society in which women – in particular black women, native 
women, poor women, immigrant women, Muslim women, and queer and trans women – 
are free and able to care for and nurture their families, however they are 
formed, in safe and healthy environments free from structural impediments,” 
read the march’s unity principles, released on Thursday.

Official partners of the march include the Natural Resources Defense Council, 
Planned Parenthood and the American Civil Liberties Union. Gloria Steinem and 
Harry Belafonteare serving as honorary co-chairs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/27/womens-march-on-washington-dc-guide>
.

The protest kicks off at 10am at the corner of Independence Avenue and Third 
Street SW, although the final route has yet to be announced. More than 280 
independently organized marches will be held in solidarity in all 50 states.

A regularly updated map on the march website 
<https://www.womensmarch.com/sisters> allows people to search by zipcode for 
their nearest event. TV host and comedian Chelsea Handler will host the march 
in Park City, Utah, which occurs during the Sundance Film Festival.

More than 20 countries will host solidarity marches, with nations including 
Australia <https://www.womensmarch.com/sisters>, Canada, Portugal and Mexico 
and the UK holding events.


Most trains and buses from major cities to DC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/27/womens-march-on-washington-dc-guide>
 have been booked out.MarchMatch <http://marchmatch.org/> is a forum for people 
offering accommodation or transport and those in need of assistance.The 
Washington Post reports that 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/local/wp/2017/01/12/200-buses-have-applied-for-city-parking-on-inauguration-day-1200-have-applied-for-the-womens-march/?postshare=6151484256094585&tid=ss_tw&utm_term=.6d688339a66b>
 1,200 buses have applied for parking permits in DC for the day of the march, 
compared with just 200 on inauguration day itself.

“All of the eastern seaboard is experiencing huge shortages of available 
charter buses,” readsthe transportation page for the New York chapter of the 
Women’s March <https://www.womensmarchnyc.com/bus/>, noting that they currently 
have no alternative vehicle or travel options available.

In preparation, the Pussyhat Project <https://www.pussyhatproject.com> is 
calling on people to knit pink woolen hats with little ears –the pattern is 
available free on its website <https://www.pussyhatproject.com/>. The “pussy 
power” beanies are part of reclaiming the word “pussy” – often used as a 
derogatory term for female genitalia, not least by Trump himself – and 
highlighting discrimination, say organizers.

“In order to get fair treatment, the answer is not to take away our pussies, 
the answer is not to deny our femaleness and femininity, the answer is to 
demand fair treatment,”reads the Pussy Project mission 
<https://drive.google.com/file/d/0BwBjtQGbV7gEZU1TdUd2b1JIZGM/view> statement.
 