
“It’s what people want to hear,” says Nicky MacCrimmon of Nicola Sturgeon’s 
pledge to delegates on the first morning of Scottish National party conference 
to publish a draft bill next weekcalling for a second Scottish independence 
referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/13/nicola-sturgeon-challenges-may-with-second-referendum-bill-scottish-independence-snp-conference>
.

“They want to know it’s not off the agenda. I don’t think they really thought 
it was off the agenda, but the party needs to make these public pronouncements. 
Then again, a consultation about the first draft of a bill to hold a vote means 
that a referendum is still a long way down the road.”

MacCrimmon, from Perthshire, is one of the party’s burgeoning membership who 
joined in the aftermath of the last independence referendum. He is also the 
land reform activist behind the SNP leadership’s only defeat of last autumn’s 
conference. MacCrimmon is no seasoned loyalist. But neither is he pawing the 
dust in anticipation of a second referendum, as his cohort are often 
characterised.

“Of course there are people who want a referendum to happen now,” agrees 
Margaret Young, of SNP Ayrshire branch, “and for very good reasons, which are 
not to do with being old or new members but because the country is in a 
desperate state with Brexit and austerity.”

The Guardian view on the SNP conference: dominant amid the dilemmas | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/12/the-guardian-view-on-the-snp-conference-dominant-amid-the-dilemmas>
Young, a committee member for campaign group Women for Independence, describes 
Sturgeon’s announcement as “an important moment to settle people, to help them 
understand that there are things happening, and to know when they are 
happening”.

“I’ve been in the SNP since 1983, and independence has always been such a 
long-term thing for me, perhaps it’s easier for me to understand why we have to 
wait,” she adds, quoting Sturgeon’s own observation from her welcome address 
that “there’s not a day that passes without someone advising me to hurry up 
with a referendum. And not a day that passes without someone advising me to 
slow down”.

A veteran of more modest SNP gatherings, Young admits that the scale of the 
Glasgow event will take some getting used to. The party has commandeered the 
city centre’s premium conference centre as well as the 3,500-capacity Clyde 
Auditorium and the five-star hotel next door for the overflow.


For a membership once known for its love of quirky tartan outfits, the 
sartorial giddiness has been kept to a minimum, and perhaps this is mirrored 
too in the lack of referendum-related zealotry. The atmosphere is sober and 
serious-minded, with first-time speakers – of whom there are many – encouraged 
to the stage by an attentive and engaged audience who continue to fill the 
auditorium throughout the day.


There is also the Heathrow-sponsored private lounge bar, located in a premium 
site above the main conference auditorium, which is particularly notable just 
days after the SNP governmentannounced its support for a third runway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/10/heathrow-third-runway-expansion-scottish-government>
 and so far appears to have become the preferred venue for MPs and MSPs to meet 
and greet.

Across the river, at IdeaSpace, the free alternative fringe festival organised 
by veterans of the yes movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/13/snp-old-politics-ideaspace-independence-vote>
 following complaints that the increasingly corporate character of the main 
conference, the focus remains on granular policy debate about alternative 
currencies in the event of independence.


The referendum bill was meat for the party, said organiser Robin McAlpine, 
“but I’m not sure how many calories it had in it”.

“It feels too much like ‘something has to be done so let’s do something’,” he 
adds. “They keep setting things up, like the listening exercise [which Sturgeon 
announced last month, asking SNP members to survey no voters to discover their 
concerns about independence].”

“The SNP are aware of the potential damage of putting this on the back burner 
again, but the problem is that there’s still no agreement on strategy, other 
than looking like you’re doing things that don’t actually commit you to doing 
anything.”
 