
India’s highest court has banned political candidates from seeking election on 
the basis of religion, caste or language, in a landmark ruling that has unclear 
but potentially far-reaching consequences for the way Indian politics is 
practised.

In a split decision, the supreme court ruled on Monday that India’s 
constitution allowed for the free practice of faith but could “forbid 
interference of religions and religious beliefs with secular activity such as 
elections”.

An election won by soliciting votes along the lines of identity politics could 
be considered corrupt practice and the result set aside, the court said.

Millions march in a sea of saffron - the silent rage of India’s ignored farmer 
caste
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/16/farmers-march-in-silence-india-maharashtra-maratha-dalit>
The dissenting judgment accused the majority justices of overreach and 
“judicial redrafting of the law”.

The ruling casts uncertainty over five upcoming elections in states where 
religion and caste have traditionally helped drive voters to the polls. 
However, some experts expressed scepticism about whether it could be enforced.

“If this judgment is taken literally, then pretty much every single party in 
India <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> could be disqualified,” said 
Ashok Malik, a fellow at the Delhi-based Observer Research Foundation.

Indian voters, especially outside big cities, have historically been organised 
<http://ashutoshvarshney.net/wp-content/files_mf/indiasidentitypoliticsthenandnow11.pdf>
 into “vote-banks” along religious, caste and language blocs, divisions the 
country’s founders considered an essential component of managing power in such 
an intricately diverse nation.

India’s caste system is alive and kicking – and maiming and killing | Mari 
Marcel Thekaekara
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/15/india-caste-system-70-anniversary-independence-day-untouchables>
India’s prime minister, Narendra Modi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/narendra-modi>, belongs to a party that is 
explicitly Hindu in character, while other parties exist to further the 
interests of, among others, India’s Muslims population as well as members of 
socially disempowered Dalit caste.

Malik said appeals to religion or caste were too deeply ingrained in Indian 
politics to be eradicated by a court order

“Identity is intrinsic to human society and there is political mobilisation 
all over the world that takes place along these lines,” he said.

“You can’t ban identity … A sweeping ban on the use of identity for political 
mobilisation is going to be unimplementable.”

Malik predicted the decision might initially lead to parties bringing 
complaints and legal cases against another. But they would soon realise they 
were “locked into mutually assured destruction”, he said. “Then everyone will 
just ignore it.”

PV Dinesh, a supreme court advocate, said the slow pace of India’s judicial 
system might also complicate the way the law was implemented.

“If an election takes places today, and you’re questioning whether it involved 
corrupt practice, that whole court process will more than than six or seven 
years,” he said.

“But elected terms, at the federal and municipal levels, are themselves only 
five years long.”

But he foresaw that politicians would find themselves caught in the net of the 
new guidelines. “If the general impression of the court is that they are 
soliciting votes in the name of religion, definitely that will be enforceable,” 
he said.

Monday’s decision was broadly welcomed by political leaders but members of 
some sectarian parties expressed reservations.

“It is a welcome move but the thing is that, as a party, if I am representing 
a community, I will ask for votes,” said Imtiaz Jaleel, a member of the All 
India Majlis-e-Ittehadul Muslimeen, a party representing Muslim Indians.

“So, if I say development in Muslims areas, and girls need to get education, 
will it tantamount to breach of law? Will [saying] Muslims should be given 
reservation or Marathas asking for reservation be a breach?”

Reservations, or affirmative-action quotas, are enshrined in India’s 
constitution <http://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-34082770> for people 
from less socially powerful caste groups, but havebeen increasingly challenged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/16/farmers-march-in-silence-india-maharashtra-maratha-dalit?CMP=share_btn_tw>
 by traditionally powerful segments of the community who argue they no longer 
reflect the distribution of power and wealth in India.
 