
For the past month, while the attention of the world has been fixed on every 
dramatic twist in the US presidential election, the renewal of armed conflict 
between India and Pakistan has barely touched the headlines. In the past few 
weeks, the two nuclear states have, between them, killed two dozen civilians 
and injured scores of others in exchanges of artillery fire across the disputed 
border – known as the “line of control” – that divides Kashmir into parts 
controlled by India andPakistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan>.

The latest flare-up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/29/pakistani-soldiers-killed-surgical-strikes-kashmir-india>
 in the long-running war of attrition between the two countries comes on the 
heels of a bloody summer of protest and repression in Kashmir that has now been 
erased from memory by the banging of war drums in Delhi and Islamabad. Since 
July, when the killing of a young militant leadersparked a furious civilian 
uprising 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/11/kashmir-death-toll-23-protests-shooting-burhan-wani-independence-violence>
 across the Kashmir valley, the Indian state has responded with singular 
ruthlessness, killing more than 90 people. Most shocking of all has been the 
breaking up of demonstrations with “non-lethal” pellet ammunition, which has 
blinded hundreds of Kashmiri civilians.

In four months, 17,000 adults and children have been injured, nearly five 
thousand have been arrested, and an entire population spent the summer under 
the longest curfew in the history of curfews inKashmir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/kashmir>.

All this has been quickly forgotten in the past two months. On 18 September, a 
small group of jihadi fighters, widely believed to have come from Pakistan, 
staged a commando raid on an Indian army camp near the northern Kashmir town of 
Uri, killing 19 Indian soldiers – the deadliest attack on Indian security 
forces in Kashmir in two decades. Indian politicians quickly blamed Pakistan, 
which the country’s home minister described as a “terrorist state”, while 
Pakistani leaders made the implausible claim thatIndia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> had staged the attack itself to 
distract from the protests in Kashmir.

The Indian prime minister, Narendra Modi, who came into office promising to 
take a harder line with Pakistan, announced that “those behind this despicable 
attack will not go unpunished”. At the end of September, India retaliated with 
what it called a “surgical strike” against alleged militant camps in 
Pakistan-controlled territory, which, according to an army statement, “caused 
significant damage to terrorists”. Pakistan denied the attack ever took place – 
claiming that there had been nothing more than the usual exchange of fire 
across the border. Meanwhile, an ugly war of words continued to escalate in TV 
news studios, some of which were refurbished as pop-up war rooms.

Since then, the relationship between the two countries, which is at the best 
of times characterised by varying degrees of hate – depending upon the 
political temperature in Kashmir – has soured to the point where both are now 
suddenly finding spies in each others’ diplomatic missions. A tit-for-tat 
nearly every day, on TV, on social media, in ambassadorial corps – even in the 
realm of culture, where India has effectively banned Pakistani actors from 
working in Bollywood, and Pakistan has banned the screening of Indian films in 
cinemas. According to recent reports, civilians caught in the crossfire have 
been evacuated, hundreds of schools shut, and local residents pressed into 
service to ferry supplies to troops stationed high in the Himalayas. As always, 
the victims of the artillery duels have been the civilians living on either 
side of a border that did not exist until the middle of the 20th century.

In the war of words that has followed the bloodshed in Uri, the brutal 
oppression of protest in Kashmir has been largely ignored. Indeed, the Indian 
state, aided by a near-militaristic TV news media, has used the Uri attack and 
its aftermath to cover up a surge of killings, maimings and blindings in one of 
the longest-running conflicts in the world. This is the story of the bloody 
summer that Kashmiris have endured – and of why they will not forget it.

On 8 July, a militant rebel leader, Burhan Wani, was shot dead by Indian armed 
forces and police in a remote Kashmir village. The killing sparked a series of 
spontaneousdemonstrations and protests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/10/kashmir-death-toll-rises-as-protesters-defy-curfew>
, which, in a matter of days, turned into a reinvigorated popular revolt 
against India’s dominion over this disputed state.

Wani’s path to militancy began in another one of Kashmir’s bloody summers – 
back in 2010, when Indian security forces killed 120 protesters. Wani, who was 
then 15 years old, is said to have joined a small group of homegrown militants 
after he and his brother were humiliated and abused by Indian soldiers. Over 
the next few years, he became Kashmir’s most famous militant commander, and 
acquired something of a cult following among young Kashmiris, who saw him as a 
symbol of resistance against Indian occupation. Wani was a new breed of 
militant: unlike the first generation of Kashmir separatist fighters in the 
early 1990s, he did not cross over into Pakistan; he didn’t use a nom de 
guerre, and he amassed a huge following on social media, where he issued brazen 
challenges to the Indian state. It was therefore no surprise that thousands 
attended Wani’s funeral in his hometown of Tral – or that those who could not 
get there organised their own funeral services across the Kashmir valley.

As Kashmiris took to the streets, police and paramilitaries were deployed in 
large numbers across the region. Thousands of young protesters charged at the 
armed forces with stones and slogans demanding freedom. Indian forces responded 
with lethal effect, firing bullets, CS gas, and metal pellets into the crowds. 
In less than four days, nearly 50 people were killed and thousands injured. 
More people took to the streets to protest against these killings, and the 
Indian forces and Kashmiri police killed and injured more of them. A cycle of 
protests connected to the funerals of those protesters were, in turn, fired 
upon, resulting in yet more killings and blindings. By the end of July, India 
was faced with a full-scale popular revolt in Kashmir.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Findia-crackdown-in-kashmir-is-this-worlds-first-mass-blinding%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77f92c07beee9be688ba8e66092e7e795cfb8a59%2F0_0_1536_2560%2F1536.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=India%E2%80%99s%20crackdown%20in%20Kashmir%3A%20is%20this%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20first%20mass%20blinding%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Findia-crackdown-in-kashmir-is-this-worlds-first-mass-blinding%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=India%E2%80%99s%20crackdown%20in%20Kashmir%3A%20is%20this%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20first%20mass%20blinding%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Findia-crackdown-in-kashmir-is-this-worlds-first-mass-blinding%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77f92c07beee9be688ba8e66092e7e795cfb8a59%2F0_0_1536_2560%2F1536.jpg>
 An Indian policeman aims a pellet gun towards Kashmiri protesters in Srinagar 
in July. Composite: Syed Shahriyar/Syed Shahriyar/NurPhoto via Getty Images 
The most recent figures put the number of dead at 94, including a young 
Kashmiri academic who wasbattered to death 
<https://www.yahoo.com/news/soldiers-raid-village-indian-kashmir-one-dead-082540745.html>
 by Indian soldiers, and an11-year-old boy 
<http://indianexpress.com/article/india/india-news-india/protests-in-kashmir-valley-after-body-of-11-year-old-found-with-pellets-3036803/>
, whose body, riddled with hundreds of pellets, was found on the outskirts of 
Srinagar, the joint capital of Kashmir, in mid-September. Shockingly, more than 
500 people, most of them young, were shot in the face with the pump-action 
“pellet guns” that the Indian forces routinely use to suppress protests. These 
weapons discharge hundreds of small metal pellets, or birdshot, capable of 
piercing the eye.

As the uprising continued, the armed forces, by their own admission, fired 
nearly 4,000 cartridges at stone-throwing demonstrators, crowds protesting 
against police brutality, and even onlookers. This means that they sent, by one 
recent estimate, 1.3m metal balls hurtling towards public gatherings 
predominantly made up of young unarmed people.

Children as young as four and five now have multiple pellets in their retinas, 
blinding them partially, or fully, for life. At the start of September, doctors 
at Kashmir’s main hospital reported that on average, one person had their eyes 
ruptured by pellets every other hour since 9 July. “It means12 eye surgeries 
per day 
<http://www.greaterkashmir.com/news/front-page/every-2nd-hour-lethal-pellets-rupture-an-eye-in-kashmir/227294.html>
,” one doctor told a local newspaper. “It is shocking.”

On 12 July, the fourth day of the protests, the state government, which is run 
by a controversial coalition between Modi’s Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata 
Party (BJP) and a local ally, the People’s Democratic Party (PDP), finally 
issued its first official statement on the use of the so-called “non-lethal” 
pellet guns. A spokesperson for the government, representing the PDP, described 
its position to the media: “We disapprove of it … But we will have to persist 
with this necessary evil till we find a non-lethal alternative.”

There is no recorded instance of a modern democracy systematically and 
willfully shooting at people to blind them

At first, the statement appeared as a typical soundbite, the sort of thing 
that officials must compose and recite with studied ambiguity for the press – 
the “government version”, as its known. But I was struck by its cavalier 
defence of state violence and brutalisation. It was obvious that this was not 
the spokesman’s personal view; it was a clear articulation of the intent of the 
Indian state in Kashmir:we have no choice but to shoot people in the eyes.

This was an unprecedented expression of state violence. There is no other 
recorded instance of a modern democracy systematically and wilfully shooting at 
people to blind them. At the end of August, according to data obtained by one 
of India’s national newspapers, nearly 6,000 civilians had been injured, and at 
least 972 of them had suffered injuries to their eyes.

According to official records at SMHS, the main hospital in Srinagar, 570 
people sought treatment after their eyeballs were ruptured by metal pellets. 
Ophthalmologists at the hospital performed more surgeries in three days – from 
10 to 12 July – than they had in the past three years. Many of the wounded were 
protesters, but not all. Not one of them deserved to be robbed of their sight.

By 14 August, as India prepared to celebrate its Independence Day, Kashmir was 
under a near total blackout. I briefly lost touch with my parents, as the state 
cut off all telephones and the internet. I was reminded, once again, of the 
lines of the late Kashmiri-American poet Agha Shahid Ali, which still echo 20 
years after he wrote them: “The city from where no news can come / is now so 
visible in its curfewed night / that the worst is precise.” Just before the 
shutdown, I had talked to my youngest sister over WhatsApp – she was a little 
girl in the 90s, when Kashmir witnessed the first rebellion against Indian 
rule. “I’d never imagined my [three-year-old] child would see everything that I 
saw as a child,” she told me.

Rebellion against India’s rule over Kashmir is neither new nor surprising – 
and the brutality of the state’s response is equally familiar. In the 1990s, 
India came down hard on a widespread uprising in the Kashmir valley – killing, 
torturing, disappearing, and imprisoning thousands. Some estimates put the 
number of people killed since 1989 at 70,000. Some 8,000 non-combatants are 
thought to have been disappeared, and 6,000 are believed to have been buried in 
mass graves. Human rights reports have identified thousands of cases of 
torture, including shocking techniques such as “simulated drowning, striping 
flesh with razor blades and piping petrol into anuses”. According toa 2012 
report in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jul/09/mass-graves-of-kashmir>, 
government documents revealed that one group of security agents had “lopped off 
the limbs of suspects and fed prisoners with their own flesh”. 

In southern Kashmir, four girls, aged between 13 and 18, were shot in their 
faces as recently as last week

Years later, very little has changed in the Indian state’s response to the 
demand for self-determination from the people of Kashmir. In a matter of four 
to five weeks this summer, Indian troops, with a clear mandate to be unsparing, 
wounded over 10,000 people. One of the youngest – five-year old Zohra – was 
admitted to a hospital in Srinagar withlacerations to her abdomen and legs 
<http://indianexpress.com/article/india/india-news-india/kashmir-violence-what-are-pellet-guns-and-why-are-they-so-lethal-2913917/>
. Fourteen-year-old Insha was in the family kitchen when aswarm of pellets 
pierced her face 
<http://thewire.in/51740/kashmir-young-paying-governments-lack-vision/>. She 
has lost vision in both eyes. In southern Kashmir, four girls, aged between 13 
and 18, were shot in their faces last week. The prognosis for the youngest of 
these,13-year-old Ifra Jan 
<http://www.catchnews.com/india-news/pellets-continue-to-blind-kashmiri-kids-but-it-has-stopped-making-news-1478345066.html>
, “is not good”, a doctor said. It is doubtful that these little girls posed a 
threat to the military force – estimated at 700,000 soldiers and police – 
stationed in Kashmir.

As the showers of metal pellets were unleashed upon protesters, bystanders and 
homebound schoolchildren,hospitals in Kashmir 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/25/opinion/kashmir-and-the-inheritance-of-loss.html?_r=0>
 began to resemble scenes from the great wars of the 20th century. Rows of beds 
with blindfolded boys and girls on them, parents waiting anxiously, doctors and 
paramedics in attendance around the clock. On occasion, police and spies also 
infiltrated the wards to compile profiles of the injured, in order to place 
them under surveillance after their release. The wounded were brought in by the 
dozen, like birds in the hunting season.

All of this was incomprehensible, even to longtime observers of violence in 
Kashmir. One of the largest military forces on the planet could not be waging a 
war against seeing. Perhaps a few aberrations, a crowd-control tactic gone 
woefully wrong – one hoped so, but the numbers kept piling up, eye after 
mutilated eye popping up on the screens of phones and computers, as journalists 
began to publish their reports.

As none of the powerful men who run Kashmir from Delhi expressed qualms about 
the blinding of children, it became clear that in its hubris the Indian state 
had decided that snatching vision from a few hundred young people was a fair 
price to pay for keeping Kashmir in check. Perhaps itself blinded by a strain 
of arrogance peculiar to occupying powers, it continued to pummel a subject 
population into submission.

The phrase Raqs-e-Bismil, used in mystic Persian poetry to denote the passion 
of the devoted, translates as the “dance of the wounded”. In the slaughterhouse 
of the Kashmir valley, even the grievously injured – with pellet-scarred eyes 
or broken limbs – have remained defiant. “We have even got some patients whose 
guts are perforated and they are asking when they can go back and join the 
protests,”one doctor reported 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/features/2016/08/kashmir-story-defiance-grief-160821113602572.html>
.

Two-and-a-half decades of rebellion in Kashmir have hardened the indifference 
of India’s political and intellectual classes to the human cost of the 
country’s repressive tactics in the valley. Amid rising nationalist fervour, 
any sense of the basic rights of a suffering population has been eroded or 
vanished entirely. The hostility now appears to be total, unbridgeable, and for 
those on the receiving end, unbearable. Powerful TV studios urge the state to 
be more aggressively macho, while activelysuppressing or distorting news 
<http://www.asianage.com/india/scribe-quits-tv-channel-over-bias-539> from 
Kashmir. One prominent newspaper ran an online poll about the continued use of 
the pellets that had wounded and blinded so many Kashmiris – a clear majority 
voted in support. Eminent columnists speak calmly of the need for “harsh love” 
toward civilian protesters to rationalise the state’s ruthless response. And 
the Twitter account for a government initiative, Digital India,posted a poem 
<http://indianexpress.com/article/india/india-news-india/digital-india-twitter-handle-poem-to-kill-kashmiri-by-indian-army-deleted-shankar-pradad-3021298/>
 calling for the army to murder Kashmiris until they surrender.

As images from Kashmir began to circulate on the internet – despite frequent 
attempts to block communications, including at least one midnight raid on the 
offices of a local newspaper, and a blanket ban on one English daily, the 
Kashmir Reader – pictures of the wounded emerged by the dozen, many of them 
looking as though they had ruptured fruits where their eyes should have been. 
On the second day of the protests, more than 50 people were admitted to the 
main hospital in Srinagar. Medics and parents were desperate to save vision in 
at least one eye for those who had been shot, attempting to extract the jagged 
and irregular pellets. “This only happens ina war-like situation 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-india-36822567>,” a surgeon sent from 
Delhi later said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Findia-crackdown-in-kashmir-is-this-worlds-first-mass-blinding%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ab063d714870483d86b81e29ce26509b6334778%2F0_256_3900_2341%2F3900.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=India%E2%80%99s%20crackdown%20in%20Kashmir%3A%20is%20this%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20first%20mass%20blinding%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Findia-crackdown-in-kashmir-is-this-worlds-first-mass-blinding%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=India%E2%80%99s%20crackdown%20in%20Kashmir%3A%20is%20this%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20first%20mass%20blinding%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Findia-crackdown-in-kashmir-is-this-worlds-first-mass-blinding%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ab063d714870483d86b81e29ce26509b6334778%2F0_256_3900_2341%2F3900.jpg>
 A Kashmiri protester who was shot by Indian security forces in Srinagar, in 
July 2016. Photograph: Tauseef Mustafa/AFP/Getty Images 
The protocol for the use of these crowd control weapons is to aim at the legs 
to disperse demonstrators. But it seems that the paramilitaries and the police 
have been deliberately firing into faces. Some may only have minor wounds, some 
will suffer limited loss of vision, some will lose one eye, some both, and some 
will be impaired for life, but the pitiless assault on protesting adolescents 
forces us to ask one question: is the Indian state happy to blind a generation?

It is inconceivable that policy mandarins in Delhi or their advisers in 
Kashmir could be unaware of the destructive power of “non-lethal weapons”. 
Earlier this year, the International Network of Civil Liberties Organisations 
and Physicians for Human Rights published a report titled “Lethal in Disguise 
<http://www.iccl.ie/international-network-of-civil-liberties-organizations-launch-report-on-crowd-control-weapons.html>
”. “Pellet rounds”, it stated, “cause an indiscriminate spray of ammunition 
that spreads widely and cannot be aimed ...” They, therefore, “are not only 
likely to be lethal at close range, but are likely to be inaccurate and 
indiscriminate at longer ranges, even those recommended by manufacturers for 
safety”.

Many countries have banned police from using ammunition meant for hunting 
animals. The multidirectional spray of pellets was designed to catch prey in 
flight. But many countries have continued to use them as a means of force to 
control civilian demonstrators.

In Israel, security forces often deploy lethal and “non-lethal” ammunition 
against Palestinian protesters, and crowd-control weapons have blinded at least 
five young Palestinians in the last two years. The use of rubber bullets by 
police wasbanned in the Spanish region of Catalonia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2014/apr/30/rubber-bullets-banned-catalonia-spain-video>
 in 2014, after at least seven people were blinded by them on the streets of 
Barcelona.

In 2011, months after the uprising in Tahrir Square that toppled an Egyptian 
dictator, a young police lieutenant, Mohamed el-Shenawy, became infamous for 
firing pellets into the eyes of protesters against Egypt’s military government. 
His exemplary skill at blinding civilians earned him the nickname the “Eye 
Sniper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/shortcuts/2013/mar/06/eye-sniper-tahrir-egypt-jailed>
”, and his notoriety as a symbol of ongoing state brutality eventually led to a 
three-year jail sentence.

Will India prosecute its own eye snipers? Or outlaw the use of these weapons?

In the country’s present hypernationalist mood, every kind of other is a 
suspicious figure, a ready-made scapegoat for any failure that befalls the 
politicians determined to make India great again: the secessionist Kashmiri, 
the impure Dalit, thetraitorous beef-eating Muslim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/03/inside-bishari-indian-village-where-mob-killed-man-for-eating-beef>
, the woman who speaks her mind, the anti-national journalist, the dissenting 
writer. Any voices who might call for a ban on these “non-lethal” guns are 
certain to be ignored. To the contrary, ministers and police, and their 
demagogues and cheerleaders, have continued to advocate the use of both pellets 
and bullets against protesting crowds in Kashmir: unruly cattle must be reined 
in at any cost.

Because Kashmiris have become accustomed to the violence inflicted on them – 
as they are to the indifference of the world – when pellets were first sprayed 
at protesters in the heated summer of 2010, most people processed this as 
nothing more than a new misfortune; just another element of the war in Kashmir. 
If one were to draw a diagram of the assaults inflicted on Kashmiri bodies over 
the decades, hardly a single part would remain unmarked: in the 1990s, when the 
violence was at its worst, the eyes were spared; now they seem to have become a 
favourite target. The victims of such tactics, consciously and not, cultivate 
reserves of tolerance for pain, but also a capacity to remember.

I remember, too. I grew up amid the darkness of the late 80s and early 90s. I 
remember that most of us teenagers innately understood that being abused, 
slapped, or beaten with batons and rifle butts by an Indian trooper was a bit 
of a joke when compared to the horrors that others endured in the dungeons of 
Kashmir. (One of the most notorious torture centres, Papa II – a colonial-era 
building on the banks of Dal Lake in Srinagar – was refurbished and 
redecorated, and served as the stately residence of the late pro-India 
politician Mufti Mohammad Sayeed. His daughter, as the current chief minister, 
now presides over the brutalisation of another generation of Kashmiri youth.)

I remember that the war in those years taught us to treat corpses and shrouds 
as reminders of passing time, which was measured for the young in massacres and 
assassinations. I recall, too, the tragic rupture in the Kashmiri body politic 
when an atmosphere of fear and loathing forced out the Kashmiri Pandits – a 
Hindu minority that had cohabited with Muslim Kashmiris for centuries – in an 
almost overnight exodus, many of them targeted and killed by separatist 
militants. Sanjay Tickoo, who runs an organisation for the welfare of Kashmiri 
Hindus, says: “Over the past 20 years, we estimate that650 Pandits were killed 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/spotlight/kashmirtheforgottenconflict/2011/07/201176134818984961.html>
 in the valley.” I don’t know what happened to Sunil and Rajesh, my childhood 
mates from the primary school we all attended near an idyllic river bend in 
Verinag in south Kashmir.

Growing up, I experienced a brutal, bleak time, as India’s response to the 
uprising included the grotesque policy of “catch and kill”, under which 
combatants and non-combatants alike were dispatched in summary executions or 
tortured to death. And yet, I don’t remember such a vengeful assault on 
ordinary people as we are seeing now. Buoyed by a belligerent nationalist at 
the helm in Delhi, the security forces on the ground perhaps feel emboldened to 
unleash a more widespread cruelty.

In 2013, an affecting photo essay 
<http://india.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/11/25/casualties-of-kashmirs-unrest-live-in-the-dark/>
 by journalist Zahid Rafiq in the New York Times documented a few of the 
stories of those who had been blinded by pellets. It remains a grim testament 
to the darkness in Kashmir– even though the blindings at that time, amid 
hundreds dead, did not attract too much notice. At the time, hardly any Indian 
civil society group or human rights organisation thought fit to speak up about 
such a wicked crime. The wanton demonisation of the Kashmiri Muslim, a project 
that some media organisations in India take particular pleasure in, was perhaps 
fully realised even then. It certainly is now, when thousands, fed on a daily 
diet of nationalist fury, take to social media to celebrate the killing, 
maiming, and blinding of young Kashmiris.

That the government in Kashmir – a collection of local elites comprising 
career politicians, technocrats, and chancers loyal to India – considers pellet 
guns a “necessary evil”, might make us feel grateful. At least they acknowledge 
the “evil” part – perhaps to address their own guilty consciences.

A few days into this summer’s uprising, the Kashmir Observer, a local 
English-language daily, reported that the local government had deployed a fleet 
of brand new ambulances to securelyferry visiting VIPs 
<https://kashmirobserver.net/2016/local-news/amid-bloodbath-streetsgovt-using-ambulances-ferry-vip-guests-picnicking-8686>
 to picnic spots in the valley. This was while protesters were being killed, 
maimed and blinded – and while the ambulances carrying them to hospitals were 
coming under fire from security forces.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Findia-crackdown-in-kashmir-is-this-worlds-first-mass-blinding%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b93e0246bc9206eeb55ba4c70583f22282ca528%2F0_97_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=India%E2%80%99s%20crackdown%20in%20Kashmir%3A%20is%20this%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20first%20mass%20blinding%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Findia-crackdown-in-kashmir-is-this-worlds-first-mass-blinding%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=India%E2%80%99s%20crackdown%20in%20Kashmir%3A%20is%20this%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20first%20mass%20blinding%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Findia-crackdown-in-kashmir-is-this-worlds-first-mass-blinding%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b93e0246bc9206eeb55ba4c70583f22282ca528%2F0_97_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Victims of police shooting who have been blinded in one or both eyes in 
hospital in Srinagar. Photograph: Yawar Nazir/Getty Images 
An ophthalmologist at the main hospital in Kashmir told the Indian Express in 
July: “For the first time theforeign bodies are irregular edged 
<http://indianexpress.com/article/india/india-news-india/kashmir-protests-non-lethal-weapon-pellets-causing-more-damage-to-eyes-doctors-2918249/>
, which causes more damage once it strikes the eye.” Irregular, sharp edges? I 
had assumed that the pellets fired at protesters – like rubber or plastic 
bullets, were round discoid things. It turns out that there exist different 
kinds of pellets, and in 2016, some Indian forces are using the jagged variety 
– which inflict greater damage to flesh and eyes alike, and which doctors say 
is far more difficult to remove.

How did India get here? How is it all right for a constitutionally democratic 
and secular, modern nation to blind scores of civilians in a region it 
controls? Not an authoritarian state, not a crackpot dictatorship, not a rogue 
nation or warlord outside of legal and ethical commitments to international 
statutes, but a democratic country, a member of the comity of nations. How are 
India’s leaders, thinkers and its thundering televised custodians of public and 
private morality, all untroubled by the sight of a child whoseheart has been 
penetrated by metal pellets 
<http://kashmirreader.com/2016/07/21/first-patient-to-have-pellets-in-heart-is-13-years-old/>
? This is the kind of cruelty we expect from Assad’s Syria, not the world’s 
largest democracy.

Historically, such an inhuman response to an uprising – to mass dissent – has 
been the province of empires and tyrants. A modern democratic nation rarely 
unleashes such violence, except upon victims whom it does not regard as its own 
people. It is quite clear that for India and its rulers, Kashmiris have been 
subjects and not citizens for as long as Kashmiris have refused Indian rule. 
You do not shower projectiles that target eyes and viscera on a people you 
consider your own. In snatching away the vision of Kashmiri children, the 
Indian state has decisively announced that it has only one message:you must be 
servile and submissive, and if you refuse, we will unleash our fury.

With a hubris derived from its might and military dominion over Kashmir, the 
state convinces itself that it has the power to inflict blindness. In no time, 
then, it blinds itself too – to thecharacter of democracy 
<http://www.hindustantimes.com/columns/unrest-in-kashmir-threat-to-the-idea-of-india/story-2uVkjCgSGdsXOEzKHVWIPK.html>
 that is its central founding principle. The harsh repression of Kashmiri 
protests, the Nobel prize-winning Indian economist Amartya Sen declared in 
July, is “thebiggest blot on India’s democracy 
<http://indiatoday.intoday.in/story/amartya-sen-kashmir-situation-democracy-raghuram-rajan/1/717959.html>
”.

It is hard not to see this mood of brutality connected, at the very least in 
its tenor, to the larger register of extreme violence, by both state and 
non-state actors, that has come to be normalised over the last couple of 
decades.

There has been some dissent in India. Journalists, activists, even some 
politicians 
<http://www.ndtv.com/opinion/over-40-days-curfew-in-kashmir-shows-how-wrong-we-have-got-it-1446756>
, have written elegiaccolumns and essays 
<http://www.ndtv.com/opinion/what-burhan-wanis-death-exposes-for-kashmir-and-delhi-1430050>
 on the savage response to the rebellion in Kashmir. They have implored their 
government to cease the brutality, to be kind, and totalk to Kashmiris 
<http://thewire.in/61373/framework-peace-kashmir/>. But it appears that the 
Indian government, clouded by a newfound chauvinism and a hunger for votes, is 
in no mood to listen to the nation’s voices of sanity. In August, only a few 
days after Indian forces in Srinagar murdered a21-year-old cash-machine watchman
 
<http://indianexpress.com/article/india/india-news-india/kashmir-21-year-old-killed-by-pellets-case-registered-against-security-personnel-2951122/>
 by firing 300 pellets into his body from close range, the Indian prime 
minister used aspeech on Kashmir 
<http://indianexpress.com/article/india/india-news-india/full-text-of-pm-narendra-modi-speech-pakistan-forgets-that-it-bombs-its-own-citizens/>
 to taunt Pakistan over its own atrocities against separatists in the province 
of Balochistan, where the Pakistani army has inflicted forced disappearances 
and summary executions on the Baloch people. “Pakistan forgets that it bombs 
its own citizens using fighter planes,” he said. But Modi chose to forget that 
his own forces had, by then, killed scores of young Kashmiris.

We need to interrogate the circumstances that have led to the deliberate 
blinding of hundreds of young people at the hands of armed forces in Kashmir, 
before this too is forgotten. As some of the wounded have begun to heal, some 
accounts have suggested that the damage may have been less severe than 
initially feared – that perhaps many of those who underwent eye surgery will 
regain “some vision” in at least one eye. This might make one feel better – 
relieved that its not worse – but there is something wrong with that kind of 
moral reckoning, akin to the Indian security officials who continue to maintain 
that pellet guns must be used because the alternative would be worse. One 
security official told an Indian news website that pellet guns had actually “
saved lives 
<http://thewire.in/51740/kashmir-young-paying-governments-lack-vision/>”: “It 
is unfortunate that there have been eye injuries but the pellets are less 
lethal than getting hit by bullets.”

So we might ask: what if the armed forces stationed in Kashmir had fired live 
bullets instead?Imagine the death toll! But this doesn’t compute: in 2016, the 
security forces have already killed nearly 100 civilians. Is that an acceptable 
number?

In a year or two, as India, and Pakistan, continue to harp on their 
territorialist positions, there will arrive a season of surface calm – a 
“return to normalcy” – in Kashmir. People will shop, marry off their children, 
and celebrate an uncurfewed Eid. They will also welcome tourists in their 
blighted land.

But when this new generation of freedom-seekers grows up into blinded, maimed, 
adulthood, they will carry our guilt-ridden consciences for us. They will 
remember more than they have seen. They will certainly remember the country 
that did this to them.

• Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread 
<https://twitter.com/@gdnlongread>, or sign up to the long read weekly email 
here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/jul/20/sign-up-to-the-long-read-email>.
 