
Last weekend at the Sree Kanteerava Stadium there was boisterous chanting, in 
both English and Kannada, the language of the Indian state of Karnataka. 
Banners were held proudly aloft, faces were painted blue and white, and there 
were overlapping renditions of “When the Blues go marching in” – a distinctly 
European borrowing. Further down the road from the home of Bengaluru FC, near 
the ticket booth, there was a scene more indigenous to the subcontinent – a 
hopeful queue stretching several metres, with people trying to butt in amid 
utter cacophony.

The 2016-17 I-League was all set for kick-off, and Bengaluru, the defending 
champions, were facing Shillong Lajong. The crowd was cheerful despite the 
struggle – the chaotic queues, dusty plastic seats and stone bleachers, and 
preposterously priced popcorn. A habit has been formed in the three years since 
the club were conceived. For the first time inIndia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>, a fan culture now exists that 
resembles the English Premier League .

Bengaluru’s rise has been meteoric, winning three trophies in as many years. 
They stormed to the I-League title in their maiden season in 2013-14. In charge 
was an Englishman, Ashley Westwood, Manchester United Academy graduate and 
Premier League journeyman. Bengaluru then won the title again in 2015-16 after 
Mohun Bagan claimed it in the interim. Bengaluru won India’s Federation Cup in 
2014-15 and they created history in 2016 by becoming the first Indian side to 
reach the final of the Asian Football Confederation Cup, with Albert Roca, a 
former assistant to Frank Rijkaard at Barcelona, now the manager.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Findia-champions-bengaluru-football-revolution-fans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe37ec4ce0c2bbd9a887da1c46b816a076d4cd9a3%2F0_0_1080_865%2F1080.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=India%E2%80%99s%20champions%20Bengaluru%20spark%20revolution%20with%20uncertain%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Findia-champions-bengaluru-football-revolution-fans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=India%E2%80%99s%20champions%20Bengaluru%20spark%20revolution%20with%20uncertain%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Findia-champions-bengaluru-football-revolution-fans%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe37ec4ce0c2bbd9a887da1c46b816a076d4cd9a3%2F0_0_1080_865%2F1080.jpg>
 Bengalaru began the 2016-17 season where they left off, with a 3-0 win over 
Shillong Lajong at the Sree Kanteerava Stadium, aka The Fortress. Photograph: 
Bengaluru FC Media 
However, along with the rest of the Indian football fraternity, Bengaluru face 
an uncertain future. Founded exactly a decade ago – in 2007 – the I-League’s 
2016-17 season could be its last. For some time the All India Football 
Federation (AIFF) has been attempting to restructure the game in India. The 
idea is to merge the I-League and the Indian Super League,a separate 
three-month tournament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/dec/23/india-super-league-fourth-biggest-league>
, to form a new elite competition, with up to 10 teams playing in a league 
lasting six to nine months, with subsidiary divisions involving promotion and 
relegation.

While the AIFF’s attempts are long overdue, it is, in many ways, a revolution 
sparked by Bengaluru. In 2013, when the AIFF invited tenders and JSW, one of 
the largest business conglomerates in India, got involved, they recognised the 
need to replicate the professionalism of the European leagues. “There was an 
intent to do something for the betterment of Indian football. We wanted to do 
things differently, in the right way, the way it was done internationally,” 
says Mustafa Ghouse, Bengaluru FC’s chief operating officer. “We wanted to 
learn from the best. From the way the team crest was designed to the type of 
communication that went out to the fans, every aspect was about how to do it to 
an international standard.”

Bengaluru set about ensuring a high level of professionalism, from legally 
drafted contracts for players – “You hear stories in India about players being 
signed very loosely, on pieces of paper. Not us,” says Ghouse – to renting 
apartments for those based outside the city. There is an emphasis on fitness, 
use of technology, and strict diets.

“In India, players used to eat dal-chaval [rice and pulses], and whatever else 
they felt like. Now, our guys know if they come back overweight, they are 
fined,” Ghouse explains. “Most of the players didn’t know all this before they 
joined us. It’s all very professionally executed, and they are seeing the 
benefits of it. They have bought into it.”

So much so that John Johnson, the former Middlesbrough and Northampton Town 
defender and one of the first overseas players to be signed by Bengaluru, was 
pleasantly surprised when he arrived on the subcontinent. “When I first came to 
India, I didn’t expect the facilities, the training, the infrastructure, and 
the standard to be as good as it was in the UK,” he says. “But we had 
everything in place, from the training ground to a restaurant on base.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Findia-champions-bengaluru-football-revolution-fans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72f652bada0e25db7e8d5790dff632e1ffd1a9b3%2F0_147_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=India%E2%80%99s%20champions%20Bengaluru%20spark%20revolution%20with%20uncertain%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Findia-champions-bengaluru-football-revolution-fans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=India%E2%80%99s%20champions%20Bengaluru%20spark%20revolution%20with%20uncertain%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Findia-champions-bengaluru-football-revolution-fans%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72f652bada0e25db7e8d5790dff632e1ffd1a9b3%2F0_147_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 The former Middlesbrough defender John Johnson celebrates last season’s 
I-League title. Photograph: Bengaluru FC Media 
“The training was just the same because we had an English coach [Westwood] and 
the mentality he brought into the club was the same as in the UK. The standard 
wasn’t as good, but it improved quickly. Players got fitter and stronger, and 
started to be smarter and more intelligent. It’s been an enjoyable journey.”

Importantly, the players now reach out to fans via social media in a manner 
new to Indian football clubs. Tickets are reasonably priced – the most 
expensive priced at 1,200 rupee (£14) and the cheapest just 40 rupee – making 
the sport widely accessible. And crucially, chanting is encouraged – a trip to 
the Kanteerava Stadium, fondly rechristened The Fortress, is one of the more 
challenging undertaken by I-League sides.

During the AFC Cup semi-final against Malaysia’s Johor Darul Ta’zim, defending 
champions at the time, the official attendance was 21,379 – a significant 
number for Indian football, especially given the match took place outside the 
sport’s strongholds of Kolkata, Goa and Kerala. “We always wanted a 
professional club we could support. We grew up watching European football, we 
saw how supporters of Manchester United, Real Madrid, Barcelona backed their 
teams,” says one of the more active fans, who asked to remain anonymous as he 
believed no one fan should stand out. “We wanted to do that for a local club. 
We had a lot of clubs but there wasn’t much of a connect between us. But when 
BFC was founded, they changed that, they reached out to us. And we responded. 
It’s a symbiotic relationship. Watching the fan culture in Europe inspired us 
in a big way. I don’t think we would have chanted the way we do now had we not 
got that exposure.”

Such a response from their supporters has meant Bengaluru are now in a 
position to issue public awareness messages. Against Lajong, the team wore 
bright pink jerseys, in response to themass molestation of women in Bangalore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/04/i-punched-and-kicked-him-victim-of-bangalore-molestation-tells-of-her-fight-back>
 on New Year’s Eve. At half-time, Sunil Chhetri – the Bengaluru and India 
captain – Johnson and Daniel Lalhlimpuia appeared in a video on the big screen 
championing #WeforWomen.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBR_4PuaJj3M&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBR_4PuaJj3M>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBR_4PuaJj3M&media=>
 Bengaluru’s players champion #WeforWomen. 
The AIFF will do well to take note of Bengaluru’s professionalism and their 
evident bond with their fans, especially given that their proposed 
restructuring involves plenty of logistical challenges. Contractually, all 
eight of the ISL teams can expect to be part of the top flight of the 
restructured league, leaving room only for two I-League teams in a 10-team 
competition. Bengaluru are assured a place as reigning champions but what of 
historically strong sides such as Mohun Bagan and East Bengal, each with huge 
fan bases in Kolkata? Unhappy with the AIFF’s plans, two sides from the state 
of Goa – Sporting Clube de Goa and Salgaocar – pulled out of the 2016-17 
I-League season.

“There are big teams in the I-League – Mohun Bagan, East Bengal, Bengaluru, 
teams from the north east, Goa,” says Sunando Dhar, the I-League CEO. “The idea 
is to get all the big teams involved in the big league. Obviously, money is a 
factor, but you can’t ignore history and legacy of the big teams. It’s a fine 
balance, but we’re trying to work it out.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Findia-champions-bengaluru-football-revolution-fans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb5b84a9111316eaffa42ead068150c7c5b435d9%2F0_0_3200_2015%2F3200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=India%E2%80%99s%20champions%20Bengaluru%20spark%20revolution%20with%20uncertain%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Findia-champions-bengaluru-football-revolution-fans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=India%E2%80%99s%20champions%20Bengaluru%20spark%20revolution%20with%20uncertain%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Findia-champions-bengaluru-football-revolution-fans%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb5b84a9111316eaffa42ead068150c7c5b435d9%2F0_0_3200_2015%2F3200.jpg>
 Bengaluru won the league in their first season in existence. Photograph: 
Bengaluru FC Media 
Then there is a crucial question: who gets the players? Chhetri is Bengaluru’s 
captain but is also the leading striker for the ISL side Mumbai FC’s. He is one 
of many Indian players dividing their time between ISL and I-League. Does the 
decision rest with the players? And how will the financial gap between ISL and 
I-League sides be plugged? Too many questions with too few answers.

The restructured league was initially expected to be unveiled in 2017, but 
Praful Patel, the AIFF president, recently said that would be difficult to 
achieve. Football officials in India are hesitant about committing to a 
timeline. “It’s like a marriage,” says Dhar, employing a distinctly Indian 
metaphor. “When two families get married, there are compromises to be made, 
both sides have to be happy. It’s easier said than done. We’re working on it. 
We don’t want to put a timeframe and put pressure on ourselves.”

At this point, Bengaluru do not really mind. They play an AFC Champions League 
qualifier against the Jordanian side al-Wehdat on 31 January and their priority 
is to qualify for the tournament proper. There is too much uncertainty about 
the game’s future in India to be bogged down by it. “There are still too many 
loose ends from whatever information we have,” says Ghouse. “We are eagerly 
awaiting some idea on how it would be structured. Depending on what is 
proposed, we’ll know where we stand.”

Regardless of what happens to the structure of the game, Bengaluru have made a 
change for the better by providing a city with an authentic football 
experience, something the fans will forever be grateful for. Yet it remains to 
be seen how the unique marriage of European footballing culture with 
subcontinental aspiration evolves in an atmosphere of uncertainty surrounding 
the game’s future in India.
 