
A breakthrough in the race to make useful products out of planet-heating CO2 
emissions has been made in southernIndia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>.


A plant at the industrial port of Tuticorin is capturing CO2 from its own 
coal-powered boiler and using it to make baking soda.

Crucially, the technology is running without subsidy, which is a major advance 
for carbon capture technology as for decades it has languished under high costs 
and lukewarm government support.

The firm behind the Tuticorin process says its chemicals will lock up 60,000 
tonnes of CO2 a year and the technology is attracting interest from around the 
world.

Debate over carbon capture has mostly focused until now on carbon capture and 
storage <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/carbon-capture-and-storage> 
(CCS), in which emissions areforced into underground rocks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/04/massive-carbon-capture-investment-needed-to-slow-global-warming>
 at great cost and no economic benefit. The Tuticorin plant is said to be the 
first unsubsidised industrial scale example of carbon capture and utilisation 
(CCU).

UK must move now on carbon capture to save consumers billions, says report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/12/uk-must-move-now-on-carbon-capture-to-save-consumers-billions-says-report>
There is already a global market for CO2 as a chemical raw material. It comes 
mainly from industries such as brewing where it is cheap and easy to capture.

Until now it has been too expensive without subsidy to strip out CO2 from the 
relatively low concentrations in which it appears in flue gas. The Indian plant 
has overcome the problem by using a new CO2-stripping chemical.

It is just slightly more efficient than the current CCS chemical amine, but 
its inventors, Carbonclean, say it also needs less energy, is less corrosive, 
and requires much smaller equipment meaning the build cost is much lower than 
for conventional carbon capture.

The new kit has been installed at Tuticorin Alkali Chemicals. The firm is now 
using the CO2 from its own boiler to make baking soda – a base chemical with a 
wide range of uses including glass manufacture, sweeteners, detergents and 
paper products.

The firm’s managing director, Ramachandran Gopalan, told BBC Radio 4: “I am a 
businessman. I never thought about saving the planet. I needed a reliable 
stream of CO2, and this was the best way of getting it.” He says the plant now 
has virtually zero emissions to air or water.

Carbonclean believes capturing usable CO2 can deal with perhaps 5-10% of the 
world’s emissions from coal. It’s no panacea, but it would be a valuable 
contribution because industrial steam-making boilers are hard to run on 
renewable energy.

CO2 turned into stone in Iceland in climate change breakthrough
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/09/co2-turned-into-stone-in-iceland-in-climate-change-breakthrough>
The inventors of the new process are two young chemists at the Indian 
Institute of Technology in Kharagpur. They failed to find Indian finance and 
were welcomed instead by the UK government, which offered grants and the 
special entrepreneur status that whisks them through the British border.

The firm’s headquarters are now based in London’s Paddington district. Its 
CEO, Aniruddha Sharma, said: “So far the ideas for carbon capture have mostly 
looked at big projects, and the risk is so high they are very expensive to 
finance. We want to set up small-scale plants that de-risk the technology by 
making it a completely normal commercial option.”

By producing a subsidy-free carbon utilisation project, Carbonclean appears to 
have something of a global lead. But it is by no means alone. Carbon8 near 
Bristol is buying in CO2 to make aggregates, and other researchers are working 
on making plastics and fuels from waste CO2.

At last, it seems, the race to turn CO2 into profit is really on.

• Roger Harrabin presents Climate Change: The Trump Card 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b086s95f> on BBC Radio 4 at 8pm on 3 January. 
Follow Roger on Twitter@rharrabin 
<https://twitter.com/RHarrabin?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
.
 