
India <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> says it will expel a Pakistani 
diplomat it accuses of being the “kingpin” of a spy ring, after his arrest on 
Wednesday outside the gates of the Delhi zoo, where police allege he was 
planning to meet Indian contacts he had recruited.

Tensions between the nuclear-armed neighbours are at their highest for more 
than a decade after19 Indian soldiers were killed in Kashmir last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/18/nine-indian-soldiers-and-four-militants-killed-in-kashmir-attack>
 in an attack by militants that Delhi accuses Islamabad of sponsoring.

Police said the official, named as Mehmood Akhtar, and two Indians also 
arrested – Subhash Jangir and Maulana Ramzan – were carrying forged documents, 
lists of army officers stationed at the India-Pakistan border and maps showing 
Indian troop deployments.

Akhtar, who reportedly worked in the visa section of Pakistan’s high 
commission, has been released by police in line with agreements on diplomatic 
immunity, but has been declaredpersona non grata. 

Ravindra Yadav, a police official, claimed the ring had been operating for two 
and a half years and that Akhtar was the kingpin.

The two Indian nationals in custody were from the northern state of Rajasthan, 
he said, and had been planning to meet Akhtar at the zoo the previous day to 
exchange documents and information for cash.

“They used to meet once in a month at a pre-decided place to exchange 
documents and money,” Yadav said.

There was a “high probability” that the leaked information was being used 
against Indian interests, a police statement said, adding that authorities had 
been trying to bust the alleged spy ring for six months.

Pakistan’s high commission in Delhi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/delhi> 
rejected the allegations and denied having ever engaged in activities 
“incompatible with its diplomatic status”.

National Geographic 'Afghan Girl' arrested in Pakistan living under false 
papers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/26/national-geographic-afghan-girl-arrested-pakistan-false-papers-sharbat-gula>
Pakistan’s top official in Delhi, Abdul Basit, was summoned to India’s foreign 
ministry to be officially informed of the decision, an Indian government 
spokesman said.

Late on Thursday night, Pakistan’s foreign ministry said it had declared an 
Indian diplomat, Surjeet Singh,persona non grata and given him 48 hours to 
leave the country.


A statement said Singh was accused of activities “that were in violation of 
the Vienna convention and the established diplomatic norms” but did not 
elaborate.

An aide to India’s prime minister in New Delhi said the government was looking 
into the matter. India’s external affair’s ministry spokesman was not 
immediately available for comment.

The diplomatic expulsions come amid heightened tensions over Kashmir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/kashmir>.

In late September, India made an unprecedented announcement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/29/pakistani-soldiers-killed-surgical-strikes-kashmir-india>
 that it had sent special forces teams into Pakistan-controlled Kashmir to kill 
militants it claimed were preparing to cross into the Indian-controlled side.

The two countries have been at loggerheads over Kashmir since 1947, when India 
was partitioned, and fought their first war over the Himalayan province they 
both claim in full but rule in part.

Pakistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> has denied the special 
forces operation took place and claims India is trying to distract from its 
crackdown on unrest on its side of Kashmir, where more than 90 civilians have 
been arrested and thousands detained in a summer of protests.

The unrest stems from the killing in July of a separatist militant, Burhan 
Wani, whose death hasbecome a rallying point 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/11/kashmir-death-toll-23-protests-shooting-burhan-wani-independence-violence>
 for Kashmiris who want greater autonomy from Delhi or complete independence.

India has been pushing to internationally isolate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/28/pakistan-humiliated-by-south-asian-countries-boycott-of-summit>
 Pakistan since the attack on its soldiers and, at a recent summit, the prime 
minister, Narendra Modi, described the Islamabad government as “the mothership 
of terrorism”.

Reuters contributed to this report
 