
The death toll from a boat accident in eastern India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> rose 26 on Sunday, a senior official 
said, warning of more casualties with rescue workers still scouring the waters.


The non-motorised wooden boat, packed beyond capacity with revellers returning 
from a kite festival, capsized on Saturday in the Ganges river near Patna, the 
capital of Bihar state.

The exact number of missing was uncertain because there was no passenger list 
but police said the boat was carrying at least 40 people.

Rescue workers were working round the clock looking for survivors, Anirudh 
Kumar, joint secretary of the state disaster management authority said.

“Workers pulled out 22 bodies in the night and this [Sunday] morning four more 
bodies were recovered,” he said.

“The boat capsized not very far from the shore. Some people managed to swim to 
safety. But we are fearing [sic] the number of dead could go up further.”
Map of india showing India, Dehli and Patna 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/maps/embed/jan/2017-01-15T07:04:06.html>  More 
than two dozen people died when a boat capsized on the Ganges river near the 
city of Patna. 
Among those to survive the tragedy was an 18-month-old toddler, now recovering 
in a city hospital, Kumar said.

The revellers were on their way back from the annual Hindu harvest festival of 
Makar Sakranti, marked by kite-flying and other festivities.

Bihar state’s chief minister, Nitish Kumar, has ordered an inquiry into the 
accident and announced compensation of $5,900 for the families of the victims.

The prime minister, Narendra Modi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/narendra-modi>, cancelled an event he was 
scheduled to attend in Patna on Sunday.

Boat accidents are common in the country, mainly because of overcrowding, poor 
maintenance, lax regulations and a lack of life jackets and other safety 
equipment.

Twenty people died after a ferry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/28/indian-motorboat-capsizes-dozens-feared-drowned>
 capsized in a rain-swollen river in India’s northeastern state of Assam in 
September 2015.

More than 100 people lost their lives in 2012 in Assam when a boat sank in the 
Brahmaputra river during a storm.
 