
There was a time when the area leading up to the village of Usku Dadjo in the 
state of Jharkhand, eastIndia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>, was 
dense forest. But because residents did not have the right to manage their 
land, the forest was steadily degraded by outsiders. Now, only sand and scrub 
remain.

Last year, the community started to reclaim traditional lands using India’s 
groundbreaking 2006Forest Rights Act 
<http://tribal.nic.in/content/forestrightactotherlinks.aspx>. While the 
community has not yet received any response from the government, residents have 
put up signs asserting their right to the land.

The struggle of communities like Usku Dadjo 
<http://www.pacsindia.org/news_items/fra-campaign-in-jharkhand> is linked to 
global efforts toconserve forests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/29/prince-charles-calls-for-focus-on-deforestation-ahead-of-paris-climate-talks>
, reduce poverty and achieve development with dignity for marginalised people.

Liberia must pass land rights bill or risk jeopardising peace, campaigners warn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/14/liberia-land-rights-bill-risk-jeopardising-peace-campaigners-warn>
China and India have a combined total of approximately 675 million forest 
dwellers 
<http://www.forestpeoples.org/sites/fpp/files/publication/2012/05/forest-peoples-numbers-across-world-final_0.pdf>
 (pdf), but the two countries have adopted remarkably different approaches to 
protecting forests and extending rights to traditional inhabitants.

China has implemented one of Asia’s most successful forest tenure reforms 
<http://rightsandresources.org/en/publication/view/chinas-forest-tenure-reforms-impacts-and-implications-for-choice-conservation-and-climate-change/>
: more than 400 million people have been given direct rights over more than 
100m hectares (247m acres) of forest.

Land ownership has been shifting out of the public domain into the hands of 
local communities and households, with nearly60% of China’s forests now legally 
owned by collectives 
<http://rightsandresources.org/wp-content/exported-pdf/rricompensationforwebwithcoverfinal.pdf>
 (pdf). Since China has implemented these reforms, farmers’ incomes have 
steadily increased and thegovernment has invested more than $50bn 
<http://news.stanford.edu/2016/06/16/chinas-environmental-conservation-efforts-making-positive-impact-stanford-scientists-say/>
 (£38bn) in programmes supporting farmers and households for environmental 
restoration, helping to ease poverty and mitigate the effects of climate change.

The Indian government hopes to emulate China’s economic growth and rapid 
industrial development. Yet growing discontent within the forests is casting 
doubt on this agenda. The Forest Rights Act is largely dormant – 
institutionally ignored and unimplemented – while the state maintains a tight 
grip over forests, to the detriment of the environment and inhabitants.

What is the significance of democracy if an autocratic state can successfully 
devolve decision-making over forests and a fiercely democratic one cannot 
recognise the rights of its citizens in accordance with its own laws?

In China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>, the decision to devolve 
authority over forests to local communities and households came less from a 
belief in rights and more from realities. The central government formulated its 
policy on collective forest reform after it was tested at a provincial level: 
community rights were found to be effective in protecting forests and boosting 
the rural economy.

Brazil's giant dams risk destroying heart of the Amazon, says Greenpeace
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/15/brazil-giant-hydropower-dams-risk-destroying-amazon-greenpeace-tapajos-river>
Unlike China, the decision to democratise India’s forests through the act did 
not come from the top, but evolved from a feeling of disenfranchisement among 
people in the forests.

If the law were implemented, the results could be staggering. A 2015 report 
<http://rightsandresources.org/wp-content/uploads/CommunityForest_RR_A4Final_web1.pdf>
 (pdf) estimated that, because of the act, the individual and community rights 
of at least 150 million people in 170,000 villages could be recognised over 40m 
hectares of forested land. This represents at least half of India’s forests. A 
concerted effort to implement the act would usher in the largest land reform in 
India’s history.

Imagine if communities in India were empowered to govern their forests, plant 
trees and restore degraded landscapes, and – because their efforts provided 
ecological services for the benefit of the country, and indeed the world – they 
were rewarded. This would be a massive, and necessary, step toward realising 
India’s commitment tosequester 2.5bn tonnes of carbon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/21/indias-climate-pledge-rests-on-green-growth-story>
 following the Parisclimate change agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/25/paris-climate-agreement-environment-climate-change-un>
 last December.

Unfortunately, only about 4m hectares have been recognised under the act 
<http://tribal.nic.in/WriteReadData/CMS/Documents/201606100434597218920MPRApril2016.pdf>
 (pdf), less than 10% of the potential area. In the resource-rich heartland, 
conflicts over land are on the rise as the government continues to award 
concessions to companies on the traditional lands of local communities.

At the same time, the state continues to wage war against a leftwing insurgency
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/may/28/maoists-india-naxalite-landless>
 born of frustration over a lack of self-determination. Theeffective 
implementation of the act 
<https://spp.ceu.edu/article/2016-03-08/improving-implementation-laws-one-factor-decreasing-violent-left-wing-extremism>
 not only carries the potential for democratic development, but also the 
potential to address the underlying causes of conflict.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Findia-follow-china-saving-forest-people-land-rights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F92db2f5640b7ae3a089e27816fde94dc3a2b006d%2F0_0_2936_1996%2F2936.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=India%20should%20follow%20China%20to%20find%20a%20way%20out%20of%20the%20woods%20on%20saving%20forest%20people%20%7C%20Gaurav%20Madan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Findia-follow-china-saving-forest-people-land-rights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=India%20should%20follow%20China%20to%20find%20a%20way%20out%20of%20the%20woods%20on%20saving%20forest%20people%20%7C%20Gaurav%20Madan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Findia-follow-china-saving-forest-people-land-rights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F92db2f5640b7ae3a089e27816fde94dc3a2b006d%2F0_0_2936_1996%2F2936.jpg>
 A rag picker on the outskirts of Jammu in 2010. India has promised an 
afforestation project as part of its commitment to tackle climate change. 
Photograph: Mukesh Gupta/Reuters 
India’s upper house is currently debating a controversial bill to channel up 
to $7bn 
<http://indianexpress.com/article/explained/campa-afforestation-bill-rajya-sabha-green-india-mission-narendra-modi-2817475/>
 to state departments for afforestation. While this may sound positive, such a 
move would undermine strides towards decentralised governance and return power 
to an inefficient bureaucracy.

Global evidence <http://www.wri.org/securingrights>, including the Chinese 
experience, indicates that communities manage forests more sustainably than 
governments or private entities.

Last year in Usku Dadjo, local resident Johan Kalkho told me: “We are ready to 
protect our forests. With a title we will get back what was taken from our 
forefathers. We have filed our claims [through the act], but have not received 
any response. But we know we are the rightful owners of the land.”

As India looks to China as an example of economic growth, it should also pay 
attention to how China has devolved forest authority while increasing the 
autonomy and incomes of forest populations. In the meantime, millions of 
Indians are still searching for democracy to trickle down from the centres of 
power into their forests.

 * Gaurav Madan is a senior associate for the Asia programme at the Rights and 
Resources Initiative <http://rightsandresources.org/>
 