
India’s rupee recall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/08/india-withdraws-500-1000-rupee-notes-fight-corruption>
 appears to have had “a massive impact” on the country’s human trafficking 
industry, according to advocacy and rescue groups, with some reporting 
reductions of up to 90% in the number of women and girls being admitted to 
their shelters.

But other activists said the illegal trade was already rebounding, and that the
financial strain of demonetisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/dec/22/india-cash-crisis-women-bear-brunt-finances-families-undone>
 on poor communities was pushing new, younger girls into sex work, and forcing 
women already in the industry to work for credit or for free.

The Guardian contacted 10 human trafficking advocacy and rescue groups to 
assess the impact of the Indian government’s shock decision last month to scrap 
the country’s two most used bank notes.

Women bear the brunt as finances and families are undone by India's cash crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/dec/22/india-cash-crisis-women-bear-brunt-finances-families-undone>
The decision, which voided 86% of the currency in circulation in India and has 
left the country’s informal economy reeling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/21/indian-businesses-demonetisation-apocalypse-biggest-financial-experiment-in-history>
, was justified partly on the basis that it would deprive criminal groups, 
including traffickers, of their cash stockpiles. But Indians too have been 
deprived of cash, limited to withdrawals of 2,500 rupees (£30) a day and 
stymied bylong lines at ATMs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/28/india-bank-lines-controversy-cash-for-queuing>
 and outside banks.

Demonetisation complicated every point in the human trafficking supply chain, 
starting with a “drastic reduction in the number of sex buyers”, said Sunita 
Krishnan, the co-founder of Prajwala, a Hyderabad-based NGO that rescues 
victims of sex slavery.

The dearth of customers for sex workers meant “it obviously did not make any 
sense to induct any new girls in this period”, Krishnan said. “In my shelter 
home, on average every month 60 to 70 new, rescued victims are admitted. From 8 
November [the day demonetisation was announced] in the last 40 days, only six 
new victims have been admitted.

“I have been on this mission for more than two decades, and this is the first 
time I’ve seen the entire flesh trade so badly affected.”

There are 18 million people 
<https://www.google.co.in/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=0ahUKEwi089Kn9IfRAhXML48KHYTZDN0QFggZMAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Feconomictimes.indiatimes.com%2Fnews%2Fpolitics-and-nation%2Findia-has-18-million-modern-day-slaves-survey%2Farticleshow%2F52518141.cms&usg=AFQjCNGuR56ia2z7au16vVQAFkvewKt5_g&sig2=sO0t2Z6Pn0f0XooKzfq4RQ&bvm=bv.142059868,d.c2I>
 living in slavery in India, according to the 2016 Global Slavery Index, with
about 135,000 children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/28/child-trafficking-india-domestic-labour-chhattisgarh>
 believed to be trafficked in the country every year.

Ashok Rajgor, the chief investigation officer at the Rescue Foundation, said 
no formal surveys had been conducted, “but our operatives in the field have 
noticed a sharp change”.

Fewer customers for brothels meant that traffickers had less capital to buy 
and transport women and girls from states such as Jharkhand, Assam and Bihar, 
all hubs for the trade.

“The market is totally down,” he said. “When you buy a girl, it’s a huge 
amount of money, maybe 200,000 rupees. It’s really big money and nowadays it’s 
very difficult to get that kind of cash.”

But he added: “The traffickers will look for other options. It’s too early to 
say how, but they’ll manage.”

The introduction of a new 2,000-rupee note, while supplies of small change 
remained scarce, had distorted the market, making younger girls more 
vulnerable, said Ruchira Gupta, the founder of Apne Aap, an NGO that works with 
women across Bihar and in Mumbai, Delhi and Kolkata.

“The demand for younger girls is going up,” Gupta said. “Now that [they] have 
only 2,000 rupee notes, clients don’t want older women, they want virgins and 
underage girls.”

She said the financial impact of demonetisation had left some women without 
enough money to buy food and their daughters at risk of being pushed into sex 
work.

Pimps, who in some red-light districts will take up to 70% of what a sex 
worker is paid, were beginning to force women to work for credit, she added.

“Women’s debt is increasing. Where we work in [the Delhi red light district] 
GB Road, I’m being told that brothel managers have started to keep log books, 
promising to pay the women later,” she said. “These women are being asked to 
work for free. They have to sleep with as many man as the pimps say just to 
have a bed and a meal.”

Other women were paid in old, invalid 500 rupee notes. “And the pimps are 
forcing them to take the money. [The women] have to stand at the bank for hours 
ever day [to exchange or deposit the notes]. Their income has been dramatically 
reduced,” she said.

Swati Maliwal, the head of the Delhi Commission for Women, which has been 
campaigning to have GB Road shut down and the women working there retrained, 
said her teams had observed similar phenomena. “The exploitation of women on GB 
Road has increased tremendously because men are coming and not paying them 
properly,” she said, adding that some women had started sleeping with up to 30 
men each day to make ends meet.

Often, trafficked women lacked the identity papers required to set up a bank 
account to exchange void currency for new notes – meaning some had seen their 
cash savings wiped out, said Urmi Basu, head of the Kolkata-based New Light 
Foundation. “There are thousands of women who have no documentation, no bank 
accounts, apart from a few hundred rupees they tuck under their blouses,” she 
said.

A “very big slowdown” had been observed in the child labour trade, said Rakesh 
Singhal, from the NGO Bachpan Bachao Andolan.

He said his organisation – whose founder, Kailash Satyarthi, won the Nobel 
peace prize in 2014 for his work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/13/kailash-satyarthi-tireless-accessible-nobel-laureate>
 – had commissioned a study of the impact of demonetisation on the industry.

“But we have observations that show a very big slowdown,” Singhal said. “Most 
of the placement agencies for children say there is no domestic child labour 
supply.

“The whole trafficking industry runs on liquid money, you’re paying the whole 
supply chain, including agents in village areas, who are paying between 5,000 
and 10,000 rupees for each child.”

All agreed the decline in the trade was likely to be temporary. “Trafficking 
is an organised crime, and traffickers and people involved in this crime adapt 
to newer means whenever there is a change in situations and the external 
environment,” said Prabhat Kumar, the general manager of Save the Children,India
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>.
 