
The Indian government has declared severe levels of toxic air pollution in 
Delhi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/delhi> an “emergency situation” as 
administrators announce a plan to temporarily shut construction sites and a 
coal-fired power station to bring the situation under control.

Schools in the capital will be closed for three days and traffic may be 
rationed, followingsix days of heavy smog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/31/toxic-smog-covers-delhi-after-diwali>
 and concentrations of harmful particles so high they cannot be measured by 
most air quality instruments.

The level of PM2.5 pollutants, which are the most harmful because they can 
reach deep into the lungs and breach theblood-brain barrier 
<http://bloodbrainbarrier.jhu.edu/>, have reached at least 999 in parts of the 
city this week, more than 16 times the safe limit of 60.

On Sunday, Delhi’s chief minister, Arvind Kejriwal, announced emergency 
measures aimed at protecting residents, including a five-day ban on 
construction and demolition, thought to be a major contributor to pollution 
levels.

Bulldozers are to be used to put out fires at the Bhalswa landfill, which 
constantly smoulders.

Kejriwal said: “People should stay home as much as they can [and] work from 
home.”

A coal-fired power station in Badarpur, south-east Delhi, will stop operating 
for 10 days, along with diesel generators in the city.

Kejriwal has called on neighbouring states to enforce laws against burning 
agricultural waste.

Around this time each year, hundreds of thousands of farmers in Haryana and 
Punjab set their fields on fire to dispose of crop remnants, sending smoke 
billowing across India’s northern plains.

The Delhi government is preparing to reintroduce a temporary scheme to only 
allow cars todrive on odd or even days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/08/delhi-car-ban-licence-pollution-smog>
 depending on the last digit of their registration numbers.


Airborne pollution in Delhi rarely stays within safe levels, even during 
summer, when winds are stronger and dust and droplets disperse more easily in 
the hot air.

It is traditionally worst in the winter months, beginning with Diwali, when 
hundreds of thousands of fireworks are let off across the city. They leave a 
haze that usuallylasts for two or three days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/29/choking-delhi-to-install-air-purifiers-at-intersections-for-diwali>
, but has persisted for almost a week this year.

The Centre for Science and Environment, a Delhi-based NGO, has said the air 
quality is the worst the Indian capital had seen in 17 years.

Hospitals in the city have reported increased admissions of people suffering 
respiratory diseases – of whichIndia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> 
has the highest rate in the world, with 159 deaths per 100,000 people in 2012, 
according to the World Health Organisation.

Children are particularly vulnerable, a 2015 study 
<http://indianexpress.com/article/india/india-others/landmark-study-lies-buried-how-delhis-poisonous-air-is-damaging-its-children-for-life/>
 finding about half the city’s 4.4 million schoolchildren had stunted lung 
development and would never completely recover.

Arti Maria, an associate professor of paediatrics at the Ram Manohar Lohia 
Hospitaltold local media 
<http://indiatoday.intoday.in/story/delhi-pollution-smog-air-quality-cng-reforms/1/803565.html>
 the air was “killing presently”.

“[The] presence of even little smoke is considered harmful for newborn and 
toddlers. The air quality right now can lead to slow brain development, mental 
irritation and psychological problems,” she said.

Businesses are reportedly suffering as a result of this week’s fog and the low 
visibility was blamed for a20-car pile up 
<http://www.newindianexpress.com/nation/2016/nov/03/dense-fog-causes-20-car-pile-up-at-yamuna-expressway-several-injured-1534582.html>
 a major Delhi expressway on Thursday.

The city struggled with poor air quality in the 1990s but managed to clear its 
atmosphere by raising emissions standards for vehicles, mandating its fleet of 
taxis and buses use compressed natural gas and moving some heavy industry to 
the outskirts of the city.

Other than smoke from fires in neighbouring states, the city’s poor air is 
attributed to a combination of road dust, exhaust fumes, industrial emissions 
and open fires, including those lit by poorer residents to cook and keep warm.
 