
A boatload of Sri Lankans has spent a night ashore in a tent in Indonesia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/indonesia> as authorities wait for the 
weather to improve before “escorting” the 44 back out to sea.

Human rights groups are becoming increasingly outspoken in their criticism of 
the Indonesian government, describingtheir handling of the group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/16/sri-lankans-reportedly-bound-for-australia-and-stranded-off-aceh-to-be-escorted-back>
 as “distressing”, “gratuitous” and “intimidating”.

The 44, including a pregnant woman and nine children, became stranded off 
Lhoknga in Aceh – on the northwest tip of Sumatra Island – last Saturday when 
their boat’s engine failed amid bad weather.

I was a refugee – nobody wants to leave their home
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/18/i-was-a-refugee-nobody-wants-to-leave-their-home>
They had left India <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> 20 days before 
with hopes of getting to Australia.

On Thursday warning shots were fired into the air when six women jumped off 
the boat, which was beached near shore, and tried to make it to the land.

A spokesman for Human Rights Watch Asia division said the shots “added 
gratuitous insult to the injury of their plight”.

“The Indonesian government’s handling of this matter has been a distressing 
series of confusing and contradictory missteps that have failed to prioritise 
the rights and needs of that group of Sri Lankans,” he said.

Authorities had planned to escort the boat out of Indonesian waters late on 
Friday, but due to bad weather and large surf, the Aceh provincial police 
chief, Husein Hamidi, said the boat people instead took shelter in a tent on 
shore and were provided with food.

Once the weather improved, they would be returned to the boat and escorted out 
of Indonesian waters, he said.

Amnesty International has called on the government to allow the group to be 
properly processed by the UN Refugee Agency rather than deploy “crude 
intimidation tactics”.

“Indonesia risks squandering the goodwill it generated when it provided 
assistance last year to hundreds of refugees and migrants who had been stranded 
on the Andaman Sea,” Josef Benedict from Amnesty International said.

This week’s actions by Indonesia “invite comparisons with other countries that 
have a notorious record of setting desperate people adrift and at risk of death 
on the high seas”, he added.

Australia’s policy of turning back boats has come under criticism by the UNHCR 
which says its approach in the region has created a “bottleneck” and placed 
more pressure on countries like Indonesia.

More than 13,000 refugees and asylum seekers are registered with the UNHCR in 
the archipelago and detention centres in Indonesia are overflowing.
 