
Indonesia’s President Joko Widodo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/joko-widodo> will fly to Australia 
this weekend, a trip seen as a high point in a often-tumultuous relationship 
that has gradually thawed since last year’s execution of two Australians.

The leader of the world’s most populous Muslim-majority nation, nicknamed 
Jokowi, will visit Sydney, for trade talks, and Canberra, where he will address 
parliament.

Bilateral relations between the two countries have suffered repeated hits and 
both sides have made efforts this year to fix them.

Jokowi’s Islamist challenge: curbing terrorism and religious intolerance | 
Melissa Crouch
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/31/jokowis-islamist-challenge-curbing-terrorism-and-religious-intolerance>
In 2013 it was revealed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/nov/18/australia-tried-to-monitor-indonesian-presidents-phone>
 that Australia’s spy agencies had attempted to listen in on the personal phone 
calls of the then-president, Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, and targeted the mobile 
phones of his wife.

And Indonesia was further frustrated that year after Canberra implemented a 
controversial policy of turning back boats of refugees. Several hundred asylum 
seekers continued to arrive inIndonesia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/indonesia> each month, having previously 
used it as a stopover point, and there are now more than 14,000 people stuck 
there.

The issue festered again this March when a freedom of information request 
revealed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/11/turnbacks-underway-when-indonesian-waters-breached-foi-documents-reveal>
 Australian maritime patrols had pushed back boats into Indonesian territorial 
waters six times. Australia had to apologise to Indonesia for the unintentional 
breaches of its waters.

Diplomatic spats between the two countries have led to low levels of trade and 
Australian foreign direct investment into Indonesia is substantially less than 
to other countries that are geographically further away.

Jokowi’s trip will be heavily focused on trade deals, as well as security 
cooperation, and the president will be hoping to secure Australian investment 
for infrastructure projects.

Indonesia’s trade minister, Enggartiasto Lukita, said 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FQ4KebPJJOE&feature=youtu.be> Australia had 
already made a request to pay the same sugar import tariff as Association of 
South-East Asian Nations (Asean) countries — at 5% compared with states outside 
the trade bloc. In return, Indonesia wanted to export biofuels at a set price, 
he added.

Australia is also seeking to secure assurances for exporting cattle to 
Indonesia, with sales to the south-east Asian country at well over AS$1bn a 
year. Indonesia hadsuggested 
<http://www.smh.com.au/world/indonesia-to-import-cattle-from-other-countries-to-reduce-reliance-on-australia-20160128-gmg96a.html>
 that it might reduce its reliance on Australia.

The visit follows a trip 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/12/malcolm-turnbull-arrives-in-indonesia-on-mission-to-heal-relationship>
 by Australia’s prime minister, Malcom Turnbull, in November last year and 
another meeting he held with Jokowi in Laos on the side of this year’s Asean 
summit.

Both events were strong signals that Australia was still seeking to restore 
the relationship after the executions of Australian drug smugglers Andrew Chan 
and Myuran Sukumaran, which led Canberra to temporarilyrecall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/29/bali-nine-executions-tony-abbott-to-recall-australias-ambassador-to-indonesia>
 its ambassador.

“It’s no longer the time for fragile egos and thin-skinned national pride. 
It’s time to roll up our sleeves and see what we can do together,” the former 
Indonesian trade minister Thomas Trikasih Lembongsaid 
<http://www.sbs.com.au/news/article/2016/10/17/trade-top-agenda-jokowis-first-australia-visit>
 last month.

Memories of Andrew Chan and Myuran Sukumaran can help us fight the death 
penalty | Brigid Delaney
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/28/memories-of-andrew-chan-and-myuran-sukumaran-can-help-us-fight-the-death-penalty>
The two countries have also found common interests in the South China Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-china-sea>, where Indonesia, as well 
as several other countries, have territorial disputes with China.

A joint statement released during a visit last month by Australia’s foreign 
minister,Julie Bishop <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/julie-bishop>
, to Indonesia said the two countries were “natural maritime partners”.

And on Tuesday, Bishop went further by announcing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/01/south-china-sea-australia-considers-joint-naval-patrols-with-indonesia>
 Australia was considering joint naval patrols with Indonesia in the contested 
waters.

“This is a regular part of what our navy does,” Bishop said. “This is part of 
our engagement in the region and this is in accordance with Australia’s right 
of freedom of navigation including in the South China Sea.”

 