
In the wake of Donald Trump’s presidential victory, it was said that Twitter 
had helped swing the election for the property developer, reality TV star and 
insatiable tweeter. But some of his more high-profile supporters on the 
so-called “alt-right 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/23/alt-right-movement-white-identity-breitbart-donald-trump>
” who have had theirTwitter accounts suspended 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/16/twitter-suspends-american-far-right-activists-accounts>
 are abandoning the platform in favour of a new social network calledGab 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/17/gab-alt-right-social-media-twitter>
.

The self-styled cult iconoclast Milo Yiannopoulos of Breitbart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/15/breitbart-news-alt-right-stephen-bannon-trump-administration>
 has apparently joined the likes of Trump attack-dogAnn Coulter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/02/ann-coulter-finally-candidate-cares-americans-interview-donald-trump>
 and the excitableAlex Jones of Infowars <http://www.infowars.com/> in signing 
up with Gab. There is even a parody RealPresidentTrump account that for a short 
while presented itself – all too convincingly – as the real thing.

And recently the white nationalist leader Richard B Spencer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/12/twitter-u-turn-banning-white-nationalist-richard-b-spencer-alt-right>
 went so far as to claim that Twitter had sent “execution squads across the 
alt-right” to purge users with far-right views. He predicted thatGab would be 
“the place where we go next”. 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-nation/wp/2016/11/28/white-nationalist-richard-spencers-ex-classmates-decry-him-by-raising-money-for-refugees/?utm_term=.0cfe30455979>

The brainchild of its 25-year-old Christian conservative founder, Andrew Torba,
Gab promises to guarantee free speech 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gab_(social_network)>, no matter how offensive. 
It is currently in the early “beta” stage of development and there is an 
extensive waiting list to join. When I applied, wanting to take a look at the 
site, I was told there were more than 400,000 applicants in front of me, and 
was advised that it could take a week before I was allowed on.

Instead I used the login of a colleague in America and spent 48 hours in a 
strange world of Trump worship, white nationalism, racism, conspiracy theory, 
gun idolatry and crass humour, all of it delivered with the righteous 
conviction of total certainty. The effect is a little like viewing the world 
through a circus mirror while being constantly told that this is what reality 
looks like.

The site is divided into 11 sections, including news, politics, technology, 
sport, art and philosophy, although the distinctions can often look arbitrary 
because a similar, slightly rabid rhetoric informs many of the postings, 
regardless of heading. Like a lot of social media it feels a bit empty, 
reminding you of that oldGertrude Stein quote 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/matt-werner/oakland-in-popular-memory_b_1560227.html>
 about her hometown of Oakland: there is no there there.

The way it works is that “Gabbers” can vote a post up or down, so that the 
most popular posting is at the top of the page. At the top of the politics page 
when I first checked in was a contribution from a poster named “Lord Humungus”. 
It featured a photograph of Michelle Obama and another of Melania Trump, along 
with the observation: “I’m proud to soon have a #FirstLady who’s actually 
pretty and more human than ape.”

That was the extent of the wisdom that had earned top spot in the politics 
listing. A little way down, Our Talking Points linked to a YouTube video that 
claimed that theSandy Hook school massacre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/dec/16/sandy-hook-classroom-massacre>, 
in which 20 children and six teachers were shot dead, was a hoax with the 
hashtag Newsisfaked! The belief that the shooting was staged, that the grieving 
parents are professional actors and that President Obama only pretended to cry 
while speaking about the tragedy are themes that break out across the site like 
acne.

Distrust of the mainstream media (MSM) is widespread on Gab, with posters 
often citing blogs, obscure news sites or Russian media for supporting 
evidence. The attitude is summed up by an image posted on the site of a 
tombstone with the engraving “2016 RIP Mainstream Media: lied, cheated and 
overplayed their hand”.

A notable outcome of the new anti-liberal political order that’s taking shape 
is that both the far right and far left are inclined to venerate the autocratic 
figure of Vladimir Putin, and in particular his murderous intervention in Syria.

Theresa May calls for international pressure on Putin over Syria
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/28/theresa-may-international-pressure-putin-russia-syria-civilian-bombing>
Several posters brought admiring attention to an interview with Syria’s 
president Bashar al-Assad 
<https://www.rt.com/news/370283-bashar-assad-rt-interview/> on the 
Russian-state fundedRussia Today, in which Assad claimed President Obama was 
behind the creation of Islamic State.

Not all Gab posters are paranoid conspiracy theorists, Putin-lovers and gun 
fanatics. There are some innocuous or mildly sceptical posters, and even one or 
two Democrats. Moreover, Torba insists that the site is open to everyone of 
whatever political persuasion. However, it’s clear that the overwhelming tone 
is of a politics that starts with Trump and moves swiftly and hysterically 
rightwards from there.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fgab-the-social-network-for-the-alt-right%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb20a134940806227ef9041cad7669a6780f376f2%2F0_215_5058_3035%2F5058.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Inside%20the%20hate-filled%20echo%20chamber%20of%20racism%20and%20conspiracy%20theories&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fgab-the-social-network-for-the-alt-right%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Inside%20the%20hate-filled%20echo%20chamber%20of%20racism%20and%20conspiracy%20theories&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fgab-the-social-network-for-the-alt-right%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb20a134940806227ef9041cad7669a6780f376f2%2F0_215_5058_3035%2F5058.jpg>
 Neo nazis join a Ku Klux Klan rally in South Carolina. In Gab, extremists have 
an new platform for their views. Photograph: John Moore/Getty Images 
And unsurprisingly, that politics is cock-a-hoop triumphalist at the moment. 
On the night of Trump’s victory, Torba wrote on his own site that “Gab is going 
to be absolutely massive under president Trump”. If the presidential election 
is the storm that has transformed the political waterfront, then Gab might be 
seen as a rock pool containing the incoming new life forms hoping to thrive in 
the storm’s wake.

Without exception, they look to the orange-faced tax-dodger as a kind of 
saviour figure. And for a while last week, many believed the great man was 
among them at Gab. The fake Trump account brought forth some heartfelt 
expressions of solidarity from those who believed, quite understandably, that 
the next president of the US had joined a meeting place for the deranged right.

As the contributor “Evil Bucket” touchingly put it: “Mr President I know I am 
just 1 in the millions of people trying to talk to you … But if I had the 
chance to say anything to you it would be. Help change the culture from a 
victim culture to a patriot culture.”

Judging by the sentiments expressed by so many Gabbers, it’s as if all their 
wishes will be granted the moment that Trump sets foot in the White House. It’s 
not so much that they see him as a brilliantly effective politician – how could 
they know, he’s never been a politician before – but rather as a symbol or 
“god-emperor”, as one poster referred to him, of a new era in which liberalism 
will be ruthlessly expunged from all corners of society.

A lot of it, in other words, is pure fantasy. After a while of reading post 
after post that insists Russia was not responsible for the Democratic National 
Committee hack, that Obama is “evil”, that Muslims are bad, that gun control is 
pernicious, that “liberalism is a plague” and so on, you gain the impression 
that this outpouring has little to do with any kind of political vision and 
much more about a release valve for people who probably don’t get out enough.

Gab is that theoretical oxymoron, a right-wing safe space, a refuge where 
people who feel alienated by the “liberal consensus” can go and mouth off in 
the happy knowledge that they won’t be banned.

It’s somewhere that you can feel comfortable making disparaging comments about 
Mexicans, blacks and Jews – as one poster put it, Gab is the place “you can go 
Jew-baiting without being shut down! And what is more fun than Jew-baiting!!??”.

And if you are someone who doesn’t thrill to that possibility, there are 
self-censoring facilities that enable you to block content containing words 
that might offend you. But that would be like travelling to Niagara Falls and 
steering clear of the waterfall.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2F3-million-criminal-immigrants-deported-donald-trump-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=3%20million%20'criminal'%20immigrants%20to%20be%20deported%2C%20says%20Donald%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2F3-million-criminal-immigrants-deported-donald-trump-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=3%20million%20%27criminal%27%20immigrants%20to%20be%20deported%2C%20says%20Donald%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2F3-million-criminal-immigrants-deported-donald-trump-video&media=>
3 million ‘criminal’ immigrants to be deported, says Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/14/3-million-criminal-immigrants-deported-donald-trump-video>
As long as you don’t incite violence, terrorism, show illegal pornography or 
disseminate the personal information of private individuals, you can say what 
you want on Gab. And what people want to say turns out to be remarkably 
predictable, often turgidly offensive and, after prolonged exposure, 
exceedingly dull.

However, that’s not necessarily such a bad thing. Twitter and Facebook are 
commercial enterprises that advertise themselves as neutral places of 
communication, which inevitably brings complications. Some of the fake news 
that Facebook promoted during the election is thought to have helped the Trump 
campaign. AndTwitter <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter>, which 
has been used to circulate Holocaust denial and other scandalous nonsense, is 
slowly coming round to a more interventionist monitoring of content.

But with Gab, everyone knows what they’re getting, and if they don’t, they 
soon will. Besides which, you have to apply to join, wait for a while, and then 
receive an invite. You therefore have to make a bit of effort to be offended. 
Who wants to go out of their way to get annoyed when all you have to do is turn 
on the news?

Perhaps the key question, though, is this: why settle for a fake presidential 
account when the real one, just as unbelievable, is still active on Twitter?

ALT-RIGHT VOICES

Breitbart 

Founded in 2007, the news site has hit headlines for its incendiary coverage 
of events such as the US election and the migrant crisis and for its 
high-profile alumni, including one-time Ukip leadership candidate Raheem 
Kassam, and Steve Bannon, Trump’s chief White House strategist. Former 
editor-at-large, Ben Shapiro, claims Bannon turned the site into a “Trump 
Pravda” that “openly embraced the white supremacist alt-right”.

American Renaissance

Billing itself as the world’s “premier race-realist site”, it features pieces 
advocating eugenics while maintaining an academic pretence. Founder, Jared 
Taylor, also sponsors conferences for alt-right “intellectuals” to rub 
shoulders.

4chan

The anonymous message-board is rife with misogyny, racism and politically 
incorrect humour. Its far-right leaning politics board drove movements such as
GamerGate <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gamergate>, produced white 
supremacist memes includingPepe the Frog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/29/pepe-the-frog-alt-right-mascot-racist-anti-semitic>
 and gave succour to the darker elements of Trump’s presidential supporters.
 