
Pass the security guards in their navy blue uniforms and white epaulettes, 
through the metal detectors that invariably beep (although no one seems to 
care), and you’re inside Jakarta’s glistening, marbled alternate reality: 
fluffy white clouds painted on the ceiling, gold lion fountain heads and glitzy 
designer stores that sell handbags that, for some, would cost an entire year’s 
wage.

For many well-heeled inhabitants of this steaming hot megalopolis, the 
megamall has all the answers you need – starting with air-conditioning. But 
there are also restaurants and playgrounds, nightclubs, bars, bookshops, gyms, 
salons, dentists, and doctors; there are supermarkets, gardens, karaoke 
parlours, cinemas, art galleries, and even evangelical churches. In Jakarta, 
the mall is a literal one-stop shop.

The city has an astounding 170 malls 
<http://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2014/10/31/jakarta-a-city-with-many-shopping-centers.html>
 – so many that, in 2011, worried authorities issued a moratorium on new ones 
in central Jakarta. Nevertheless, in a city with next to no open public space, 
Jakartans still invariably find themselves inside a mall with alarming 
frequency.

“Oh, I come to the mall every day,” laughs 25-year-old Faisyah Dyanti, who 
both works and hangs out at GrandIndonesia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/indonesia>, or GI, one of the higher-end 
megamalls in central Jakarta. “My office is right next to the mall so I come 
here to eat lunch. I prefer it because there is air-con and more choices.”

Over the years, mall upon mall has been tacked up in Jakarta – a resulting 
“mall sprawl” that has seen some malls situated just hundreds of metres away 
from one or even two comparable others, sharing many of the same shops.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fjakarta-megamalls-air-conditioned-alternate-reality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf004ac7b566088a5674d20b987207386f30bec3%2F0_0_4250_3425%2F4250.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Inside%20the%20bubble%3A%20the%20air-conditioned%20alternate%20reality%20of%20Jakarta's%20megamalls&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fjakarta-megamalls-air-conditioned-alternate-reality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Inside%20the%20bubble%3A%20the%20air-conditioned%20alternate%20reality%20of%20Jakarta%27s%20megamalls&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fjakarta-megamalls-air-conditioned-alternate-reality%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf004ac7b566088a5674d20b987207386f30bec3%2F0_0_4250_3425%2F4250.jpg>
 Plaza Indonesia is next door to Grand Indonesia 
But it’s not just about shopping. Malls in Jakarta effectively function as 
pseudo public spaces: a place to meet up with friends and family, take a walk, 
go out for meal or have a business meeting. Although the city’s planning law 
stipulates that 30% of land in Jakarta should be allocated as green space, in
reality it accounts for less than 10% 
<http://jakartaglobe.id/archive/green-space-is-not-wasted-space-and-jakartas-citizens-have-a-right-to-enjoy-it/>
.

If you go to a traditional market you have to blend in, you can’t dress up 
like this
Deborah 
“You know why we like to come to the mall? Because we don’t have any other 
places to go,” says Deborah, who is spending the afternoon shopping with her 
teenage daughter. “Even if we do, it takes for ever to get there. The traffic 
jams – oh my God, I don’t like it and I am Indonesian. The mall is 
headache-free: you just go there and come home, easy.”


Indeed, most people cite traffic as their main reason for spending an 
inordinate amount of time in the mall. But another apparent draw, in a country 
that is 90% Muslim, is the more liberal dress code.

“There is a different culture here. I saw one woman in hot pants and heels,” 
says Rita Damayanti, 29, a headscarf-wearing university lecturer from central 
Java who was visiting GI for the first time. “The combination is perfect … but 
they must be getting tired walking around the mall in those stilettos!”

“If you go to a traditional market you have to blend in, you can’t dress up 
like this,” agrees Deborah, gesturing to her above-the-knee denim skirt. “Each 
mall is different, but in central Jakarta you can wear what you want in the 
mall, and no one will stare.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fjakarta-megamalls-air-conditioned-alternate-reality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64977715e62a3202a11dd7003259f9aa871f5685%2F0_782_4250_2551%2F4250.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Inside%20the%20bubble%3A%20the%20air-conditioned%20alternate%20reality%20of%20Jakarta's%20megamalls&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fjakarta-megamalls-air-conditioned-alternate-reality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Inside%20the%20bubble%3A%20the%20air-conditioned%20alternate%20reality%20of%20Jakarta%27s%20megamalls&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fjakarta-megamalls-air-conditioned-alternate-reality%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64977715e62a3202a11dd7003259f9aa871f5685%2F0_782_4250_2551%2F4250.jpg>
 Visitors attend a product launch event by Studio Makeup in Grand Indonesia in 
central Jakarta 
Whether malls really offer Indonesia’s women more real freedom, however, is 
more hotly debated.

“At least we can learn diversity, but I’m still not talking about social 
justice,” says Indonesian author Ayu Utami. She says malls offer women a level 
of protection they don’t have on the streets, but it’s a false form of freedom.

Yet in the artificial bubble of the mall, she adds, Jakartans can learn new 
habits – such as a respect for diversity and non-smoking spaces. Before smoking 
was officially banned in malls, the only smoke-free spaces that were respected 
in the city were mosques and petrol stations, says Utami, only half jokingly.

“The street has its own norms, and the malls have their own norms, but of 
course it is a selective process,” Utami says. “Poor people cannot go inside 
the mall.”

Jakarta’s luxury malls are a world of their own: an incongruous social scene 
compared to the reality outside.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fjakarta-megamalls-air-conditioned-alternate-reality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9703ddb473b23e20df844887b0a1606941bb12c1%2F0_841_4250_2551%2F4250.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Inside%20the%20bubble%3A%20the%20air-conditioned%20alternate%20reality%20of%20Jakarta's%20megamalls&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fjakarta-megamalls-air-conditioned-alternate-reality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Inside%20the%20bubble%3A%20the%20air-conditioned%20alternate%20reality%20of%20Jakarta%27s%20megamalls&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fjakarta-megamalls-air-conditioned-alternate-reality%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9703ddb473b23e20df844887b0a1606941bb12c1%2F0_841_4250_2551%2F4250.jpg>
 A nanny minds a baby while the parents shop 
“Here you see a parade of characters, women dressed to the nines, wearing tens 
of thousands of dollars prancing around,” says Lydia Ruddy, a communications 
and policy analyst in Jakarta. “The family with the kids trailing around, the 
mum and her Gucci bag and the nanny in a $10 uniform because the baby can’t 
burp over mum’s blouse.”

One mall manager, who asked to remain anonymous, revealed that some of the 
high-end designer stores pay minimal or no rent; the idea being that their 
presence imbues the mall with glamour and prestige.

And while malls function in lieu of public spaces, they are hardly free. Even 
going to the mall costs money – you have to pay for parking, and if you want to 
sit down you have to order in a cafe or restaurant.

“You pay perhaps 10 to 50 times more for your food just because it’s in the 
mall,” says Marco Kusumawijaya of the Rujak Centre for Urban Studies, over a 
coffee at one of the few independent coffee shops in the city. “You pay for the 
marble floor, you pay for the freezing air-conditioning, the useless atrium and 
these expensive guards and sweepers.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fjakarta-megamalls-air-conditioned-alternate-reality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feccfb97a370b13d575f8d7de086bd658ea242dc9%2F0_873_4250_2551%2F4250.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Inside%20the%20bubble%3A%20the%20air-conditioned%20alternate%20reality%20of%20Jakarta's%20megamalls&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fjakarta-megamalls-air-conditioned-alternate-reality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Inside%20the%20bubble%3A%20the%20air-conditioned%20alternate%20reality%20of%20Jakarta%27s%20megamalls&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fjakarta-megamalls-air-conditioned-alternate-reality%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feccfb97a370b13d575f8d7de086bd658ea242dc9%2F0_873_4250_2551%2F4250.jpg>
 Thamrin City is a low-end shopping centre for cheap clothing 
It all seems rather bizarre in contrast to how millions of Jakartans actually 
live.

Waiting for his afternoon shift near the Green Bay Mall on the Pluit 
waterfront in north Jakarta, Ahmed Setiawan is busy feeding flies to his caged 
birds. He’s never been to Green Bay mall, and has no desire to go.

“That place is just for rich people. We can’t afford to go there. The salary 
of fishermen is just Rp20,000 [US$1.50] a day.

“Actually the mall is a disturbance. Before we used to look for bait and 
mussels in the water in front there, but now there’s hardly any fish. It’s very 
annoying, and the government doesn’t care. They just care about money.”

Around the corner, Rohani is selling rice and snacks from her wooden cart. 
She’s been to Green Bay once since it opened several years ago. “I went there 
when it was the birthday of the mall and there were fireworks,” she says. “I 
just looked once. Only once.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fjakarta-megamalls-air-conditioned-alternate-reality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F98bea7c8407a91d72960fec4f0876595c0317cb5%2F0_697_4250_2550%2F4250.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Inside%20the%20bubble%3A%20the%20air-conditioned%20alternate%20reality%20of%20Jakarta's%20megamalls&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fjakarta-megamalls-air-conditioned-alternate-reality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Inside%20the%20bubble%3A%20the%20air-conditioned%20alternate%20reality%20of%20Jakarta%27s%20megamalls&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fjakarta-megamalls-air-conditioned-alternate-reality%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F98bea7c8407a91d72960fec4f0876595c0317cb5%2F0_697_4250_2550%2F4250.jpg>
 Men fish at the back of Green Bay mall; they can’t afford to use the shopping 
centre as they only earn around $1.50 per day 
Rather than malls, traders and fishermen like Rohani and Setiawan go to 
traditional markets. These are clusters of bustling street-side stalls, wooden 
tables stacked with cheap clothing, fruit and vegetables, and meat carcasses 
hanging in the heat.

They also buy goods direct from street vendors, whose traditional wooden carts 
circle the localkampung neighbourhoods, selling everything from buckets and 
brooms to mountains of fruit.

It’s this colourful street life that is threatened by the ubiquity of malls – 
and the social inequity they represent, says Kusumawijaya.

Many malls in Jakarta grossly exceed the dimensions stipulated in the city’s 
2010 spatial planning bylaws. Yet developers are permitted to build wider and 
higher by paying compensation. Kusumawijaya believes this is a form of “spatial 
injustice”.

Welcome to Twitter city: is there no limit to Jakarta's social media obsession?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/nov/21/twitter-city-facebook-jakarta-live-week-social-media-obsession->
“Why can’t you build more for your house? Because you cannot pay the 
compensation, while these people are building more and more,” he says. “The 
problem is that every additional square metre means additional water extraction 
from the ground, additional electricity. This creates more of a burden on the 
city.”

Still, the realities of the outside world are easily forgotten in the mall, 
especially the fact that many Jakartans cannot afford to spend time there – 
including some of the employees.



But for many others, mall culture is the only type of urban experience they’ve 
ever known. At the Carnivalle section of GI – a virtual theme park – Herdi 
Herdiansyah, 32, a marketing consultant, rocks a pram with his six-month-old 
son amid the din and flashing lights.

“We’re just introducing him to the idea, for his eyes only. You know, so he 
won’t be too surprised when he grows up and is ready to play here.”


If you live or work in Jakarta, we’d love to hear from you. Share your ideas, 
thoughts, stories and pictureshere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/nov/14/the-future-of-jakarta-what-needs-to-change-share-your-thoughts>
. You can also contribute onTwitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and
Instagram <https://www.instagram.com/guardiancities/> using the hashtag 
#GuardianJakarta
 