
In Oakland’s commercial district, a diverse coalition of insurgents relieve 
shops of goods and light storefronts ablaze. Newly flush with fancy clothes, a 
group of workers evade marauding riot cops. Nearby, freed prisoners and 
neighboring citizens barricade the streets surrounding an occupied stadium. The 
military is expected to arrive in just a few days to decisively crush the 
rebellion.

This is one of the scenarios that plays out on the board of Bloc by Bloc, a 
cooperative tabletop strategy game that pits players against the authorities in 
a struggle to liberate the city. The “insurrection game”, as the creators, 
Rocket Lee and Tim Simons, bill it, is a not-for-profit project aimed, they 
say, at undermining imperialist themes in strategy games – and perhaps 
radicalizing unsuspecting players.

LA's black enclave buffeted by police pressure and tech-driven gentrification
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/01/venice-gentrification-oakwood-african-american-california>
The most popular games “really reinforce the worst elements of capitalism in 
our society: warfare, where you re-enact famous battles; colonization, where 
you conquer and dominate new territories; and industrial expansion, where you 
exploit for profit”, says Simons, while clutching dice. “When a riot escalates 
into a popular insurrection and begins to break down all types of social 
barriers – that’s what this game is about.”

Interest in Bloc by Bloc – which raised $49,000 from more than 800 supporters 
in acrowdfunding campaign 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/1604844025/bloc-by-bloc-the-insurrection-game>
 earlier this year – so far seems evenly split between serious gamers and 
serious activists. Initial feedback, though mostly positive, includes worries 
about the looting. “The looting card says ‘popular expropriation’ on it,” 
Simons says. “The loot represents material resources needed in a popular 
insurrection, plus taking back what’s stolen from people in a repressive 
society.”

One reviewer declined to cover Bloc by Bloc because it wasn’t 
“family-friendly”. “That response was so fascinating,” Lee says. “This isn’t a 
violent game, really, but people are uncomfortable about who the protagonists 
are and who the enemies are. In Call of Duty, it’s American soldiers killing 
terrorists; here, it’s regular folks fighting the police. The so-called 
protectors are in the role of people to be challenged.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbloc-by-bloc-board-game-gentrification-protest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad18678904d5ed448a7fb247b7c7ae4cf415d4b5%2F73_0_640_800%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Insurrection%20%E2%80%93%20the%20board%20game%3F%20Bloc%20by%20Bloc%20brings%20uprising%20to%20your%20living%20room&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbloc-by-bloc-board-game-gentrification-protest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Insurrection%20%E2%80%93%20the%20board%20game%3F%20Bloc%20by%20Bloc%20brings%20uprising%20to%20your%20living%20room&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbloc-by-bloc-board-game-gentrification-protest%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad18678904d5ed448a7fb247b7c7ae4cf415d4b5%2F73_0_640_800%2F640.jpg>
 ‘To honor the politics of the game, it had to be available for free as well.’ 
Photograph: Out of Order Games 
We were playing in their office in downtown Oakland, a city sometimes called 
the riot capital of the United States. The real-life streets outside the window 
had actually resembled gameplay only a couple of weeks prior to our game, when 
an estimated 10,000 people marched following the election of Donald Trump. As 
the night wore on, they responded to police teargas with fireworks and 
scattered flaming barricades throughout downtown.


That’s no coincidence. In Oakland in 2009, a public transit officer fatally 
shot Oscar Grant while he lay on his stomach, handcuffed. The ensuing marches, 
which foreshadowed the tactics and tone of the Black Lives Matter movement, 
struck Simons with their erosion of divisions between protesters. Bloc by 
Bloc’s collaborative gameplay, he explained, was directly inspired by that 
feeling ofcollective power 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/19/los-angeles-la-gentrification-resistance-boyle-heights>
 in therapidly gentrifying streets of Oakland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/21/oakland-housing-crisis-rising-rents-evictions>
.

Modular tiles representing discrete districts compose the cityscape. Up to 
four players represent allied groups: neighbors, students, prisoners, or 
workers. White wooden blocks represent the police. Simons and Lee spared few 
expenses producing the components – colorfully illustrated cards and attractive 
wood manufactured in the United States and Germany – but the source files are 
also available online. “To honor the politics of the game, it had to be 
available for free as well,” Simons says.

To reflect the infighting that characterizes uprisings, players may draw cards 
at the game’s outset that assign hidden agendas: vanguardist, nihilist, 
sectarian, or social. It’s possible that one player might seize power alone or 
otherwise betray solidarity. This wrench to the cooperative scenario, Lee 
explains, is partly about avoiding “quarterbacking”, a term for when players 
dictate actions to their peers.

“It’s a way to not re-enact power dynamics at the table,” says Lee, who 
focused on ethics in games as a graduate student at MIT. “You know, like when a 
white guy tells everyone what to do.”

Players’ key actions, determined by dice rolled and cards drawn, are based on 
what Lee and Simons consider the hallmarks of 20th-century urban rebellion: 
looting, barricading, marching, and improvising tools to clash with police.

A pamphlet inside the box recounts inspirational revolts from the last 10 
years. There’s Athens, Greece, in 2008, when anarchists raged after police 
fatally shot a teenager in the countercultural hub of Exarcheia; and Cairo in 
2011, when a popular uprising ousted the ruler Hosni Mubarak. “This new 
generation of insurrections draws its power from participatory, 
anti-authoritarian practices and a rejection of respectability politics,” 
Simons says. “Also, they’re all fundamentally anti-police.”

Virtual realty: can a computer game turn you into an ‘evil’ property developer?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/nov/09/virtual-realty-computer-game-evil-property-developer>
Especially influential on Bloc by Bloc is Oaxaca City, Mexico. In 2006, 
teacher demonstrations led to a rejection of the local government and police. 
An isolated urban uprising, though, does not make a revolution. After six 
months of hard-earned municipal independence, federal forces violently 
descended on Oaxaca City. So, win or lose in Bloc by Bloc, the game’s conceit 
goes, the military arrives at the end. “Oaxaca is where we got the idea for the 
countdown,” Simons says.

Victory comes at the end of eight turns, each of which represents a day and a 
night, if players have occupied enough of the designated state districts. After 
that, in the words of the manual, “a tense stalemate ensues [between troops and 
insurgents]. The liberated zones of the insurrection remain autonomous and 
vibrant with potential. Suddenly, it seems anything is possible.”
 