
Last year saw the highest costs from natural disasters since 2012, with two 
earthquakes in Japan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/16/japan-hit-by-second-powerful-earthquake-with-fears-of-more-to-come>
 in April accounting for the heaviest losses, a leading insurer has said.

Climate change threatens ability of insurers to manage risk
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/07/climate-change-threatens-ability-insurers-manage-risk>
Losses from natural disasters worldwide totalled $175bn (£142bn) last year, 
some $50bn of which was covered by insurance, Munich Re said in an annual 
survey on Wednesday.

The earthquakes on Japan’s southern Kyushu island caused $31bn worth of 
damage, with $6bn of the costs covered by insurance.Floods in China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2011/jun/17/china-evacuation-floods> 
in June and July caused $20bn in costs, only $300m of which was insured.

The third-costliest disaster was Hurricane Matthew 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/06/hurricane-matthew-haiti-rescuers-battle-reach-remote-areas>
, which hit the Caribbean and the eastern US in October. It incurred losses 
totalling $10.2bn, of which $3.8bn was covered by insurance.

In 2015, when the El Niño 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/oct/23/el-nino-la-nina-drought-flood-weatherwatch>
 weather phenomenon reduced hurricane activity in the North Atlantic, global 
natural disaster losses totalled $103bn,$32bn of that sum insured 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/04/insurers-paid-out-26-billion-dollars-natural-disaster-claims->
. However, the number of people killed dropped to 8,700 last year from 25,400 
the previous year.

Michael Bloomberg and Mark Carney: How to make a profit from defeating climate 
change
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/14/bloomberg-carney-profit-from-climate-change-right-information-investors-deliver-solutions>
Last year’s losses were “in the mid-range” after three years of relatively low 
costs, Munich Re board member Torsten Jeworrek said in a statement. He stressed 
that “losses in a single year are obviously random and cannot be seen as a 
trend”.

The company said there was an “exceptional” number of floods, which accounted 
for 34% of overall losses, compared with an average of 21% over the past decade.

Those included $6bn in losses, about half of them insured, resulting from 
storms and flooding in Europe – particularlyin Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/30/four-dead-after-severe-floods-hit-southern-germany>
 and theParis region 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/10/paris-floods-made-almost-twice-as-likely-by-climate-change-say-scientists>
 – in May and June.

Jeworrek said that “the high percentage of uninsured losses, especially in 
emerging markets and developing countries, remains a concern”.
 