
The campaign to persuade Barack Obama to allow the NSA whistleblower Edward 
Snowden <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/edward-snowden> to return home to 
the US without facing prolonged prison time has received powerful new backing 
from some of the most experienced intelligence experts in the country.


Edward Snowden downplays Trump victory: he's 'just the president'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/21/edward-snowden-donald-trump-election-victory>
Fifteen former staff members of the Church committee, the 1970s congressional 
investigation into illegal activity by the CIA and other intelligence agencies, 
have written jointly to Obama calling on him to end Snowden’s “untenable exile 
in Russia, which benefits nobody”. Overeight pages 
<https://fenton.egnyte.com/fl/x1pPckyQ94#folder-link/?p> of tightly worded 
argument, they remind the president of the positive debate that Snowden’s 
disclosures sparked – prompting one of the few examples of truly bipartisan 
legislative change in recent years.

They also remind Obama of the long record of leniency that has been shown by 
his own and previous administrations towards those who have broken secrecy 
laws. They even recall how their own Church committee revealed that six US 
presidents, from Franklin Roosevelt to Richard Nixon, were guilty of abusing 
secret powers.

“There is no question that Snowden broke the law. But previous cases in which 
others violated the same law suggest leniency. And most importantly, Snowden’s 
actions were not for personal benefit, but were intended to spur reform. And 
they did so,” the signatories write.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F22%2Fedward-snowden-work-not-finished-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F5%2F21%2F1432211360823%2FKP_237043_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Edward%20Snowden%3A%20my%20work%20is%20not%20finished%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F22%2Fedward-snowden-work-not-finished-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Edward%20Snowden%3A%20my%20work%20is%20not%20finished%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F22%2Fedward-snowden-work-not-finished-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F5%2F21%2F1432211360823%2FKP_237043_crop_640x480.jpg>
Edward Snowden: my work is not finished 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2015/may/22/edward-snowden-work-not-finished-video>
The Church committee, or the US Senate select committee to study government 
operations with respect to intelligence activities, to give it its full name, 
sat in 1975-76 at a time of deep public anxiety about the rogue work of federal 
agencies. The aftershocks of Watergate were still being felt, andSeymour Hersh 
<https://s3.amazonaws.com/s3.documentcloud.org/documents/238963/huge-c-i-a-operation-reported-in-u-s-against.pdf>
 had exposed in the New York Times mass illegal activities by the CIA, 
including routine surveillance of anti-war groups.

As the 15 staff members point out, the committee investigation led to the 
disclosure of jaw-dropping illegal acts including the planting of an FBI 
informant inside the civil rights group the NAACP, attempts to push Martin 
Luther King into killing himself, and Cointelpro, the vast program run secretly 
by the FBI to disrupt progressive organisations in the US.

The lead signatories of the Obama letter are Frederick Schwarz, who was chief 
counsel to the Church committee and is now at the Brennan Center for Justice, 
and William Green Miller, the committee’s staff director who went on to become 
US ambassador to Ukraine in the 1990s. Together with their fellow former 
staffers, they add heft to acampaign 
<https://composer.gutools.co.uk/content/pardonsnowden.org> to pardon Snowden 
that has already attracted thesupport <https://pardonsnowden.org/supporters> of 
prominent public figures including the co-founder of Apple Steve Wozniak, 
philanthropist George Soros and Tim Berners-Lee, who invented the world wide 
web.

Privacy experts fear Donald Trump running global surveillance network
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/11/trump-surveillance-network-nsa-privacy>
In their letter, which they have also sent to the US attorney general, Loretta 
Lynch, the 15 cite the formerCIA <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/cia> 
director David Petraeus as an example of the kind of official leniency that has 
so far eluded Snowden. Petraeus violated both the law and national security by 
leaking confidential information to his biographer and lover, then lied about 
it to the FBI.

“Yet he was allowed to plead guilty to just one misdemeanor for which he 
received no jail time,” the letter says. The reference to Petraeus is pointed 
at a time when the former military commander is beingactively considered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/28/donald-trump-vacant-secretary-state-position-david-petraeus-mitt-romney-senator-bob-corke>
 by President-elect Donald Trump to become US secretary of state.

Trump gains no mention in the former staffers’ plea to Obama, but he is the 
elephant in the room. The letter writers state euphemistically: “As the US 
relationship withRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> 
deteriorates, the risk to all interests involved increases.”

They stop short of adding that Trump’s close ties 
<http://time.com/4433880/donald-trump-ties-to-russia/> to Russia, and his 
notorious flattery towards Vladimir Putin, could imperil Snowden’s current 
asylum in that country.
 