
Alison Reid and I opened DIESEL, A Bookstore <http://www.dieselbookstore.com/> 
in 1989 in Emeryville, California: a corrupt, fading Chandleresque industrial 
town which was filling up with artists’ lofts, and would eventually transform 
into a biotech and digital startup industrial park with several shopping malls. 
Before the transformation was complete we moved our store back to our original 
stomping grounds in North Oakland. We had both worked in bookstores before and 
didn’t feel there was a bookstore in the East Bay that we wanted to work in, so 
we decided to open our own. A combination of a respectful workplace and a 
dynamic interaction with readers, along with an eclectic and lively selection 
of books on all subjects was what were shooting for; the kind of neighborhood 
bookstore every neighborhood should have.

Our first thought was to be a 24-hour bookstore/bar/cafe, but we scaled that 
back a bit. We’ve been there for the last 20 years and added three 
stores—Malibu, LA, and Marin. –John Evans

What’s your favourite section in the store?

Brad Johnson (store manager, Oakland): I’m torn between Belle Lettres and 
Poetry, which is fitting since many of us are forever arguing about books that 
could be shelved in both. Poor Maggie Nelson has seen her bookBluets relocated 
so often I sometimes have to double-check where we’re keeping it. Fortunately, 
it usually ends up on display somewhere. Anything where language takes 
precedence over plot, I’m usually plundering for my staff recommendations and 
adorning with shelf-talkers.

If you had infinite space what would you add?

Brad: I want to say a bar, but realize my co-workers will read this and add it 
to their growing list of reasons to be concerned about my health and 
well-being. Besides, we have a marvelous ad hoc bar behind the register, for 
readings and “what-not” (aka, winding down from a particularly busy Saturday 
shift). So, no, I’m not going to say a bar. I will, instead add another floor 
(above or below), in which we might have a bar, but also more books, possibly a 
small DVD store and/or viewing space. I think the best bookstores are cultural 
hubs that can pretty regularly refashion their space.

John Evans (owner): I would want a record/CD store within the store and even 
possibly a musical instrument store, along with a regular music performance 
space.

What do you do better than any other bookstore?

Brad: I really hope we maintain this sense that we’re a small, local 
store—where names and reading tastes are remembered, conversations pick up 
where they left off, etc.—where something new can be discovered each time you 
visit. We pack a lot of books in this space, and we’re regularly switching up 
displays to insure the ones that aren’t necessarily ordered in stacks get the 
sort of attention they deserve.

John: I find most bookstores that say that they are the best at something are 
mistaken. However, one of our strengths is our working philosophy of mutual 
respect for each other, for the readers that shop with us, and those in the 
wider book world. Most of us also have either eerie biblio-intuitive skills, 
photographic memory, or encyclopedic recall, all of which come in awfully handy.
 Photograph: Literary Hub 
Who’s your favourite regular?

Brad: My favourite regular is this little girl who comes in with her dad, 
usually right around closing time, and has this cutest, cartoon-kid voice, 
squealing with excitement at being in a bookstore. I can’t make out most of 
what she is saying, but “BOOKS” is so clearly articulated, and she wails so 
loudly when her dad tries to coax her out the door, that I’m always happy to 
stay open as late as necessary when she visits.

What’s the craziest situation you’ve ever had to deal with in the store?

Brad: If by ‘crazy’ you mean “delightful as hell,” I’d have to say the ‘Black 
Lives Matters’ carolers who came in on Christmas Eve. Roughly 50 or so people 
filled the store, on one of the busiest days of the year, singing songs with 
lyrics dramatically changed into protest songs, ending with a recital of names 
of those killed by police in 2014. It was, suffice it to say, intense. Happily, 
if any were upset by it, none said so to me.

What’s your earliest/best memory about visiting a bookstore as a child?

John: My brother and his wife, who were 10 years older than me, lived in 
Boston, and when we visited them once we went to a bookstore. While there I 
completely lost track of my family. They may have left me there for all I 
remember. But while there I sunk into the atmosphere, tone, reality of the 
place. They sold paperbacks and cassettes (this was around 1970 and I was 
around 13). I browsed the books, eventually picking three of them. I overheard 
the conversations between customers and booksellers when I wasn’t perusing a 
book and loved the range of styles and topics discussed. I thought “This would 
be a good job.” The three books I got wereMythologies by W. Butler Yeats, and 
The Aleph and Labyrinths by Borges. Destiny.

What’s been the biggest surprise about running a bookstore?

Brad: Frankly, that I like it so much. For most of my adult life I’ve been 
looking for something I could call a ‘vocation’ or ‘craft.’ I poured lots of 
time and money into getting a PhD, in hopes that academia might scratch that 
itch. It wasn’t until I went back to bookselling, though, that everything kind 
of clicked: where my intellectual interests met the public performance and 
various administrative skills picked up along the way.

John: How perpetually exciting, fascinating, and seemingly made-for-me it is. 
Also, how deeply affecting it is to so many people, of such variety, every day.

The staff shelf

What are the staff at DIESEL reading?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-diesel-a-bookstore-in-california%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f2b1962b27984f01909c333e476e17cee12f976%2F0_0_1568_2533%2F1568.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20bookstore%3A%20DIESEL%2C%20A%20Bookstore%20in%20California&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-diesel-a-bookstore-in-california%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20bookstore%3A%20DIESEL%2C%20A%20Bookstore%20in%20California&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-diesel-a-bookstore-in-california%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f2b1962b27984f01909c333e476e17cee12f976%2F0_0_1568_2533%2F1568.jpg>
 * The Myth of Wu Tao-Tzu by Sven Lindqvist (2012). Chris recommends: “In a 
hundred pages, Lindqvist moves elegantly from meditations on the power of art 
to the problems of social inequality. Through gorgeous language and striking 
imagery, this part-moral coming-of-age story, he explores the purpose of art in 
a world of suffering.” 
 * The Argonauts by Maggie Nelson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/apr/23/the-argonauts-maggie-nelson-review-harry-dodge-transgender>
 (2015). Brad recommends: “The deeply personal nature of Nelson’s writing is 
tectonic, as she shifts between autobiography, poetry, and critical analysis in 
such a seamless way that the seismic rumbles may not be immediately noticeable. 
Until, that is, you look up from your reading, and see that the landscape 
around you has changed. The Argonauts will be a revelation for many who have 
never read Maggie Nelson, and a new beginning for those who have.”  <> Facebook 
 
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-diesel-a-bookstore-in-california%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ed9cfea8396f844eaea7383cf18eeb79452e2c7%2F0_0_1684_2560%2F1684.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20bookstore%3A%20DIESEL%2C%20A%20Bookstore%20in%20California&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-diesel-a-bookstore-in-california%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20bookstore%3A%20DIESEL%2C%20A%20Bookstore%20in%20California&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-diesel-a-bookstore-in-california%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ed9cfea8396f844eaea7383cf18eeb79452e2c7%2F0_0_1684_2560%2F1684.jpg>
 * Wages of Rebellion by Chris Hedges (2015). John recommends: “World-class 
journalist Chris Hedges’ new book, Wages of Rebellion, is simultaneously a 
meditation on the histories of rebellion and revolution; a call to action; and 
an analysis of effective strategies for possibly achieving lasting social 
change. It is well-written, clear-eyed, and timely. This is a book for our 
historical moment.”  