
As unfortunate as it may seem, a season of success such as enjoyed by 
Inverness Caledonian Thistle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/invernesscaledonianthistle> immediately 
triggers thoughts of how the club can possibly improve. Their manager, John 
Hughes, admitted as much after Saturday’s Scottish Cup triumph.

An 86th-minute James Vincent goal secured the first piece of major silverware 
for the Highland side 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/30/inverness-caledonian-thistle-falkirk-scottish-cup-match-report>
, 21 years after their formation. Falkirk were unfortunate to lose by the odd 
goal in three. Inverness had already taken third place in the Scottish top 
flight, earning them a place in Europe. On Sunday Inverness hosted an open-top 
bus parade in recognition of the efforts of Hughes and his players.

Inverness Caledonian Thistle 2-1 Falkirk | Scottish Cup final match report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/30/inverness-caledonian-thistle-falkirk-scottish-cup-final-match-report>
“To be honest, I don’t think we will go and achieve what we have done this 
year – it has been a remarkable season,” Hughes said. “I asked everyone to sign 
up for it at the start of the season: ‘What are you going to do to be a 
winner?’ And they have really taken it on board.

“What you have to do is dampen down the expectation and just keep going. That 
is a test of your character and will – if you can keep going, keep together and 
dig it out. That’s what we do in Inverness. Always underdogs and always a siege 
mentality.”

Hughes’s task will inevitably be made tougher by the loss of key players. The 
Inverness captain, Graeme Shinnie, has signed for Aberdeen. Marley Watkins, who 
scored the first goal againstFalkirk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/falkirk>, is out of contract and likely 
to depart, as is the striker Edward Ofere.

“We are going to lose a few,” Hughes added. “Shinnie’s away, Marley might go, 
big Edward will probably go. We just have to rebuild and start again. We still 
have the nucleus of the backbone of the team and if we can keep everyone injury 
free we are not a bad team. I think that shows up in the league. We are still 
hopeful that big Ofere and Marley will stay here. I have enjoyed working with 
them but they are in freedom of contract; any suitors that are after them, 
seeing Marley in the cup final, someone will take a chance on him and, if so, 
he goes with our best wishes.”

Inverness 2-1 Falkirk | Scottish Cup final match report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/30/inverness-caledonian-thistle-falkirk-scottish-cup-match-report>
For Hughes this represents a career highlight. He had previously endured a 
patchy managerial record, including a sacking by Hartlepool United.

“I have always been a dreamer,” he said. “I have always had great belief in 
what we do and the style of football we play.

“I do not have a big ego, I just love being involved in football, winning 
Scottish Cups and doing what we do, with the style of football. Through it all 
is the style of football we play; these players have taken that on and 
implemented it. That’s my biggest buzz.”
 