
Investigators have returned to the wreckage of an air crash in Colombia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/29/plane-carrying-brazilian-footballers-team-chapecoense-crashes-en-route-to-medellin>
 that killed 71 people including most of Brazil’s Chapecoense football team as 
unconfirmed reports suggested the plane was low on fuel or suffered an 
electrical fault.

By nightfall on Tuesday, rescuers had recovered most of the bodies, which were 
to be repatriated toBrazil <https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil> and 
Bolivia, where the passengers and nine-person crew were from, and had located 
both flight data recorders. Soldiers guarded the hillside crash site overnight.

Only six people – three players, a journalist and two crew members – survived 
the crash on Monday night when Chapecoense’s charter plane, an Avro RJ85, hit a 
mountain en route to the team’s Copa Sudamericana showdown in Medellín.


Tragedy strikes Chapecoense, serial overachievers dubbed a ‘Brazilian 
Leicester’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/29/chapecoense-brazilian-football-team-plane-crash-colombia>
Of the players, goalkeeper Jakson Follmann was recovering from the amputation 
of his right leg, doctors said. Another player, defender Hélio Neto, remained 
in intensive care with severe trauma to his skull, thorax and lungs.


Fellow defender Alan Ruschel had spine surgery.

Investigators from Brazil flew to join Colombian counterparts checking two 
black boxes from the crash site on a muddy hillside in wooded highlands near 
the town of La Unión.

Bolivia, where the charter company LaMia was based, and the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/29/british-investigators-fly-to-colombia-to-help-examine-plane-crash>
, where the plane, a variant of the BAE 146, was manufactured, also sent 
experts to help the investigation.

Colombia’s El Tiempo newspaper cited crews from planes approaching Medellín 
airport on Monday night as saying the pilot of Chapecoense’s flight shouted 
over the radio that he was running out of fuel and needed to make an emergency 
landing.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fchapecoense-fans-mourn-colombia-plane-crash-victims-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chapecoense%20fans%20mourn%20plane%20crash%20victims%20at%20football%20stadium%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fchapecoense-fans-mourn-colombia-plane-crash-victims-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chapecoense%20fans%20mourn%20plane%20crash%20victims%20at%20football%20stadium%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fchapecoense-fans-mourn-colombia-plane-crash-victims-video&media=>
Chapecoense fans mourn plane crash victims at football stadium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/nov/29/chapecoense-fans-mourn-colombia-plane-crash-victims-video>
Landing priority was given to a plane from the VivaColombia airline, which had 
already reported instrument problems, the paper said.

Shortly afterwards the pilot of the Chapecoense plane told the control tower 
he was experiencing electrical difficulties before the radio went silent, the 
paper quoted the sources as saying.

Another survivor, Bolivian flight technician Erwin Tumiri, said he survived 
because he strictly followed safety instructions.

“Many passengers got up from their seats and started yelling. I put the bag 
between my legs and went into the foetal position as recommended,” he told 
Colombia’s Caracol Radio.

Bolivian stewardess Ximena Suárez, another survivor, said the lights went out 
less than a minute before the plane slammed into the mountain, according to 
Colombian officials in Medellín.

Doctors said Suárez and Tumiri were shaken and bruised but not in critical 
condition, while journalist Rafael Valmorbida was in intensive care for 
multiple rib fractures that partly collapsed a lung.
 