
Unless Saracens <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> suffer an 
outbreak of triskaidekaphobia – fear of the number 13 – at Sale , they should 
equal Munster’s record of successive victories in the European Cup in what has 
been a remarkable year for the champions, who also hold the Premiership.

Owen Farrell and George Kruis have tasted defeat once this year, at Harlequins 
in January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/09/harlequins-saracens-premiership-match-report>
. They have played 27 matches for their club and England, who went through 2016 
unbeaten with 13 victories in 13 Tests, while the Vunipola brothers, Mako and 
Billy, have been on the losing side twice, against Quins on each occasion, 
having made 35 and 31 appearances respectively.

The match against Sale, who were thrashed 50-3  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/10/saracens-sale-european-champions-cup-match-report>
at Allianz Park last Saturday, is Saracens’ penultimate match of a year that 
will for them end against Newcastle at home on Christmas Eve. The year started 
with a defeat that ended a run of 15 consecutive victories in all competitions 
and, other than Harlequins, no one has beaten Saracens when they have had all 
their England players available. At least one victory has been recorded against 
every other side in the Premiership, including both the relegated London Irish 
and promoted Bristol.

Maro Itoje the superman in ruthless Saracens’ six-try sacking of Sale
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/10/saracens-sale-european-champions-cup-match-report>
Sale <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/salesharks> lost to Saracens this 
season in front of their own supporters, 28-13 in the league last month during 
the autumn international series. The Sharks have lost their past five matches 
and are not enjoying the home comforts of previous seasons with Gloucester, 
Saracens, Exeter and Toulon all leaving Salford victorious in the past three 
months.

“Our consistency gives us the fear factor,” says the Saracens’ outside-half, 
Alex Lozowski, one of the new members of the squad from last season. “We have 
not lost in Europe for ages [13-9 to Clermont Auvergne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/apr/18/clermont-auvergne-saracens-european-rugby-champions-cup-report>
 in the April 2015 semi-final], but I wouldn’t say teams are looking at us 
thinking we are unbeatable; every club believes they can beat another. When you 
play you have to have belief: you cannot go into a match thinking you are going 
to lose.

“The players are desperate to do well again in Europe this year and I would 
love to win it for the first time but no one is talking about last season. The 
focus is simply on going as far as we can in the tournament and, while we have 
made a good start in the group, there are teams who have put in good 
performances and are looking really strong.

“The sooner you can qualify for the quarter-finals the better and we need to 
play well at Sale to put us in the driving seat in the pool. We want to come 
back into the competition in January in a really strong position to top the 
group, which is why Sunday is a massively important game for us.”

Sale are out of contention for a place in the last eight after losing their 
opening three pool matches and failing to pick up a bonus point. Their priority 
is to avoid sliding down the Premiership table any further and joining 
Worcester and Bristol in the relegation fight.

Their preparations this week were disrupted by a dispute with Castleford over 
Denny Solomona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/13/sale-controversial-denny-solomona-deal-castleford-rugby-league-union>
, who signed for the Sharks on a three-year deal despite having a contract with 
the rugby league club.The Tigers have issued a high court writ against Sale for 
damages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/13/castleford-high-court-sue-denny-solomona-sale-switch>
. Solomona makes his debut for Sale on the right wing with another recent 
league recruit, Josh Charnley, on the left. Steve Diamond has made five changes 
in the pack, all in the second row, where Josh Beaumont is unavailable through 
injury, and the back row.

Castleford to sue Denny Solomona and Sale over cross-code switch
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/13/castleford-high-court-sue-denny-solomona-sale-switch>
“Saracens showed what a great team they have when they beat us last weekend 
but we didn’t play well and you can’t afford one yellow card let alone three if 
you are going to challenge them,” says Sale’s director of rugby.

“It’s been a tough week on the training field. We have some big games coming 
up. The lads are hurting at the moment and wanting to get back to the way we 
all know they can perform.”

Saracens have made two personnel changes, with the hooker Jamie George 
dropping to the bench and Jackson Wray replacing Kelly Brown in the back row.

It is nearly two years since Saracens lost a European Cup pool match away from 
home, at Clermont 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/25/clermont-auvergne-saracens-european-champions-cup-match-report>
, in a season when they recorded a back-to-back double over Sale. History, if 
little else, offers hope for Sale. In 1982 Argentina conceded 50 points in 
losing to South Africa in Pretoria. When they played them again the following 
week, they won 21-12, with their outside-half, Hugo Porta, scoring all their 
points.
 