
Iran’s supreme leader has said Saudi Arabian authorities “murdered” Muslim 
pilgrims who were injured during last year’shajj 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/hajj> stampede, as Mecca prepares to host 
the annual event again.

“The heartless and murderous Saudis locked up the injured with the dead in 
containers — instead of providing medical treatment and helping them or at 
least quenching their thirst. They murdered them,” Ayatollah Ali Khamenei said 
in astatement on his website  
<http://english.khamenei.ir/news/4121/Hajj-hijacked-by-oppressors-Muslims-should-reconsider-management>
marking the anniversary of the disaster and calling for new management of the 
event. He offered no evidence to support the allegations.

The Hajj crush: ‘It was the closest thing to hell on earth’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/dec/23/hajj-crush-pilgrimage-mecca-stampede-saudi-arabia-mina-valley>
Saudi Arabia’s crown prince and interior minister, Mohammed bin Nayef, said 
Iran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> was attempting to “politicise” 
the hajj.

In comments published later on Monday by the Saudi Press Agency, he said Iran 
haddecided not to send its citizens to the pilgrimage this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/29/iran-pilgrims-will-not-attend-hajj-amid-row-with-saudi-arabia>
, which starts on Friday. Iran accuses Saudi Arabia of sabotaging negotiations 
that took place earlier this year regarding the security of pilgrims.

The September 2015 stampede and crush of pilgrims killed at least 2,426 people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/03/hajj-crush-how-crowd-disasters-happen-and-how-they-can-be-avoided>
, according to an Associated Press count. Tehran has said 464 of the dead were 
Iranian and blamed the catastrophe on Saudi mismanagement of the annual 
pilgrimage.

Khamenei has also blamed Saudi Arabia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia> for an earlier crane collapse 
in Mecca that killed 111 people, and said the kingdom’s rulers had were 
“satans”.

“Those who have reduced Hajj <https://www.theguardian.com/world/hajj> to a 
religious-tourist trip and have hidden their enmity and malevolence towards the 
faithful and revolutionary people of Iran under the name of ‘politicising 
hajj’, are themselves small and puny satans who tremble for fear of 
jeopardising the interests of the Great Satan, the US,” he said in the 
statement.

A top Saudi official said Khamenei’s accusations reflect “a new low”.

“These accusations are not only unfounded, but also timed to only serve their 
unethical, failing propaganda,” said Abdulmohsen Alyas, the Saudi 
undersecretary for international communications and media at the Ministry of 
Culture and Information.

“Saudi Arabia stands ready to serve the pilgrims and ensure their safety and 
comfort,” Alyas said.

Iranian foreign ministry spokesman Bahram Ghasemi said the ministry has formed 
a committee to investigate the issue and pursue it in international forums, 
without elaborating.

The hajj stampede caused a new flare-up in tensions between Iran and Saudi 
Arabia, regional rivals that back opposite sides in the civil wars in Syria and 
Yemen. The two countries severed diplomatic relations in January after Saudi 
Arabia executed a prominent Shiite cleric and angry Iranian crowds overran 
Saudi diplomatic missions.

Saudi authorities have not released the findings of their investigation into 
the hajj disaster. Preliminary statements suggested the crush was caused when 
at least two large crowds intersected.

Saudi Arabia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia> is this year 
issuing pilgrims with electronic bracelets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/04/saudi-arabia-tightens-up-hajj-planning-avoid-repeat-2015-disaster>
 and using more surveillance cameras to avoid a repeat of the crush.
 