
The morning of 20 January 1992 began much like any other for the Mohammed 
family in the marshlands of southernIraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq>. Rising at first light, they roused 
their herd of buffaloes and drove the beasts snorting and protesting into the 
surrounding wetlands to graze. After a quick breakfast of bread and yoghurt, 
washed down with sugary tea, they readied themselves for a long day out on the 
water.

But on that day, one of the coldest on record, five-year-old Hanaa and her 
mother caught no fish and gathered no reeds. No sooner had they paddled past 
the last of their neighbours’ floating reed houses than a squadron of 
government fighter jets emerged from the mist, guns blazing. They reduced the 
artificial islets to embers, and killed many of the buffaloes. Not content with 
shooting up a few villages as punishment for locals’ alleged harbouring of 
defeated Shia rebels, Saddam Hussein soon dispatched his engineers to divert 
the Tigris and Euphrates rivers away from the marshes. The effects were 
disastrous. By the turn of the last century,the Middle East’s largest wetlands 
had withered <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2001/may/19/iraq.timradford> 
from a peak of 20,000 sq km to almost nothing.
 Satellite view of the wetlands in southern Iraq in February 2000, and in 
February 2010. Photograph: Modis/Terra/Nasa  See the full visual 
“There were no fish, no grasses, so of course we couldn’t stay,” remembers 
Hanaa, now in her 20s and a mother of four. “The village just died.”

However, in March this year, almost 25 years since she and her siblings were 
pushed off their land and into the slums of a nearby city, Hanaa and some of 
her former neighbours will be making a triumphant homecoming.

Authorities in Baghdad are rebuilding these lost communities. They are keen to 
resettle properly at least some of the roughly 250,000 Marsh Arabs who have 
trickled back to the area since it was partially re-flooded more than 10 years 
ago. At a time when some3 million other Iraqis <http://www.unocha.org/iraq> 
have been displaced by Isis-fuelled violence, officials see this as a crucial 
step in righting the wrongs of a previous conflict.

“These are our marshes, they’re a key part of our heritage, and we’re doing 
everything we can to get the water to them to preserve them,” said Hassan 
Janabi, the minister of water resources. In July,Iraq’s marshes were listed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/18/iraqi-marshlands-named-as-unesco-world-heritage-site>
 as a Unesco world heritage site.

Last summer, the ministry sent in an excavator to dredge up tonnes of wetland 
mud and mould it into 43 islands. The soon-to-be-residents, all of whom lived 
here before it was drained, are building their own houses. Most turned to the 
old tribal sheikh for mediation in divvying up the properties.

Related: UK government faces calls to shelter Yazidi refugees persecuted by 
Isis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/26/uk-government-calls-shelter-yazidi-refugees-persecuted-isis>

Life in these picture-postcard villages could be tough and unforgiving. Few 
had schools, even fewer had a health clinic, and none had electricity. It’s the 
memory of these less than idyllic conditions that appears to have persuaded 
many of the returnees to rebuild along the roads that Saddam’s army created 
through the marshes – where the amenities are superior – rather than chancing 
their luck out on the open water.

The new Ghubbah will be better laid out and equipped than its previous 
incarnation, local proponents of the plan say. With an entire island dedicated 
to “infrastructure”, notably a classroom and a water filtration system, it will 
boast facilities of which its former residents can be proud.

Many of them, particularly those who spent a decade in exile in neighbouring 
Iran, will just be pleased to return home. “Everything we do – from buffalo 
breeding to fishing – is connected to the water, so it’s good to live in the 
middle of the water,” said Haidar Hammeed, whose family have gone from one 
temporary lodging to another over the past few years. “It’s more practical.”

Coming at a time of conflict and low oil prices, which has seen the ministry 
of water resources’ allocation from the state’s capital investment fund cut 
from $1.7bn (£1.4bn) in 2013 to $90m (£73m) in 2016, some wonder if this is the 
best use of scarce resources. But the minister and local NGOs insist this is no 
mere aesthetic exercise.
 Abu Sabah, a Marsh Arab, cuts down reeds at the Chebayesh marsh in Nassiriya. 
Photograph: Thaier Al-Sudani / Reuters/Reuters 
Ever since the Marsh Arabs were pushed into exile, their unique culture has 
been steadily eroded by more socially conservative norms. Where once they sang 
and danced at weddings, “now they only serve food”, says Jassim al-Asadi, 
director of Nature Iraq’s southern operations and a native of the marshes.

Women once worked almost as equals in the marshes – during their years away 
their role has changed. In the new towns along the military roads, some women 
are no longer allowed to work, while more are now dressed in niqabs.

Ultimately, though, there might not be much Baghdad or the people themselves 
can do to preserve the marshes in the long term. Turkey has built at least34 
large dams 
<http://www.fao.org/nr/water/aquastat/basins/euphrates-tigris/index.stm> on the 
Euphrates and Tigris and their tributaries, which have reduced the amount of 
water reaching Iraq and, at the same time, reduced rainfall has affected the 
north of the country.

The region’s unquenchable thirst might engineer what Saddam never did: a 
permanent destruction of the marshes.

 * Travel for this article was supported by Internews’ Earth Journalism Network
 <http://www.earthjournalism.net/>
 