
Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> will appeal the European 
Union’s order to force it to collect a record €13bn in taxes from Apple, the 
Irish government has said.

The Irish finance department’s announcement on Monday comes nearly four months 
after EU competition authorities hitApple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> with the back-tax bill based on 
its longtime reporting of European-wide profits through Ireland. The country 
charges the American company only for sales on its own territory at Europe-low 
rates that in turn have been greatly reduced by the controversial use of shell 
companies at home and abroad.

The Apple tax ruling – what this means for Ireland, tax and multinationals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/30/eu-apple-ireland-tax-ruling-q-and-a>
In its formal legal submission, the Dublin says its low taxes are the whole 
point of its sales pitch to foreign investors — and said it is perfectly legal 
to levy far less tax on profits than imposed by competitors. It accuses EU 
competition authorities of unfairness, exceeding their competence and 
authority, and seeking to breach Ireland’s sovereignty in national tax affairs.

The ruling unveiled 30 August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/30/apple-pay-back-taxes-eu-ruling-ireland-state-aid>
 by the European competition commissioner Margrethe Vestager called on Apple to 
pay Ireland the €13bn for gross underpayment of tax on profits across the bloc 
from 2003 to 2014. Her report concluded that the California-based Apple used 
two shell companies incorporated in Ireland to permit Apple to report its 
Europe-wide profits at effective rates well under 1%.

The scope of the order could have been even greater because EU time limits 
meant the judgment could include potential tax infringements dating only from 
2003, not all the way back to Apple’s original 1991 tax deal with Ireland. But 
Irish specialists in corporate tax estimate that the EU’s order, if enforced, 
actually would total €19bn because of compounding interest from delayed payment.
tax 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/08/corporation_tax-zip/giv-310755cLl2nFXyVR4/>
The centerpiece of Ireland’s argument is that Vestager should have confined 
herself to policing illegal state aid that gives an unfair advantage to a 
particular company, whereas the EU has launched an assault on a policy that 
Ireland has offered to all foreign companies locating on its soil.

The benefits are obvious in Ireland, which has the fastest-growing economy in 
Europe driven by the exports of about 1,000 multinationals that employ 5% of 
the workforce and generate nearly a quarter of economic output. Apple is the 
biggest private employer in the Irish Republic’s second-largest city, Cork, 
with a workforce exceeding 5,500. Economists estimate Apple’s Cork operation 
pumps around €19bn annually in salaries, tax and investment into the Irish 
economy.

“The purpose of the state aid rules is to tackle state interventions which 
confer a selective advantage. The state aid rules by their nature cannot remedy 
mismatches between tax systems on a global level,” the finance department brief 
argued as it contested the EU’s contention that Apple got benefits denied to 
other companies based here.

The Irish reply sets the stage for a titanic legal battle from Brussels to 
California and beyond that has implications for more than 600 US multinationals 
based in Ireland and thousands more using tax-avoidance vehicles globally. 
Apple chief executive Tim Cook already has denounced the EU judgment, disputes 
its calculations and says the company will pursue its own legal challenges 
expected to last years.

Ireland, an EU member since 1973, has for decades charged a headline rate on 
corporate taxes of 12.5% —less than half the European norm and nearly a third 
the US rate of 35% — and has facilitated the complex use of shell companies 
that help Apple and scores of other hi-tech global enterprises, including 
social media and pharmaceutical leaders, to pay far less on non-US sales of 
goods and services.

The finance department has pledged to close its shell company-focused rules, 
but that move is expected to create no obstacle to global companies, which can 
shift the same accounting strategies to other countries beyond the EU’s wrath.
 