
Ireland should not rule out leaving the European Union if Theresa May cannot 
secure a soft Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/03/rogers-resignation-is-latest-sign-britain-is-heading-for-hard-brexit>
 deal, a former Irish diplomat has said.

Ray Bassett, the former ambassador to Canada, called on Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> to toughen up its position, arguing 
the government needed to stop being so loyal to Brussels and vocalise the 
potential destruction Brexit posed.

Bassett, the first Irish diplomat to call for a breaking of ranks, said: 
“Nothing will be served by not confronting forcefully, the ‘punish the Brits’ 
elements in Brussels.

“Having been involved in many negotiations, I can say confidently that the 
difficult party usually gets accommodated.”

He said Ireland could not rely on federalists within Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> to advocate its case, and with 
no allies outside Britain, it needed to launch its own campaign for a soft 
Brexit with access to the single market and immigration controls.

Irish leaders fear Brexit will bring economic disaster
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/16/irish-pm-calls-brexit-summit-to-confront-looming-crisis>
Bassett, who was previously involved in Northern Ireland peace talks and 
served as joint secretary of the British-Irish secretariat in Belfast, is the 
first former diplomat to call for a shift in negotiation position.

Writing in the Sunday Business Post, he said the Irish government’s 
determination to remain as close as possible to the line being taken by the 26 
other member states was “at odds” with the national interest.

Earlier this year, Irish business leaders and former politicians including the 
former taoiseach John Brutonwarned of the economic “disaster” Brexit could cause
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/16/irish-pm-calls-brexit-summit-to-confront-looming-crisis>
 given that the UK is the country’s single biggest export market.

The former ambassador says the country will find itself alone without any 
natural allies when Britain leaves the EU, and Brussels has shown “in the 
infamous bailout and other matters” that “Ireland’s national interest does not 
carry much weight nowadays”. This was a reference to threats made by the 
European Central Bank to stop cash flow to the country unless it bailed out 
private bondholders during the 2010 crash.

“We simply cannot leave out interest in the hands of people like former EU 
commissioner Michel Barnier, a noted federalist,” said Bassett, in reference to 
theEU’s chief Brexit negotiator 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/29/eus-brexit-negotiator-wants-to-stop-uk-getting-soft-transitional-deal-michel-barnier-access-single-market>
.

“Instead of bleating about a common EU position, we should be convening 
meetings in Dublin at heads of government level with like-minded countries such 
as the Nordics, Netherlands etc that have a powerful self-interest in Britain 
getting as good a deal as possible,” he said.

Publicly, Ireland is remaining loyal to the other 26 member states. 

In December the taoiseach, Enda Kenny, rejected a call from the House of Lords 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/12/lords-brexit-reports-northern-ireland-uk-irish-relations>
 for the EU to allow a bilateral deal between Dublin and Brussels because of 
the unique dangers.

“A bilateral deal is not being examined,” he said. Days earlier, the 
government’s European affairs minister, Dara Murphy, called the House of Lords 
plan “nonsensical”.

Bassett called on the Irish government to break ranks with its EU partners. 
“Ireland needs to position itself as the leader of the countries wanting as 
soft a Brexit as possible,” he said, adding that the taoiseach should also 
support Britain’s position on controls on immigration, something Europe has 
already said is non-negotiable.

A spokesperson for the Irish embassy in London said: “Ray Bassett recently 
retired after a long and distinguished career in DFAT [the Department of 
Foreign Affairs and Trade]. He never worked at a senior level on EU issues, but 
any contribution to the Brexit debate is of course welcome.

“The government has been consistently clear that it wants to maintain the very 
strong links between Ireland and Britain in the context of the closest possible 
EU-UK relationship. Supporting the integrity, unity and effectiveness of the EU 
itself is also a key national priority for us as one of 27 remaining member 
states.

“Of course, at this stage we are all waiting for the British government to set 
out its vision of the future relationship.”
 