
John Bruton, a former taoiseach of Ireland, objected to a decision to gift a 
statue of Queen Victoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/07/students-queen-victoria-statue-cecil-rhodes-colonial-past>
 to Australia 30 years ago, declassified Irish cabinet papers show.


The statue was sent despite the opposition of then finance minister Bruton and 
the director of the director of the National Museum of Ireland, John Teahan. It 
has stood outside Sydney’sQueen Victoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/queen-victoria> Building ever since.

The Irish Times reported 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/news/politics/john-bruton-objected-to-sending-queen-victoria-statue-to-sydney-1.2908974>
 that then taoiseach Garret FitzGerald backed the plan to send the statue, 
which was originally unveiled at Dublin’s Leinster House in 1908, to Australia.


Is a Queen Victoria statue offensive? It’s about time we debated our colonial 
past | Owen Jones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/07/students-queen-victoria-statue-cecil-rhodes-colonial-past>
However, Teahan wrote a memo objecting to the plan because it was the work of 
an Irish artist, John Hughes. “I advise that such a figure be retained and 
protected until we have grown up sufficiently to look that Queen, long dead, 
straight in the eye,” Teahan said. Bruton took the same view when the matter 
came before cabinet.

“The minister for finance strongly objects to the removal of the Queen 
Victoria statue fromIreland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>. The 
monument is representative of one of the many traditions of Irish history. It 
is part of our heritage in no less a way than Norman or Viking remains,” said a 
memo.

“In the context of the Anglo Irish Agreement, in which reference has been made 
to the ‘two traditions’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/dec/30/national-archives-thatcher-vetoes-anglo-irish-agreement>
, the minister for finance sees great danger in publicly jettisoning a figure 
of the second tradition. The repercussions for the government from such an act 
would far outweigh any minor adverse publicity that might arise if the 
Australian request were refused.”

Despite the objections, the cabinet agreed to send the statue to Australia “on 
loan until recalled”.

After Irish independence from the UK in 1922, Leinster House became the home 
of Ireland’s parliament, the Dáil, and the statue stayed there until 1948 when 
it was moved to storage after decades of protests from politicians.

Archive files show how Thatcher vetoes shaped 1985 Anglo-Irish agreement
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/dec/30/national-archives-thatcher-vetoes-anglo-irish-agreement>
At one point the statue was due to be sent to the city of London, Ontario, but 
neither the Canadian nor Irish governments were willing to pick up the 
transport tab. But in June 1986, Ireland’s ambassador to Australia, Joseph 
Small, received a request from the office of the lord mayor ofSydney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney>, Doug Sutherland, asking if 
it would be possible to send Queen Victoria to Australia on loan.

“For over two years we have been searching the world in vain for a life-size 
bronze statue of Queen Victoria. We have looked to India, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, 
South Africa, Yemen, etc all to no avail. Yesterday, just when we were giving 
up hope we received advice that there is stored in Dublin a fine bronze statue 
of Queen Victoria ... it appears to be ideal to locate it in front of the Queen 
Victoria Building looking towards the town,” said the letter from Sutherland’s 
office.

FitzGerald received a letter from Niall Glasser, director of promotion for the 
Sydney project, saying a loan or a gift of the statue would be accepted with 
gratitude. “There it would stand as a constant reminder of the permanent bond 
and friendship between our two countries,” he said, adding that the statue 
would be properly maintained.


 