
At 7am on Thursday, polling stations will open in an upmarket corner of west 
London for the Richmond Park byelection. This odd affair is entirely in keeping 
with a year of unexpected political events.

They might be the party of government, but the Conservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> are not putting up a 
candidate. The frontrunner is a self-styled “independent”: Zac Goldsmith, the 
unfathomably wealthy, roll-up-smoking Tory environmentalist who was until 
recently Richmond Park’s Conservative MP and the party’s candidate for London 
mayor.

Goldsmith resigned from his party, and triggered the byelection, in late 
October in protest against the government’s support for the expansion of nearby 
Heathrow airport. Strangely, however, the local Tory website carries an email 
address for anyone who wants to volunteer for his re-election campaign, and he 
has been joined on his rounds by Tory MPs. Ukip has decided not to put up a 
candidate, instead lending its support to someone its describes glowingly as “a 
principled man who was fully committed to helping get Britain out of the 
European Union”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fis-progressive-alliance-only-way-stop-hard-right-populism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9fa274faa22bded9108e250d58e3706cfe1aa7c%2F0_0_4016_6001%2F4016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20a%20progressive%20alliance%20the%20only%20way%20to%20stop%20hard-right%20populism%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fis-progressive-alliance-only-way-stop-hard-right-populism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20a%20progressive%20alliance%20the%20only%20way%20to%20stop%20hard-right%20populism%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fis-progressive-alliance-only-way-stop-hard-right-populism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9fa274faa22bded9108e250d58e3706cfe1aa7c%2F0_0_4016_6001%2F4016.jpg>
 Zac Goldsmith resigned from the Commons when the government announced its 
support for Heathrow expansion. Photograph: Guy Bell/Rex/Shutterstock 
Clearly, then, the main parties of the right are united behind Goldsmith. But, 
at the same time, in Richmond and elsewhere, more and more noise is being made 
about cross-party campaigns and electoral pacts on the left and centre-left. 
This might do two key things: first, further the case for changing the voting 
system; and second, act as a block to the most extreme visions of Brexit and 
the kind of nasty populism that is not only running riot across the world, but 
also exerting its pull on parties and politicians supposedly of the centre. It 
is the second factor that gives Richmond Park an air of drama.

The Liberal Democrats <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liberaldemocrats> 
held the seat until 2010. Encouraged by the 19.3% swing away from the Tories 
they managed at the recent Witney byelection, they are outwardly hopeful that 
their candidate – an accountant called Sarah Olney, who is also opposed to 
Heathrow expansion – might pull off an unexpected victory, thanks largely to 
Goldsmith’s support for Britain leaving the EU (his constituency voted strongly 
in favour of remaining).

Meanwhile, as part of an informal agreement relating to future elections for 
local council seats, the localGreen party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/green-party> – which got 3,800 votes at 
last year’s general election – has stood down to improve the Lib Dems’ chances. 
Their activists talk about Goldsmith’s position on the EU, but also his staunch 
support for austerity and the nasty, Islamophobic campaign he waged against 
mayoral opponent Sadiq Khan. The newly formed Women’s Equality party has made 
the same decision.

Which brings us to Labour. Despite senior MPs and some local members calling 
for their party to pull out – thus maximising the chances of Goldsmith’s defeat,
as I have previously argued in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/04/bravo-green-party-richmond-park-byelection-zac-goldsmith>
 – Labour has stuck with the usual protocol. Its candidate is campaigning hard 
in Richmond Park, leading to fears that he will split the anti-Tory vote. At 
the local party’s meeting to select the candidate on 4 November, a member 
called Mike Freedman suggested that proceedings ought to be abandoned. He says 
he was interrupted by an official sent from the Labour party’s London HQ. “He 
said: ‘You can’t do that,’” Freedman tells me. “I said: ‘I can.’ He said: 
‘Well, I won’t let you. I’ll stop you.’ And he said if we didn’t choose a 
candidate the party would impose one.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fis-progressive-alliance-only-way-stop-hard-right-populism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F005803f68e03286ac1f972a6ffce104a53396804%2F0_0_2634_1836%2F2634.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20a%20progressive%20alliance%20the%20only%20way%20to%20stop%20hard-right%20populism%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fis-progressive-alliance-only-way-stop-hard-right-populism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20a%20progressive%20alliance%20the%20only%20way%20to%20stop%20hard-right%20populism%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fis-progressive-alliance-only-way-stop-hard-right-populism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F005803f68e03286ac1f972a6ffce104a53396804%2F0_0_2634_1836%2F2634.jpg>
 Clive Lewis, Labour’s shadow business secretary, was one of three MPs who 
urged the party to stand down in Richmond Park. Photograph: Paul 
Ellis/AFP/Getty Images 
Eventually, after Freedman and half a dozen or so others had walked out, the 
meeting selected a candidate: the journalist and transport expert Christian 
Wolmar.

“It just seems potty,” Freedman says. “Which is why I did everything I could 
to persuade him not to stand and the party not to work for him. But, 
unfortunately, that’s not going to happen. I’m afraid my prediction is that 
Goldsmith will sneak it by a couple of thousand.”

This all brings us back to the key issue. The progressive half of British 
politics remains divided while, in the wake of Brexit, the right seems to have 
buried its differences, and got on with shaping the future.

Is it finally time for what some people call a progressive alliance?

“How do you stop the authoritarian right – the Tories and Ukip – dominating 
politics in this country for the foreseeable future? That requires people 
thinking outside the box. It requires looking at the maths on the ground and 
saying: ‘How do we stop them?’ The Tories are masters at gaming the electoral 
system and we’re quite pathetic at it. We constantly stand candidates against 
each other. They get how the first-past-the-post system works. We think we do, 
but we don’t act on it.”

These are the words of Clive Lewis, the shadow business secretary, an ally of 
Jeremy Corbyn and one of the three MPs – along with Lisa Nandy and the shadow 
City minister, Jonathan Reynolds – who urged the party to stand down in 
Richmond Park. Theresa May, he reminds me, has a parliamentary majority of 12, 
and there are 27 Tory MPs who beat Liberal Democrats into second place at the 
last election, when the Conservative party was still affecting to be socially 
liberal and pro-European.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fis-progressive-alliance-only-way-stop-hard-right-populism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf7f1cbe55865b8c306af8364d18496a3c79c545%2F0_763_3840_4800%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20a%20progressive%20alliance%20the%20only%20way%20to%20stop%20hard-right%20populism%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fis-progressive-alliance-only-way-stop-hard-right-populism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20a%20progressive%20alliance%20the%20only%20way%20to%20stop%20hard-right%20populism%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fis-progressive-alliance-only-way-stop-hard-right-populism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf7f1cbe55865b8c306af8364d18496a3c79c545%2F0_763_3840_4800%2F3840.jpg>
 Former Lib Dem leader Paddy Ashdown is a member of More United, which intends 
to back general election candidates who support ‘open and tolerant’ politics. 
Photograph: Graeme Robertson for the Guardian 
“But the Tories have now arguably turned into a hard-Brexit, authoritarian 
party,” he says. “So, there’s a good chance that an electoral coalition in 
their constituencies could beat them. But if you haveLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> and the Greens and everyone else 
standing you reduce the chances of that happening. More Lib Dems are better 
than more Tories. That’s just the reality. You’ve got to be brutally pragmatic.”

The idea of cooperation between parties on the left and centre-left has buzzed 
around British politics for decades. In 1997, Labour and the Lib Dems came to 
an informal accord to limit their campaigning in some of each other’s target 
seats and tacitly encouraged anti-Tory tactical voting (in the Cheshire seat of 
Tatton, the two parties stood down to make way for the independent Martin Bell, 
who defeated the corrupt Tory MP Neil Hamilton). Over the past two decades, in 
Scotland and Wales, Labour has been sporadically in coalition with the Lib Dems 
and Plaid Cymru. Recent history has undermined the cause: the Lib Dems’ 
decision to govern in partnership with the Tories and the prospect of Labour 
coming to an agreement with the SNP at Westminsterplayed very badly with a 
certain kind of English voter in the election of 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2015/may/06/nuneaton-election-2015-scottish-get-in-with-labour-were-done-for>
. Now, though, in the age of Brexit, Donald Trump and a resurgent political 
right, the idea is back.

Most MPs and party leaders remain either sceptical or hostile. Almost all the 
supportive noise about progressive alliances comes from grassroots activists 
and people beyond the main parties – although, as Clive Lewis proves, the idea 
is slowly beginning to find an outlet at Westminster.

For Lewis, the focus is on delivering a win for the political left in a 
fragmented political landscape and binding together people from different 
parties to resist the most drastic visions of Britain leaving the EU, while 
also opposing nasty rhetoric and policy on immigration. For others, the main 
issue remains a voting system that gave the Tories unchallenged power on the 
support of only 24% of the electorate and how cooperation between parties could 
bring radical change.

This is the basic position of Caroline Lucas, the co-leader of the Green 
party, who has long made the case for cross-party politics with the help of
Compass <http://www.compassonline.org.uk/action/campaigns/progressive-alliance/>
, a campaigning organisation that grew out of the Labour party and aims to 
create a more equal, sustainable and democratic society. These days, it also 
includes people from the Lib Dems, the Greens, Plaid Cymru and the SNP.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fis-progressive-alliance-only-way-stop-hard-right-populism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3218f3a3668403ec3bcbdce9831eeaef71e2ac1b%2F0_203_2447_1467%2F2447.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20a%20progressive%20alliance%20the%20only%20way%20to%20stop%20hard-right%20populism%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fis-progressive-alliance-only-way-stop-hard-right-populism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20a%20progressive%20alliance%20the%20only%20way%20to%20stop%20hard-right%20populism%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fis-progressive-alliance-only-way-stop-hard-right-populism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3218f3a3668403ec3bcbdce9831eeaef71e2ac1b%2F0_203_2447_1467%2F2447.jpg>
 ‘I don’t think we’re going to make much progress if we simply point fingers’ 
... Green party co-leader Caroline Lucas. Photograph: Clive Gee/PA 
“This is all very real now,” she says. “My worst fear is that we’ll be 
consigned not just to five or 10 years of Tory rule, but to 20: yet more cuts, 
yet more rolling back of the welfare state, [indifference to] climate change 
and a government that’s immune to the idea of investment in the green economy. 
And that’s what motivates me to say: ‘How can we look for something better?’”

Her essential idea, she explains, is to try to “hack into this incredibly 
dysfunctional electoral system and see if we could get more MPs elected who 
support electoral reform”, with a view to a politics “more in tune with the 
majority of people in the country”.

For some people, I suggest, the idea of the Greens and Labour cooperating with 
the Lib Dems might be deeply problematic, given what Nick Clegg and co did 
between 2010 and 2015. “But I don’t think we’re going to make much progress if 
we simply point fingers,” she says. “Yes, there are plenty of things the Lib 
Dems did in coalition with the Tories that I absolutely opposed and wish very 
strongly that they hadn’t done. But, similarly, there are plenty of things that 
Labour did under Tony Blair that I wish they hadn’t done. But if we just focus 
on those things, rather than areas where we can agree, then we leave the way 
open to a very rightwing form of Conservative rule or something potentially 
even worse. And that, to me, is incredibly irresponsible.”

She and Lewis think that the push has to come from local people in individual 
seats, rather than from Westminster. Both like the idea of locally organised 
primaries, in which candidates from existing parties might stand alongside 
people with no political baggage and people would select the candidate best 
placed to defeat the parties of the right. “It’s got to be a bottom-up 
expression of what people want,” she says. “And I think what’s exciting right 
now is that there are groups springing up around the country that have no link 
to any political party where people come together and say: ‘We’ve got to get 
smarter about how we work.’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fis-progressive-alliance-only-way-stop-hard-right-populism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F316d8396593fa2961b833a1c14704f56fb18abcc%2F0_146_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20a%20progressive%20alliance%20the%20only%20way%20to%20stop%20hard-right%20populism%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fis-progressive-alliance-only-way-stop-hard-right-populism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20a%20progressive%20alliance%20the%20only%20way%20to%20stop%20hard-right%20populism%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fis-progressive-alliance-only-way-stop-hard-right-populism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F316d8396593fa2961b833a1c14704f56fb18abcc%2F0_146_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
 The Lib Dems hope Zac Goldsmith’s support for Brexit, despite strong backing 
for remain in the constituency, will help its candidate, Sarah Olney. 
Photograph: Martin Godwin for the Guardian 
Lucas cites Sussex Progressives <http://www.sussexprogressives.com>, founded 
in the wake of the EU referendum and based in Brighton. The group includes 
activists from Labour, the Lib Dems and the Greens, as well as people who are 
not members of any party. Since the summer, it has been holding monthly 
meetings, as well as hosting street stalls and distributing leaflets about the 
benefits that migrants from the EU bring to the UK. Now, it is increasingly 
thinking about the next election – which, let’s not forget, might arrive next 
year – and how to put pressure on parties in seats where the progressive vote 
is split; Brighton Kemptown, for example, where the Tories beat Labour in 2015 
by 690 votes, but the combined vote for the Greens and the Lib Dems totalled 
more than 4,500.

One of the group’s founders is 29-year-old Green party member Georgia 
Amson-Bradshaw. “I’d take what I could get,” she says. “I’d prefer that, in any 
given seat, there was a single progressive candidate. I suppose, if I’m really 
dreaming big, it’d be really amazing if the Greens, Labour, Lib Dems – and even 
the SNP and Plaid – could come together nationally around a narrow set of 
commonly agreed policies.”

She tells me about a similar group in Ely, Cambridgeshire 
<https://elyprogressives.wordpress.com/>, and about people trying to start up 
progressive alliance initiatives in Truro in Cornwall, Whistable in Kent,London 
<https://twitter.com/ProgressivesLDN> and elsewhere. “Stuff is definitely 
happening spontaneously around the country,” she says. “And that makes me feel 
optimistic.”

These new initiatives are all rooted on the left, but other political startups 
are focusing their efforts on a swathe of politics that also includes the 
centre-right. The aim is to resist the worst effects of the Brexit vote, while 
making a stand for the fundamental liberal, democratic values that the 
increasingly rancorous political mood threatens.

The first is More United, which takes its name from Jo Cox’s maiden speech, 
which became a memorial to the murdered Labour MP (“We are far more united than 
the things that divide us”). It recently launched a crowdfunding drive for at 
least £100,000, to be spent backing candidates at the next general election who 
support “open and tolerant” politics. Its public faces include the former Lib 
Dem leader Paddy Ashdown, the historian Simon Schama, tech entrepreneur Martha 
Lane Fox – and, waving an unlikely flag for the pop/politics crossover, Luke 
Pritchard of the slightly faded mid-noughties band the Kooks.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fis-progressive-alliance-only-way-stop-hard-right-populism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6b5bd9d3400dd40210304df8f3d387c48b80f8d%2F0_0_2441_1270%2F2441.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20a%20progressive%20alliance%20the%20only%20way%20to%20stop%20hard-right%20populism%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fis-progressive-alliance-only-way-stop-hard-right-populism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20a%20progressive%20alliance%20the%20only%20way%20to%20stop%20hard-right%20populism%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fis-progressive-alliance-only-way-stop-hard-right-populism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6b5bd9d3400dd40210304df8f3d387c48b80f8d%2F0_0_2441_1270%2F2441.jpg>
 Sussex Progressives is one of several grassroots groups that supports left and 
centre-left cooperation across the parties. 
There is also the Tigger-ish TV presenter Dan Snow, who explains that the aim 
is to help candidates of what he calls “the progressive centre” – including 
some Tories – and diminish the chances of those from both the hard right and 
the hard left (which, he says, will include some Labour believers in 
“Trotskyite, destructive chaos”). People standing in marginal seats will be 
invited to sign up to a charter of principles, including support for “a United 
Kingdom that welcomes immigration, international cooperation and a close 
relationship with the EU” and “a modern democracy that empowers citizens, 
rather than politicians”. If more than one candidate in a given seat signs up, 
More United’s national membership will be balloted on whom to pick. Once all 
that is complete, the organisation will provide money and local volunteers. “It 
doesn’t take a huge amount of money to shift the dial locally,” says Snow.

And then there is Common Ground, formed after the EU referendum, which also 
reckons its target voters will include “many Conservative voters and previous 
Tory supporters”, as well as people on the left. They had planned an open 
primary to select the best liberal, pro-European candidate in Richmond Park, 
but bumped up against the complexities of electoral funding rules, and the fact 
that, in byelections, organisations other than political parties understood to 
be backing particular candidates are limited to a total spend of £700. “We’re 
experimenting – we don’t have a blueprint,” says one of the group’s prime 
movers, the financial journalist Hugo Dixon. “But we’re hopeful that we’ll find 
a way of doing the same thing in the future.”

In Richmond Park, Compass has put out a leaflet suggesting that local people 
have the chance to “vote for new politics”. It doesn’t specifically mention the 
Lib Dems, but it offers the prospect of people “who want a more equal, 
sustainable and democratic society coming together to support the progressive 
candidate best placed to win”. The Greens’ election material makes a similar 
argument, assuring people that “by not standing in this byelection, the Green 
party aims to be a catalyst for change, successfully building alliances with 
other local parties to create a fairer voting system”.

Meanwhile, Labour’s Christian Wolmar is still campaigning. He says the idea of 
a progressive alliance “only emerged very late”, and that the Labour party was 
not offered a say in whom any single candidate should be. Moreover, he says he 
has been reminded during his campaigning that “the notion that all these people 
who say they’ll vote Labour would automatically vote Lib Dem is really not 
true”.

That may be the case, I say, but the chances of Goldsmith being beaten might 
still be maximised if Labour were not in the race. Does he worry that, by 
standing, he might let in Goldsmith?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fis-progressive-alliance-only-way-stop-hard-right-populism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F587a3ad0d5114baa7a0c28dd720c05d86a0e7151%2F557_0_2040_2550%2F2040.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20a%20progressive%20alliance%20the%20only%20way%20to%20stop%20hard-right%20populism%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fis-progressive-alliance-only-way-stop-hard-right-populism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20a%20progressive%20alliance%20the%20only%20way%20to%20stop%20hard-right%20populism%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fis-progressive-alliance-only-way-stop-hard-right-populism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F587a3ad0d5114baa7a0c28dd720c05d86a0e7151%2F557_0_2040_2550%2F2040.jpg>
 Labour’s candidate in Richmond Park, Christian Wolmar, says Labour voters 
would not automatically vote Lib Dem if the party chose not to run. Photograph: 
Yui Mok/PA 
“I’ve thought hard about this,” he says. “If my votes and the Lib Dems’ votes 
together add up to more than Zac’s votes, I don’t think that means that Zac 
would have won if I hadn’t been standing. It really depends on the way the 
votes go. Of course, I really don’t want Zac to win. But we were not in a 
position where we could just resign from this. There are vast numbers of people 
who would have been incensed by that, locally and nationally.”

That said, he acknowledges that he has met Labour supporters in Richmond Park 
whose priority is trying to keep the Tories at bay. “There are some people who 
certainly say: ‘My instincts are entirely Labour, but I’m going to vote Lib 
Dem, because I want to get Zac out,’” he admits. Other Labour people, he says, 
will not vote Lib Dem in any event. Nonetheless, when it comes to other areas 
of the country, he believes in “thinking cannily and cleverly”, and perhaps 
negotiating with the Greens and the Lib Dems.

The Richmond Park byelection and prospects for a progressive alliance | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/28/richmond-park-byelection-and-prospect-of-progressive-alliance>
“But that would still be hellishly difficult,” he insists. “It’s much more 
complicated than you think. There are a lot of people in the Labour party who 
would resist it, and Lib Dems who would resist it as well.”

At the last election, the Greens’ candidate in Richmond was a freelance 
journalist called Andree Frieze. She was going to stand this time, too, but 
came to the conclusion that the prize is defeating Goldsmith, and all else 
follows from that.

“It would reduce the Tory majority,” she says. “It would send a message to 
this government that we’re anti-Heathrow expansion and we’re anti-Brexit. There 
are four food banks in the borough of Richmond, because of this governments’ 
policies – they didn’t exist before 2010.Zac Goldsmith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/zac-goldsmith> might be environmentally 
green, but he is rightwing every step of the way. He ran a shocking mayoral 
campaign. He voted for every single welfare cut. He’s a Tory.”

What does she think of Labour’s stance? “It’s appalling. They are living in 
cloud cuckoo land if they think they can win here. It’s pointless.

“This should be about getting rid of a government that’s destroying this 
country,” she says. “And to do that … well, you have to get rid of Zac.”
 