
Chris Bledsoe is of the contrarian opinion that most New York City apartments 
are too large. His company, Ollie, rents studios on East 27th Street in 
Manhattan thatrange from 260-360 square feet in size <http://www.ollie.co/>, 
well below the city’s housing code standard of at least 400 square feet. Take a 
tour of Carmel Place, and each unit looks like a furnished dining room, bedroom 
or living room – but rarely like all three of those spaces at the same time.

By providing multipurpose furnishings and high-end amenities like housekeeping 
and grocery shopping services, Bledsoe believes he has cracked the code on 
sustainable urban housing. Inside the apartments, the desk converts into a 
dinner table; the bed folds into a wall, leaving a couch in its place; clothing 
racks accordion out from the closets to make for tighter storage capacity.

Ollie’s advertising boasts that its micro-units help reduce carbon emissions 
by housing twice as many residents as would fit in a traditional apartment 
tower. “By the very nature of what they are, small space living units are 
inherently greener than the alternative,” Bledsoe says.

$199 for a luxury cruise? 'Voluntourism' eco vacations struggle to catch on
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/dec/01/carnival-cruises-voluntourism-pollution-water-impact-travel>
Residential buildings account for 22% of all carbon emissions in the US, 
according to a 2010 Energy Departmentstudy 
<http://buildingsdatabook.eren.doe.gov/ChapterIntro2.aspx>. “Most of those 
emissions are coming from the energy required to heat, cool, and light the 
home,” Bledsoe says. “Part of our philosophy is ‘space is waste’.”

Creating sustainable living quarters presents a big challenge for urban 
planners as the number and size of cities are projected to grow worldwide. In 
2016, 54.5% of the global population lived in cities of at least half a million 
people, according tothe United Nations 
<http://www.un.org/en/development/desa/population/publications/pdf/urbanization/the_worlds_cities_in_2016_data_booklet.pdf>
, which expects the rate to climb to 60% by 2030. For cities with at least 1 
million inhabitants, the UN forecastsan increase of 1.7 billion people by 2030 
<http://www.un.org/en/development/desa/population/publications/pdf/urbanization/the_worlds_cities_in_2016_data_booklet.pdf>
.

Apartment construction in the US also hit a ten-year high 
<http://www.rentcafe.com/blog/rental-market/apartment-construction-at-a-10-year-high-new-units-up-a-staggering-50-percent-in-2016/>
 in 2016, while the average size of each unit has shrunkby 7% since 2009 
<http://www.rclco.com/advisory-apt-unit-size>. While there’s no reliable data 
on micro-housing, some notable policies and projects are popping up on that 
front too. Former New York City mayor Michael Bloomberg waived the city’s 
zoning standards to allow micro-apartments.

Ollie now services two buildings in New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york>. The company is also building 
similar projects in Pittsburgh, Los Angeles and New Jersey, and has another 50 
in exploratory phases in San Diego, Seattle, San Francisco, Oakland, Denver, 
Chicago, Washington DC, Boston and Miami – some of which already have “dorm 
style” living facilities catering to millennials.

But is more density really the key to sustainable urban living?

“From the point of view of reducing environmental impact, micro-housing has 
obvious benefits,” says John Quale, a sustainability expert at the University 
of New Mexico. “Any time you can get people into smaller housing units, it 
reduces the energy use of the building.

In addition, Carmel Place units were built using modular construction – in 
other words, boxes built in a factory. The time needed to construct this type 
of building is substantially shorter than building on-site, which, as Quale 
points out, translates to significantly less commuting time for employees 
constructing the units, and therefore a substantial reduction in carbon 
emissions related to worker transportation.

But other experts say overcrowded cities hardly feel sustainable if lodgings 
are dehumanizing, or if residents lack access to literal green spaces.

“In Tokyo, your hotel room may be a very tiny box that you sleep in,” says Tom 
Morgan, an analyst at the environmental engineering consulting firm Arcadis. 
“That takes density to another level, but that doesn’t feel like a very 
socially sustainable solution. Our definition of a sustainable city looks at 
economic, social and environmental aspects. The most sustainable cities come up 
with a balance of all three.”

As good as micro-apartments may be for the environment, critics warn 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2013/12/the-health-risks-of-small-apartments/282150/>
 that packing ever more people into smaller housing units presents a mental 
health quandary. Research shows that claustrophobic living spaces can cause
psychological problems 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0049089X11001694>, such as 
increased stress and an inability to concentrate. The New York City zoning law 
which mandates apartments need to be at least 400 square feet was waived for 
Carmel Place in 2012, in part because the company’s design scheme was thought 
to make up the diminutive floor plans, which include high ceilings, balconies 
and large windows that Bledsoe says provide sufficient light and air.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fmicro-apartments-urban-housing-ollie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff259558c232978d1919ad6799671cb694dbbf698%2F0_66_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20an%20even%20smaller%20New%20York%20apartment%20the%20key%20to%20sustainable%20living%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fmicro-apartments-urban-housing-ollie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20an%20even%20smaller%20New%20York%20apartment%20the%20key%20to%20sustainable%20living%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fmicro-apartments-urban-housing-ollie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff259558c232978d1919ad6799671cb694dbbf698%2F0_66_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
 Inside Ollie apartments, the desk converts into a dinner table and clothing 
racks accordion out from the closets to make for tighter storage capacity. 
Photograph: Ollie 
In theory, Ollie spares transient young professionals from purchasing 
furniture they may discard when their careers take them to new locales. The 
company also helps eliminate packaging and transport waste by providing 
services that refill hygiene receptacles while tenants are out.

But micro-units’ ability to ease New York City’s affordable housing crisis is 
still subject to debate. While 55 units, or 40% of Carmel Place, are designated 
affordable housing, the remaining studios come at a relatively high starting 
price of $2,540 per month. A New York Postarticle 
<http://nypost.com/2016/06/12/the-costly-fallacy-of-nycs-first-micro-apartments/>
 in June pointed out that on a price-per-square-foot basis, these are among the 
steepest rates in the city.

But Bledsoe dismisses that calculation since it doesn’t factor in the costs of 
dual-purpose furnishings and luxury amenities.

The degree to which Ollie can temper urban sprawl will likely define its 
legacy as a sustainable homebuilder. But experts note that the type of tenants 
or owners that micro-units attract is a factor as well. “If the apartments are 
encouraging a second home by professionals that can afford those rates, that is 
not a sustainable solution,” Morgan says.

Bledsoe says that out of Carmel Place’s 55 residents, only one or two are 
using the space as a crash pad. “And when used that way, it’s often by 
empty-nesters [parents whose children have moved out] who are using it as a 
step toward urbanization. They have been living in the suburbs and haven’t 
determined yet that urban living is totally for them. This is a way for them to 
test drive it, and if they decide they like it, they’ll make the decision to 
downsize altogether.”

If true, this will likely inspire more micro-units to pop up, with beds that 
fold from walls and dining tables that run the width of tiny apartments.
 