
The damaging admission that a British drone was involved in the “accidental 
killing” of 62 Syrian soldiers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/19/raf-reaper-drones-used-airstrike-killed-syrian-government-troops>
 has exposed the truth about how far the UK has been drawn into this bloody and 
unwinnable conflict. And it may also provide the Syrian president Bashar al 
Assad and his allies with sufficient grounds to bringwar crimes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/war-crimes> charges against Britain.

Was it lawful for UK forces to kill British Isis fighters in Syria? | Joshua 
Rozenberg
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/07/lawful-uk-forces-british-isis-fighters-syria>
Given the recent lessons of the Chilcot inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/06/chilcot-judgment-damning-not-justice-tony-blair-crime-aggression>
 into the Iraq war, it seems barely conceivable that we could be unwittingly 
repeating the calamitous mistakes of Iraq. Yet when parliament voted last year 
toapprove limited military action in Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/02/syria-airstrikes-what-happens-after-the-commons-vote>
, MPs restricted British forces to airstrikes against specified Islamic State 
targets.

Last weekend’s battlefield bloodshed preceded the horrifying bombing of a UN 
aid convoy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/21/syria-aid-convoy-attack-what-evidence-claims-russia-to-blame>
 by as yet unknown forces. The killing of Syrian soldiers has allowed Assad to 
turn the tables on the coalition and accuse Britain and America of deliberately 
targeting his forces. It is an accusation that once again places Britain at 
risk of fighting an illegal war in the Middle East.

Assad claims the attack on his troops could not have been a mistake. Syria’s 
Russian allies sought an emergency meeting of the United Nations security 
council to review the incident.

And Russia’s UN ambassador, Vitaly Churkin, described the timing of the attack 
as “highly suspicious”, adding that it did not look like an honest mistake. It 
was even claimed that Isis forces, the intended target of the coalition 
airstrike, used the attack to take ground from the regime forces.

The Ministry of Defence has denied that Syrian soldiers were deliberately 
targeted and said the incident would be fully investigated. But should the 
Syrian victims want to take a case to the international criminal court in The 
Hague it will be doubly embarrassing for Britain. The US is not a signatory to 
the ICC treaty, so it would be left to Britain, Washington’s junior partner in 
the coalition, to defend any charges. The Hague, of course, is exactly where 
many wish to see Assad (who also hasn’t signed the ICC Treaty) facing charges 
of war crimes. This week foreign secretary Boris Johnson and human rights 
barrister Amal Clooney stepped up their own efforts togather evidence 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/amal-clooney-boris-johnson-anti-isis-campaign-delivers-damning-speech-to-un-over-isis-genocide-a7314461.html>
 against all those accused of committing atrocities in Syria – including 
Assad’s forces.

Among the 223 MPs who voted against taking military action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2015/dec/02/syria-airstrikes-mps-debate-vote-cameron-action-against-isis-live?page=with:block-565f8399e4b05c30c3e4905f#block-565f8399e4b05c30c3e4905f>
 last year many will have known that Syria was not like any other conflict, and 
British forces risked becoming caught up in a confusing and dangerous civil war.

Those who did vote for airstrikes thought they had done enough to restrict 
military action to the limited terms of the motion, which named Isis as the 
sole enemy. During the debate leading up to the December vote, David Cameron 
told the Commons that he was only asking to end the absurdity that prevented 
British aircraft from chasing Isis terrorists intoSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> from Iraq.

He said the targets were to be “the leaders of this death cult itself 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201516/cmhansrd/cm151202/debtext/151202-0001.htm>
, the training camps, the communications hubs and those … plotting against us”.

Figures this month from the MoD show that since December, the RAF has flown a 
thousand sorties over Syria, striking targets 79 times. Typhoon and Tornado 
jets, supported by Raytheon Sentinel R1 ground surveillance aircraft, have 
dropped more than 100 giant Paveway bombs and 23 Brimstone missiles. Scores of 
special forces based in Jordan and Iraq have taken on Isis forces and killed 
dozens of fighters on the ground.

Ruhul Amin and Reyaad Khan: the footballer and the boy who wanted to be first 
Asian PM
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/07/british-isis-militants-killed-raf-drone-strike-syria-reyaad-khan-ruhul-amin>
But it is the deployment of the RAF’s fleet of 10 Reaper drones that may have 
sucked British forces into unauthorised conflict. It was a British Reaper that 
took part in the US-led operation that caused the “accidental” deaths of the 62 
Syrian soldiers and threatened the fragile truce.

And it is the use of Reapers, based in Iraq, and flown remotely by satellite 
from an RAF base in Waddington, Lincolnshire, against Isis fighters who are 
British citizens that has triggered an inquiry. The government has confirmed 
that Reapers took part in operations to assassinate British Isis fighters in 
Syria who are said to have posed a direct threat to the UK. One of these 
strikes took place before the Commons had voted in December in favour of 
limited military action in Syria, killingReyaad Khan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/08/how-did-britain-decide-to-assassinate-uk-isis-fighter-reyaad-khan-drone-strike>
, 21, an Isis fighter from Cardiff who had appeared in a terrorist recruitment 
video. He died as a result of a joint US/UK operation in August last year along 
with Ruhul Amin, 26, from Aberdeen, a passenger in the car in which they were 
travelling. Further joint US-UK operations took out cyber-terroristJunaid 
Hussain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/27/junaid-hussain-british-hacker-for-isis-believed-killed-in-us-airstrike>
, 21, also in August, and Isis executionerMohammed Emwazi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/13/killing-mohammed-emwazi-was-significant-blow-to-isis-says-us>
, 26, also known as Jihadi John, in November.

Those deaths are now being investigated by a joint parliamentary committee on 
human rights, which has already said that the use of drones in the government’s 
“targeted killing” programme left British pilots and commanders operating them 
vulnerable to murder charges.

It found that confusion over the precise legal justification exposes frontline 
personnel and all those involved in decisions to launch lethal attacks outside 
warzones to “criminal prosecutionfor murder or complicity in murder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/10/uk-drone-strikes-murder-charges-clarify-legal-basis-targeted-kill-policy-isis>
”.

Calls for the government to publish the legal advice that supports its claim 
that Britain is acting in self-defence have so far been rejected. Even if it 
publishes a full response to the human rights committee report ministers are 
unlikely to concede any ground to those who believe UK military action in Syria 
may have broken international law. But as each month passes Britain becomes 
more and more embroiled in the Syrian quagmire. As we commit increasing numbers 
of personnel and more hardware to US-led military operations, the risk of being 
caught up in illegal acts will only increase.
 