
Fox’s mega-hyped midseason drama, Star, opens with the titular aspiring singer 
– an orphan who’s been bounced around foster homes most of her life – 
FaceTiming on a cracked iPhone. An iPhone 5, even. It’s a small touch, but a 
clear signifier that Lee Daniels’ Empire follow-up won’t be trafficking in the 
same lavishness that defines that show.

This Is Us emerges as safe winner in terrible year for network pilots
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/14/this-is-us-nbc-2016-network-pilots>
Minus the expensive clothes, champagne and casually thrown shade, Empire is, 
at its core, a TV series about a nouveau riche black family who will do 
anything and everything to protect their fortune. The fear of one day having to 
go back to the ghetto (or, worse, back to prison) motivates the morally 
questionable behavior of Cookie and Lucious Lyon. The writing staff does its 
best to engender audience sympathy for the power-hungry, fabulously wealthy 
Lyon dynasty (their success varies from character to character, season to 
season) but it’s hard to sustain much of a dramatic thrust when your 
protagonists are both already on top of their profession and have never met an 
antagonist who can best them for more than a three-episode arc.

Star feels like a reaction to the narrative rut that Empire finds itself in. 
The three leads – Star (Jude Demorest), her half-sister Simone (Brittany 
O’Grady) and sad little rich girl Alexandra (Ryan Destiny, who is blessed with 
a name that sounds like a character from an anime) – don’t have everything they 
want. Really, they just don’t have anything. They arrive in Atlanta hoping to 
become a successful pop act without any actual knowledge of how to go about it. 
Instead, they find that everyone around them seems to think they understand the 
way to stardom – their Bible-thumping godmother (Queen Latifah) and her 
daughter, and a sleazy manager played by Benjamin Bratt.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DT2snL9QUIZI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DT2snL9QUIZI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DT2snL9QUIZI&media=>
The Empire formula is still there – climactic musical numbers, shocking 
cliffhangers, awkwardly shot scenes of titillation, splashes of grim violence, 
a peculiar relationship between the unsavory world of show business and 
down-home Christian values – but in service of a classic underdog story. Star 
and friends shampoo hair in exchange for a free place to stay. Their first 
performance is in front of a somnambulistic bar crowd. Their manager may or may 
not be totally full of it. We don’t even see our first mansion for two-thirds 
of the show’s runtime. It’s all faded glory and untapped potential, as though 
one of Cookie’s magnificent leopard-print outfits got dragged by a city bus for 
a few miles.

Underneath all the pluck is a layer of creeping dread too. Star is naive, but 
not in a cute, Will Ferrell-in-Elf sort of way. Her physicality and willingness 
to survive at all costs reminds me more of Nomi Malone, the hero of Paul 
Verhoeven’s camp classic Showgirls. Nomi comes from nothing, uses her wit and 
her sexuality to thrive, dances her way to the good life, then finds herself 
corrupted and right back where she started. If we can take it seriously for a 
moment, Showgirls was both an indictment of ambition and also an ode to the 
struggle of women to navigate a male-dominated industry. The film’s elliptical 
ending promises that Nomi hasn’t been totally discouraged by the last 131 
minutes of psychological torture, peer pressure and freaky pool sex with Kyle 
MacLachlan.

Demorest’s performance as Star exudes the same sort of extreme self-belief and 
determination that some might mistake for stupidity. It’s certainly more 
believable than whatever Elizabeth Berkley was going for in Showgirls. If this 
show is also a meditation on the corrosive power of fame, then it might end up 
going to places far darker than Empire. Just in the pilot, Star presents itself 
as a grittier program. Substance abuse, PTSD, hate crimes and sexual assault 
all get brought up with more gravity than they would be on the gilded sets of 
Empire. The stakes here really matter and when the final cliffhanger dropped, I 
felt more genuine interest in what happens next than I have in at least two 
seasons of Empire. Star will inevitably be compared to its network sibling, 
thanks to its structural similarities, parallel workplace settings and the 
shared presence ofLee Daniels <https://www.theguardian.com/film/lee-daniels>. I 
just spent a few hundred words doing just that. It’s natural, but hopefully by 
the end of Star’s first season we won’t even be thinking of Empire. Whether 
it’s a classic rags-to-riches fable or a cautionary tale, Star is already more 
alive than Empire has been in years.
 