
In the 1980s, long before his thoughts turned to the US presidency, Bernie 
Sanders –then mayor of Burlington, Vermont 
<http://viewer.gutools.co.uk/us-news/gallery/2015/jun/19/bernie-sanders-burlington-vermont-mayor-in-pictures>
 – took it upon himself to try to decelerate the development of the Lake 
Champlain waterfront. Rejecting a plan to turn it into a series of luxury 
condominiums, Sanders also worked to preserve public housing by passing 
ordinances that made it harder for developers to evict tenants, and created a 
community land trust to allow residents to purchase their units. In addition, 
he supported the local Onion River Collaborative market (now City Market), 
instead of accepting a proposal for a large, unpopular supermarket in the 
centre of town.

Whatever one thinks of his subsequent political career, Sanders’ efforts in 
Burlington remind us that the impact of – and concerns over – urban 
gentrification are nothing new. These days, however, gentrification is perhaps 
the most widely used term in any discussion about contemporary cities, and 
invariably carries with it sinister implications of deep social division and 
exclusion.

Rather like a law of nature or scientific fact, the gentrification process is 
now considered inevitable, and inevitably bad. How did we come to think about 
it in this way – and what are the consequences of this perception for our 
cities?

I became aware of the pervasiveness of this view last May, when I wrote an 
article about the dangers of greening cities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/may/06/dangers-ecogentrification-best-way-make-city-greener>
. It discussed the “just green enough” approach to implementing urban 
ecological projects – controlling the scale and speed of gentrification by 
making incremental changes to more areas of a city, as opposed to commissioning 
single, large-scale greening projects such as New York’s High Line.

 A number of readers challenged the argument. “Interesting, but unavoidable,” 
one reader posted. No matter the approach taken, others added, gentrification 
is the inevitable, negative outcome.


Once this process of ‘gentrification’ starts, it goes on until the whole 
social character of the district has changed
Ruth Glass 
I’m not so sure. Despite how it must sometimes feel to residents of a city, 
gentrification isnot a natural phenomenon that occurs outside of the choices 
made by individuals and groups. As Quinton Mayne, assistant professor of public 
policy at Harvard’s Kennedy School of Government, said recently when I asked 
him whether he feels gentrification is inevitable: “People and politics are 
both the problemand the solution … If I really thought it was inevitable, I 
don’t think I could teach my urban politics course. My goal is to help students 
understand both the complexity and thorniness of the problem, but also to give 
them hope by helping them break this complexity down into its constituent parts 
– so they realise that gentrification is constructed and man-made. Then 
hopefully we can figure out ways of finding points of leverage for them to set 
a new course for urban development.”

What are these points of leverage? Ways of mitigating gentrification, such as 
Sanders’ efforts, can take place at widely different scales: from community 
organising to government policies to a shift away from valuing profit as the 
ultimate standard of success in urban development projects.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fgentrification-inevitable-bad-urban-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e7ba9ef4ffc6d5f299d23063e30cafb205221e2%2F7_60_1913_1148%2F1913.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20gentrification%20inevitable%20%E2%80%93%20and%20inevitably%20bad%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fgentrification-inevitable-bad-urban-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20gentrification%20inevitable%20%E2%80%93%20and%20inevitably%20bad%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fgentrification-inevitable-bad-urban-change%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e7ba9ef4ffc6d5f299d23063e30cafb205221e2%2F7_60_1913_1148%2F1913.jpg>
 The local community in Berlin formed a coalition to save the greengrocers 
under threat from regeneration. Photograph: Martha Doerfler - RLS/Flikr/CC 
BY-SA 2.0 
In addition to community coalition-building, there are a variety of laws and 
policies – from property tax abatements and incentives tozoning ordinances 
<http://www.investopedia.com/terms/z/zoning-ordinance.asp>, participatory 
budgeting 
<http://www.participatorybudgeting.org/about-participatory-budgeting/what-is-pb/>
 and housing policies – that really can make it easier for low- and 
middle-income residents to stay in their rented homes without anxieties about 
it becoming unaffordable. Perhaps more importantly, they can also be given the 
chance to move into other neighbourhoods that might be at risk of rapid 
gentrification.

Some cities have implemented rent control, or laws requiring developers to 
include a portion of affordable housing in new buildings. The result: cities 
that are more just, and more interesting, for residents of all income levels.

Nor is it just about laws. Last spring Bizim Bakkal, a small greengrocers 
<http://www.bizim-kiez.de/en/> owned by a Turkish family in the popular Berlin 
neighbourhood of Kreuzberg, received an eviction notice from WGW Property 
Management. The company planned to redevelop the building into condominiums, 
and divide the grocery store into two smaller shops. In response, the owner 
joined forces with other residents and small business owners and tapped into 
existing dissatisfaction with rising rents across Berlin. The eviction was 
dropped, andthe coalition, Bizim Kiez <http://www.bizim-kiez.de/en/>, continues 
to challenge processes of gentrification, modernisation and expulsion.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fgentrification-inevitable-bad-urban-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff197d88af62c849fd596c9dd0f6173195352febf%2F0_0_5078_3048%2F5078.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20gentrification%20inevitable%20%E2%80%93%20and%20inevitably%20bad%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fgentrification-inevitable-bad-urban-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20gentrification%20inevitable%20%E2%80%93%20and%20inevitably%20bad%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fgentrification-inevitable-bad-urban-change%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff197d88af62c849fd596c9dd0f6173195352febf%2F0_0_5078_3048%2F5078.jpg>
 The London skyline as seen from the Heygate Estate, Elephant and Castle, 
before it was demolished as part of the regeneration of the area. Photograph: 
elephantpix / Alamy/Alamy 
So why do many people feel that gentrification is inevitable in the first 
place? Ruth Glass, the British sociologist who first introduced the term in a 
1964 study of London, certainly thought so: she wrote that given the economic 
and social climate of postwarLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, 
gentrification as a process was inevitable.

Glass had witnessed enormous change in the wealth of the city, from “rationed 
to competitive consumption”. And yet while wealth had increased, London’s new 
“gentry” was displacing working-class residents, who fled to cheaper housing on 
the city’s outskirts. As Glass saw it, the city’s liveability, diversity and 
dynamism were under threat.

“One by one,” she wrote, “many of the working-class quarters of London have 
been invaded by the middle classes … Once this process of ‘gentrification’ 
starts in a district, it goes on rapidly until all or most of the original 
working class occupiers are displaced, and the whole social character of the 
district has changed.”

Throughout the 1980s and 90s, a number of critical geographers, especially 
David Harvey and Neil Smith, linked this process to larger social and economic 
changes happening since the 1970s, namely deregulation and laissez-faire 
economics. The suggestion was that because these larger economic and political 
forces were the ultimate causes of gentrification, it could not be fully 
addressed without a change in the mode of production. “I would love to see a 
world after gentrification,” Smith wrote in 1996, “and a world after all the 
economic and political exploitation that makes gentrification possible.”

Gentrification X: how an academic argument became the people's protest
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/jan/12/gentrification-argument-protest-backlash-urban-generation-displacement>
At the same time as academics devoted themselves to the systematic study of 
this new analytical category, however, real-estate developers were applying it 
as a refined strategy. Gentrification became a recipe: add artistic elements; 
celebrate the neighbourhood’s diversity; mix in luxury loft residences; attract 
expensive stores. A recent episode of South Park, The City Part of the Town, in 
which the city bends over backwards to attract a Whole Foods,brilliantly 
captured 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/oct/26/what-south-park-teaches-us-about-gentrification>
 just how much of a caricature 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/oct/26/what-south-park-teaches-us-about-gentrification>
 this gentrification recipe has become.

Global political movements against the process of gentrification are thus, 
perhaps, caught in a loop. The more we use the term gentrification to analyse 
widely disparate urban problems worldwide, the more the idea is reinforced that 
gentrification is a force of nature. And the more gentrification is perceived 
as inevitable, the more developers will take it as a ready-made recipe.

Therefore, we must go beyond familiar stereotypes of gentrification. Yes, 
developers push people out of their homes – but other factors, such as 
inadequate housing stock and vacant land, play as much, or even more, of a role 
in limiting affordable housing. The caricature of gentrification may be useful 
to activists, developers and TV producers, but it will not lead us to novel 
solutions to real socio-economic and spatial inequality.

Jeanne Haffner is a Mellon postdoctoral fellow in Urban Landscape Studies at 
Dumbarton Oaks Research Library and Collection (Trustees for Harvard 
University). Her book,The View from Above: The Science of Social Space 
<https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/view-above>, is published by MIT Press.

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 