
A few months ago I interviewed Klaus Bondam, head of the Danish cycling union 
<https://www.cyklistforbundet.dk/english> and formerly Copenhagen’s mayor for 
roads and infrastructure, and asked him how he saw his city changing in the 
coming years. The answer was something of a surprise.

“Look at something like car parking,” Bondam told me. “It’s so old fashioned 
in my eyes. The private ownership of a car – that will end in the next 10 to 15 
years. I think it’s going to be a combination of shared cars, of city cars, of 
public transport, bicycles, electric bicycles, of freight distribution by 
electric cargo bikes.”


This sounded like a rapid timeframe, I told him. Bondam was adamant: “I’m 
totally convinced about that. Why on earth would you make a big investment that 
you just leave outside 95% of the time and don’t use?”

This was, of course, Copenhagen, which already has very high levels of cycling 
<http://www.cycling-embassy.dk/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/Copenhagens-Biycle-Account-2014.pdf>
, and measures to curb private car use. But other people also believe that such 
a transport revolution could be coming to other urban areas.

The key element of this is the advent of the driverless car. These might seem 
something for the distant future, but the technology is already affecting 
people’s lives – car insurance premiums arepredicted to plummet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/16/smart-technology-cars-insurance-premiums-safer-cheaper>
 in the next few years as crash-avoidance and sensor-triggered braking systems 
become more widespread.

Leading the way on driverless technology are tech firms, notably Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/may/28/google-self-driving-car-how-does-it-work>
. One effect of this is that research into driverless cars involves not just 
how they might work, but how they could be used, a product of the computer 
engineer’s traditional impatience with inefficient or wasteful systems.

How driverless cars could change our whole future | John Naughton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/25/uber-self-driving-cars-pittsburgh-how-driverless-cars-could-change-our-future-lyft-john-zimmer>
All this inevitably draws engineers towards the idea of car sharing. As Bondam 
notes, each person, or family, having their own car is absurdly inefficient and 
leaves everyone, car user or not, having to deal with external factors such as 
streets cluttered with parked vehicles, and cars crawling along looking for 
parking.

Sharing systems already exist in many cities, not least bike networks of the 
type seen inLondon <https://tfl.gov.uk/modes/cycling/santander-cycles>, Paris 
<http://en.velib.paris.fr/>, New York <https://www.citibikenyc.com/> and 
elsewhere. App-based taxi services such as Uber are broadly similar, although 
they create their own problems, not least a large number of vehicles cruising 
round as they await fares, causing pollution and congestion.

One Google-spinoff company is trying to look further into the future for more 
radical solutions. Anand Babu, chief operating officer atSidewalk Labs 
<https://www.sidewalklabs.com/>, believes cities could be fundamentally 
reshaped by the mass arrival of shared, driverless cars, something he forecasts 
to happen sooner than many people think.

The intention of Sidewalk Labs is to reshape cities through the conjunction of 
clever planning and hi-tech solutions. It is working onLinkNYC 
<https://www.sidewalklabs.com/link-nyc/index.html>, a joint venture between New 
York City and CityBridge, a consortium involving Sidewalk Labs, to turn defunct 
payphone booths into digital hubs, andFlow <http://www.flowmobility.io/>, a 
more ambitious plan aimed at helping urban areas monitor and manage traffic 
more effectively.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fsidewalk-labs-google-mass-sharing-driverless-cars-reshape-suburbs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd3ed6e37b4504315a51b6b8e479bb6cffe54b838%2F331_0_4853_2912%2F4853.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20the%20mass%20sharing%20of%20driverless%20cars%20about%20to%20reshape%20our%20suburbs%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fsidewalk-labs-google-mass-sharing-driverless-cars-reshape-suburbs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20the%20mass%20sharing%20of%20driverless%20cars%20about%20to%20reshape%20our%20suburbs%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fsidewalk-labs-google-mass-sharing-driverless-cars-reshape-suburbs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd3ed6e37b4504315a51b6b8e479bb6cffe54b838%2F331_0_4853_2912%2F4853.jpg>
 A LinkNYC kiosk in New York 
Babu, formerly head of special projects for Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google>, concedes it is early days for 
his company. “When technologists approach cities, the criticism is that they 
treat it like any other software problem,” he says. “We’re trying to avoid 
that.”

And while he stresses the risks in trying to predict the future, Babu says 
there could soon be big and interconnected changes for transport in what he 
calls the “20-100mph range” – cars and what might replace them – and the 
“10-20mph range”, covering cycling and other more short-range travel modes.

Driverless cars, Babu says, could have a particular impact in expansive US 
cities, making often moribund outer suburbs easily accessible and more 
attractive, in turn relieving the pressure on people to live in the centre. 
With mass driverless car sharing, he argues, you would need far fewer vehicles 
overall, leaving neighbourhoods much more attractive for walking or cycling.

Babu believes there is “tremendous latent demand” for people to live in 
communities based around walking and bikes. As he sees it, the suburb (or inner 
city) of the future would see people hop on a bike either for local trips or to 
access to the next, more rapid form of transport, be it a driverless car or 
public transport.

“You could potentially move to a model where these suburban cities that were 
so reliant on individual vehicles could become incredibly well-connected 
metropolitan areas, where you could get anywhere within 30 minutes, plus a 
first mile/last mile of walking or bike connection,” he says. “You’re in a 
high-speed, shared vehicle for the majority of miles, but then the last mile or 
first mile you embrace a wide amount of innovation around all sorts of personal 
vehicles, whether self-powered or electric powered, to connect.”


There’s an alternative, scary future where people … shove each of their 
children into a driverless car to go to school
Rachel Aldred 
The idea of a company such as Google taking an interest in cycling might seem 
anomalous. But urban cycling, like shared cars, can appeal to tech firms’ focus 
on efficient and adaptable technology.

Google announced last year a plan to combat road congestion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jun/19/google-cycle-plan-bikeability-googleplex-mountain-view-silicon-valley>
 around its headquarters in Mountain View, California by getting together with 
the local county government to plan and build a network of useable and safe 
bike lanes.

It followed research into local commuting patterns that found 20% to 30% of 
trips were under five miles – perfectly achievable on a bike in the agreeable 
local climate.

This slightly Truman Show-style image of cities filled with benign, 
never-crashing, always-available shared cars does, however, come with various 
caveats.

For example, it’s perfectly possible people might eschew Babu’s first or last 
mile on a bike or e-bike and get driven right to their door, thus keeping 
traffic on residential roads and doing nothing to improve the globe’s ongoing 
pandemic of ailments associated with sedentary living.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fsidewalk-labs-google-mass-sharing-driverless-cars-reshape-suburbs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17ff5d885a09bea93b3cdadc175ddf40ac01f196%2F0_50_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20the%20mass%20sharing%20of%20driverless%20cars%20about%20to%20reshape%20our%20suburbs%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fsidewalk-labs-google-mass-sharing-driverless-cars-reshape-suburbs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20the%20mass%20sharing%20of%20driverless%20cars%20about%20to%20reshape%20our%20suburbs%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fsidewalk-labs-google-mass-sharing-driverless-cars-reshape-suburbs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17ff5d885a09bea93b3cdadc175ddf40ac01f196%2F0_50_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 ‘Cities could move to a model where you could get anywhere within 30 minutes 
with a first mile/last mile bike connection,’ says Anand Babu of Sidewalk Labs. 
Photograph: Alamy 
Also, with cars often criticised for their depersonalising and divisive effect 
on urban life, this atomisation could increase all the more if they are simply 
replaced by driverless versions.

Rachel Aldred 
<https://www.westminster.ac.uk/about-us/our-people/directory/aldred-rachel>, a 
transport expert at the University of Westminster, argues that various visions 
are feasible. “There’s an alternative and scary future where people become more 
individualised – they shove each of their children into a driverless car to go 
to school,” she says. “And people could spend a lot of time in driverless cars. 
I’m not saying that is going to happen, but there are different trends, 
potentially, that you might see.”

Aldred continues: “We need to do more thinking about what exactly we want 
driverless cars used for, and who will use them. The trade-offs are not always 
recognised.

“On the one hand people say they’ll be much more efficient, which would spare 
road capacity, which is great if that is the case. But on the other hand it 
will open up the benefits of car mobility to many more people, who currently 
have limited access. You can’t have it both ways.”

Can e-bikes revolutionise long-distance commuting?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/sep/14/e-bikes-long-distance-commuting-speed-pedelec-electric-cycles>
Which way will it go? What does seem very possible is that the hegemony of the 
private car, seen for so many decades as immutable and permanent, could end 
sooner than many people think, maybe even within Bondam’s predicted timeframe.

Fifty years ago, the business behemoths of the day were collaborating with 
city planners to drive urban motorways through city centres. These are now 
gradually being removed – as with, for example, Paris’sdecision to close the 
Voie Georges-Pompidou 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/sep/09/paris-divided-highway-car-free-six-months-pedestrianisation>
 along the Seine for a trial period of six months.


The new industrial giants, such as Google, are looking beyond antiquated 
issues like free-flowing motor traffic and towards cities in which people enjoy 
living.

They won’t always get it right. Babu excitedly told me about the potential for 
low-cost, lightweight carbon-fibre cycle flyovers, which might be 
technologically nifty but fall into the classic trap of seeing the bike as 
something to be removed from a city rather than placed at its centre.

But the fact he and other tech innovators are even thinking such things is 
encouraging. The transport revolution is coming. You’ll just have to wait to 
see precisely how it looks.

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 