
Here’s a story I believe. That’s partly because I want to. But it’s also 
because the people I heard it from believe it, which, given who they are, 
matters more. It goes that when Theresa May found out that Philip Hammond had 
met Sadiq Khan before delivering his autumn statement to discuss what powers 
and monies would behanded down to City Hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/nov/24/london-and-the-chancellors-2016-autumn-statement>
, Number 10 sent a rocket through the party wall.

I can’t say if this was because the PM was annoyed at not being told in 
advance that her man at Number 11 would be sitting down to natter with theLondon
 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> mayor, or because she didn’t want him 
hobnobbing with Khan at all. Either way, the tale is being seen as not only 
confirming May’s determination to impose her authority over her ministers but 
also showing her to be wary of allowing Khan to get a larger grip on the 
capital’s affairs.

Well, you can see how there might be a dilemma. Not everyone 
<http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/politicsandpolicy/personal-values-brexit-vote/> views 
the Brexit vote as primarily a regional revolt against we smug gits of the 
“metropolitan elite”, but with Ukip attitudes more of a threat to the PM than 
the Labour Party in parliament is, you can imagine why she might not wish to 
risk being portrayed as favouring the voracious, multicultural, remain-stay 
capital. On the other hand, the implications of Brexit appear to mean that the 
country may become still more dependent on London’s resilient, 
highly-productive economy and the subsidy this supplies to the rest of the UK – 
good reasons for listening to its businesses and politicians of several shades 
who think more autonomy would help it do so more effectively.

Whatever is in the PM’s mind, the government’s approach to devolution to 
London government is looking just a bit uneven. Is it truly on the capital’s 
side? The affordable housing deal announced by Hammond last month is seen in 
City Hall as quite a triumph and a reflection of its good working relationship 
with housing and London minister Gavin Barwell, also MP for Croydon Central, 
whose praises Khan sang at mayor’s question time on Wednesday. But at the other 
end of the scale is transport minister Chris Grayling’slong-feared 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/sep/14/is-chris-grayling-really-sold-on-london-suburban-rail-devolution>
 refusal to hand control of the Southern and other suburban rail services to 
Transport for London despite his predecessor agreeing to. Khan is squeezing 
political profit from this for all he’s worth. Can’tblame him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/13/the-guardian-view-on-southern-rail-the-wrong-kind-of-minister>
 for that, but it shows that he knows there’s nothing else to be extracted for 
the time being.

Then there’s the lower profile devo prizes in between. Khan welcomed Hammond’s 
saying 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/autumn-statement-2016-philip-hammonds-speech>
 that the budget for adult education in London will be put at the direct 
disposal of the city itself, believing it can be deployed to best effect at 
local level. But hisdeputy for planning, regeneration and skills 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/press-releases/mayoral/jules-pipe-announced-as-deputy-mayor>
, Jules Pipe, recently spoke of exactly the same commitment being made in the 
budget 18 months earlier. “I’m hoping this thing’s for real this time and that 
this chancellor wasn’t holding crossed fingers behind his back,” he observed. 
It’s supposed to happen from 2019. Another Hammondannouncement 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/571559/autumn_statement_2016_web.pdf>
, to transfer the work and health programme budget to London subject to meeting 
“certain conditions, including on co-funding” was greeted by Pipe with a 
similarly measured “maybe”. The sums involved are relatively small, but could 
go quite a long way.

Pipe remained hopeful that such moves, if they occur, could be “symbolic” of a 
larger, long-term intent and stressed again London’s need for the type of bold, 
fiscal devolution recommend by theLondon Finance Commission 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/what-we-do/business-and-economy/promoting-london/london-finance-commission>
 under Boris Johnson, and whose second report, asked for by Khan, isbeing 
worked on 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/sites/default/files/terms_of_reference_london_finance_commission_2.pdf>
 by an array of major brains. Some say the wheels of central government are 
moving slower than ever just now, but the fragmented Britain revealed by the 
referendum result suggests thatdevolution impetus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/oct/15/theresa-may-brexit-strategy-could-depend-on-giving-london-more-autonomy>
 could help fend off national paralysis - something Brexit Britain really 
doesn’t need.
 