
“The Premier League may not be the best league in the world but it is the most 
unpredictable because any team can beat any other on their day.” That’s the 
go-to line for pundits and fans in England, and their theory was only 
strengthened by Leicester City’s remarkable title win last season. The supposed 
competitiveness of the current campaign is also used to add weight to the 
argument that thePremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> is somehow different to 
other leagues, but it doesn’t take much delving to realise that shock results 
are not exclusive to England.

Some of Europe’s most dominant sides are facing tough challenges in their 
domestic leagues this season. The most striking example of this is perhaps 
Paris Saint-Germain, who have wonLigue 1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ligue1football> for the last four seasons 
running but find themselves third in the table, behind Monaco and shock leaders 
Nice.

How Nice became Europe's in-form team | Martin Laurence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/who-scored-blog/2016/oct/25/nice-ligue-1-mario-balotelli-europe>
Paris Saint-Germain have dropped 10 points in their first 12 league matches – 
six more than at this stage last season – after a defeat to Toulouse and draws 
with St Etienne and struggling Marseille. Their recent stalemate with Marseille 
was a particularly intriguing example of how the points don’t always go to the 
most dominant side, a fact not restricted to the Premier League. The champions 
mustered 16 shots while Marseille became the first side in Ligue 1 history to 
fail to have a single attempt at goal, but they still held out for a goalless 
draw.

Elsewhere, while Bayern Munich top the Bundesliga once more, they do so only 
on goal difference and are competing with two unexpected rivals. Their closest 
challengers from last season, Borussia Dortmund, are currently fifth in the 
table and only ended their run of four games without a win by beating bottom 
club Hamburg at the weekend. Instead it’s newly promoted RB Leipzig who are 
pushing Bayern Munich closest after a sensational start to the campaign. RB 
Leipzig have won their last five matches and sit just above Hoffenheim – the 
third unbeaten team in theBundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> – who finished last 
season one point above a relegation play-off spot.

Paris Saint-Germain shocked by Toulouse in second defeat of season
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/23/toulouse-paris-saint-germain-match-report>
Hoffenheim, who are managed by 29-year-old Julian Nagelsmann 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/24/julian-nagelsmann-hoffenheim-prodigy-thomas-tuchel-rejected-bayern-munich>
, would have beaten Bayern at the Allianz Arena on Saturday were it not for an 
own goal from their winger Steven Zuber. As it happened they became the third 
side to take points from Bayern in the reigning champions’ last five games, 
joining Frankfurt and Cologne in proving that the league leaders have been far 
from untouchable.

In Serie A <https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball>, while 
Juventus are at the league’s summit once more, they have lost twice this 
season; first to an Inter side that have had very little else to cheer this 
season and then back at San Siro against a Milan team that featured four 
players under the age of 23. Napoli, who finished second last season, find 
themselves down in sixth after a run of seven points from their last six games.

Atlético Madrid’s win over Bayern Munich in the Champions League in September 
suggested that their season was starting with a bang, but they haven’t had it 
all their own way either. They have dropped 12 points from their first 11 
league games and their defeat to Real Sociedad on Saturday was a low point, 
even more disappointing that their draws with newly promoted Alavés and 
Leganes. Results like that wouldn’t happen to all-conquering Barcelona though, 
would they? Well actually they would. TheLa Liga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball> champions have already 
lost at home to Alaves and away at Celta Vigo this season.

Bayern Munich saved by Steven Zuber’s own goal against Hoffenheim
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/05/bayern-munich-hoffenheim-bundesliga-report>
In that sense, when you consider that the Premier League’s “big six” have lost 
just two matches to sides not within that same bracket –Liverpool against 
Burnley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/20/burnley-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
 andManchester United against Watford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/18/watford-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
 – the theory that the Premier League is unlike any other league in terms of 
upsets is just not true.

The one area in which the Premier League does stand up as the most competitive 
league this season is the gap from the top of the league to the relegation 
zone. With 16 points separating Liverpool in first to from Hull in 18th, the 
gulf is the smallest in Europe’s big leagues. Nevertheless, in terms of shock 
defeats, England’s top flight has been no different to any other league in the 
sense that they remain few and far between, with its unpredictability perhaps a 
little overstated – Leicester’s 2015-16 heroics aside.

Pep Guardiola has already dismissed the notion that the Premier League is 
somehow superior in terms of intensity, saying: “None of you have been in La 
Liga or the Bundesliga to know how intense it is. You have to have respect for 
the other leagues and the way they play.” Perhaps it’s also time to accept that 
top teams do drop points elsewhere too.

Premier League team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
La Liga team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Bundesliga team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Serie A team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Ligue 1 team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Liga NOS team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
• Follow WhoScored on Twitter <https://twitter.com/WhoScored> and Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/WhoScored>
• Follow Martin Laurence <https://twitter.com/martinlaurence7> on Twitter
 