
Islamic State has claimed responsibility for the Istanbul nightclub attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/istanbul-nightclub-attack> that killed 39 
partygoers in the first hours of 2017 when a lone gunman fired 180 bullets in a 
seven-minute shooting spree.

Turkish police have arrested eight people in connection with the attack and 
released a blurred photograph of the suspect. The Turkish military retaliated 
against Isis with airstrikes and artillery fire against the group in Syria.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fisis-group-claims-responsibility-for-istanbul-nightclub-attack%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3466ea46930371821497f9feae7035f79b514ef3%2F0_597_1141_1140%2F1141.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Isis%20claims%20Istanbul%20nightclub%20attack%20as%20perpetrator%20remains%20at%20large&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fisis-group-claims-responsibility-for-istanbul-nightclub-attack%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Isis%20claims%20Istanbul%20nightclub%20attack%20as%20perpetrator%20remains%20at%20large&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fisis-group-claims-responsibility-for-istanbul-nightclub-attack%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3466ea46930371821497f9feae7035f79b514ef3%2F0_597_1141_1140%2F1141.jpg>
 A photo released by the Turkish police of their main suspect for the gun 
attack. 
Authorities had obtained the fingerprints and a basic description of the 
gunman and were close to identifying him, said the Turkish deputy prime 
minister, Numan Kurtulmuş, after a cabinet meeting on Monday evening.

Kurtulmuş said the attack was a message from extremist groups that they 
intended to be a “scourge” againstTurkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey>, but said it was determined to fight 
back. “Wherever they may hide in 2017, we will enter their lair,” he said.


“With the will of God, with the support of our people, with all our national 
capacity, we will bring them to their knees and give them all the necessary 
response.”

The gunman killed a police officer and another person in order to enter the 
Reina nightclub 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/01/istanbul-terror-attack-reina-nightclub>
, which overlooks the Bosphorus in the wealthy Ortaköy neighbourhood of 
Turkey’s largest city. Nearly two-thirds of those killed in the club, which is 
frequented by celebrities, were foreigners. Many of them were from the Middle 
East. Sixty-nine people were injured.

The Isis-linked Aamaq news agency said the attack was carried out by a “heroic 
soldier of the caliphate” who attacked the nightclub “where Christians were 
celebrating their pagan feast”.

It said the man fired an automatic rifle and detonated hand grenades in 
“revenge for God’s religion and in response to the orders” of Isis leader Abu 
Bakr al-Baghdadi.
Reina map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2017/01/archive-2-zip/giv-3902rkdffxSm9blm/>
The group described Turkey as “the servant of the cross” and suggested it was 
in retaliation for Turkish military offensives against Isis in Syria and Iraq.

“We let infidel Turkey know that the blood of Muslims that is being shed by 
its airstrikes and artillery shelling will turn into fire on its territories,” 
the statement said.

Turkish authorities reportedly believe the attacker is likely to be either 
from Uzbekistan or Kyrgyzstan. Kyrgyzstan’s foreign ministry said it was 
looking into the media reports.


Eleven of those killed were Turkish nationals and one was a Turkish-Belgian 
dual citizen, reports said. Seven victims were from Saudi Arabia; there were 
three each from Lebanon and Iraq; two each from Tunisia, India, Morocco and 
Jordan, and one each from Kuwait, Canada, Israel, Syria and Russia.


Foreign nationals named among victims of Istanbul attack
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/01/foreign-nationals-named-among-victims-of-istanbul-attack>
Those in Istanbul to collect the bodies of their loved ones included the 
father of Mehmet Kerim Akyil, 23, who had flown from Belgium to Turkey to 
celebrate new year, and relatives of Bulent Sirvan Osman, 38, a married father 
of two from Irbil, Iraq, who was in Istanbul on business.

The German foreign ministry said two residents of Bavaria, one a Turkish 
national and one a dual Turkish-German citizen, had died in the attack.

Turkish media reports said police had established similarities with a suicide 
bomb and gun attack at Istanbul’sAtatürk airport in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/29/istanbul-ataturk-airport-attack-turkey-declares-day-of-mourning>
 and were investigating whether the same Isis cell could have carried out both 
atrocities.


Meanwhile, Turkish jets struck eight targets, and tanks and artillery fired on 
103 Isis targets near al-Bab, Syria, killing 22 fighters, the Turkish chief of 
general staff’s office told reporters.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fisis-group-claims-responsibility-for-istanbul-nightclub-attack%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F166ad746110d4918896d187eb7365ff693d75b31%2F0_133_3250_1950%2F3250.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Isis%20claims%20Istanbul%20nightclub%20attack%20as%20perpetrator%20remains%20at%20large&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fisis-group-claims-responsibility-for-istanbul-nightclub-attack%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Isis%20claims%20Istanbul%20nightclub%20attack%20as%20perpetrator%20remains%20at%20large&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fisis-group-claims-responsibility-for-istanbul-nightclub-attack%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F166ad746110d4918896d187eb7365ff693d75b31%2F0_133_3250_1950%2F3250.jpg>
 Flowers and pictures of the victims near the entrance of the Reina nightclub. 
Photograph: Yagiz Karahan/Reuters 
It remains unclear how the attacker managed to escape from the club, which is 
just across the street from a police station. One report suggested he had 
abandoned his weapon and mingled with the crowd outside, pretending to be an 
injured civilian.


The Turkish prime minister, Binali Yıldırım, said the attacker left a gun at 
the scene and escaped by “taking advantage of the chaos”.

There were more than 30 violent acts last year in Turkey, which is a Nato 
member and a partner in the US-led coalition fighting Isis in Syria and Iraq. 
There were a number of bombings, including three in Istanbul that authorities 
blamed on Isis, a failed coup attempt in July and renewed conflict with Kurdish 
rebels in the south-east.

Isis claims to have active cells in Turkey. Analysts believe it was behind 
suicide bombings last January and March that targeted tourists on İstiklal 
Street in Istanbul and the attack at Atatürk airport in June, in which 45 
people died.

In December, Isis released a video purportedly showing the killing of two 
Turkish soldiers and urged its supporters to “conquer” Istanbul. Turkish 
authorities have not confirmed the authenticity of the video.
 