
Islamic State <https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> has been dispatching 
children and teenagers into battle and sending them as suicide bombers at an 
unprecedented rate, analysis by US researchers has found.

Examining Isis death notices of 89 children and youths on Twitter and the 
encrypted communications appTelegram 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/feb/24/telegram-messaging-app-whatsapp-down-facebook>
, a study by Georgia State University found that the minors came from at least 
14 nationalities, with just under two-thirds aged between 12 and 16.

According to the analysis 
<https://www.ctc.usma.edu/posts/depictions-of-children-and-youth-in-the-islamic-states-martyrdom-propaganda-2015-2016>
, which ran from the start of 2015 until the end of January this year, the 
death rate has doubled for those aged 18 and under being used by Isis. Overall, 
39% of them were used to drive cars or trucks laden with explosives at the 
enemy. A further 33% died as foot soldiers.

There were three times as many suicide operations involving children and youth 
in January 2016 as the previous January, the researchers found.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fisis-sending-children-die-unprecedented-rate-report-child-soldiers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67549d6f7829881f76810e4b1b76394e43af6c8f%2F196_155_1360_2039%2F1360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Isis%20sending%20children%20to%20die%20at%20unprecedented%20rate%2C%20report%20warns&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fisis-sending-children-die-unprecedented-rate-report-child-soldiers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Isis%20sending%20children%20to%20die%20at%20unprecedented%20rate%2C%20report%20warns&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fisis-sending-children-die-unprecedented-rate-report-child-soldiers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67549d6f7829881f76810e4b1b76394e43af6c8f%2F196_155_1360_2039%2F1360.jpg>
 Briton Talha Asmal, 17, was among the 89 dead. Photograph: Handout/PA 
“The Islamic State has so heavily championed the mobilisation of children – on 
a scale rarely associated even with violent extremist organisations – that it 
suggests organisational concerns that far outweigh short-term propaganda 
benefits,” the report said.

The report’s co-author Charlie Winter said what surprised him was that Isis 
was not using children in a way that substantially differed from adult 
soldiers. “The way children are being used is perhaps counterintuitive in the 
context of child soldier precedence. They aren’t just being used to buoy the 
ranks of Isis nor are they being used in roles that adults can’t engage in,” he 
said.

“Children and youth don’t really receive any special treatment from Isis 
propagandists. They’re celebrated in exactly the same way adults are. And 
they’re celebrated alongside adults rather than being given any recognition for 
their age … It’s almost an incidental fact.”

Although explicit information on age from Isis sources was scant, Winter said 
the researchers were cautiously using child development theory guidelines to 
classify subjects and that all those in the sample used were believed to be 18 
or under.

Examining the location of where children died against their given 
nationalities, Winter said many appeared to have been imported into conflict in
Iraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> from bordering Syria.

The list of the dead includes Talha Asmal, 17, from Dewsbury, who blew himself 
up in the northern Iraqi town of Baiji last year. Speaking in the weeks after 
his death a local imam, Qari Asim, said Isis leaders were acting “like 
paedophiles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/15/dewsbury-in-utter-shock-at-over-talha-asmals-death-in-iraq-suicide-bombing>
” by grooming young men.

Meet 'Average Mohamed', the gas station manager fighting Isis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/17/meet-average-mohamed-gas-station-manager-fighting-islamic-state>
Last August, London’s Metropolitan police said more than 30 children from the 
UK had been made the subject of family court orders due to fears they might be 
radicalised. The country’s most senior counter-terrorism officer, assistant 
commissioner Mark Rowley, said some children were “almost babes in arms”. Their 
ages ranged from two to 17.

The US researchers’ list of the dead also includes a French national and the 
18-year-old AustralianJake Bilardi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/12/exclusive-blog-shows-australian-teen-reported-dead-in-iraq-suicide-attack-had-planned-bombings-in-melbourne>
 who had planned to attack targets in Melbourne, before leaving to fight for 
Islamic State.

Winter said Isis had been training and indoctrinating children for years and 
they were now being “drip-fed into the Isis military project … [but] at an 
accelerating rate.”


Internal Isis documents uncovered by the Guardian show the group deliberately 
planned to train and arm children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/07/leaked-isis-document-reveals-plan-building-state-syria>
 for combat in dedicated camps for “caliphate cubs”.

The report’s authors conclude that Isis’s use of children in war was likely to 
raise serious ethical quandaries for future military engagement.

“It is clear that the Islamic State leadership has a long-term vision for 
youth in its jihadi efforts. While today’s child militants may well be 
tomorrow’s adult terrorists, in all likelihood, the moral and ethical issues 
raised by battlefield engagement with the Islamic State’s youth are likely to 
be at the forefront of the discourse on the international coalition’s war 
against the group in years to come.”
 