
It is a war within a war, fought across thousands of miles of desert, scrub 
and forest, from the Atlantic seaboard to the Indian Ocean coastline.

It pits the Islamic State <https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> (Isis), the 
Iraq and Syria-based group that has expanded deep into Africa since surging to 
international attention in 2014, against al-Qaida, the veteran extremist group, 
which has maintained a significant presence in much of the continent in recent 
years.

Both groups and their affiliates are also fighting an array of armies and 
counter-terrorist agencies: French soldiers, US special forces, British 
military trainers, as well as the local armies of a dozen states. Last week, it 
was revealed the US was building a$50m base for drones in Niger 
<http://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-37515551>, which is at the very centre of 
the conflict zone.

But at the same time, the extremist groups are fighting each other. Such 
internecine struggles between militant groups may seem esoteric to casual 
observers. But the eventual result will have an enormous impact on the security 
of dozens of often fragile states inAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> and, more broadly, on the future of 
Islamic militancy.

Don’t underestimate Islamic State. More atrocities are on their way | Abdel 
Bari Atwan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/21/islamic-state-atrocities-nice-bavaria>
Though they share many aims, al-Qaida and Isis have divergent strategic 
visions and favour dramatically different tactics.Al-Qaida 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/al-qaida> has largely avoided attacks on 
other Muslims, including Shias, and has sought to build support from local 
communities. Though still committed to strikes in the west, it does not appear 
to see a terrorist campaign in Europe or the US as a priority. Isis, also known 
as Isil, has made other Muslims who do not share its beliefs a key target, 
often used violence to keep local communities in line, and launched bloody 
attacks in the west.

In recent months Isis has been forced on to the defensive in Iraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/jul/21/the-shia-militias-taking-back-iraq-from-isis-video>
 and Syria, losing between a quarter and a third of the territory of its 
self-declared “caliphate”. In Libya, the group was recentlyforced out of the 
city of Sirte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/10/libyan-forces-fight-street-battles-with-isis-for-control-of-sirte>
. Such defeats mean that Isis’s success in other parts of the Islamic world may 
become crucial to its survival.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fisis-al-qaida-turf-wars-africa-may-push-fragile-states-to-breaking-point%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7532a4e97694f3c33a5b04edc55054f598584a6%2F0_0_2500_1744%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Isis%20and%20al-Qaida%20turf%20wars%20in%20Africa%20may%20push%20fragile%20states%20to%20breaking%20point&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fisis-al-qaida-turf-wars-africa-may-push-fragile-states-to-breaking-point%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Isis%20and%20al-Qaida%20turf%20wars%20in%20Africa%20may%20push%20fragile%20states%20to%20breaking%20point&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fisis-al-qaida-turf-wars-africa-may-push-fragile-states-to-breaking-point%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7532a4e97694f3c33a5b04edc55054f598584a6%2F0_0_2500_1744%2F2500.jpg>
 Malians walk past a billboard in the northern city of Gao left by Islamic 
militant group Mujao, which reads: ‘Enforcing Sharia [law] is the road to 
happiness, it is the road to paradise.’ Photograph: Sia Kambou/AFP/Getty Images 
This month, a faction calling itself Islamic State in the Greater Sahara 
claimed its first strike in the landlocked country of Burkina Faso. The 
intensifying insurgency there and in neighbouringMali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mali> has been dominated by al-Qaida in the 
Maghreb (Aqim).

Experts have downplayed the significance of the recent attack in Burkina Faso. 
“It’s looking very difficult for Isil to get to the point where it could 
challenge al-Qaida for pre-eminence in Africa. I don’t think that large-scale 
clash is going to happen. Isil will never be completely dislodged but is facing 
decline into obscurity,” said Ryan Cummings, director of Signal Risk, a South 
Africa-based security consultancy.

In Somalia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/somalia>, only one minor 
commander, now based in the remote mountains in Puntland, has resisted the 
bloody purge of dissidents within al-Shabaab, the local militant movement and 
al-Qaida affiliate.

Though Boko Haram <https://www.theguardian.com/world/boko-haram>, the 
extremist movement that has waged a brutal seven-year campaign in the 
north-east of Nigeria, remains nominally loyal to Isis, a recent change in 
leadership has opened up the possibility that the group might soon swing back 
towards al-Qaida.

The violence within the ranks of Boko Haram was prompted by the replacement of 
Abubakar Shekau, leader since 2009, by Abu Musab al-Barnawi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/05/isis-tries-to-impose-new-leader-on-boko-haram-in-nigeria>
, the son of the late founder of the movement. The change appears to have been 
made on the orders of Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the leader of Isis.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fisis-al-qaida-turf-wars-africa-may-push-fragile-states-to-breaking-point%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ee7b05fb079fc8ca5240cf9ab70749d4b122f0c%2F0_0_3072_1927%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Isis%20and%20al-Qaida%20turf%20wars%20in%20Africa%20may%20push%20fragile%20states%20to%20breaking%20point&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fisis-al-qaida-turf-wars-africa-may-push-fragile-states-to-breaking-point%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Isis%20and%20al-Qaida%20turf%20wars%20in%20Africa%20may%20push%20fragile%20states%20to%20breaking%20point&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fisis-al-qaida-turf-wars-africa-may-push-fragile-states-to-breaking-point%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ee7b05fb079fc8ca5240cf9ab70749d4b122f0c%2F0_0_3072_1927%2F3072.jpg>
 Abubakar Shekau, former leader of Nigerian Islamic militant group Boko Haram, 
who was infamous for the abduction ofnearly 300 hundred girls from Chibok 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/16/nigerias-president-muhammadu-buhari-says-he-will-trade-boko-haram-prisoners-for-chibok-girls>
 in 2014. Photograph: AFP/Getty Images 
Senior US officials have suggested  
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-nigeria-boko-haram-idUSKCN0Z72WT>
al-Baghdadi was unhappy at Shekau’s systematic use of children as suicide 
bombers. Forty-four such attacks were launched last year, killing hundreds of 
people.Four out of five bombers in these strikes were girls. 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2016/08/03/africa/nigerias-boko-haram-new-leader/index.html>
 Others say Shekau’s erratic behaviour and disobedience may have been more 
important.

Boko Haram, which was rebranded as the Islamic State in West Africa after 
Shekau swore an oath of allegiance to al-Baghdadi, has also been under 
significant pressure, as militaries fromNigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria> and neighbouring countries have 
ramped up their campaign.

“Boko Haram is not in a good position overall. It has suffered quite 
significant losses of territory, fighters and resources,” said Virginia 
Comolli, senior fellow at the IISS, the International Institute for Strategic 
Studies and author ofa book on the group 
<http://www.hurstpublishers.com/book/boko-haram/>.

Figures compiled by Johns Hopkins University 
<http://warontherocks.com/2016/09/charting-boko-harams-rapid-decline/> show the 
group was responsible for 244 killings during the second quarter of 2016, the 
lowest level in nearly five years.

Though the rainy season usually sees less activity, experts agree that Boko 
Haram is weaker than it has ever been. Nigerian military officials and 
policymakers, as well as many local people, hope the new split will fatally 
weaken the group.

“We welcome the development and we pray they would continue fighting and 
fragmenting,” said Jibrin Gunda, a leader of one of the many “home guard” 
militia set up to counter Boko Haram.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fisis-al-qaida-turf-wars-africa-may-push-fragile-states-to-breaking-point%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F14d579607ceb89bfec055f712602f46fbe95c271%2F36_0_1463_1463%2F1463.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Isis%20and%20al-Qaida%20turf%20wars%20in%20Africa%20may%20push%20fragile%20states%20to%20breaking%20point&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fisis-al-qaida-turf-wars-africa-may-push-fragile-states-to-breaking-point%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Isis%20and%20al-Qaida%20turf%20wars%20in%20Africa%20may%20push%20fragile%20states%20to%20breaking%20point&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fisis-al-qaida-turf-wars-africa-may-push-fragile-states-to-breaking-point%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F14d579607ceb89bfec055f712602f46fbe95c271%2F36_0_1463_1463%2F1463.jpg>
 Abu Musab al-Barnawi took over as leader of Boko Haram. He has pledged 
allegiance to Isis but comes from a faction that has ties to al-Qaida. 
Photograph: Screengrab 
“The emergence of [a] crack in any group signified the end of it, no matter 
how strong such a group was,”Gunda told the local Daily Trust newspaper. 
<http://www.dailytrust.com.ng/news/news/shekau-vs-barnawi-the-battle-for-boko-haram-s-soul/162159.html#Tv1Zf68qAVgvL0Vj.99>

But Boko Haram has always been fragmented, with two main factions manoeuvering 
for influence over several years. Currently, Shekau, infamous for theabduction 
of nearly 300 schoolgirls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/16/nigerias-president-muhammadu-buhari-says-he-will-trade-boko-haram-prisoners-for-chibok-girls>
 from the town of Chibok in 2014, appears to have lost the power struggle.Holed 
up in the vast Sambisa forest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/29/nigeria-sambisa-forest-boko-haram-hideout-kidnapped-school-girls-believed-to-be-held>
, dozens of his followers have been killed in a series of recent attacks by 
rivals.

Al-Barnawi looks stronger. However, despite his oath to Isis leader 
al-Baghdadi, he comes from the faction within Boko Haram that has historically 
had personal ties and ideological affinities to al-Qaida. Al-Barnawi favours 
major strikes on high-profile military or governmental targets or Christians, 
but not against other Muslims, for example. Close associates are also believed 
to have fought with al-Qaida militants in Mali in 2012.


Al-Barnawi is unlikely to break his oath and defect from Isis, but other 
leaders could emerge to lead Boko Haram into the embrace of al-Qaida, said 
Cummings. Others suggest Boko Haram is experiencing“buyers’ remorse”  
<http://foreignpolicy.com/2016/06/20/boko-harams-buyers-remorse/foreignpolicy.com/2016/06/20/boko-harams-buyers-remorse/http://foreignpolicy.com/2016/06/20/boko-harams-buyers-remorse/>
after joining Isis.

“Al-Qaida is on a trajectory to be by far the most powerful jihadist movement 
in Africa … Material circumstances favour an al-Qaida alignment. If you are 
looking for safe havens, different types of material assistance such as 
weapons, money and manpower, then there are multiple incentives … It’s an 
obvious decision,” said Daveed Gartenstein-Ross, an expert at the US-basedF 
<http://www.defenddemocracy.org/>oundation for the Defence of Democracies. 
<http://www.defenddemocracy.org/>

At the UN general assembly in New York last month, the Nigerian president, 
Muhammadu Bukhari, spoke 
<http://www.usnews.com/news/articles/2016-09-22/nigerias-muhammadu-buhari-asks-for-un-help-with-boko-haram-chibok-girls>
 of “remarkable progress [against] Boko Haram, whose capacity to launch 
orchestrated attacks as a formed group has been severely degraded”.

But repeated campaigns against groups across Africa and beyond have rarely 
achieved a definitive victory. Even if they have surged over the past 15 years 
and particularly since the Arab uprisings of 2011, many groups currently active 
have antecedents reaching back decades.

“It is frustrating. A lot of resources, including from western donors, are 
going into the fight but new factions and groups are always emerging,” said 
Comolli.
 