
The Istanbul rush hour commute is like no other. Passengers feast on toasted 
sandwiches, tea and freshly brewed coffee before taking one of a choice of 
seats. Some even get to light up a cigarette out the back.


 That’s because 300,000 people in Turkey’s biggest city take the ferry to work 
every day.

 “Besides enjoying a peaceful ride, it was the fastest way to reach the 
office,” said graphic designer Baris Akdogan who took the boat between the 
city’s European and Asian shores to work every day until early this year. “The 
alternatives can be a real pain … [the] bus takes at least an hour or the 
subway can be really crowded,” said fellow passenger Melike Son, a project 
manager who gets breakfast on board.

 In Istanbul, more than 100 ferries and sea buses carry up to 2,100 commuters 
per trip with many routes served by eight departures an hour. The Istanbul 
Deniz Otobusleri (IDO) or Istanbul Sea Bus company, the largest maritime 
transport corporation in the world, carried 47 million passengers around the 
city last year, with a similar number using other ferry companies in the city.

But around the world, holding up ferry transport as a serious commuting 
alternative has regularly been ridiculed. Critics maintain they are too slow 
and expensive, can reach only selected parts of a city and are no match for 
mass transit systems such as subway trains or even buses.


Among the criticisms heard in New York are that fares are too expensive, 
winters are too cold, and the ferries too slow
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F28%2Fistanbul-ferries-future-transport-new-york-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F27%2F1432722541265%2F5158c7dc-a703-4462-a336-787199c0fbc1-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Istanbul%20shows%20ferries%20have%20a%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F28%2Fistanbul-ferries-future-transport-new-york-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Istanbul%20shows%20ferries%20have%20a%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F28%2Fistanbul-ferries-future-transport-new-york-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F27%2F1432722541265%2F5158c7dc-a703-4462-a336-787199c0fbc1-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Passengers on New York’s Staten Island ferry. Photograph: Alamy 
 In February, New York City mayor Bill de Blasio announced that a new ferry 
service 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/02/04/nyregion/mayor-de-blasio-moves-to-expand-ferry-service-in-new-york-city.html>
 for the city is to begin operating in 2017. New York is “the ultimate coastal 
city,” he said, and plans to spend $55m (£36m) linking Brooklyn, Manhattan, 
Queens and elsewhere by boat. As in Istanbul, De Blasio’s plan would see ferry 
fares the same as bus and subway, and outlying districts are expected to enjoy 
increased service.

“Currently New York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> misses an 
opportunity for market expansion by not being better integrated,” said Roberta 
Weisbrod, a maritime consultant and executive director of Worldwide Ferry 
Safety Association. “But there are strong hopes that that will change in the 
near future.”

 Among the criticisms heard in New York is that fares are too expensive, 
winters too cold for ferry use and that ferries can’t move people as quickly as 
subway trains.

 “My concerns are classic even among ferry enthusiasts [and] include whether 
specific routes will attract adequate ridership, require significantly higher 
levels of operating subsidies than other modes of transport,” said Gene 
Russianoff from the Straphangers public transport advocacy organisation, who 
calls himself “a ferry sceptic, not a ferry opponent”.

 There’s much world cities can learn from the example set by Turkey’s biggest 
metropolis. Unlike Istanbul’s ferry system, New York’s Pier 11 at Wall Street, 
for example, hasno bus or mass transit 
<http://www.nywaterway.com/Pier11WallStTerminal.aspx> connections. London’s 
Woolwich Ferry is forced to compete with a footbridge and light rail serving 
the same route.
 New York’s proposed ferry network 
 “We’re well on our way to reaching our goal of getting 12 million passengers 
on the Thames by 2020,” said Andy Thompson, Transport for London’s (TfL’s) head 
of London river services, “and TfL demand models suggest river bus commuter 
numbers could double in the next five years with the right investment in new 
piers and riverside development delivery.”

 But even if they do, ferry traffic would account for just 20 million of the 
current 3.5 billion annual journeys taken in London.

 In other cities, ferry infrastructure is popular mainly because it is well 
integrated. Manly Wharf in Sydney’s north-east is connected to a fleet of buses 
that move commuters deep into suburbia, and the Hong Kong-mainland China 
passenger ferry line is linked by coach to a host of Chinese provinces.

 Something New York and many other city ferries lack are the lateral-thrust 
propellers that give many Istanbul boats a critical edge in attracting 
travellers. The propellers help ferries pull up alongside docks allowing 
passengers to embark and disembark quickly. In the way the airline Ryanair 
whittles profit from its ultra-quick turnaround schedule, the Istanbul ferry 
system is able to do likewise, and it must.

With projected ridership of over 36 million by 2018, ferry services ​​are a 
substantial part of New York's transit mix

 Istanbul’s ferries remain popular because they are deeply connected to other 
transport systems. In Kadikoy, a teeming district on Istanbul’s Asian shore, 
just 20 steps separate ferry stations from the entrance of a 16-stop metro line 
that stretches to the city southern limits. A two-minute walk brings commuters 
to a major bus terminal.

 What’s more, Istanbul is able to call on a series of natural advantages many 
other cities can’t. A history of popular, municipal-run ferry use dates back to 
1853, predating the first Bosphorus bridge – the only alternative way to cross 
the city – by 120 years. As a result, much of Istanbul’s central shoreline is 
publicly owned, unlike in cities across the Atlantic such as New York or San 
Diego. Pensioners (and accredited journalists) travel for free on Istanbul’s 
public transport and locals say ferries are a link to the city’s historical 
soul.

 Despite this, the city’s ferries face a challenging future. A city whose 
population has increased 15-fold since 1960 meansresidents are increasingly 
moving inland to find affordable housing 
<http://www.architecture.com/WhatsOn/May2015/Ist-onSituationsbyEAA-EmreArolatArchitects.aspx>
. Despite the equivalent of the entire population of Pittsburgh using ferries 
every day, that represents just a tiny percentage of Istanbul’s overall 
commuter total; the majority usemetrobuses 
<http://www.nctr.usf.edu/2013/03/a-bus-rapid-transit-line-case-study-istanbuls-metrobus-system/>
 that run on dedicated highway lanes.

 Local media reports that the IDO is losing money 
<http://www.hurriyetdailynews.com/istanbul-ferries-budget-hit-by-mismanagement-marmaray.aspx?pageID=238&nID=78426&NewsCatID=344>
 to a combination of competition and mismanagement, and city authorities are 
planning to reduce ferry services on some routes. Even as Istanbul has been 
recently noted asthe world’s most congested city 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/news/morning-mix/wp/2015/03/31/the-worlds-most-congested-cities-by-the-numbers/>
, ferry traffic is falling as authorities invest more in underwater rail and 
road transportation systems linking the European and Asian districts. And 
though its ferry service may be romantic and relaxing, it can’t compete with 
modern technology: the recently opened Marmaray train line takes passengers 
under the Bosphorus Strait in just four minutes.

 The future of ferry commuting will be coloured by faster, cleaner vessels – 
though experts say they’re unlikely to ever be the centrepiece of urban 
transportation. TheNorwegian Zero Cat 120 
<http://maritime-connector.com/news/general/%E2%80%9Czerocat-120%E2%80%9D-winner-of-ship-of-the-year-2014/>
, the world’s first battery-powered, zero-emission car ferry, is set to begin 
operating this year. However, this model needs to be recharged after every 
six-kilometre trip, and in cities prone to blackouts caused by storms and 
hurricanes, would result in chaos.

Has the time come for floating cities?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/mar/18/floating-cities-proposals-utopian-sci-fi>
 Others look to forecasts of increased passenger traffic as a sign of the 
strength of the ferry. “With projected ridership of over 36 million by 2018, 
ferry services are a substantial part of the transit mix in New York,” said 
Roland Lewis of the Metropolitan Waterfront Alliance, a pro-ferry 
non-governmental organisation.

 Weisbrod thinks the broader future of urban ferry use looks similarly 
positive. “It is an old form of transport that was supplanted by bus, auto and 
train [but] Sydney, Brisbane, Stockholm, London, New York and Bangkok already 
have linear urban ferries; Manila, the most dense city on earth, just started a 
linear urban service on the Passig River; Mumbai is considering coastal 
service,” she said.

 “Now that those forms are suffering congestion, ferry transport is being 
reconsidered.”
 