
The New Year’s Eve attack on an Istanbul nightclub concluded a dreadful year 
forTurkey <https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey>, during which the country 
was shaken by a failed military coup, a policy setback in neighbouring Syria 
and a string of terrorist atrocities.


No group has yet claimed responsibility for Saturday night’s attack, but 
suspicion will fall on Islamic State. The group repeatedlystruck at Turkish 
cities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/20/several-dead-in-suspected-terrorist-blast-at-wedding-in-turkey>
 in 2016 in retaliation for Ankara’s support for international efforts to 
suppress its activities in Syria and Iraq.

Given recent history, an extremist Kurdish nationalist group known as the 
Freedom Falcons, or TAK, could also be in the frame for the attack. It claimed 
responsibility for bomb explosions outside a football stadium in Istanbul that
killed 45 people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/10/bomb-outside-istanbul-football-stadium-causes-multiple-casualties>
 in December, and a car bomb attack in Adana the previous month.

The TAK, a breakaway faction of the outlawed Kurdistan Workers’ party (PKK), 
says it is responding to a harsh crackdown by the army and police in Kurdish 
areas of south-eastern Turkey. The crackdown, which displaced thousands of 
civilians, followed the collapse in 2015 of a ceasefire between the PKK and the 
government ofRecep Tayyip Erdoğan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/recep-tayyip-erdogan>, Turkey’s president.

In all there were several dozen serious terrorist attacks in Turkey in 2016, 
often targeting the police and army but just as often hitting civilians. 
Government officials have also pointed the finger of blame for some attacks at 
Syrian Kurds. They claim the Syrian Kurd People’s Protection Units (YPG) are 
allied to the PKK and share its aims of carving out autonomous Kurdish areas in 
Syria and Turkey.

Turkey’s military intervention in northern Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/24/turkey-launches-major-operation-against-isis-in-key-border-town>
 by ground and air in 2016 inflamed the situation. It was ostensibly designed 
to assist the fight against Isis. But Erdoğan’s main purpose in ordering the 
only direct Syrian intervention by any Nato member country was to contain the 
YPG’s territorial advances and prevent any linkup with the autonomous Kurdish 
areas of northern Iraq.

This effort is still under way. The YPG were specifically excluded from the 
Syria ceasefire jointly brokered by Turkey, Russia and Iran last week. But it 
remains unclear whether Erdoğan’s effort will be successful. What is clear is 
that Erdoğan’s manoeuvrings have brought Turkey into conflict with its 
long-time ally the US, which does not not share Ankara’s view of the YPG as 
terrorists but sees them as useful anti-Assad fighters. US material and weapons 
support for the YPGprovoked Turkish protests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/29/syria-us-arms-supply-kurds-turkey>
.

Erdoğan’s intervention has also brought strains with Iran, Turkey’s historical 
rival dating back to the time of the Ottoman and Persian empires. Although both 
governments oppose Kurdish minority aspirations, Sunni Muslim Turkey resents 
Shia Iran’s increasing influence in Iraq and Syria and in other areas it views 
as within its traditional spheres of influence.

Viewed overall, Erdoğan’s Syrian policy flopped badly in 2016. In the light of 
the Russian and Iranian-led battlefield successes, notably the fall of Aleppo, 
Erdoğan was forced to freeze his key demand that Assad step down. And having 
burned his bridges with Washington, he has also been obliged to throw his 
weight behind Moscow’s peacemaking efforts.

But the assassination of Russia’s ambassador 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/19/russian-ambassador-to-turkey-wounded-in-ankara-shooting-attack>
 to Turkey in Ankara last month by a man shouting “Remember Aleppo” underlined 
how fragile the bilateral relationship – in tatters a year ago after a Russian 
warplane was shot down – remains.

Domestically, an attempted army coup last summer almost succeeded in toppling 
Erdoğan. The wave of repression that followed including the jailing of 
thousands of alleged supporters of the exiled cleric Fethullah Gulen and a 
ruthless crackdown on the judiciary, academia and the media.

Erdoğan has accused the HDP, the leading pro-Kurdish party, of supporting the 
PKK, and several of its leaders were detained. At the same time, he continued 
to push throughconstitutional changes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/04/turkey-arrests-pro-kurdish-party-leaders-mps>
 designed to give him quasi-autocratic presidential executive powers.

Meanwhile, attempts by Turkish officials to implicate the Obama administration 
in the coup attempt, because of its refusal to extradite Gulen, further 
strained ties with Washington. Erdoğan fell out simultaneously with the EU over 
sharp European criticism of post-coup human rights abuses.

As the new year begins, Erdoğan appears set on strengthening his grip on 
power, by both democratic and undemocratic means, and pursuing his onslaught 
against the Kurds inside Turkey and in Syria.

In a statement issued after Saturday night’s attack, he vowed to “fight to the 
end” against terrorists whose aim he said was to “create chaos and destabilise 
the country”.

But Turks heard tough-sounding language of that kind from Erdoğan on too many 
similar occasions in 2016. More and more people may conclude that it is the 
president’s failed, divisive policies that must change if the carnage is to end.
 