
The man suspected of shooting dead 39 people in a New Year’s Eve attack on a 
nightclub in Istanbul has been arrested, Turkish officials said late last night.

It is understood the Uzbek national, named as Abdulkadir Masharipov by the 
Turkish media, was captured in a raid by security forces on a house in the 
residential Esenyurt district of Istanbul, 25 miles from where the attack took 
place.

A state news agency also reported that four other people were arrested with 
him, including a Kyrgyz man and three women.

The state-run Anadolu Agency said the suspects were being taken to Istanbul’s 
police headquarters for questioning. It also claimed police were carrying out 
raids on other suspectedIslamic State <https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> 
cells.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fpolice-hunt-gunman-istanbul-new-years-eve-attack-video-report&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Istanbul%20nightclub%20attack%20suspect%20arrested%2C%20according%20to%20Turkey%20officials%20%E2%80%93%20video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fpolice-hunt-gunman-istanbul-new-years-eve-attack-video-report>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Istanbul%20nightclub%20attack%20suspect%20arrested%2C%20according%20to%20Turkey%20officials%20%E2%80%93%20video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fpolice-hunt-gunman-istanbul-new-years-eve-attack-video-report&media=>
Istanbul nightclub attack suspect arrested, according to Turkey officials 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2017/jan/01/police-hunt-gunman-istanbul-new-years-eve-attack-video-report>
After the arrest, Turkey’s foreign minister, Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu, thanked police 
and security organisations “who caught the Reina attacker in the name of the 
people”.

In the last two weeks, dozens of people across Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> have been detained and questioned in 
connection with the deadly assault at the Reina nightclub.

During the attack on new year revellers, the gunman arrived by taxi at the 
upmarket venue in the Ortaköy district on 31 December and shot dead 21-year-old 
police officer Burak Yıldız and Ayhan Arık, a 47-year-old travel agent who had 
been walking past the entrance.

He then went inside and started spraying bullets at the 600 partygoers. The 
attacker repeatedly reloaded his weapon to shoot the wounded as they lay on the 
ground. At least 70 people were injured.

Isis has claimed responsibility for the attack, saying it was revenge for 
Turkish military involvement in Syria.

After fleeing the scene of the massacre, it is believed the gunman initially 
hid in a safe house, where he was joined by his wife and children. He then fled 
with his four-year-old son, who was still with him when he was pinned down by 
officers and handcuffed, according to the Turkish newspaper Hürriyet. A 
photograph circulated on social media by the publication shows a bruised and 
bloodied black-haired man.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fistanbul-nightclub-gunman-new-years-day-reina%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F577c729efc34b6cfffd2c11b1d6a1415b584cb83%2F0_116_720_432%2F720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Istanbul%20nightclub%20suspect%20arrested%2C%20Turkish%20officials%20say&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fistanbul-nightclub-gunman-new-years-day-reina%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Istanbul%20nightclub%20suspect%20arrested%2C%20Turkish%20officials%20say&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fistanbul-nightclub-gunman-new-years-day-reina%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F577c729efc34b6cfffd2c11b1d6a1415b584cb83%2F0_116_720_432%2F720.jpg>
 Abdulkadir Masharipov was captured in a raid by security forces at a house in 
the residential Esenyurt district of Istanbul just 25 miles from where the 
attack took place. Photograph: AP 
The Turkish television channel NTV said the suspect’s son had been taken into 
protective custody. It said police had established the gunman’s whereabouts 
four or five days ago, but delayed the raid to monitor his movements and 
contacts.

Before the arrest, Turkey’s deputy prime minister said he believed the attack 
had been carried out professionally and an intelligence organisation was 
involved.

During an interview with broadcaster A Haber on Monday, Norman Kurtulmus said: 
“It was an extremely planned and organised attack.”
 