
Turkey believes the gunman who killed 39 people in an attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/31/turkey-armed-attacker-opens-fire-in-istanbul-nightclub-reports>
 on new year revellers in an Istanbul nightclub is an ethnic Uighur, a senior 
government official has said.

Veysi Kaynak, one of several deputy prime ministers, told the broadcaster A 
Haber thatTurkey <https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> had established his 
possible locations and links, hours after police carried out a dawn raid in a 
town on the edge of Istanbul and detained several suspects.

Istanbul nightclub attack caps off dreadful year for Turkey
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/01/istanbul-nightclub-attack-dreadful-year-for-turkey>
He said he could not rule out the possibility that the attacker, who remains 
at large, had fled abroad, but that operations within Turkey were more likely 
to achieve a result.


“The terrorist’s identity has been established by security forces and his 
potential whereabouts have also been determined,” Kaynak said, describing the 
man as a “specially trained” member of a cell who carried out the attack alone.

Turkey’s foreign minister said on Wednesday that the gunman had been identified
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/04/istanbul-nightclub-gunman-identified-says-turkish-foreign-minister>
 but provided no further details. Turkish media had reported he was believed to 
be an ethnic Uighur from central Asia, possibly Kyrgyzstan.

Uighurs, a largely Muslim, Turkic-speaking minority in far western China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> with significant diaspora communities 
across central Asia and Turkey, were among those detained on Thursday in 
Selimpaşa, a coastal town just to the west of Istanbul. Turkish news agencies 
said investigators had received intelligence that individuals who may have 
helped the gunman were there.

It was not immediately clear how many people were detained on Thursday, but at 
least 36 people have been held since the attack, according to earlier media 
reports.

Islamic State claimed responsibility for the attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/02/isis-group-claims-responsibility-for-istanbul-nightclub-attack>
, saying it was revenge for Turkish military involvement in Syria.

The suspect, who authorities have not named, shot his way into exclusive 
Istanbul nightclub Reina early on Sunday and opened fire with an automatic 
rifle, throwing stun grenades to allow himself to reload and shooting the 
wounded on the ground.

In the confusion, several early witness reports said there may have been more 
than one attacker, something the Turkish authorities have largely ruled out.

“There was only one shooter. The act was carried out with one gun … but there 
could have been helpers inside,” Kaynak said, noting that investigators were 
still examining whether he had a lookout or other accomplices inside the club.

Police in the Aegean coastal city of Izmir on Wednesday detained what they 
said were 20 suspected Isis militants thought to be of central Asian and north 
African origin. Fake passports, mobile phones, and equipment including night 
vision goggles and a GPS device were seized.

 