
There’s a touch of irony in the fact the Australian government has invested 
$200m in the internationalGreen Climate Fund 
<https://www.greenclimate.fund/home>, a United Nations fund to assist 
developing countries in adapting to and mitigating the effects of climate 
change.

There is, however, no equivalent investment fund by the government, or 
corporate Australia, towards developing sustainable economies on Aboriginal 
lands through one of those mitigation practices, namely carbon farming.

Investment in a sustainable Aboriginal carbon industry would directly impact 
climate change, Indigenous poverty and the management of traditional lands and 
waters. These are all key parts of meeting Australia’s commitment to the
sustainable development goals 
<http://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/sustainable-development-goals/> 
(SDGs), specifically SDG13 (climate action), as well as SDG8 (decent work and 
economic growth), SDG11 (sustainable cities and communities), SDG14 (life below 
water) and SDG15 (life on land).

The government formally adopted the sustainable development goals in Paris 
last year. At the same time the UN called upon the international business 
community to play their part in achieving the goals, saying their success 
relies heavily on action and collaboration by all actors.

No politician can keep a promise to bring back jobs – especially not Donald 
Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/nov/14/no-politician-can-keep-a-promise-to-bring-back-jobs-especially-not-donald-trump>
Paris is a long way from an Aboriginal community in Cape York undertaking 
carbon farming or central Australia where I live, and so is Sydney. But climate 
change is the great equaliser. All Australians experience the hotter summers, 
crazy storms and pungent smoke from out-of-control bushfires that float into 
the cities and towns.Climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-change> is like the polluted 
air all people, rich and poor, have to endure in Beijing and around the world. 
It impacts on us all.

One of the ways Indigenous people are taking action on climate change is 
through carbon farming. Carbon farming is simply managing vegetation to 
increase carbon storage or reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Early dry season 
savannah burning across northern Australia is the most popular form of carbon 
farming practised by traditional owners and Aboriginal ranger groups today, and 
it’s something that comes naturally to most of them. As a young ranger I recall 
the old blokes always having a smile on their face and a spring in their step 
when we went out burning in the national park. The young blokes loved it too. 
The work is enjoyable and satisfied their cultural obligations to country.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fits-time-to-invest-in-indigenous-carbon-farming-on-aboriginal-lands%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F331888ecd8743f4e53bb2781661606f43aad42fb%2F0_271_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=It%E2%80%99s%20time%20to%20invest%20in%20carbon%20farming%20on%20Aboriginal%20lands%20%7C%20Rowan%20Foley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fits-time-to-invest-in-indigenous-carbon-farming-on-aboriginal-lands%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=It%E2%80%99s%20time%20to%20invest%20in%20carbon%20farming%20on%20Aboriginal%20lands%20%7C%20Rowan%20Foley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fits-time-to-invest-in-indigenous-carbon-farming-on-aboriginal-lands%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F331888ecd8743f4e53bb2781661606f43aad42fb%2F0_271_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
 Planning the annual burning of country in central Australia. Photograph: 
Aboriginal Carbon Fund 
Burning country not only maintains its health but makes a statement that 
country is being cared for. The “biggest estate on earth 
<https://www.themonthly.com.au/issue/2011/december/1322699456/james-boyce/biggest-estate-earth-how-aborigines-made-australia-bill-g>
” didn’t happen by chance, rather, through good fire management practises, the 
land was kept in good order, a bit like housekeeping.

Carbon farming through early dry season savannah burning takes place on 
Aboriginal lands in the Kimberley, Top End and Cape York. The Aboriginal 
rangers, mostly traditional owners, light small fires in April, May, June and 
July. This prevents the large hot wildfires that typically ignite in August, 
October and November, releasing huge amounts of greenhouse gases into the 
atmosphere. This early season burning always results in tired but happy 
rangers, a landscape that is well managed and in recent times, an economic 
return from selling carbon credits.

Automation will embed gender inequality at work – unless we fix it now
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/nov/09/automation-will-embed-gender-inequality-at-work-unless-we-fix-it-now>
These carbon credits can then be sold to the government through the Emissions 
Reduction Fund auction <http://www.cleanenergyregulator.gov.au/ERF> and/or 
corporations that want to be carbon neutral in the voluntary market. The income 
goes back to the community, rangers and management of Aboriginal lands and 
waters.

The Aboriginal Carbon Fund  <http://aboriginalcarbonfund.com.au/>is putting 
forward the creation of an industry development fund to support carbon farming, 
which would resemble the financial commitment already provided to the Green 
Climate Fund, Cooperative Research Centre for Developing Northern Australia or 
Research and Development Corporations. A modest investment fund of $10m would 
go a long way to supporting sustainable economies on Aboriginal lands.

By supporting the fund or purchasing these carbon credits, corporate Australia 
can make a direct investment in Aboriginal Australia and their lands for the 
first time. An Aboriginal-driven economy is being created, but like any new 
emerging industry it cannot stand alone, and it needs investment.

It must be questioned why such enormous amount of financial support for the 
intervention was found but none for an innovative industry on Aboriginal lands. 
Funds were found for placing an army of government business managers throughout 
communities in the Northern Territory, but no economy has been invested in.

Regardless of the reasons for the funding shortfall, climate change, 
Indigenous poverty and the sustainable management of Aboriginal lands are all 
connected and can all be addressed through carbon farming.


With the support of business, not just the government, Australia can address 
these issues and meet its commitments to the sustainable development goals by 
taking action on climate change.

Rowan Foley will be speaking on SDG15 (life on land) at the SDGA16 conference 
<http://sdga.org.au/> in Sydney on 29-3o November 
 