
For the past six months Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> had been trying and failing 
to conjure some sort of credible Brexit plan and all she’d got for her efforts 
was a load of flak for being clueless. Eventually, she just got fed up. If she 
couldn’t come up with a deal she believed in, then she would come up with one 
she didn’t. She knew it would be economically disastrous for Britain to leave 
the single market, but if that’s what it took to get everyone who had voted to 
leave the EU off her back then so be it.

Now to share her moment of enlightenment with the rest of the world. And where 
better than in one of the gilt-lined state rooms of Lancaster House that had 
doubled up as Buckingham Place for the Crown? As the room began to fill – 
cabinet ministers and EU ambassadors in the centre rows, hacks and No 10 
apparatchiks to the side – a lone TV screen displayed the message “Plan for 
Britain”. And nothing else. It was a start, I suppose.

Related: Prime minister vows to put final Brexit deal before parliament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/prime-minister-vows-to-put-final-brexit-deal-before-parliament>

The Maybot slid into the room almost unnoticed and took several deep breaths. 
She glanced down at her notes. There at the top in capitals was “TRY TO SOUND 
HUMAN. WE’VE GOT TO NEGOTIATE WITH SOME OF THESE PEOPLE LATER”. Easier said 
than done, but she’d do her best. She’d start by trying to soften everyone up.

“It’s not you,” she said, looking directly at the ambassadors. “It’s us”. 
Britain had simply outgrown the EU and no longer wanted to be constrained by 
sleeping with only 27 partners. Britain wanted to go and shag the rest of the 
world. We had asked for an open marriage and the EU had said no, so a divorce 
was inevitable. But no one should panic. Britain wasn’t leavingEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. Much as we’d like to if that 
was geographically possible.

Understandably, being dumped live on global TV didn’t go down terribly well 
with the visiting ambassadors. There was a lot of head-shaking and whispering. 
The Maybot tried not to catch their eye and moved on to the part of her speech 
marked “Global Britain”.

“The referendum was a vote for a new global Britain,” she insisted, hoping 
that no one would remember that many people who had voted to leave the EU 
wanted as little as possible to do with the rest of the world. Too full of 
foreigners stealing our jobs. “Global Britain, global Britain,” she repeated. 
If she said it often enough, someone might believe it. Even if she didn’t.

Related: 'At best delusional': readers react to Theresa May's Brexit speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/at-best-delusional-readers-react-to-theresa-mays-brexit-speech>

Having got the pleasantries out the way, the Maybot moved on to her 12-point 
plan. She wasn’t entirely sure why there were so many points in the plan as 
most of them were just vague promises to clarify things that hadn’t yet 
happened, but her advisers had told her that cutting the plan down to just 
three points – 1. Get out the single market. 2. Get out the customs union. 3. 
To hell with the lot of you – wouldn’t play out that well.

“Global Britain, global Britain,” the Maybot droned. If in doubt, return to 
the leitmotif. Britain wanted to be really, really global – Michael Gove had 
promised her that Donald Trump was dead keen on coming to a win-lose deal with 
the UK – but she was keen to extend the hand of friendship to the little old 
EU. So if the EU was prepared to give us everything we wanted in the 
negotiations, then we might just continue to trade and talk to it.

But it was up to the EU to show willing. “It would not be the act of a friend 
to treat us punitively in the negotiations,” she said. Several ambassadors had 
to pinch themselves at this point; it hadn’t been the act of a friend to vote 
to leave. But the Maybot had one more sting in the tail. “No deal for Britain 
is better than a bad deal for Britain,” she added. Her way or no way. If the 
worst came to the worst, Britain could always settle for WTO rules and become a 
tax haven.

“The country is coming together,” she concluded. One last white lie wouldn’t 
hurt. She knew it had never been so divided, and the divisions were only likely 
to get deeper now she had declared her hand for a hard Brexit that she hadn’t 
voted for and didn’t want. But people had demanded clarity and she’d given it 
to them. There was almost no applause at the conclusion of her speech but for 
once she didn’t care.

Somehow she felt a little lighter. A weight was off her shoulders.
 