
Italian prosecutors accused of arresting the wrong person in a smuggling trial 
in Sicily have responded by launching an investigation into their accusers, a 
court has heard.

In June, prosecutors in Palermo claimed to have arrested 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jun/08/alleged-people-smuggling-kingpin-is-extradited-to-italy>
 one of the world’s most wanted people smugglers, a 35-year-old Eritrean called 
Medhanie Mered.

Eritrean smuggler trial in Sicily has wrong man, say former victims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/03/eritrean-smuggler-trial-sicily-wrong-man-say-former-victims>
But at a hearing earlier this month, two of the smuggler’s former victims said 
they did not recognise the detained man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/03/eritrean-smuggler-trial-sicily-wrong-man-say-former-victims>
, and argued officials had seized the wrong person. Separately, a family of 
Eritrean exiles said the man on trial was in fact their relative, Medhanie 
Berhe, a 29-year-old former dairy hand, and now a victim of mistaken identity.

This caused considerable embarrassment to the prosecutors – as well as to 
Britain’s National Crime Agency, who had also hailed their involvement in his 
arrest.

Attempting to undermine the testimony of the two witnesses, the prosecutors 
said at the trial’s most recent hearing on Thursday that they had launched an 
investigation into the former victims’ backstories. In the Palermo courtroom, 
prosecutors Calogero Ferrara and Claudio Camilleri said their investigation 
showed there was no proof the pair had even been toItaly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> before reaching Sweden, where they 
currently live.

In addition, the prosecutors have said they are monitoring some of the 
activities of the defendant’s lawyer. Attorney Michele Calantropo has requested 
access to a refugee camp in Sicily, where he hopes to meet Eritreans who can 
corroborate the claims of the first two witnesses.

In response, Ferrara and Camilleri said: “In the event that the lawyer will be 
authorised to enter [the camps], we will ask the director of the immigration 
camp to give us all the details and the names of the people he will meet with.”

Calantropo said: “There are [some] people fighting for the truth while other 
people are instead fighting to win a trial.”

Elsewhere in the courthouse on Thursday, another lawyer representing an 
alleged Eritrean smuggler in a separate case also raised similar concerns. 
Mulubrahan Gurum, a 42-year-old Eritrean, is accused of being Mered’s 
financier. But Gurum’s lawyer, Isotta Maio, believes prosecutors have caught 
the wrong man.

Interviewed by the Guardian, Maio said that of the 1,700 wiretapped 
conversations on Gurum’s cellphone, only seven have been used in the trial as 
evidence of his connection to smuggling. Maio said her client cannot be clearly 
identified in five of the seven recordings, while none of them include specific 
references to the smuggling process.

She said: “My client is considered to be the cashier of the organisation, but 
the money he [talks about] in the seven wiretappings … are small amounts of 
money, such as €300.” A single Eritrean would expect to pay about $2,000 
(£1,500) to cross the Mediterranean to reach Italy.

Prosecutors are maintaining a media blackout about the cases, and have 
declined to comment.
 