
Italian prosecutors have suggested for the first time that a man accused of 
being one of the world’s most-wanted people smugglers may in fact be the victim 
of mistaken identity, in an embarrassing blow to a high-profile investigation 
led by Britain’s National Crime Agency.

'They got the wrong man,' says people-smuggling suspect
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/nov/22/people-smuggling-suspect-sends-facebook-message-that-man-on-trial-is-not-him>
In June, Italian and British officials claimed to have helped arrest Medhanie 
Yehdego Mered, one of the alleged masterminds behind the smuggling of thousands 
of people from north Africa toEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.

After being extradited from Sudan to Italy, the alleged smuggler faced two 
prosecutions, first in Sicily and then in Rome, despitea series of Guardian 
articles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/nov/22/people-smuggling-suspect-sends-facebook-message-that-man-on-trial-is-not-him>
 that revealed doubts about the identity of the man in custody.

Six months later, some of the prosecutors have suggested that the wrong man 
may have been arrested, after the prosecution team in Rome broke ranks with 
their Sicilian colleagues. In a 23-page document submitted to court officials, 
the Rome prosecutors wrote: “This prosecution office have good grounds to state 
that the real physical aspect of Medhanie Yehdego Mered is the one shown in the 
attached photo,” referring toa picture of a man who differs substantially in 
appearance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/09/smugglers-victims-say-police-have-arrested-innocent-refugee#img-2>
 to the man in custody in Sicily.

To bolster their argument, the Rome prosecutors then cited testimony by a 
prosecution witness, an alleged former customer of Mered, who said the man in 
the photograph was the real smuggler, rather than the man on trial in Sicily. 
According to the prosecutors’ document, Seifu Haile, 28, said: “This is 
Medhanie [Mered]. He is the king in Libya, very respected by everyone.”

The document corroborates reporting by the Guardian, which suggests that the 
man in custody is in fact Medhanie Tesfarmariam Berhe, an Eritrean refugee with 
no connection to Mered’s alleged business. The Guardian has previously published
testimony from other alleged Mered customers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/09/smugglers-victims-say-police-have-arrested-innocent-refugee>
, all of whom said the Italian and British police had made a mistake. Mered has 
himself alsosaid in Facebook messages published by the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/nov/22/people-smuggling-suspect-sends-facebook-message-that-man-on-trial-is-not-him>
 that the wrong man is on trial in his place.

The news causes considerable embarrassment for Britain’s NCA, GCHQ, and the 
Foreign and Commonwealth Office, all of whom played a part in the alleged 
smuggler’s arrest. Court documents show that the NCA’s representative in north 
Africa, Roy Godding, played a key role in the extradition, whilethe NCA boasted 
on its website 
<http://www.nationalcrimeagency.gov.uk/news/869-prolific-people-smuggler-captured-in-sudan>
 in June that it had tracked Mered to an address in Khartoum. At the time, the 
FCO said its own role was crucial to proceedings.

Berhe remains in custody until at least 10 January, while a Sicilian court 
assesses the Rome prosecutors’ claims, which have been contested by their 
Sicilian counterparts. Asked about the case by the Guardian, the Sicilian 
prosecutors refused to comment.

The NCA said it was “confident in our intelligence”.

Berhe’s lawyer Michele Calantropo said: “The prosecutors in Palermo have 
[contested] the document produced by their colleagues in Rome. It’s very 
bizarre. And in the meantime an innocent man is going to spend Christmas in 
jail.”

On Monday, an Italian MP spoke out about the case for the first time, and 
announced a parliamentary inquiry. Erasmo Palazzotto, a leftwing MP and 
vice-president of the national commission for foreign affairs, said he hoped 
the inquiry would “accelerate the investigation and make sure that we are not 
keeping in jail an innocent man that might be the victim of a mistaken 
identity”.
 