
Jack White <https://www.theguardian.com/music/jack-white> has announced his 
second solo album. Lazaretto, the follow-up to 2012's Blunderbuss, will be 
released through White's Third Man Records on 9 June.

On Tuesday White gave an unusual first taste of the music to come: High Ball 
Stepper, released as aYouTube video 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sRbnAxrS3EM>, is a four-minute instrumental 
track with growling and reversed guitars, chewy distortion, and nary a single 
lyric. It recalls Led Zeppelin, Jimi Hendrix andperhaps even Battles 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IpGp-22t0lU>. White hasn't said if the rest of 
Lazaretto will be instrumental.

The album's lead track will be released later this month. "[The new album's] 
not one sound, it’s definitely several," White told Rolling Stone last year. "I 
don't pick my style and then write a song. I just write whatever comes out of 
me …"
Reading on mobile? Click here to watch High Ball Stepper  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sRbnAxrS3EM> 
Unlike Blunderbuss, which White issued as several special packages, Lazaretto 
will get only one limited-edition treatment. Available only to subscribers of 
Third Man's Vault series – and only for people who subscribe before 30 April – 
the deluxe Lazaretto comes on split-colour blue-and-white vinyl, with a poster, 
a "linen, letter-pressed postcard", a 7in of two demos, and what press 
materials describe as a "lavish" hardbound 40-page book.

This summer, White is scheduled to appear at several North American music 
festivals, including Bonnaroo and New York's Governors Ball. He will continue 
to release twin-track singles with the groupthe Dead Weather 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/oct/03/dead-weather-release-new-singles>
 and is reportedly to appear onNeil Young's upcoming covers album, A Letter Home
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/mar/13/neil-young-jack-white-a-letter-home-album>
.

Blunderbuss debuted at No 1 in the UK, spending 14 years on the album chart.
 