
Jack Straw, who was a cabinet minister throughout the 13 years of the last 
Labour government, is to be denied a knighthood and a peerage under the current 
party leader,Jeremy Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>.

Having served as home secretary, foreign secretary and then lord chancellor, 
Straw is understood to have been lined up for a seat in the Lords during the 
final days of Ed Miliband’s period as party leader. But hesuspended himself 
from party membership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/feb/23/conservatives-suspend-sir-malcolm-rifkind-over-cash-for-access-claims>
 last February after being secretly filmed by undercover reporters while 
apparently offering his services to a private company for cash. This prevented 
an offer of a peerage at the time.

Although Straw was subsequently cleared of misconduct 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/17/sir-malcolm-rifkind-and-jack-straw-cleared-of-cash-for-access-misconduct>
 by the parliamentary standards watchdog, his chances of a seat in the Lords 
are said to have disappeared afterCorbyn’s election as leader 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/12/jeremy-corbyn-wins-labour-party-leadership-election>
 in September.

“The chances of Jeremy awarding him with either a knighthood or a peerage are 
close to zero,” said one senior party source, before adding: “Actually, they 
are zero.”

Straw, who stood down as MP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/oct/25/labour-mp-jack-straw-resign-2015-election>
 at the last general election, did not respond to requests for comment. He is 
currentlyserving on a panel that is reviewing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/18/tom-watson-urges-david-cameron-to-drop-sinister-foi-review>
 the Freedom of Information Act, although his appointment was criticised by 
some, as he has been avocal opponent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/09/freedom-of-information-commission-not-very-free-with-its-information>
 of the act.

Jack Straw's ministries among worst on freedom of information requests
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/08/jack-straw-ministries-among-worst-freedom-of-information>
On Monday, the Guardian reported that Straw led two of the Whitehall 
departmentsmost likely to reject public requests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/08/jack-straw-ministries-among-worst-freedom-of-information>
 for information. Straw’s ministries never ranked higher than 15 out of 21 
government departments in terms of releasing information in full, according to 
a Guardian analysis ofgovernment-wide figures 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/government-foi-statistics>.

According to party sources, there are several reasons for the decision not to 
nominate the former minister for a peerage: hissupport for the 2003 invasion of 
Iraq <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/jan/21/straw-iraq-war-inquiry>; 
adamages claim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/nov/08/libyan-dissident-rendition-damages-supreme-court-belhaj>
 that is being brought against him by a Libyan couple who were “rendered” to 
one of Muammar Gaddafi’s prisons; an ongoing inquiry by Westminster’s 
intelligence and security committee (ISC) into that and other rendition 
allegations; and thewords that were captured 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/feb/23/cash-for-access-allegations-jack-straw-malcolm-rifkind>
 by the undercover reporter.

It appears Straw’s support for the war in Iraq counts most heavily against him 
among theLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> leader and his 
closest supporters.

Both Straw and the Tory MP Sir Malcolm Rifkind, the then chair of the ISC, were
caught in a sting 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/investigations/11411007/Jack-Straw-and-Sir-Malcolm-Rifkind-in-latest-cash-for-access-scandal.html>
 mounted by the Daily Telegraph and Channel 4 in February last year. The 
transcript of the exchanges indicated that Straw hoped for a seat in the Lords.


Jack Straw: 'I would have done a better job than Gordon Brown'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/jan/31/jack-straw-better-job-gordon-than-brown>
The two men were filmed as they offered to use their positions as politicians 
in return for payments of thousands of pounds from a fictitious Chinese company.

At one point, one of the reporters asked Straw about the implications of his 
leaving the House of Commons. Straw replied: “Well, the implications are that I 
can do a lot more for you.”

A Telegraph reporter then asked: “Ah ha, in what way?”

JS: “Well, it’s not subject to regulation. Obviously ... I’m still the same 
person – I mean, if you are a member of parliament and you have commercial 
interests, you have to be so careful ... if I was ever to stand up in the House 
of Commons and talk about sugar, I could end up being disqualified … Because 
there are very strict rules against advocating on behalf of companies who are 
paying you.”

Tel: “Right.”

JS: “ ... Well obviously if I’m not in the House of Commons, I’m not in that 
position. I could end up in theHouse of Lords 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/lords>, so you’re aware ... you may have 
seen that ...”

Tel: “That’d be good. You mentioned.”

JS: “ ... I mean there’s speculation in the paper at the moment – no one has 
said anything to me officially. But the rules there are different and plenty of 
people have commercial interests there.”

Tel: “Ah great, so you’ll be able to help us a lot more potentially?”

JS: “I’ll be able to help you more, Claire, I’ll be able to help you more.”

Both politicians denied any wrongdoing, and said that they had acted in 
accordance with parliamentary rules. Rifkind was suspended from his 
parliamentary party while Straw suspended himself. Senior Labour sources say 
Straw had been in line for a peerage until this point.

In September, Conservative sources briefed journalists 
<http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/news/Politics/article1609378.ece> that 
Rifkind would be “near the top of the list” the next time David Cameron 
proposed a list of new political peers.

The parliamentary standards commissioner, Kathryn Hudson, and the House of 
Commons standards committee cleared both of any wrongdoing and criticised the 
way the exchanges had been reported.


Both the Telegraph and Channel 4 were angered by the commissioner’s 
conclusions. The Telegraph published a leader which condemned them as “deeply 
troubling” and “shameful”, while Channel 4 reported itself to the regulator, 
Ofcom.

In December, Ofcom found 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/21/parliamentary-commissioner-faces-questions-over-rifkind-straw-sting>
 that the reporting was of significant public interest and did not unfairly 
represent the two politicians. It also concluded that the undercover filming 
was “proportionate and warranted”.

A damages claim is being brought against Straw by Abdel Hakim Belhaj, who was 
abducted in Thailand and flown to Tripolialong with his pregnant wife 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/apr/08/special-report-britain-rendition-libya>
, Fatima Bouchar, in March 2004, with the assistance of MI6. Straw was foreign 
secretary at the time.

A cache of secret documents that detailed the involvement of MI6’s then head 
of counter-terrorism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/interactive/2012/apr/08/libya-moussa-koussa>
, Mark Allen, in that renditionwas discovered 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2011/09/08/us/uk-documents-reveal-libya-rendition-details>
 during the 2011 Libyan revolution. After Straw gave an interview to the BBC in 
which he said that “no foreign secretary can know all the details of what its 
intelligence agencies are doing at any one time”, well-placed sources told the 
Guardian that the rendition operations were “ministerially authorised 
government policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jan/23/judicial-inquiry-libya-rendition-mi5-mi6-abduction>
”.

Government lawyers are arguing that the claim should be thrown out on the 
grounds that the case will involve the acts of other countries. A decision is 
expected from the supreme court in the next few months.

Meanwhile, a Scotland Yard investigation, Operation Lydd, has been examining 
the Libyan rendition operation. A police file iscurrently with Alison Saunders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/oct/31/met-libya-abduction-rendition-cps>
, the director of public prosecutions.

The treatment of Belhaj and Bouchar is also being investigated by the ISC, 
after an interim inquiry by Sir Peter Gibson, a retired appeal court judge,
reported 
<http://www.detaineeinquiry.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2013/12/35100_Trafalgar-Text-accessible.pdf>
 that there were “serious allegations of UK involvement” which “plainly require 
investigation”.

When asked about the Libyan renditions in the past, Straw has said: “At all 
times I was scrupulous in seeking to carry out my duties in accordance with the 
law, and I hope to be able to say more about this at an appropriate stage in 
the future.”
 