
1. The Big Three Killed My Baby

After playing in local Detroit bands while working as an upholsterer, Jack 
White 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/08/jack-white-acoustic-recordings-1998-2016-review>
 formedthe White Stripes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2004/nov/14/popandrock.thewhitestripes> in 
1997 with his then wife, Meg. They presented themselves to the public as 
brother and sister and released their self-titled debut album in 1999. Album 
highlight The Big Three Killed My Baby is an early sign of what would become 
the band’s trademark sound: garage rock riffs, Meg’s simple but effective drums 
and Jack’s howling blues vocals. More political in tone than most of their 
material, this song has White rallying against the “big three” – 1950s motoring 
giants Chrysler, Ford and General Motors – when he finds himself penniless 
after paying to have his car fixed. Simplistic in its nature, the song 
introduced listeners to the duo’s take on garage rock and was an early nod to 
White’s interest in numerology.

2. I’m Bound to Pack It Up

By 2000, the White Stripes were part of Detroit’s booming garage-rock scene 
alongside bands includingthe Von Bondies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2002/may/29/artsfeatures4> and the 
Dirtbombs. Solidifying their position as Motor City’s most promising act, Jack 
and Meg released their second album, De Stijl; a reference to the early 
19th-century Dutch art movement that stripped its subjects down to key elements 
and colours. On De Stijl,the White Stripes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2011/feb/05/white-stripes-remembered> 
grew their raw sound, adding country twang on I’m Bound to Pack It Up and 
hinting that White was more than a mereMC5 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2012/feb/20/michael-davis-mc5-incendiary-moments>
 revivalist. It’s a melodic but bittersweet kiss-off to a lover he has 
abandoned after deciding she no longer cares for him. “I’m sorry to leave you 
all alone, you’re sitting silent by the phone,” White sings over strummed 
chords and evocative strings, “but we’d always known there would come a day.”

3. Fell in Love With a Girl <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fTH71AAxXmM>

Fell in Love With a Girl was the point at which the White Stripes went from 
local notoriety to global stardom. Taken from their 2001 album White Blood 
Cells, it had a Lego-style video directed by Michel Gondry and a parody byWeird 
Al Yankovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jul/30/weird-al-yankovic-interview>. 
The song arrived during a boom in garage rock when bands likethe Strokes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/jun/22/the-strokes-10-of-the-best>
, the Datsuns, the Hives and the Vines were gatecrashing the charts and 
climbing festival bills. NME dubbed the movement “the new rock revolution” and 
Fell in Love With a Girl was arguably its calling card. Simple songwriting with 
big hooks that sounded fantastic on sticky indie-disco dancefloors; a new 
generation of music fans had their anthem.

4. Hotel Yorba <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DZPEUyiNcjA>

Another White Blood Cells 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2003/mar/29/artsfeatures.popandrock> 
highlight, Hotel Yorba catches White “thinking of a place down by the lake”, 
where he and his lover can be alone to stomp their feet on the wooden boards 
and never worry about locking the door. White’s habit of romanticising eras he 
is too young to have experienced is easy to mock, but when it’s running 
alongside lovable country-pop tunes like this one it’s no surprise the music 
world fell for the duo in 2002.

5. I Just Don’t Know What to Do With Myself

Elephant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/nov/24/albums-decade-white-stripes-elephant>
, the White Stripes’ first album as a big band, arrived in 2003 and was 
introduced with their lead single, Seven Nation Army. That song’s second life 
as a chant heard at sporting events around the world perhaps gives an undue 
weight to its greatness. Much better was this cover of Dusty Springfield’s I 
Just Don’t Know What to Do With Myself. An underrated skill of White’s is to 
imbue songs with melodrama (also listen to the band’s stirring live rendition 
of Jolene by Dolly Parton). He nails a high-pitched shriek, making tangible the 
hurt in a line as simple as “planning everything for two / doing everything 
with you”. You won’t hear it at a World Cup final anytime soon – but maybe 
that’s a good thing.

6. In the Cold, Cold Night

Meg White got a raw deal during her White Stripes days. She learned the drums 
to join a band with her husband and then had her rudimentary skills derided by 
fans and critics alike. All along, her one-time husband told people she was his 
sister. Let’s hear it for Meg then on the Elephant cut In the Cold, Cold Night, 
where she lends a delicate and airy vocal. The innocence of Meg’s voice 
disguises a subtly sexual song about a more mature lover who makes her feel 
“like a full-grown woman might”. She has all but vanished from the music scene 
since the duo officially retired in 2011, but an album of songs like this one 
would always be welcome.

7. Steady As She Goes <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DXAidGQUuns>

Having released five albums in six years, Jack White was a prolific writer. 
The Raconteurs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/mar/19/brendan-benson-raconteurs-album-jack-white>
, a side project featuring Brendan Benson, allowed the tireless White to flirt 
with prog and country for the first time. More indulgent and maximal than the 
White Stripes’ fiercely analogue leanings, the Raconteurs signalled the 
eventual end of the band. Steady As She Goes was the Raconteurs’ introduction 
to the world, and remains their strongest statement. Opening with a plodding 
bassline courtesy of Jack Lawrence, White’s sinewy guitar riff soon gives way 
to a huge singalong chorus. This was the song long-time friends White and 
Benson wrote together on a whim and immediately started the band, so impressed 
were they by their creation.


8. I Cut Like a Buffalo <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RYDhw8_lAn0>

The Dead Weather were darker, dirtier and keener to get to the point than the 
Raconteurs. Listed as the band’s drummer, White took a backseat for the garage 
band withthe Kills’ Alison Mosshart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/mar/10/alison-mosshart-kills-6-music-jarvis>
 on vocals. A domineering presence like White can only back off slightly before 
getting itchy feet, however, and his presence (and voice) was felt all over the 
band’s 2009 debut Horehound. “You cut a record on my throat,” White,a vinyl 
lover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/01/jack-white-play-first-vinyl-record-space-third-man-records>
, sings here, “but the record’s not broken.” Like all of his best songs, I Cut 
Like a Buffalo delves into the past for inspiration, this time adding elements 
of funk and goth and coming up with something that feels equal to what came 
before.

9. I’m Shakin’ <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MvpoiiBW9bc>

For such a domineering and charismatic star, it was inevitable that at some 
point White would ditch the monikers and release music under his own name. I’m 
Shakin’ is a highlight from his warmly received debut solo album,Blunderbuss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/apr/19/jack-white-blunderbuss-review> 
(2012). Lyrically, it picks up on an old theme of White’s writing, painting an 
old-timey take on romance. “When you touch my hand and talk sweet talk, I got a 
knockin’ in my knees,” he sings, like a sailor from the 1920s writing love 
letters home to his sweetheart. Lyrical tropes aside, I’m Shakin’ showed 
White’s ability to develop his sound, blending in elements of funk and gospel 
to his blues-pop style.


10. Don’t Hurt Yourself

White’s collaborations with female artists led to some of his best work, from 
the early days with Meg White to his production forLoretta Lynn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/06/loretta-lynn-full-circle-review> 
and Wanda Jackson (let’s not mention his 2008 Bond theme Another Way to Die, 
featuring Alicia Keys). When Beyoncé released the album Lemonade in 2016, it 
wasn’t a huge shock to see White credited as a guest artist – like Beyoncé, he 
is an investor in the music-streaming serviceTidal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/20/jack-white-defends-tidal-what-is-elitist>
, but it was perhaps unnerving for members of theBeyhive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/30/beyonce-beyhive-fans-rachel-roy-lemonade>
 that it proved to be a highlight on the album. With a sample of Led Zeppelin’s 
When the Levee Breaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/23/led-zeppelin-hear-an-unreleased-version-of-when-the-levee-breaks>
 running through it, this primal empowerment anthem centres around Beyoncé 
angrily asking, “Who the fuck do you think I am?” and threatening to leave her 
cheating man. White provides the chorus, ramping up the drama as he instructs: 
“When you hurt me, you hurt yourself.” Beyoncé’s husband Jay Z probably isn’t a 
fan of the song, but it is the most relevant Jack White has sounded in years.
 