
Third Man Records, the record label run by Jack White 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/jack-white>, has issued a statement claiming 
that quotes from a recent interview with White have been taken out of context.

The interview, which took place on Third Man’s own website, quoted White as 
saying that Meg White “doesn’t answer her phone” to him, adding that the band’s 
future is now over: “That time is gone.”

During the interview White also seemed to express a disinterest in playing 
live, saying “I’d say half the shows I play I’d rather not play. Festivals for 
example. But I have to make the best of it and try to get inspired.”

However, a statement posted by a Third Man Records spokesperson on Facebook, 
says the interview has been spun by other news sites to look more sensational 
than it was. It reads: “Friends, family, journalists, naysayers, believers, 
tweeter & ‘grammers... I know we’ve all enjoyed our game of click bait bingo 
with Jack White this past year. Whatever it is, fear not because you are in the 
age of instantaneous negative internet gratification.”
Regarding the remarks about Meg White, Third Man write: “[Meg] doesn’t have to 
answer her phone. [Jack is] not even complaining about that nor is it 
depressing.The White Stripes <https://www.theguardian.com/music/thewhitestripes>
 is over and it’s been said a hundred times, and maybe that’s just the quickest 
way for him to answer that question he gets asked a dozen times a day. Jack 
loves Meg, and she’s an incredible drummer - nobody can do what she does and 
did with the White Stripes - but those days are unfortunately gone. Let’s move 
on, Jack and Meg have.”

The original interview also implied that White might not tour again, at least 
not in any recognisable form, quoting White as saying: “It’s very expensive to 
tour, people think that’s how musicians make their money these days sadly, but 
it’s hard to go on the road no matter what size you are … only seated theatres 
for acoustic shows for the rest of my days.”
But the statement believes this was also taken out of context: “[Jack] never 
said that, but he IS taking a long break from the road (which was previously 
announced and discussed drama free over a month ago). He said he’d like to do 
acoustic shows in sit down venues and electric shows in standing venues. He 
said he doesn’t like festivals but hey, he does them anyway and he makes them 
work. Bonnaroo and Coachella were two of the greatest shows he’s ever been a 
part of.”


On Jack White’s musical future – which was thrown up in the air by quotes such 
as “sometimes creating in a closet and never releasing it has it’s advantages” 
– the label said: “He is not quitting music. He’s working with the Dead Weather 
next week, he’s involved in several projects we’re not even gonna tell you 
about right now cause we don’t want to ruin the surprise.”


Stay tuned for a statement claiming that the statement about the interview has 
also been taken out of context.
 