
The former cabinet minister Jack Straw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jackstraw>, who has been tasked with 
considering how to tighten up the Freedom of Information Act, led two of the 
Whitehall departments most likely to reject public requests for information.


Straw’s ministries never ranked higher than 15 out of 21 government 
departments in terms of releasing information in full, according to a Guardian 
analysis ofgovernment-wide figures 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/government-foi-statistics>. 

In 2010, his final year as lord chancellor, the Ministry of Justice was the 
worst ranked government department, providing none of the information requested 
more often than any other ministry.

In the six years he was a secretary of state under the act, his departments 
ranked 16th, 17th, 15th, 20th, 21st and 21st out of between 21 and 23 
ministries. Straw was foreign secretary until 2006, and then justice secretary 
until 2010.
FOI requests under Jack Straw 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/02/jack-strawfoi/giv-27167aQ2hAh9v3tqP/>
Straw now sits on an independent five-person panel set up to review FoI 
legislation. The panel is expected later this month to propose making some 
information harder to access for members of the public, journalists and 
campaigners.

Critics have previously condemned Straw’s appointment to the panel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/19/government-accused-of-trying-to-water-down-freedom-of-information-act>
 because he has been a vocal opponent of FoI. In 2012, he said “the insatiable 
demands of the [FoI] enthusiast have effectively made good decision-making more 
difficult”, and said the bill should have been “more modest”.

The panel has been asked by Downing Street 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/freedom-of-information-new-commission> 
to examine whether to reduce the “burden” on public authorities of releasing 
information, and it is expected to recommend that more requests could be 
rejected on cost grounds.

Since its introduction in 2005, FoI laws have been used to uncover matters 
ranging fromPrince Charles’s letters lobbying government ministers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/may/13/prince-charles-black-spider-memos-lobbying-ministers-tony-blair>
 to the MPs’ expenses scandal.

The panel is expected to reinstate ministers’ right to veto information 
releases, which was undermined when thesupreme court ruled last year that it 
was wrong to use the veto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/mar/26/supreme-court-clears-way-release-secret-prince-charles-letters-black-spider-memos>
 to block the Guardian’s request to see Charles’s letters.

In 2006, Straw’s department granted full information to FoI requesters in only 
36% of cases. The average across Whitehall that year was 63%, according to 
official statistics.

For four out of the five years Straw was a secretary of state under the act, 
his departments were worse than average at responding within the 20-day 
deadline demanded by law.

Maurice Frankel, the director of the Campaign for Freedom of Information, said 
it appeared that Straw had been appointed to the panel “because of his 
criticisms of the act”. But he cautioned that Straw’s record on releasing 
information may be a function of the type of request that his departments 
received rather than because of his attitude towards transparency.

The speed with which the Foreign Office and Ministry of Justice handled FoI 
requests increased after Straw left, but they tended to withhold information in 
full slightly more.

Frankel pointed out that “other departments, such as health, took steps to 
significantly improve their compliance with time limits on responding to 
requests”.

Asked about his record on FoI as a secretary of state, Straw said requests 
were handled principally by officials.


“From recollection, very few requests ever came to me before release,” he 
said. “If they did, I would have turned them round promptly, as I did with all 
the work in ministerial boxes.

“I was also always keen to see that departments complied with deadlines. For 
example, I recall that I kept a very close eye on deadlines for parliamentary 
questions.”

Last month it emerged that before he stood down as an MP last May, Straw had 
given a corporation 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/12118857/Jack-Straw-advised-client-how-to-avoid-release-of-emails-under-FOI.html>
 for which he was working as a £60,000-a-year paid adviser guidance on how to 
block the release of documents from the Foreign Office by citing an FoI 
exemption that allows information affecting commercial interests to be withheld.

The freedom of information commission, chaired by Terence Burns, the chairman 
of Channel 4, has been asked to decide whether there is “an appropriate public 
interest balance between transparency, accountability and the need for 
sensitive information to have robust protection” and “whether the operation of 
the act adequately recognises the need for a ‘safe space’ for policy 
development and implementation and frank advice”.

Other members of the commission include the former Conservative party leader 
Michael Howard, the Lib Dem peer Alexander Carlile and Dame Patricia Hodgson, 
the chair of Ofcom.

It is expected to propose strengthening the right of ministers to veto the 
release of material, and to extend the ability of official bodies to refuse to 
answer requests on cost grounds.

Frankel said there were signs that it may propose extending freedom of 
information principals to private contractors working for public bodies and 
could force the wider publication of documents that until now have only been 
released to the requester.


The FCO defended its record under Straw and said that in the years he was 
there it managed to either release information or refuse to do so within the 
deadline of 20 working days in seven out of 10 cases. This was worse than the 
Whitehall average.

An MoJ spokesman said: “The Ministry of Justice receives amongst the most FoI 
requests of any government department and deals with sensitive information 
which must be handled with appropriate care. We are fully committed to 
disclosing accurate information as required in law and have made continuous 
efforts to improve performance.”
 