
Jack White has published a lengthy apology to the Black Keys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/black-keys>, Danger Mouse, Adele, Meg White 
and "anyone I've offended with my comments about my creativity, their 
creativity, and the music business in general". Over the course of almost 1,000 
words, White endeavoured to "clear up" past statements about his peers and 
prevent future "hounding" by the media.

Writing on his official website 
<http://jackwhiteiii.com/an-apology-and-explanation-from-jack-white/>, White 
admitted that "recontextualised [statements] ... are difficult to clarify 
without making [them] seem even more petty and strange". But he said he still 
wanted to try, complaining that past "shop talk" had sounded more negative than 
it was intended to.

More than anyone else, the statement appears to reflect on the Black Keys. The 
rockers' public beef began almost a year ago, when lawyers representing White's 
ex-wife, Karen Elson, filedcourt papers 
<http://nashvillecitypaper.com/content/city-news/judge-slaps-jack-white-restraining-order-bars-contact-estranged-wife>
 that happened to contain the musician's private slating of Black Keys frontman 
Dan Auerbach. In an email sent to Elson, White reportedly described Auerbach as 
an "asshole" who gets "free reign to follow me around and copy me".


Auerbach didn't lash back. "I don't know [Jack], so it's extra-unexpected," he 
told Rolling Stonein May 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/the-black-keys-say-they-share-a-common-enemy-with-jack-white-20140520>
. But his Black Keys bandmate was not so self-restrained. "[White] sounds like 
an asshole," Patrick Carney declared.


After that, the issue refused to go away. In a recent interview with the 
Observer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jun/01/jack-white-interview-larry-david-alan-partridge-chris-rock-lazaretto>
, White complained about unoriginal rock bands, comparing them to 
school-children who "dress [just] like [their schoolmates] because it's the 
easiest way to get through the week". Although White didn't mention the Black 
Keys by name, he wasn't so discreet in a different conversationwith Rolling 
Stone 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/jack-white-without-the-stripes-thered-be-no-black-keys-20140530>
: "There are kids at school who dress like everybody else ... and there are 
musicians like that, too," he said. "I'll hear TV commercials where the music's 
ripping off sounds of mine, to the point I think it's me. Half the time, it's 
the Black Keys."


White went on to criticise Duffy, Lana Del Rey and Adele for copying Amy 
Winehouse. "Did [Amy] invent white soul? Wearing a beehive? No. But she did 
something brand new and fresh, altogether as a package, and you see who's in 
her wake." He also expressed disappointment in his former White Stripes 
bandmate Meg White, describing her as "one of those people who won't high-five 
me when I get the touchdown".


In his apology, published on Sunday, White said his comments about Meg White 
had been "blown out of proportion". And he stated that he "wish[es] no slight 
to the talents of Winehouse, Duffy, Lana Del Rey, and Adele". "All ... are 
wonderful performers with amazing voices," he wrote, "[and] they deserve all 
they’ve gotten."


White also offered his "best" to the Black Keys, saying he hopes "their record 
stays in the top ten for many months". But although he applauded their label, 
Nonesuch, and their "producer and songwriter" Danger Mouse, he declined to 
mention Auerbach or Carney by name.


White also declined to actually take back any of his comments; overall, the 
musician blames most of his recent issues on laypeople's inability to 
comprehend professional nuance. "[Mine were] the type of comments that are to 
be made to producers, engineers, and managers who thoroughly understand the 
behind-the-scenes of what we do all day long," he wrote. "I should’ve been 
smarter to know that it would be pointless to use comparisons like I did to 
readers who most likely don’t understand the scenario and that my words would 
seem very negative in nature."


Lazaretto, White's second solo album, will be released on 10 June.

 