
Jack Straw signed up to plans for an invasion in Iraq, despite fearing there 
could be “a long and unsuccessful war”, theChilcot report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/iraq-war-inquiry> finds.

The report states the then foreign secretary raised the question in response 
to a briefing in March 2003 of what would happen in the event of a protracted 
conflict, but “Mr Straw’s question was not put to officials and there is no 
indication that it was considered further”.

We need your help reporting on Chilcot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/06/we-need-your-help-reporting-on-chilcot>
It also criticises Straw’s role in the deeply flawed process of preparing for 
post-crisisIraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq>, with the UK failing 
to win over Washington to its preferred plan for the UN to take the lead. “It 
was Mr Straw’s responsibility as foreign secretary to give due consideration to 
the range of options available to the UK” should it fail to convince the US 
that the UN should take charge, it says.

“These included making UK participation in military action conditional on a 
satisfactory post-conflict plan … Mr Straw did not do so in January 2003,” it 
says.
Chilcot 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/06/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=chilcot_findings>
Straw is also revealed to have been aware at the time of Blair’s private 
promise to then US presidentGeorge W Bush 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/george-bush> in 2002 to be with him “all 
the way”, in a note that was not widely circulated.

In a message to Blair on 11 March 2003, as the pair worked hand-in-hand to 
build the case for the war, Straw pressed the idea of the “Kosovo route” of 
avoiding a vote in the UN security council on military action, to prevent it 
being vetoed by France, and perhaps by other members. But he also suggested a 
plan B in which the UK would not participate in military action if it failed to 
win the support of the parliamentary Labour party. In conclusion, Straw said: 
“When Bush graciously accepted your offer to be with him all the way, he wanted 
you alive, not dead.”

Chilcot also vindicates the judgment of the late Robin Cook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2005/aug/06/politics.labour>, who resigned from 
the cabinet inMarch 2003 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2003/mar/17/labour.uk> in protest over 
what he saw as the rush towards military action.

While criticising the conclusions Blair and his inner circle drew from 
contemporary intelligence reports about the threat posed by Iraq, the executive 
summary of the Chilcot report says: “As Mr Cook’s resignation statement on 17 
March made clear, it was possible for a minister to draw different conclusions 
from the same information.”

It also suggests the inclusion of the sceptical Cook, or deputy prime minister 
John Prescott, in discussions about the buildup to the conflict could have 
helped improve decision-making.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fsir-john-chilcot-report-iraq-military-action-last-resort-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sir%20John%20Chilcot%3A%20Iraq%20military%20action%20was%20not%20a%20last%20resort%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fsir-john-chilcot-report-iraq-military-action-last-resort-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sir%20John%20Chilcot%3A%20Iraq%20military%20action%20was%20not%20a%20last%20resort%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fsir-john-chilcot-report-iraq-military-action-last-resort-video&media=>
Sir John Chilcot: Iraq military action was not a last resort – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2016/jul/06/sir-john-chilcot-report-iraq-military-action-last-resort-video>
Geoff Hoon, the defence secretary at the time, also emerges from the report as 
a restraining influence on Blair in the year before the invasion of Iraq. Hoon 
attempted, for example, to secure greater UK involvement in planning for the 
conflict and its aftermath.


“Mr Hoon advised that the UK should support President Bush and be ready to 
make a military contribution; and that UK involvement in planning would improve 
the US process. One of Mr Blair’s objectives at Crawford [the summit between 
the leaders at Bush’s Texas ranch] in 2002, should, therefore, be to secure 
agreement to the UK’s participation in military planning,” the report reads.

Hoon also made clear in 2002 his reservations to Blair about focusing solely 
on Iraq as the source of potential weapons proliferation: “Mr Hoon sent a 
minute to Mr Blair on 22 March, which included Mr Hoon’s assessment that Saddam 
Hussein was ’only one unpleasant dimension’ of the ’key strategic problem’ of 
the spread of WMD, and that a more active counter‑proliferation strategy was 
needed for the region as a whole.”

He also warned Blair at the same time that “if a coalition takes control of 
Baghdad (especially without catching Saddam), it will probably have to stay 
there for many years”.

Hoon also urged Blair to use a meeting with the US defence secretary,Donald 
Rumsfeld, in June 2002 to investigate the US’s thinking in detail.

“Further, by raising in general terms, that our contingency planning has shown 
we need plenty of warning in order to be able to contribute to military action 
I would reinforce the need for the UK to be exposed fully to US thinking as 
soon as possible,” he said in a note. But Chilcot records: “Mr Blair wrote 
alongside the last point: “No, that will send a wobbly message.”
 