
The offices of Jack White's record label, Third Man Records 
<http://www.thirdmanrecords.com/>, landed like a spaceship on an unloved lot in 
downtown Nashville in 2009. The area is not a salubrious one: his neighbours 
are a methadone clinic, a halfway house and the Rescue Mission, the city's main 
homeless shelter. On a cloudless, airless morning in May, when it's already 30C 
by 9am, every corner has a sentry of hard-luck cases on crutches and men with 
teeth like a crossword puzzle. Third Man, meanwhile, is a squat and purposeful 
brick building. It is painted all in black, save for three steel roller 
shutters that each represent a juncture of White's life: one is yellow, a nod 
to the livery of the upholstery business he started when he was 21; the second 
is red, the signature colour of his blues-rock band, the White Stripes; the 
last is blue, the colour he has latterly adopted for his solo career.

Through the front door, you begin a journey down the neural pathways of 
White's brain. At his behest, Third Man staff dress exclusively in yellow, 
black and a dash of white: men wear sharp suits and skinny ties, with three 
thin lines scratched, as if by an animal's claw, through the centre; the 
women's dresses are prim and Mondrian-inspired, with a frisson added by 
low-denier hosiery. The soundtrack is supplied by vinyl rotating on vintage 
record players, a gumball machine dispenses yellow, black and white 
gobstoppers, and the room is surveilled by the beady eyes of esoteric taxidermy 
that includes a peacock in full plume and a splendid Himalayan wild goat 
grazing among the soft seating.

As you walk around, depending on your inclination, you will either admire Jack 
White a little bit more for the singularity of his vision or dismiss this as a 
gimmicky curiosity shop. Either reaction would not displease the space's 
38-year-old curator. The output of Third Man Records is wilfully 
unconventional: White recently produced a new album with Neil Young –A Letter 
Home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/may/25/a-letter-home-review-neil-young-forgoing-studio-trickery>
, acoustic versions of Young's favourite songs – but they recorded it in a 1947 
Voice-o-Graph booth that imbues the tracks with a sandpaper crackle. He has 
overseen the production of a limited-edition vinyl that smells of peaches (The 
Ghost Who Walks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/may/23/karen-elson-ghost-who-walks>, 
the 2010 debut album by his then-wife Karen Elson), a playable, $250 
gold-plated disc (for Jay-Z's soundtrack to last year's film adaptation ofThe 
Great Gatsby <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-great-gatsby>) and a 12in LP 
that had to be smashed to play the 7in single in the centre (for another of 
White's bands,the Dead Weather 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/jun/26/the-dead-weather-pop-review>).

These are conceptually straightforward, however, compared with White's plans 
for his second solo album,Lazaretto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/apr/02/jack-white-lazaretto-solo-album-high-ball-stepper>
. Come 9 June, it will be available as a CD or digital version, naturally, but 
he will also release a limited-edition vinyl "ultra LP", which has hidden 
tracks, one song with alternate introductions (depending on where the needle is 
dropped) and a hand-etched hologram floating in the "dead wax" between the last 
grooves and the label. All of which suggests a man with a lot of wild ideas who 
is doing whatever the hell he wants.

After I've been snooping around for 40 minutes or so, White arrives in his 
black Tesla Model S electric sports car. He is turned out nattily: an 
aquamarine shirt is co-ordinated with leather Oxford shoes; his hair spills out 
of a black newsboy cap and he wears dazzling white socks, as he always does. 
His metal belt buckle features the Third Man logo – three blocky figures in 
front of a globe – and the Roman numerals "III", a number that has been a lucky 
omen for White since an epiphany he had as an upholsterer. He beckons me past 
the stuffed goat into an office, on the smoked-glass door of which are painted 
the words: "John A White III DDS. Family Dentistry 9am to 3pm."

Business is good? White nods his head, fires up a dainty cigarillo. "We have 
almost no consideration for profit and I think that's why we are highly 
profitable," he says. His dark eyes dart, he speaks in flurries, more Detroit, 
his hometown, than Nashville, his adopted one. "I just don't care. People 
always told me over the years: 'You have such a mind for business and 
marketing.' That's hilarious because I never ever think about it. I've never 
chased after hits and I've never chased after people's attention. Third Man 
Records stands for a lot of things and when you stand for things, people come 
to you."

The White Stripes were that rare critical-commercial crossover – their 2003 
album,Elephant, led by the world-conquering Seven Nation Army, sold 4m copies – 
but White could never, I suggest, be accused of trying to please all of the 
people, all of the time. "I always feel a little alone in that sense," he 
replies, taking a drag. "I purposely put things up that will turn a lot of 
people off.The White Stripes <https://www.theguardian.com/music/thewhitestripes>
 was all about that: brother and sister dressed in red, white and black; the 
girl's in ponytails with a peppermint swirl on the bass drum, the guy's singing 
the blues… This was a turn-off for a lot of people. They said, 'This isn't the 
blues!'"
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FsRbnAxrS3EM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FsRbnAxrS3EM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FsRbnAxrS3EM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Of course Jack and Meg White, the band's drummer and silent partner, weren't 
brother and sister, they were ex-husband and wife; but anyone who thought that 
the band's novelty look or fictional back-story besmirched its authenticity, 
argues White, was missing the point. "So that was when I was like, 'That's 
exactly why me and you shouldn't share anything!' It was over between me and 
that viewer or that listener immediately and I was fine with that. Now you get 
down to the people who really care, who want to dig deeper."

White, as he acknowledges, has become adept at pre-empting public dissection 
of his new music. Some will inevitably complain thatLazaretto is not as good as 
a White Stripes record, and there's not much he can do about that. Others will 
say that it sounds exactly like the White Stripes or one of his – don't dare 
call them "side projects" – other bands:the Raconteurs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/raconteurs> or the Dead Weather.

"All I can do is attack the song, song by song, [it] doesn't matter if it's 
the Dead Weather, the Raconteurs or me, I'm attacking the song," he says. 
"Sometimes they sound really different and sometimes people will say, 'That 
sounds exactly like a White Stripes song with five people playing on it.' If 
anything that'd be a compliment to me. I'd be flattered. I don't know, it's 
going to be me on there no matter what."

White tries to make the creative process distinct for each incarnation. For 
Lazaretto, his innovation was to take his time. White Stripes albums were often 
written and recorded furiously:White Blood Cells, their 2001 breakthrough, was 
made in three days. The new record is the product of 18 months of tinkering. 
Sometimes White would complete the music and return to put down the lyrics 
months later.

"It was a bad idea to write like that," he concedes. He eventually got some 
inspiration when he found a stack of short stories and plays he'd written when 
he was 19. They were average, mostly, even embarrassing, but the odd phrase and 
character was salvageable. "I thought, 'What if you write a song with 
yourself?' Collaborate with your 19-year-old self on a song." He lets rip a 
honking laugh: "And don't give him any royalties."

White is braced for people picking through his lyrics on Lazaretto like cub 
reporters rifling through a celebrity's rubbish bins. With his first solo 
album, 2012'sBlunderbuss, there was endless speculation about how personal 
White – hot from his divorce from British supermodel Elson – had got, with the 
singer forced to reaffirm that he would never be stupid enough to write open 
letters to loved ones, past or present. When the subject comes up this morning, 
it is the one moment when his voice rises in mild irritation.
 White with his ex-wife Karen Elson. Photograph: Gareth Cattermole/Getty Images
"I write what I write, and some people might think one thing and other people 
something else," he says. "I know it's not about me, so I get a little bit 
upset that I have to waste so much time clearing that up with the listener or 
the press or whatever. It feels a little bit like this is a conversation from 
the 1960s, when people like Dylan broke those barriers down. I shouldn't have 
to have this conversation now."

White does eventually concede that some personal observations and bugbears 
have slipped on to the record. He doesn't own a mobile phone or engage with 
social media, and clearly has reservations about technology's relentless march. 
These sentiments find their way on to Entitlement, a rant about the younger 
generation's desire for instant gratification. White is doing his own bit to 
turn back the clock: at his gigs, he enforces a strict ban on the audience 
shooting pictures or video; at home, he only allows his children – Scarlett, 
eight, and Hank, six – to play with mechanical toys. "There's romance and 
beauty in that in a real physical way," he says, "and that's more important for 
them than to just quickly cop to video games and iPads."

He also admits the title track of the album captures something of his life 
right now. A lazaretto is a medical quarantine, traditionally occupied by 
contagious sea dogs returned from voyage. White is so busy these days that the 
idea of such a place has become almost exotic: "I fantasise about living in 
one-room apartments and being in a work camp somewhere, where there's 
absolutely nothing around me but a cot and a teapot and a sink." When was the 
last time White sat around and did nothing? "Maybe when I was a teenager," he 
decides. "When I was 21, I already had my own upholstery shop, I had a 
mortgage, I had a house. So I was 18 or 19 the last time I woke up and was 
like, 'Ahhh! I guess I'll play chess today.'"

Lazaretto is dedicated to three feminist pioneers: Florence Green from 
Norfolk, the last surviving veteran of the first world war until her death in 
2012; the American anarchist and writer Voltairine de Cleyre; and "Amazing"
Grace Hopper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/dec/09/grace-hopper-google-doodle-cobol-computer-language>
, a computer scientist and rear admiral in the US navy. How much should we read 
into that? White admits that he barely knows more than a paragraph's biography 
of each of them, but he jotted their names down at various points in the 
recording process. He says: "So, just another way to provoke thought, I guess."

Of course, it's never that straightforward with White. From the White Stripes 
to the Dead Weather, much of his work has been collaborations with women, and 
as a producer at Third Man he has worked with countless more. But this has not 
been enough for him to swerve charges of misogyny. The complaints were levelled 
most explicitly in a 2012 article in theAtlantic magazine, entitled "Jack 
White's Women Problem 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/entertainment/archive/2012/04/jack-whites-women-problem/256349/>
", which painted White as a dinosaur who was controlling towards women and 
guilty of patronising them in his songs, such asFreedom at 21 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s92smjLq_38> from Blunderbuss.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F0J2QdDbelmY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F0J2QdDbelmY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F0J2QdDbelmY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading this on mobile? Click here to watch video 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0J2QdDbelmY>

"I really don't get that," says White, riled, "because you look at the R&B and 
hip-hop world and, for God's sake, they are talking about kicking pregnant 
women down the stairs and every other word is 'bitch'. I don't know where the 
hell people got that from me because I've done so much work in my life to 
promote female musicians and artists. I mean, I've worked with more women than 
you could ever imagine, eight to 80: Loretta Lynn,Wanda Jackson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/nov/17/jack-white-wanda-jackson>, 
Alicia Keys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/jul/30/jack.white.alicia.keys.bond.theme>
, Ruby Amanfu,Alison Mosshart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/jul/03/jack-white-dead-weather-raconteurs>
, Meg White and on and on. I respect and I'm inspired by them so much."

A part of White's success has unmistakably been the mystique that surrounds 
him, not least through his own cultivation. When the White Stripes broke 
through at the turn of the millennium, details of his childhood emerged 
unsteadily and unreliably. White assiduously avoided clearing up the 
tittle-tattle, until eventually birth, marriage and divorce certificates were 
slightly churlishly unearthed by journalists. These confirmed that he was born 
John Anthony Gillis, the last of 10 children, the seventh son, to parents who 
worked for the Roman Catholic archdiocese of Detroit. He married Megan White in 
1996, took her name, taught her how to drum, and they divorced in 2000. Sitting 
with him now, a giraffe's neck and head looming over us, it is clear that the 
man still enjoys a degree of artifice.

White, therefore, can't have enjoyed the past few months. When he and Elson 
divorced in 2011, the split was so amicable they celebrated with a party: "a 
positive swing bang humdinger 
<http://pitchfork.com/news/42798-jack-white-and-karen-elson-divorce-throw-party/>
," they called it on the invites. But the relationship soured and last summer 
Elson sought and received a restraining order against White. She wanted to 
restrict his access to their children and complained that White had refused on 
various occasions to attend family counselling. As an embarrassing aside, an 
email to their shared business manager was released in which White described 
Dan Auerbach, the singer-guitarist of theBlack Keys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/black-keys>, as an "asshole" who "ripped 
off" the White Stripes.

The details were sensational; not least that Jack White 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/jack-white> sends emails. But when the 
subject comes up, he is, surprisingly, not evasive. He has spent the morning 
with Scarlett and Hank, and he is reportedly back on good terms with Elson. 
Many of their problems, both parties apparently concede, came from overexcited 
lawyers. But today White does not stop there.

"I'm a very provocative person and very intimidating," he concedes. "So it's 
very hit-or-miss who can hang with me. I don't blame anyone who doesn't want to 
be around me – it's expected." He laughs wryly, "I'm incredibly complicated, 
incredibly full of energy, incredibly busy and I never stop thinking, I never 
stop creating. Sitting next to me in a room or laying next to me in a bed, it 
could be a lot of work. To be friends with me, have breakfast with me, have 
coffee, is a lot of work, too. It's like you're going to lunch with Larry 
David, Alan Partridge and Chris Rock all in one person – maybe with a little 
bit of Woody Allen mixed in there. And some people might not think it's funny!"
 Meg and Jack White performing at Madison Square Garden in 2007. Photograph: 
Stephen Lovekin/WireImage 
So White is not surprised when his endeavours – the White Stripes, or his 
marriages – don't last for ever? "I expect them not to, yeah," he replies. "So 
I try to make the best of everything as it's happening. The overwhelming goals 
of my life are to create community, create family, create scenarios where 
things get better and last a long time. Create them! But knowing in the back of 
my head that my personality is a tragic Greek figure that will possibly destroy 
it and perhaps that was my plan all along."

As for Elson's specific gripe about counselling, White admits that he has had 
therapy, but not for years, and he wouldn't seek treatment again. "Loss hurts, 
insults hurt, death hurts," he says. "You can't change that, you can only 
change your perspective on it. If you said to a therapist – and I haven't been 
to one in many years, because it just doesn't do anything for me anymore – but 
if you said to a therapist: 'My dad beat me every day and then murdered all my 
brothers and sisters in front of me, before turning the gun on himself. And it 
was in the newspaper the next day and I got fired from my job because of the 
scandal of it…' If you said something like that to a therapist, all they can 
ever say is, 'Wow, that's too bad. I guess we've got to figure out a way for 
that not to bother you any more.'

"So when you figure out that trick, that becomes how you attack anything bad. 
You figure out a way to look at it so it doesn't bother you so much anymore. My 
problem is that most of it is private, so I don't really want people to know 
about it, but you can't help people knowing about some things."

Last August, in response to Elson's legal accusations, White filed his own 
motion, citing an email from Elson that described him as "an amazing father". 
(He makes a point of only touring in blocks of two weeks so that he is never 
away too long from Scarlett and Hank.) Did it pain White that he had to go 
public?

"Pick your battles, you just do what makes sense at any given time," he says. 
"Some people go on talk shows and then cry in front of Oprah Winfrey or Barbara 
Walters and they tell you every goddamn last thing about their life. I don't 
know; I don't really need that kind of attention. I'm like, 'Shit, I'm not 
using my children to sell a couple more records or something like that.'"

White doesn't mention the Black Keys by name, but he's happy to sound off in 
general about where modern music is getting it wrong.Trent Reznor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/may/08/trent-reznor-staleness-permeated-rock-music>
 of Nine Inch Nails complained recently of artists trying to appeal to an 
obscure coterie of blog writers, and White agrees there may be something in 
that. But, to him, the main problem is musicians playing it safe. "You're 
learning how other people are dressing on the playground, and you are dressing 
like them because it's the easiest way to get through the week," he says. "You 
can't applaud that; I don't applaud that activity."

White only feels like he has a few kindred spirits: Bob Dylan, Jay-Z, Kanye 
West and specifically Neil Young, who shares his fascination with mechanical 
objects and a desire to keep experimenting. "We are both putting ourselves on 
stage and presenting ourselves to people," says White. "Now you can take the 
easy way out: you can go on in jeans and a T-shirt and say, 'Hey, look at me, 
I'm real.' Or you can go onstage in a three-piece suit and hat and say, 'I'm 
real… Or maybe I'm not! What's more interesting?' And everyone makes the jeans 
and T-shirt choice. I mean, 95% of people do."

There's no doubt that White is sincere, but he also clearly derives some 
satisfaction from being an outsider. Since he moved in, the area of Nashville 
around Third Man has become unexpectedly desirable. This had led to discussions 
in recent times between the city and business owners about moving out the 
homeless and replacing them with creative types, including – the horror! – a 
Soho House-style members' club. The plans would see White's property shoot up 
in value, but he is strongly opposed to them. "This is a solid neighbourhood, 
everyone looks out for each other," Ben Swank, Third Man's co-founder, had 
explained to me on my tour. "The work the Rescue Mission does is more important 
than what we're doing."

Pretence and authenticity are subjects that White spends a lot of time 
thinking about. They were at the heart of the White Stripes and those notions 
remain central to his life now. Third Man Records could be full of the latest 
recording equipment; instead it houses a darkroom for developing photographs 
and an antique lathe that once carved out James Brown records and now cuts 
vinyl straight from a live performance. White refuses to use computer programs 
such as Pro Tools to clean up his recordings, andLazaretto was recorded by 
analogue means, in his home studio on a 16-track Neve mixing console, and the 
tape was edited with a razor blade.

But all that really matters to White is whether what's being created is 
worthwhile and will endure "like little time capsules". He has no idea if they 
will, but he's found a test he is happy with. I ask whose opinion he most 
valued onLazaretto. "My kids," White replies. "I watch their eyes and their 
body movements when they listen to the songs. Because children don't lie. If 
they are not responding to something, it's probably not that good. But if a kid 
says, 'Can you play that song again?' You're like, 'Oh yeah!' Now I know we got 
somewhere because a kid would never say that unless they really felt it inside."
 