
Unlike other megalopolises across the world, and in sharp contrast to the 
trend of global urbanisation, more people are actually leaving Jakarta than 
arriving. The city’s net migration rate has been negativesince at least 1990 
<https://knoema.com/atlas/Indonesia/Jakarta-Special-City-District/Recent-Net-Migration>
.

Imagining a future for this chaotic metropolis is very difficult for most 
people who live and work here. If they imagine anything, it’s to detach their 
own future from the city.

Plan Bs are common; the fleeing started in the mid-1990s when famous artists 
like Agus Suwage moved out to cities such as Yogyakarta, with more attractive 
ecosystems and lower rents. Young, aspiring Indonesians continue to have faith 
in their capital as a source of income and social liberation – but not as a 
permanent home, or even a place to stake their long-term future.

Two of my younger friends (one 34, the other 36) are planning second lives in 
central Java where they have bought land and are designing houses. They’re not 
alone: South and central Jakarta have actually lost population – in part due to 
massive land-use changes – and the only thing preventing the entire city from 
shrinking is the birth rate. As it is, thepopulation of Jakarta has more or 
less stabilised, at 9.6 million 
<https://esa.un.org/unpd/wup/Publications/Files/WUP2014-Report.pdf>, with 
roughly 30 million in the greater urban area.

But the issue for Jakarta isn’t its 9.6 million residents – it is the 3.5 
million commuters 
<https://www.pressreader.com/indonesia/the-jakarta-post-jplus/20160806/281711204031988>
. Governing this city is no longer about managing places, but flows.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fjakarta-indonesia-30-million-sinking-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93c0887e11d8938b636793b1d8327f7cd76f39a3%2F0_0_3500_2573%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jakarta%20at%2030%20million%3A%20my%20city%20is%20choking%20and%20sinking%20%E2%80%93%20it%20needs%20a%20new%20Plan%20B&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fjakarta-indonesia-30-million-sinking-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jakarta%20at%2030%20million%3A%20my%20city%20is%20choking%20and%20sinking%20%E2%80%93%20it%20needs%20a%20new%20Plan%20B&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fjakarta-indonesia-30-million-sinking-future%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93c0887e11d8938b636793b1d8327f7cd76f39a3%2F0_0_3500_2573%2F3500.jpg>
 Around 3.5 million Jakartans commute every day. Photograph: Beawiharta/Reuters 
Traffic is the most visible problem, and you do not need to stay long in the 
city to experience it. Once limited to rush hour downtown, gridlock has now 
metastasised throughout the city:average motorised vehicular speed in 2014 was 
11mph 
<http://www.rappler.com/world/regions/asia-pacific/indonesia/87843-jakarta-bad-traffic-in-numbers>
. Average spending on routine transportation, meanwhile, has risen to between 
15% and 35% of income. In cities such as London and Singapore, it is between 5% 
and 8%.

What is not visible is even worse: the city is sinking at up to 20cm a year

Flooding <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/flooding>, similarly, has 
become more frequent: from roughly every five years, to every rainy season, and 
now to almost every time it rains for more than three hours.

What is not visible is even worse: the city is sinking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/oct/01/what-world-most-vulnerable-city-battle-survival-nature>
. Land subsidence is happening at a rate of 3cm per year in some parts of the 
city, 20cm in others. Not only is this causing more flooding, but it has the 
potential to damage the city’s drainage, piping and sewerage systems. The sea 
level in Jakarta Bay isrising 6mm every year 
<http://start.org/download/car2/2-firman.pdf>. 

Because only 50% of households have piped water 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0197397516306816> – the 
lowest in Indonesia – residents rely on raw water supply, draining the natural 
aquifer beneath the city and causing the entire urban area to sink. Ironically, 
run-off is increasing, as deforestation upstream from the city and 
concretisation within are causing water to be wasted in alarming amounts. 
Jakarta now produces more wastewater than clean tap water.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fjakarta-indonesia-30-million-sinking-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ab41b9e2d7e18964094ff2752d9d673e8c8336b%2F0_161_4096_2459%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jakarta%20at%2030%20million%3A%20my%20city%20is%20choking%20and%20sinking%20%E2%80%93%20it%20needs%20a%20new%20Plan%20B&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fjakarta-indonesia-30-million-sinking-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jakarta%20at%2030%20million%3A%20my%20city%20is%20choking%20and%20sinking%20%E2%80%93%20it%20needs%20a%20new%20Plan%20B&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fjakarta-indonesia-30-million-sinking-future%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ab41b9e2d7e18964094ff2752d9d673e8c8336b%2F0_161_4096_2459%2F4096.jpg>
 The population of Greater Jakarta has reached 30 million. Photograph: Mast 
Irham/EPA 
What I hope for Jakarta’s future, therefore, is simple. I call it the “old 
agenda”. I would like for an average Jakarta working man or woman to spend no 
more than 10% of their salary on public transit. I would like piped water to 
reach at least 80% of households. And I would like land subsidence to stop: we 
must ban groundwater extraction, its main cause. In turn, this will greatly 
reduce flooding.

Others megacities have demonstrated that this is possible. Tokyo managed to 
stop land subsidence 40 years ago. Other cities, such as London, have cleaned 
their rivers not just of visual garbage but also invisible pollutants. Some 
have developed advanced public transport systems to free them from choking cars.

For Jakarta this will be difficult, but not impossible. Over the last two 
decades, research has produced enough knowledge for technical solutions. 
Bottom-up initiatives, too, are abundant, from zero waste efforts to communal 
sewerage processing. Schemes and designs to upgrade slums, rather than razing 
them, have been proposed. Other Indonesian cities have implemented many of 
these policies.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fjakarta-indonesia-30-million-sinking-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac7e834346acbaa126d2a588682e0a8943e4e269%2F0_0_3000_2004%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jakarta%20at%2030%20million%3A%20my%20city%20is%20choking%20and%20sinking%20%E2%80%93%20it%20needs%20a%20new%20Plan%20B&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fjakarta-indonesia-30-million-sinking-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jakarta%20at%2030%20million%3A%20my%20city%20is%20choking%20and%20sinking%20%E2%80%93%20it%20needs%20a%20new%20Plan%20B&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fjakarta-indonesia-30-million-sinking-future%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac7e834346acbaa126d2a588682e0a8943e4e269%2F0_0_3000_2004%2F3000.jpg>
 Indonesia is the most populous country in south-east Asia. Photograph: Jefta 
Images/Barcroft Images 
But forced evictions in Jakarta 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/muhammad-zulfikar-rakhmat/forced-evictions-jakarta_b_9758944.html>
 show that something is terribly wrong with our city’s governance. 
Understandably, we often put our hopes on the shoulders of politicians – but 
expecting politics to fundamentally change the status quo is delusional. 
Jakarta’s politics – and Indonesia’s – is entrenched in an elitist oligarchy, 
in which party bosses or their corporate backers are the main financiers. 
Political parties are in effect “owned” by them.

Some politicians have adapted their strategy to conform. There is a new strand 
of extra-budgetary populism: extracting funds directly from corporations or 
businessmen, by selling the city’s policies to build what pleases the people. 
This has resulted in a kind of politics that manipulates facts by reducing 
evidence-based urban science to subjective, anecdotal experience and a strain 
of anti-intellectualism that ignores the bigger picture.

Welcome to Twitter city: is there no limit to Jakarta's social media obsession?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/nov/21/twitter-city-facebook-jakarta-live-week-social-media-obsession->
“My street is cleaner,” people say, ignoring the fact that the 6,000 tonnes of 
garbage collected is being moved unsustainably to other parts of the city. “My 
TransJakarta bus route is better,” people say, despite the fact that the total 
number of passengers is far below the target, let alone what is needed.

Perhaps it is better to put our hopes on bottom-up initiatives from 
individuals and communities. Thanks to communication technology and social 
media, independent initiatives can spread quickly around Jakarta. Take waste, 
for example: Adi Wibowo and his colleagues are spearheading zero-waste 
initiatives at a household level; Dewanto Bachrie’sJakarta Osoji Club 
<https://www.facebook.com/JakartaOsojiClub/>, Amaranila Lalita Drijono’s Bersih 
Nyok <https://twitter.com/bersihnyok> (Let’s Be Clean) group, and architect 
Martin Katoppo’sDesign as Generator <http://www.dagedubrag.org/> initiative are 
all volunteer efforts working to improve public space and reduce waste. On the 
canal bank near Jakarta Bay, Gugun Muhammad and his informal community have 
built several rafts dedicated to cleaning the canals themselves, in the hopes 
that they won’t be evicted by the city. These are just a few examples in my 
limited radar, and I am sure there are more.

I want to mention one other city in Indonesia: Pontianak 
<http://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2012/01/22/pontianak-the-city-two-rivers-three-cultures.html>
. Here, citizens are taking the task of cleaning the city’s canal system into 
their own hands. And the local government has responded by collaborating with 
them. Pontianak is approximately 1/60th the size of greater Jakarta – but if 
the capital wants to hold on to its vision of being the great megacity of 
south-east Asia, it should start taking more notice of the smaller things in 
life.

Architect Marco Kusumawijaya is director of the Rujak Center for Urban Studies 
and former head of the Jakarta Arts Council

What would make Jakarta better, and what changes are most urgently needed? 
Share your ideas, thoughts, stories and pictureshere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/nov/14/the-future-of-jakarta-what-needs-to-change-share-your-thoughts>
. You can also contribute onTwitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Instagram <https://www.instagram.com/guardiancities/> using the hashtag 
#GuardianJakarta
 