
Earlier this month, 16 buses full of hundreds of “Jakmania” – the nickname for 
fanatical supporters of Persija, Jakarta’s leading football club – were 
travelling in a convoy near the town of Palimanan in West Java.

With their trademark orange uniforms and flags, the fans (both official and 
unofficial members of Jakmania) had just finished cheering on their team 
against arch-rivals Persib Bandung – a club based in the city three hours from 
the Indonesian capital.

The match, which ended in an uncontroversial 0–0 draw, was supposed to have 
been held in Persija’s home ground, the majestic Gelora Bung Karno stadium in 
Central Jakarta. But a riot during Persija’s previous home match – which saw 
four policemen injured, including one who was left in a coma for several days – 
caused police to move it to a neutral venue more than 500 kilometres away, and 
to ban all Persib supporters, known as Vikings, from attending.

Relations between Jakmania and Vikings were particularly tense because a month 
earlier, several Jakmania had attacked some rival fans on the outskirts of 
Jakarta. A 17-year-old Persib supporter, Muhammad Rovi Arrahman, was beaten to 
death.

Despite the ban on Vikings’ attendance at last November’s game, trouble was 
again in the air. “We were told to be careful, because some Vikings had been 
spotted near Palimanan,” recalls Donal Aldiyansah, the acting chairman of 
Jakmania.

He ordered the bus convoy to stop at a rest area until police could sort out 
their security. When they finally continued their trip back to Jakarta, they 
were escorted by several policemen – but as the Jakmania buses approached a 
motorway toll gate, they were pelted with showers of stones. “It was the 
Vikings. We knew it from their blue shirts and scarfs,” Aldiyansah says.

While some buses tried to escape, others pulled over. Hundreds of Jakmania 
stormed out and ran towards their attackers, and an ugly brawl broke out at the 
side of the motorway. A few hours later, when the clash subsided, Persija fans 
found one of Jakmania’s regional coordinators, Harun Al Rasyid Lestaluhu, lying 
dead on the ground, his face and body badly beaten.

Jakarta’s ghetto


Indonesian football, which only recently had its ban lifted by Fifa 
<http://www.bbc.com/sport/football/36292992> following a murky dispute over who 
runs the game here, has a hooliganism problem.Save Our Soccer 
<https://www.facebook.com/SOS-SAVE-OUR-SOCCER-INDONESIA-229118420437507/> (SOS) 
– one of the Indonesian game’s few critical voices – was one of the first 
groups to highlight that football-related violence in this country has reached 
alarming levels.

Since the Indonesian Football League started in 1993-1994, at least 54 
football-related deaths have occurred, according to SOS’s research. “These 
numbers cannot be underestimated or referred to just as accidents. It’s too 
expensive if watching football can cost someone’s life,” says an SOS 
coordinator, Akmal Marhali.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fjakarta-hooligan-violence-jakmania-persija-football-fans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57f8c9cd66119cafd0548e3bbf3ea43c9e9ac07b%2F0_39_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jakarta's%20hooligan%20problem%3A%20violence%20and%20deaths%20surround%20'Jakmania'%20football%20fans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fjakarta-hooligan-violence-jakmania-persija-football-fans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jakarta%27s%20hooligan%20problem%3A%20violence%20and%20deaths%20surround%20%27Jakmania%27%20football%20fans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fjakarta-hooligan-violence-jakmania-persija-football-fans%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57f8c9cd66119cafd0548e3bbf3ea43c9e9ac07b%2F0_39_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Tensions between Jakmania and the police peaked in May, following the death of 
a fan. Photograph: Johannes P Christo/Tempo 
 Pointing to the history of violence between Persija Jakarta and Persib 
Bandung, Marhali has several explanations for the spate of tragic incidents. 
“There is fanaticism in each camp, of course, and the sense of rivalry is 
high.” Indonesian fans are also highly influenced by European football culture, 
which itself continues to wrestle with the long-standing problem of hooliganism.

But Marhali also criticises the repeated lack of forward-planning from the 
security forces, and the absence of a proper supporter management programme 
from both the clubs and the Indonesian Football Association. “If every feud is 
not solved completely and clearly, similar incidents will continue to recur,” 
Marhali says.

In truth, however, the roots of Jakarta’s football hooliganism run much 
deeper, into the very makeup of Jakartan society. To better understand the 
violence surrounding Jakmania, we visit one of the supporters’ strongholds: the 
district of Manggarai in East Jakarta.

It is not hard to identify places where Jakmania fans like to hang out here. 
There are graffiti signs everywhere, such as the large Persija symbols on the 
walls near the train station. Among Jakmania, the Manggarai district is dubbed 
“Barrabravas”, because they often sparks riots in the soccer field. The term is 
taken fromthe name for hooligan groups in Latin America 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/aug/21/argentina-football-gangs-barra-bravas>
.

One supporter jumped over the fence on to the pitch, followed by hundreds 
more. The police fired tear gas …

Manggarai is known as Jakarta’s ghetto: it is is one of the most densely 
populated areas in the city, and has the highest rate of unemployment. Riots 
and small-scale clashes – known in local slang as “tawuran” – occur here on a 
regular basis.

A couple of years ago, the police erected an iron fence in one part of 
Manggarai, to prevent young people from different areas brawling against each 
other. So the youths simply began throwing stones back and forth over the fenc, 
intifada-style. And they carry this attitude into the football arena too.

“This is a violent neighbourhood, with or without Jakmania,” says Herdian 
Lesmana, with a wry laugh.


Lesmana – better known by his nickname Uban (for his grey hair) – is a 
regional coordinator for Jakmania, based in Manggarai. He is in charge of 
organising meetings and preparing transport so the hundreds of fans who live 
here can attend each Persija match.

“We know many Persija fans are violent and often trigger unrest,” Uban says. 
He is, however, less forthcoming about the motives behind his group’s anger. 
“In every game, we always try to calm our base – but it’s hard.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fjakarta-hooligan-violence-jakmania-persija-football-fans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2346a6ebeed7b8a9ec41cdacb7589c710723bbcb%2F0_200_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jakarta's%20hooligan%20problem%3A%20violence%20and%20deaths%20surround%20'Jakmania'%20football%20fans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fjakarta-hooligan-violence-jakmania-persija-football-fans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jakarta%27s%20hooligan%20problem%3A%20violence%20and%20deaths%20surround%20%27Jakmania%27%20football%20fans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fjakarta-hooligan-violence-jakmania-persija-football-fans%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2346a6ebeed7b8a9ec41cdacb7589c710723bbcb%2F0_200_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Dressed in their trademark orange, Jakmania fans protest following violent 
clashes with the police. Photograph: M Iqbal Ichsan/Tempo 
Of the tens of thousands of fans who regularly watch Persija play, only a 
fraction are registered as official members of Jakmania. The unofficial fans 
are known as “Rojali” (short for “Rombongan The Jak Liar”) because they never 
buy a ticket. To watch a match at Gelora Bung Karno Stadium costs a minimum of 
50,000 rupiah – too expensive for many of the team’s supporters, for whom a 
meal in a modest food stall in Jakarta costs 15,000 rupiah.

The former chairman of Jakmania, Richard Achmad Supriyanto, admits it is 
almost impossible to control the behaviour of all these fanatic supporters, who 
are spread far and wide throughout Jakarta’s suburbs and beyond.

But Uban is also critical of the police for not helping him to control his 
fellow fans – both inside and outside the stadium. He claims police are often 
reckless and use excessive violence when they confront Jakmania: “They quickly 
use their batons or tear gas – but we are football fans, not terrorists. Using 
tear gas will provoke a riot.”


‘All hell broke loose’


The antipathy between Jakmania and the police peaked in May this year, after a 
16-year-old fan, Muhammad Fahreza, was killed in the middle of a game between 
Persija and Persela Lamongan at the Gelora Bung Karno stadium. Fahreza had been 
stuck outside the stadium, among the masses who do not have tickets and try to 
push their way in.

“They don’t have tickets, so they will sing and make loud noises from outside 
the stadium and wait for ‘jebolan’,” explains Akbar (alias Bontot), a 
22-year-old official coordinator for Jakmania.

The term jebolan refers to the moment during a match when police decide to 
open the stadium gates to spectators without tickets. Usually this access is 
given after half time, or when police can no longer hold the gate closed. At 
some point during the game in May, the stadium’s gates – heavily guarded by 
police – were opened.

After the match had finished, Fahreza’s brother Sholeh discovered him lying 
inside an ambulance, and decided to take him home. It is not known when 
Fahreza’s injuries had been sustained, but his condition deteriorated rapidly 
overnight, and the next day he was rushed to hospital – where he later died. 
According to Sholeh, his body was full of bruises, and there were swellings on 
the back of his head.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fjakarta-hooligan-violence-jakmania-persija-football-fans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f7b451769fb79ff6d0bd0d184da9b2984366e69%2F0_69_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jakarta's%20hooligan%20problem%3A%20violence%20and%20deaths%20surround%20'Jakmania'%20football%20fans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fjakarta-hooligan-violence-jakmania-persija-football-fans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jakarta%27s%20hooligan%20problem%3A%20violence%20and%20deaths%20surround%20%27Jakmania%27%20football%20fans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fjakarta-hooligan-violence-jakmania-persija-football-fans%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f7b451769fb79ff6d0bd0d184da9b2984366e69%2F0_69_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Jakmania supporters are held following trouble in the game against Sriwijaya 
last June, when a policeman was left in a coma. Photograph: M Iqbal Ichsan/Tempo
Sholeh claims his brother was beaten by the police – an accusation they 
denied, adding that the investigation was ongoing. According to a Jakarta 
police spokesman, Brigadier General Boy Rafly Amar, the only witness suggesting 
Fahreza had been beaten by police was Sholeh, who claimed he heard it from his 
brother before he died. “There is no other witness,” Boy said in August.

The death of Muhammad Fahreza angered many Jakmania. The following home game, 
against Sriwijaya FC, had to be abandoned when a skirmish happened in front of 
Persija’s goal and the opposing team scored. Jakmania were furious: 
firecrackers were lit in the stands and thrown on to the pitch. All hell broke 
loose when one supporter jumped over the fence on to the pitch, followed by 
hundreds more. The police fired tear gas and the match had to be stopped.

One police officer, Brigadier Hanafi, was separated from his ranks and 
immediately set upon by some fans, who beat him badly. Other Jakmania ransacked 
fences and stacked them on top of this policeman. At that critical moment, 
several officers approached and chased the attackers away, and Hanafi was 
rushed to the hospital. After being in a coma for several days, his condition 
improved – but he had lost the use of his left eye.

Cycle of violence



“All Cops Are Bastards”: this slogan was discovered in an old sketch book 
belonging to Fahreza after his death. Elsewhere in the book, Fahreza refers to 
himself as an “ultra”, a widely used term for hooligans in Europe.

Jakmania spokesperson Diky Soemarno says he is familiar with the acronym ACAB 
(also known by the code “1312”, after the position of the letters in the Roman 
alphabet). “Many of our members just follow the term because it had been a 
trend in the UK,” Soemarno says, adding that Jakmania leaders cannot easily 
stop it from circulating further. “It’s already a trend in social media among 
teenagers who are members of Jakmania.”

Shirts and accessories featuring ACAB can be found very easily in Jakarta. In 
a T-shirt shop selling a variety of Persija related merchandise in Kalimalang, 
East Jakarta, there is a stack of shirts with the slogan: “No one like us, we 
do not care. We are the real Persija fans.”

Jamaludin, alias Oboi, is the coordinator of Persija fans from Cikarang, an 
area full of factories on the outskirts of Jakarta. He is currently detained in 
the Jakarta police headquarters, having been charged for assaulting Brigadier 
Hanafi at the game against Sriwijaya in June.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fjakarta-hooligan-violence-jakmania-persija-football-fans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F003cc3b0847daa9c716ef8b14276832d31d2e0f3%2F0_41_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jakarta's%20hooligan%20problem%3A%20violence%20and%20deaths%20surround%20'Jakmania'%20football%20fans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fjakarta-hooligan-violence-jakmania-persija-football-fans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jakarta%27s%20hooligan%20problem%3A%20violence%20and%20deaths%20surround%20%27Jakmania%27%20football%20fans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fjakarta-hooligan-violence-jakmania-persija-football-fans%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F003cc3b0847daa9c716ef8b14276832d31d2e0f3%2F0_41_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 ‘In every game, we always try to calm our base – but it’s hard.’ Photograph: 
Eko Siswono Toyudho/Tempo 
Speaking from his cell in August – his hair shaved clean, and wearing an 
orange prisoner’s shirt – Oboi gives his version of events that day, claiming 
he was the fan who first jumped over the stadium fence and ran on to the pitch.

Oboi says it was the police who triggered the violence, when they fired tear 
gas into the crowd. “I jumped on to the pitch to avoid the tear gas; I had 
almost fainted. It was chaotic, and I jumped because I wanted to save my men.”

Oboi claims he didn’t beat up the police nor assault them in any way. But he 
refuses to comment on the reasons for Jakmania’s hatred towards the police, 
about ACAB or Fahreza’s death. He repeatedly denies any wrongdoing in the 
incident.

Another Jackmania fan, Nicko Primary Suhendar, 20, who was inside the stadium 
during the riot but is not implicated in the Hanafi incident, admits the fans 
did set off firecrackers when Persija’s goalkeeper conceded a goal in the 80th 
minute.

“There was a lot of noise, but then the police fired tear gas at us,” Suhendar 
says, suggesting the police had provoked Jakmania to respond violently. Then he 
adds: “We still hold a grudge against the police because of Fahreza’s death.”

Guardian Jakarta live: what it is, and how to get involved
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/nov/21/guardian-jakarta-live-what-how-get-involved>
The deputy director of the Jakarta police’s Violent Crime Unit, Grand 
Commissioner Adjutant F Hendy Kurniawan, says he has heard of the hatred for 
the police among Jakmania fans – but adds that the police have not yet fully 
assessed this sentiment. “We haven’t seriously looked into it,” he admits.

His comment seems to offer little hope for Indonesian’s violent, divided 
football culture. However, when asked if there is any way out of this cycle of 
violence, Marhali from SOS points to a past initiative which sucessfully 
reconciled “Bonek” (supporters of Persebaya Surabaya) with Pasoepati 
(supporters of Persis Solo).

“These fans used to clash regularly,” Marhali says. “But now, after several 
years and a bunch of reconciliation efforts, both clubs never find their fans 
attacking each other again.” The question is, can the same now be done for 
Jakmania’s hooligan element?

This piece was produced in collaboration with Tempo 
<https://investigasi.tempo.co/84/di-balik-aksi-brutal-jakmania>, Indonesia’s 
leading source for investigative journalism

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join in the discussion
 