
Before Jakarta, there was Batavia, the 17th-century capital city of the Dutch 
East Indies, built with the skill of just a few hundred ethnic Chinese artisans 
who had settled as traders along the shore.

How little has changed.

Many big projects in modern day Jakarta, a city of more than 10 million, have 
been built by developers from the minority group, the descendants of the 
original merchants and other Chinese who have arrived since.

Chinese-Indonesians – estimated to make up 1% to 4% of the country’s 250 
million people 
<http://worldpopulationreview.com/countries/indonesia-population/> – have had 
an impact on Jakarta which is vastly disproportionate to their physical 
numbers. The economic success of the group’s small elite has led to repeated 
bouts of resentment, discrimination and even violent assaults.

Governor Basuki Tjahaja Purnam, a Chinese-Indonesian known as Ahok, has proven 
that despite a history of political exclusion, high office is also achievable. 
He is running for election in February.

Yet a racially charged anti-Ahok protest this month has forced Jakarta to 
confront whether the minority has truly been accepted after three sometimes 
prosperous – but always uncertain – centuries.

A mini market was raided 
<http://en.tempo.co/read/news/2016/11/07/055818308/6600-Trees-Damaged-after-November-4-Rally>
 in a Chinese-Indonesian neighbourhood, bringing back painful memories of riots 
in 1998 in which more than 1,000 were killed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fjakarta-chinese-indonesians-governor-ahok%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc8c6f0854deb8c22f0118b645d1041cf02828707%2F0_0_3500_2359%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jakarta's%20violent%20identity%20crisis%3A%20behind%20the%20vilification%20of%20Chinese-Indonesians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fjakarta-chinese-indonesians-governor-ahok%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jakarta%27s%20violent%20identity%20crisis%3A%20behind%20the%20vilification%20of%20Chinese-Indonesians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fjakarta-chinese-indonesians-governor-ahok%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc8c6f0854deb8c22f0118b645d1041cf02828707%2F0_0_3500_2359%2F3500.jpg>
 The 4 November anti-Ahok protest. Photograph: Beawiharta/Reuters 
Protesters, many of them hardline Islamists who are unhappy Ahok is both 
Chinese-Indonesian and Christian, have promised another rally for next Friday – 
and hope to beat their attendance of more than 100,000 people on 4 November. 
Police say they will block them this time, but observers worry it may further 
raise the potential for violence.

Sibarani Sofian, an urban development specialist, says the city has since been 
divided into pro and anti-Ahok factions. While he is ethnic Chinese, he prefers 
the termTionghoa, which means “of Chinese descent” and attempts to avoid 
assumptions of links to the Chinese state, another prejudice sometimes thrown 
at the minority.

He says the demonstration was the apex of unhappiness among some Indonesians 
with Ahok being governor. “I personally think there is still considerable risk 
today facing Tionghoa society, although people already learned the lesson of 
the ’98 riots,” he adds.

Batavia repeated

When the Dutch ruled Batavia, they granted special concessions 
<http://econ.tu.ac.th/archan/rangsun/MB%20663/MB%20663%20Readings/%E0%B9%95.%20%E0%B8%A3%E0%B8%B0%E0%B8%9A%E0%B8%9A%E0%B8%97%E0%B8%B8%E0%B8%99%E0%B8%99%E0%B8%B4%E0%B8%A2%E0%B8%A1%E0%B9%84%E0%B8%97%E0%B8%A2/Overseas%20Chinese%20Capitalism/Overseas%20Entrepreneurship%20in%20SE%20Asia.pdf>
 to a handful of Chinese living in the port.

François Valentijn, a Dutch historian, wrote in the 1720s that “if there were 
no Chinese here, Batavia would be very dead”. And two decades later, that 
situation was almost realised.

There is still considerable risk today facing Tionghoa society, although we 
have learned the lesson of the '98 riots
Sibarani Sofian 
In 1740, bitterness from native Indonesians and the Dutch to the growing 
wealth of a small portion of Chinese people led to open bigotry against the 
minority population, most of whom were extremely poor themselves.

In October that year, Chinese sugar mill workers finally revolted; the 
response was a pogrom in which nearly the entire population were killed.

The persecution lasted after Indonesia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/indonesia> declared independence from the 
Dutch at the end of the second world war. Many were denied citizenship by laws 
that labelled Indonesians of Chinese descent who had lived here for generations 
as “aliens”. Even the communist party in the 1950s – popular among ethnic 
Chinese – would not allow them into its leadership.

Indonesia’s second president and dictator who ruled for three decades, 
Suharto, attempted to deal with the “Chinese problem” by forced assimilation 
under his New Order government, banning Chinese schools, books and languages.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fjakarta-chinese-indonesians-governor-ahok%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15f41f254e614c8292f535a16c68c82ad99fd1e7%2F0_0_3000_2014%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jakarta's%20violent%20identity%20crisis%3A%20behind%20the%20vilification%20of%20Chinese-Indonesians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fjakarta-chinese-indonesians-governor-ahok%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jakarta%27s%20violent%20identity%20crisis%3A%20behind%20the%20vilification%20of%20Chinese-Indonesians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fjakarta-chinese-indonesians-governor-ahok%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15f41f254e614c8292f535a16c68c82ad99fd1e7%2F0_0_3000_2014%2F3000.jpg>
 Ethnic Chinese-Indonesians make up 1-4% of the population. Photograph: 
Bloomberg/Getty 
On the side, though, he copied the Dutch colonisers by making deals with 
ethnic Chinese businessmen, providing them with monopoly rights to grow his 
economy.

In his book Asian Godfathers, author Joe Studwell said Suharto had decided he 
would dole out concessions to “people who would get a job done and who posed no 
political challenge to his authority. These individuals tended to be Chinese 
immigrants.”

Among the most prominent is Mochtar Riady who founded the Lippo Group, a 
conglomerate in real estate, banking, healthcare and natural resources 
reputedly worthmore than $10bn 
<https://www.ft.com/content/2e63aaca-ca6a-11e5-be0b-b7ece4e953a0>. 

Sudono Salim, once considered the richest person in the country, ran Salim 
Group, the world’s largest instant noodle maker; while Eka Tjipta Widjaja 
founded Sinar Mas, a conglomerate that owns Asia Pulp & Paper, andworks in 120 
countries 
<http://jakartaglobe.id/corporate-news/sinar-mas-group-to-build-asias-largest-pulp-and-paper-mill/>
.

Waiting for Glodok: the ghost street haunted by Indonesia’s riots
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/nov/22/glodok-jakarta-recover-indonesia-1998-riots-chinatown>
Yet Chinese-Indonesians were forced to conceal their identity, with 
Chinese-language newspapers banned and Chinese festivals cancelled. While these 
tycoons made billions, they kept low public profiles and went by their 
Indonesian – not Chinese – names.

They had good reason to be cautious. 

Domestic bitterness grew from rumours that Chinese-Indonesians controlled 70% 
of the economy, despite no comprehensive research to back that up. This was 
further entrenched in a 1995study by Australia’s foreign affairs department 
<https://www.academia.edu/15944780/CHINESE_OVERSEAS_IN_SOUTHEAST_IN_ASIA> which 
said “Sino-Indonesians” controlled 68% of the top 300 conglomerates.

Finally, in May 1998, Suharto’s balancing act backfired. Mobs targeted Glodok 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/nov/22/glodok-jakarta-recover-indonesia-1998-riots-chinatown>
, the historic Chinatown of Jakarta, looting shops and burning buildings.

They left more than 1,000 dead and an estimated $300m of property damage. 
Scores of ethnically Chinese women and girls were raped.

Krishna Linarda, a 53-year-old tax consultant, whose grandfather owned a 
Chinese-language book shop in Glodok, was there that day. When he heard where 
the rioters were heading, he drove to pick up a friend just in time before her 
house was burned.

“As I drove to get her, I saw the rioters were flipping cars with their 
hands,” he says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fjakarta-chinese-indonesians-governor-ahok%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe5c41b39ed44e35c397c9ad38788a2fdef72c036%2F0_0_1992_1372%2F1992.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jakarta's%20violent%20identity%20crisis%3A%20behind%20the%20vilification%20of%20Chinese-Indonesians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fjakarta-chinese-indonesians-governor-ahok%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jakarta%27s%20violent%20identity%20crisis%3A%20behind%20the%20vilification%20of%20Chinese-Indonesians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fjakarta-chinese-indonesians-governor-ahok%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe5c41b39ed44e35c397c9ad38788a2fdef72c036%2F0_0_1992_1372%2F1992.jpg>
 An ethnic Chinese man in what remained of his shop after the 1998 riots. 
Photograph: Charles Dharapak/AP 
He checked into a hotel where he thought he would be safe but the mob spread. 
“I could see them from our room on the fourth floor, breaking into a music shop 
and stealing guitars and a keyboard. Some took a set of drums.”

A shop he worked in was also smashed, he later found out. “We opened again a 
week later,” he says with a hint of pride. “But after that, the community built 
iron gates at the entrance to every alley and a local resident would keep watch 
at night.”

Ahok’s rise

Since then, ethnic Chinese have been able to express their heritage after 
successive leaders abandoned the assimilation policy. Chinese New Year is a 
public holiday and in Glodok, Mandarin and other dialects are spoken openly. 
But the iron fences remain, some with fresh spikes added on top.

This year the community is again facing a challenging test, as Ahok is accused 
of blasphemy for comments he made about his political enemies exploiting verses 
of the Qur’an. He has been formallynamed as a suspect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/16/jakarta-christian-governor-to-face-blasphemy-trial-over-islam-insult-claim>
, making it likely that he will face charges and could even be jailed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fjakarta-chinese-indonesians-governor-ahok%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F644a1023e965d5fc6dd704badc50503a019a8cb7%2F573_0_2400_2400%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jakarta's%20violent%20identity%20crisis%3A%20behind%20the%20vilification%20of%20Chinese-Indonesians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fjakarta-chinese-indonesians-governor-ahok%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jakarta%27s%20violent%20identity%20crisis%3A%20behind%20the%20vilification%20of%20Chinese-Indonesians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fjakarta-chinese-indonesians-governor-ahok%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F644a1023e965d5fc6dd704badc50503a019a8cb7%2F573_0_2400_2400%2F2400.jpg>
 Basuki Tjahaja Purnama, or Ahok, who is running for election. Photograph: 
Tatan Syuflana/AP 
This month’s demonstration, which ended in violence with one person dead 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-37856476>, appeared to be backed by his 
political opponents, interested in halting his popular rise by exploiting 
simmering sectarianism.

Indonesia’s Ulama Council, the country’s top Muslim clerical body, announced a 
non-Muslim should not become a leader of the capital of the world’s largest 
Muslim majority nation. As an outspoken and brash politician, Ahok is divisive, 
even among Chinese Indonesians.

His stubbornness in relocating thousands of slum residents along Jakarta’s 
dirty river banks has led to an outcry, and many Chinese-Indonesians worry that 
negative perceptions of the governor might reflect badly on them.

Linarda, the tax consultant from Glodok, argues it is all just politics and 
that the protests “would not have happened if there wasn’t an election”.

“I can say 100% of my Muslim friends don’t agree with the protesters,” he 
says, adding that he believes entrenched racial divides are broadly over in 
Indonesia.

“My blood is red and my bones are white,” he says, referring to the colours of 
the national flag. “Only my eyes are a different shape.”

Christine Susanna Tjhin, from the Centre for Strategic and International 
Studies <http://www.csis.or.id/> says that while the Ahok phenomenon has 
“highlighted the sad reality that scapegoating and stereotyping are still alive 
and kicking”, she does not think there are big dangers for Chinese-Indonesians.

My blood is red and my bones are white. Only my eyes are a different shape
Krishna Linarda 
“Circumstances now are very different to May ’98. The economy is still growing 
and on the right track, with the main focus on infrastructure development, 
particularly in previously neglected areas. Politics is fundamentally still 
stable despite pre-elections dramas. Security apparatus is more present and 
accessible. And, more importantly, society is now less prone to be provoked by 
racial agendas.

“The danger that I’m concerned with is less about physical threats, but more 
about how [Chinese-Indonesians] fit into the narratives of Indonesian 
pluralism. What has happened is that, as Jakarta’s election approaches, race 
and religious identity are dominating public debates, rather than issues 
related to social justice and good governance.”

China reaches out

Indonesia prides itself on moderately practiced religion and pluralism, its 
motto being “unity in diversity”. President Joko Widodo, a close ally of Ahok’s 
and the person who handed him the governor’s office when he ran for president, 
has sought to quell the recent furore.

After the 4 November protest, he cancelled a long-planned trade trip to 
Australia at the last minute so he could attempt to placate political opponents 
and religious leaders.

But it’s not just the anti-Ahok movement that is rehashing tired racist 
tropes. Old resentments are reappearing as Chinese business takes a growing 
interest in Indonesian investments.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fjakarta-chinese-indonesians-governor-ahok%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea40331154e72de125f2c1410fcb3b78a5a13bdf%2F0_0_4096_2457%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jakarta's%20violent%20identity%20crisis%3A%20behind%20the%20vilification%20of%20Chinese-Indonesians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fjakarta-chinese-indonesians-governor-ahok%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jakarta%27s%20violent%20identity%20crisis%3A%20behind%20the%20vilification%20of%20Chinese-Indonesians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fjakarta-chinese-indonesians-governor-ahok%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea40331154e72de125f2c1410fcb3b78a5a13bdf%2F0_0_4096_2457%2F4096.jpg>
 Anti-Ahok protesters are planning another demonstration on 2 December. 
Photograph: Bagus Indahono/EPA 
Some Chinese-Indonesians are facilitating deals between the two countries, 
often through their positions on Indonesian public and private business 
associations.

Charlotte Setijadi, a visiting fellow at the ISEAS-Yusof Ishak 
<https://www.iseas.edu.sg/> institute, has been researching how the shared 
ethnicity between a small elite of Chinese Indonesians has allowed them to 
assume a “bridging” role.

“Some also have personal networks and reputations as businessmen so they get 
asked for investment advice by both Chinese government officials and 
businesses,” she said.

Most Chinese-Indonesians do not speak Mandarin and cannot read Chinese letters
Evi Sofian 
“The majority of the time, they do not engage in the business deals 
themselves, but they get asked for advice or introductions to the relevant 
potential local partners and businesses.”

Chinese money is still not flowing into Indonesia as some would like. While on 
paper the number of China’s investments is growing, less than 10% actually go 
ahead.

Regardless, the perception of close ties has created tension. The association 
of Chinese-Indonesians with a foreign country, especially one that has been a 
sometimes overwhelming power in the region, has often been used to reinforce 
suspicion from some native Indonesians, orpribumi, of outside interference.

“Even among the ethnic Chinese business community, there are those who are 
worried about Chinese-Indonesian businessmen being perceived as being too 
pro-China,” Setijadi says.

$40bn to save Jakarta: the story of the Great Garuda
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/nov/22/jakarta-great-garuda-seawall-sinking>
“So this is a complex and ongoing issue, and reflects the persistent 
undercurrent of suspicion towards Chinese-Indonesians, as well as their 
perceived belonging and economic dominance.”

There are frequent attacks in the media by various right-wing and Islamist 
pribumi groups that accuse Chinese-Indonesian businessmen and politicians of 
being China’s puppets.

Evi Sofian, an editor and journalist with the English-language Jakarta Post, 
is Chinese-Indonesian but has not been able to trace how long her family has 
been in the country.

“Many people are uncomfortable being associated with Beijing, as if we have 
our nationalism questioned,” she says. “Most Chinese-Indonesians do not speak 
Mandarin and cannot read Chinese letters. I am sure we are as blind as any 
Indonesian when it comes to Chinese culture.”

Share your ideas, thoughts, stories and pictures here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/nov/14/the-future-of-jakarta-what-needs-to-change-share-your-thoughts>
. You can also contribute onTwitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Instagram <https://www.instagram.com/guardiancities/> using the hashtag 
#GuardianJakarta
 