
Jake Bugg <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jake_Bugg> is just back from 
rehearsing forhis appearance on <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jNTfML6V9cc> 
Later with Jools Holland. It's Tuesday afternoon, and the performance is that 
evening. If he's excited about the prospect he keeps it as tightly buttoned as 
his Fred Perry jacket. "It hasn't quite registered yet," he says, staring at 
his trainers "I can't believe it because it all feels like a dream."

Bugg may have only just turned 18 but he sounds much older, and his songs – 
which straddle melancholic folk and bluesy rock – sound older still, harking 
back to the origins of rock'n'roll.

His father is a nurse, his mother works in sales, and he grew up in Nottingham 
on what was once Europe's largest council estate. He spent his days kicking a 
football around, hanging out in local shops and learning to fend for himself. 
"You get tired of the same old streets," he says. "If you want to live your 
dreams, you have to get out."

It's an old story: working-class kid uses music as a passport to his or her 
dreams. But Bugg has his own spin on it. "I was watchingThe Simpsons when I 
heardVincent <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nwE3VdZ_AHQ> by Don McLean," he 
recalls. "I remember thinking: I want to write songs like that."

Unlike his mates, who were into hip hop and grime, Bugg began exploring rock's 
back pages. "My uncle had given me an acoustic guitar and so I started getting 
into the Beatles, Dylan and Hendrix." Seeing cousins in bands made him think 
that was something he wanted to do too. Did he ever think about auditioning for 
a talent show? "At school people would say I should go onBritain's Got Talent, 
but I would never have done that because it doesn't seem genuine, it doesn't 
feel natural."

Instead he made a name for himself in Nottingham and, on a whim, uploaded some 
songs to the BBC'sIntroducing <http://www.bbc.co.uk/music/introducing/> scheme 
for new artists. "I got an email saying a DJ in Nottingham was going to play my 
song, and from there I got invited to play at Glastonbury."

He dropped out of studying music technology at his local college when he found 
a Beatles songbook in the library and concluded he'd rather learn some songs 
than go to classes. Now, at barely 18, Bugg has a record contract with Mercury, 
and has supportedLana Del Rey <https://www.theguardian.com/music/lana-del-rey>, 
Example and most recently Michael Kiwanuka on tour.

In the past record companies gave artists time to develop their careers, but 
these days that's less of an option. "There's a lot of single deals," he says. 
"You get a single and then see how it goes. Illegal downloads have fucked up 
the industry so people just aren't getting signed up as much." Is he worried? 
"You might as well use that time you were going to worry to write a song," he 
says. And he has already written around 40 and released two so far.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FfY0oPg1h8fQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FfY0oPg1h8fQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FfY0oPg1h8fQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
The new single, Lightning Bolt – selected by Zane Lowe as a record of the week 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/zanelowe/2012/04/hottest_record_-_jake_bugg_-_l.html>
 – sounds reminiscent of the White Stripes.Trouble Town 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WTM9rV8uKpI> – his first single – was an 
autobiographical glimpse into life on a council estate. "Stuck in speed-bump 
city where the only thing that's pretty is the thought of getting out," he 
sings, over a driving, rustic acoustic melody. "There's a tower block overhead, 
all you've got is your benefits and you're barely scraping by."

Anyone who has picked up an acoustic guitar in the past 50 years does so in 
the shadow ofBob Dylan <https://www.theguardian.com/music/bobdylan>. "I should 
check out more Dylan," he says. "I've only listened to one album."

Hang on, did I hear him right? "Yeah," he confirms, "I guess that's a journey 
to look forward to."

Given his musical tastes and the old-fashioned – in the best sense – nature of 
his music, I wondered ifJake Bugg <https://www.theguardian.com/music/jake-bugg> 
felt he was living in the wrong decade. "Yeah, I would love to have been born 
in the 60s," he says. Then he smiles, and adds: "But I'm here now." 

Jake Bugg's single Lightning Bolt is out on 4 June
 