
Grammy award-winning singer James Taylor has cancelled a February 2017 concert 
in thePhilippines <https://www.theguardian.com/world/philippines> in protest at 
the alleged extrajudicial killings in president Rodrigo Duterte’s brutal drug 
war.


“I don’t think of my music as being particularly political but sometimes one 
is called upon to make a political stand,” the US star said insocial media 
posts on Twitter <https://twitter.com/JamesTaylor_com/status/811391582247223296>
 as well as on his Facebook page.

Philippines secret death squads: officer claims police teams behind wave of 
killings
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/04/philippines-secret-death-squads-police-officer-teams-behind-killings>
“For a sovereign nation to prosecute and punish, under the law, those 
responsible for the illegal trade in drugs is, of course, understandable, even 
commendable,” he said, calling drug dependence a “scourge” and a “worldwide 
problem”.


“But recent reports from the Philippines of summary executions of suspected 
offenders without trial or judicial process are deeply concerning and 
unacceptable to anyone who loves the rule of law.”

Duterte, a fiery populist provincial politician, was elected by a landslide 
earlier this year largely on a vow to kill 100,000 criminals.

Police or suspected vigilantes have killed more than 5,300 people since July, 
but the government rejects the allegations of extrajudicial executions and 
insists those killed by police had resisted arrest and fought police. Earlier 
this week Duterte saidhe himself had killed at least three suspected criminals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/14/philippines-president-rodrigo-duterte-personally-killed-criminals>
 when he was mayor of the town of Davao.

Taylor, 68, rose to fame in the 1970s for writing and performing songs such as 
Fire and Rain and You’ve Got a Friend and has won five Grammy Awards over his 
long career.

In recent press interviews he has openly discussed his recovery from heroin 
addiction in his teens, just before he became globally famous.

Taylor informed local promoter Ovation Productions about his decision late on 
Tuesday and rejected last-minute appeals to reconsider, Ovation president and 
chief executive Renen de Guia said.

De Guia said Taylor was the first foreign performer he is aware of to have 
cancelled a Philippine concert over the killings, and hoped he would be the 
last. “As far as we’re concerned we’re pushing through with the others,” he 
said.

Taylor was scheduled to have played in Manila on 25 February next year as part 
of a foreign tour. He said his Manila boycott would not affect the Hong Kong, 
Singapore, Australia and New Zealand legs of his tour.

Asked to comment on Taylor’s stand on the drug-related killings, de Guia said: 
“This is a very sensitive issue and I don’t want to say anything more.”
 