
There were many obvious candidates for Britain’s face of 2016. Looking back on 
the sorry excuse for a year just ended, though, I’d argue it’s hard to overlook 
the claims of James O’Brien. You’ll know O’Brien, maybe mostly from his 
appearances onNewsnight, where he sometimes gives the impression of being the 
solitary post-Paxman presenter who does not seem more concerned with the 
tailored tightness of his suit than the pinched state of the nation. It is 
though – ironically – on radio where his face has really come into its own.

For the past decade or so, O’Brien, now 44, has hosted a talk show every week 
day on LBC, the London station that went national in 2014. Over the course of 
last year, as the news on both sides of the Atlantic became ever more surreal,
LBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/lbc> wisely took to filming O’Brien’s 
trademark streams of consciousness, the introductory segments that set up the 
subsequent three hours of chat in which he, as his station advertises, is 
“Leading Britain’s Conversation”. Many of the clips of these commentaries 
became standalone viral hits. Watching them now, from what seems – briefly – 
the safer vantage of 2017, you might assume that O’Brien’s show goes out late 
at night, so tortured and world-weary and emotional is his address, sitting 
alone in a room with only his outsize microphone and nearly a million listeners 
for company. In fact, most days last year, like many of the rest of us, the 
presenter had reached this state of anxious and slightly unhinged disbelief by 
10am, when his show begins, just by listening to theToday programme, reading 
the papers and scrolling through his Twitter feed.

In his stride during these riffs O’Brien can sound like Alastair Cooke 
channelling Samuel Beckett, marvelling darkly and on a loop at the existential 
absurdity of the national pageant. Sometimes last year he found a convincing 
righteous anger, as for example at the absence of contrition of Kelvin 
MacKenzie (and his “capo di capi” Rupert Murdoch) in the wake of the 
Hillsborough verdict. Sometimes he captured the scarier extremes that 
mainstream politics had reached, as when he readan unattributed passage from 
Mein Kampf 
<http://www.lbc.co.uk/radio/presenters/james-obrien/james-amber-rudds-speech-echoes-mein-kampf/>
 in order to establish its similarity to the policy floated about the status of 
immigrant workers by the incoming home secretary, Amber Rudd. And sometimes he 
could simply not contain his heartfelt disgust, as when theDaily Mail chose to 
report the Jo Cox trial verdict on page 30 of that morning’s paper (O’Brien 
examined each story on the previous 29 pages 
<http://www.lbc.co.uk/radio/presenters/james-obrien/jo-cox-murderer-page-30-daily-mail-james-obrien/>
 considered more important than the brutal hate-crime murder of a sitting MP).

If I had a column it would be once a week and unanswerable. Here people can 
call me up and call me an idiot every day

Often, though, O’Brien’s expression was one of genuine bafflement as the daily 
drama went from flotilla on the Thames, to Gove and his Lady Macbeth, to the 
unfolding reality show of the American election. “And so the analysis 
continues, with that ever-creeping sense of dread inevitability…” he remarked, 
typically one morning while wearing the look of a man who has Twitter trolls 
for company day and night. That expression is generally leavened by another 
brighter impulse: his undimmed relish for Jesuitical debate and the endless 
promise of an enlightened or life-affirming caller. Liberal political 
commentators are often described these days as existing in a metropolitan 
bubble. O’Brien’s mornings, by contrast, often involve labyrinthine arguments 
with alt-right wannabes, callers who think all Muslims should apologise for 
terrorist atrocities, climate-change deniers and people who honestly believe 
that the judiciary undermine our sovereignty, or who wanted to vouch for the 
hidden merits of Andrea Leadsom (or Jeremy Corbyn) as the true saviour of the 
nation. He takes on all-comers, listening for scraps of wisdom, sometimes 
perversely losing the plot, or getting mired in circular arguments about the 
garden bridge or fly-tipping, mostly trying to apply reason to fearmongering 
while being perennially “late for the travel”.

It hasn’t stopped, this tide. On the way to see O’Brien last week, I was 
listening to his show, which featured two of 2017’s opening soliloquies. The 
first, inevitably, was about “Fat Cat Wednesday”, the fact that the FTSE CEOs 
had earned more than the average worker by the second working lunch of the 
year. O’Brien pointed to the statistic that the boss of Barclays earned roughly 
100 times the wage of his 1979 counterpart, while the current average British 
salary is only about four times the 1979 figure. “Why do we put up with it?” he 
wondered. “We are just nuts, aren’t we? A nation of forelock-tugging 
deferential muppets… explain it to me,” he asked. “Rescue me from my ‘leftist 
hell’…”

And of course the callers started coming: “James, why are you so jealous of 
wealth?” and all the rest.

The second subject for discussion was the resignation of the EU ambassador, 
Sir Ivan Rogers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/03/the-guardian-view-on-ivan-rogers-resignation-a-loss-at-a-crucial-time>
. O’Brien’s bait for the story was “why would the man who was in charge of our 
EU Brexit negotiations not know yet what our objectives are?” There were only 
two answers to that question. One was that there is no plan. The other, which 
proved more seductive to callers, was that there was a plan “but it was best 
kept inside Theresa May’s head”. “What do you mean? What do you even think you 
mean when you say that?” O’Brien asked at one particularly heated point.

After the show, I meet the presenter in the Leicester Square office of his 
station. His eye is weeping a bit from conjunctivitis (a listener has 
recommended he bathe it in milk, but he’s not convinced). I put to him my 
proposition that he has become the authentic face of angst in 2016, the Ancient 
Mariner of Trump and Brexit, and he laughs broadly at the idea.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-pyYoL9ngtE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-pyYoL9ngtE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-pyYoL9ngtE&media=>
Watch James O’Brien’s 2014 interview with Nigel Farage. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-pyYoL9ngtE> 
He’s adamant that the fated expression is just the way his face sits, that 
it’s physiognomy not psychodrama. Mostly. “Though, I mean, take this morning,” 
he says. “Brexit was supposed to be about accountability – but so far the Leave 
side are going after the judiciary, the rule of law, the impartiality of the 
civil service, the sovereignty of parliament, and caller after caller supports 
that. Those are the moments when you really go, ‘the emperor is actually in the 
altogether’. Just because we film it now, I don’t think there is any 
face-palming for the cameras from me. I was face-palming long before the 
cameras came in.”

In some ways, despite the implications, 2016 was the year O’Brien had been 
waiting for. Over the years he has talked for countless hours about the merits 
or otherwise of the European Union, and was quite agnostic on the subject. LBC 
presenters are under no obligation to be impartial – quite the opposite – but 
in the run up to the referendum he tried to be as even-handed as he could, he 
says. “The closest I came to an opinion was that my constant fear was that it 
would unleash something really ugly. I think I was probably more aware of that 
than most, because of what I do and what I hear every day.”

He had set some of those fears out in a short book published in 2015 called 
Loathe Thy Neighbour 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/why-are-we-scared-of-immigration.html> in 
which he observed how the narrowing of debate on immigration could only end one 
way. The book feels a bit like a canary in the coal mine now.

“I could certainly hear it coming,” he says. “You know, for a long time, I 
thought white supremacism was a bit comical. But I guess if you have an 
economic crisis and then a refugee crisis, history suggests that the stage is 
set for some pretty toxic politics.”

Some of those politics are alive and well in these same corridors. The day 
after we meet it is announced that Nigel Farage, for a long time a guest host, 
has agreed to take up a regular evening slot at LBC. O’Brien was one of the few 
interviewers to rattle Farage in the past – the then Ukip leader curtailed a 
2014 interview in which the presenter tried to press him on his expenses. On 
another occasion, O’Brien described the MEP as “[an] ornament to this radio 
station” but also “politically and to a degree morally bankrupt… the worst kind 
of rabble-rousing demagogue… someone who… puts [his wife] on the payroll having 
pledged that he never would.” This is probably a minority view among LBC 
presenters. On a Sunday, O’Brien’s studio is occupied by the blunt prejudices 
of theMail columnist Katie Hopkins, who the previous day had been approvingly 
retweeting the thoughts of neo-Nazis 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/entry/katie-hopkins-tweet-racist-neo-nazi_uk_586a91a3e4b0f24da6e93af7>
. How does he feel about having those colleagues?

“The boring answer would be that I am only responsible for the three hours I 
am responsible for,” he says. “I would go a tiny bit further, though, and say I 
don’t think I can relish the freedom I have every day to put forward my own 
agenda, without accepting that the same freedoms have to be extended to people 
whose positions I find toxic. I have had other offers, but where else would I 
get three hours every day to literally go on air and say what I want? If I had 
a newspaper column it would be once a week and unanswerable. Here people can 
call me up and call me an idiot, and they do so every day. They are wrong 
usually. But I have to listen and make my argument accordingly.”

O’Brien has long been an enthusiastic tweeter, though he has stopped reacting 
to the vitriol he gets online, because it becomes self-defeating, and anyhow he 
does it in the real world for three hours every morning. He would agree, 
however, that one consequence of the more polarised politics is that people now 
feel more emboldened to say publicly what they were once only prepared to 
say anonymously.

“From the very first week I did this show, I kept hearing about political 
correctness,” he says. “But I never really knew what it meant. People would 
always come on and say, you know, ‘you are not allowed to say that’ and I 
wondered what it was exactly they wanted to say but couldn’t. Now we know: 
political correctness prevented them saying ‘don’t speak Polish on my bus’ and 
‘don’t wear a headscarf to read the news’. It was basic manners. I think we 
might find in retrospect that old place was a much nicer place in which to 
live, especially if you are an immigrant.”

Don’t call it post-truth. There’s a simpler word: lies | Jonathan Freedland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/16/not-post-truth-simpler-words-lies-aleppo-trump-mainstream>
Despite this sense of being a bellwether, O’Brien feels he nevertheless missed 
some of the currents of this new reality. “I bypassed Breitbart and all that 
stuff because I thought it was just too bonkers,” he says. “That was probably a 
mistake. But then the idea that, say, Hillary Clinton’s key aide was behind the 
abduction of Madeleine McCann – I mean how do you have a phone-in about that? 
It would be like having a conversation about whether the moon is made of 
cheese. But it seems there are millions of people apparently who genuinely 
believe that stuff, so perhaps we should have done.”

Some of the drama of the show these days lies in his determined effort to 
separate fact from fake news or the blind faith of “Brexit means Brexit”. In 
the painstaking effort of this, you can probably hear O’Brien trying to live up 
to the example of his father, Jim, also a journalist, who died four years ago.
An obituary 
<http://www.birminghampost.co.uk/news/local-news/tributes-paid-after-former-post-3908627>
 from his father’s editor at theBirmingham Post noted that “Jim had a wonderful 
shorthand note and was a stickler for accuracy. He was of the last of the 
old-school journalists who told it straight and heartily disliked ‘jazzing the 
story up’.”

O’Brien senior had learned these habits in the traditional way. He left school 
at 15 to make tea at theShipley Times and Express in West Yorkshire. He went 
from the weekly to theHull Daily Mail and eventually to the Daily Telegraph, 
where he was industrial correspondent before he got made redundant by Max 
Hastings. “After that he faffed for a few years as a PR and a consultant,” 
O’Brien recalls, “before he realised he missed his vocation and went to do 
shifts at theKidderminster Shuttle, our local weekly newspaper. This was a man 
with 20 years experience on theDaily Telegraph. I was so proud of him when he 
did that. And as soon as his byline appeared, theWorcester Evening News rang up 
and said: ‘That’s not you is it Jim?’ So he went to work there. And then when 
that byline appeared, theBirmingham Post got in touch, which was where he ended 
up.”

The truth-telling subtext of that history lives on in O’Brien, though he has 
come to his own obsessive fact-checking by a different route.

“My dad was suspicious of journalists who thought their own opinions were 
important,” he says. “But he was proud all the same. I’m really glad he got to 
see me onQuestion Time. I think he felt: ‘Well done son.’” He smiles. “Mostly 
though, journalistically he thought reporters like him were the engine room, 
and people like me were prancing about morris dancing up on deck.”

Another legacy of his father that survives in O’Brien is the education he 
received at Ampleforth college (the “Catholic Eton”) in North Yorkshire.

“My father, when he got to the Telegraph, I know that he felt he was held back 
by his background. And he was,” O’Brien says. “I have seen people with a 
fraction of his talent up on the editorial floor. He and my mother decided to 
spend more money than they could possibly afford to buy for me the golden 
ticket that all the people who were flying past him had in their back pocket.” 
Inevitably O’Brien spent some of his time in the Ampleforth debating society 
arguing why private education should be abolished, but he didn’t underestimate 
for a moment what a gift it was.

Neither did being schooled by monks put him off religion. Despite liberal 
positions on most issues, regular listeners to his show know he is a 
traditionalist in some areas, particularly about the institution of marriage, 
straight or gay. He also goes to church on Sundays. “I left it for a while,” he 
says. “But it has come back round for me since my dad died. He was very devout 
and I used to tease him about it. Now I go to church to talk to him.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fjames-obrien-radio-people-still-talk-lbc-presenter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e1da4183f1c2608e55f7b9803a41ba200c692ce%2F0_999_4912_6140%2F4912.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=James%20O%E2%80%99Brien%3A%20%E2%80%98On%20radio%2C%20people%20still%20talk%20like%20no%20one%20is%20listening%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fjames-obrien-radio-people-still-talk-lbc-presenter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=James%20O%E2%80%99Brien%3A%20%E2%80%98On%20radio%2C%20people%20still%20talk%20like%20no%20one%20is%20listening%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fjames-obrien-radio-people-still-talk-lbc-presenter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e1da4183f1c2608e55f7b9803a41ba200c692ce%2F0_999_4912_6140%2F4912.jpg>
 ‘I was face-palming long before the cameras came in’: James O’Brien. 
Photograph: Antonio Olmos for the Observer 
You guess he only ever wanted to follow in his old man’s footsteps. After 
university, he tried to call in some of his dad’s Fleet Street contacts, but 
“they were mostly redundant or dead.” He got his break while working in 
Aquascutum, the tailor’s off Regent Street in London. “I was flogging suits in 
the early 90s, and one day John Major ordered a white suit from us, as it 
turned out for an EU summit in Florence. I offered the story to the William 
Hickey column in theExpress and when they offered to pay me I asked if I could 
do some shifts there instead. That was how I got my foot in the door. It was 
the era of Clive Hollick and Rosie Boycott, when the paper was a kind of 
experiment in popular liberalism, one I enjoyed being part of.”

He became a gossip columnist at about the time that OK! magazine started. 
“Previously we had been looking through keyholes, and suddenly celebrities were 
throwing open their patio doors for the blandest kind of coverage.” He felt 
somewhat like an imposter, having pitched up at a national title without having 
done his apprenticeship. “I think for journalists who had never had to deal 
with the duty sergeant or the A&E doctor, journalists like me,” he says, “it 
became too easy to forget that they were real people you were writing about. If 
you were writing about entertainment, there was a danger these people ceased to 
be real humans. That’s where you get to the point where someone likeLily Allen 
gets pilloried for the crime of compassion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/15/lily-allen-profile-refugees-criticised-social-media-speak-mind>
.”

O’Brien has sometimes trod a fine line with that kind of judgmental habit 
himself – in 2009 hemade headlines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/apr/24/frank-lampard-radio-rant-lbc> 
with an emotional on-air encounter with the footballer Frank Lampard, for 
example, who phoned his show live to answer criticism O’Brien had aired about 
his divorce arrangements – but mostly, though he is robust in his putdowns to 
aggressive or ill-informed callers, you can hear him taking pains to stop short 
of cruelty. He had a widely shared argument last year with a Brexiteer called 
Ashley, an electrician from Devon, whose vapid arguments about sovereignty and 
immigrants he forensically dismantled one by one, to leave Ashley gibbering.

Does that process ever feel like an abuse of his own power?

“I’m aware of the power,” he says. “But on that occasion we felt it was 
important to shed the light a little on what he and many others thought. I 
don’t think he would have gone away feeling insulted. Maybe a bit silly, but 
that’s not my fault. If he felt insulted that would be my fault. It’s a poor 
listen if people feel like that.”

O’Brien’s great luck, he believes, is that he had a lot of years to develop 
this complex tone in relative obscurity. “What has obviously shifted since I 
started here is the idea that LBC is a station for racist taxi drivers,” he 
says. “And we worked hard to shift that by the quality of the calls. The trick 
was: don’t put anyone through until you get a good one. That is quite scary 
because you have to do a lot of talking. And you rely on your producers. The 
switchboard would be full but I wanted to take calls from people I could learn 
something from.”

He believes he has reached that point. He gets zoologists calling about 
escaped gorillas and parents of coma survivors calling about life support. “The 
other day I was doing a show about fidelity and I took a call from the woman 
who’d had a baby by an undercover cop,” he says. “We kept her on for half an 
hour. I don’t think that would have happened in the beginning – it is because 
we try to treat each call as precious and important, rather than just churn.”

He has tried a few times to do a similar show on TV, but the intimacy and 
space isn’t the same. “On radio, people still talk as though there is no one 
listening. I mean, when the VIP child-abuse stuff started breaking, it ceased 
to be extraordinary to have a caller begin by saying: ‘I have never told anyone 
this before’”.

In that way, it is like being a confessor, he suggests.

“It sounds pompous, but I do honestly get emails from listeners saying: 
‘Thanks for helping me see the world in a different way.’”

That’s the one thing that gets him out of bed in the morning. The other thing, 
he says, is the knowledge that he is making the right enemies. Kelvin MacKenzie 
leads the calls for him to be sacked, which is all the incentive he needs to 
keep making the arguments. “The media is not rocket science, is it? If I was a 
tax-avoiding billionaire newspaper owner I would give a column to someone who 
tried to blame everything on Poles and health tourism, too, and try to shut 
down anyone who said different.”

And where, after last year, does he place his hope?

“I guess I hope the next chapter of populism will involve going after the real 
people responsible for the problems, not the people they have been told are 
responsible,” he says.

He is not holding his breath. He is, like half of the rest of us, far more 
likely to be found holding his head in his hands, five mornings a week, for the 
foreseeable future.

Strong words: James O’Brien’s best takedowns

On Kelvin MacKenzie and Hillsborough: 
<http://www.lbc.co.uk/hot-topics/hillsborough/james-obrien-takes-aim-at-kelvin-mackenzie-over-hi/>
‘A man whose conduct that day was so despicable, that frankly he should never 
have been employed again, let alone elevated subsequently, and rewarded today 
with another column… unless you see it as a sort of mafia operation where the 
capo di capi rewards his henchmen.’

On Boris Johnson: ‘He can’t resist it, can he? He can’t resist it, giving his 
audience what they want, rather than caring about truth, compassion or facts.’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fjames-obrien-radio-people-still-talk-lbc-presenter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20fb5379bdc30f64c77ce3197d257106f2884624%2F455_686_3621_2173%2F3621.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=James%20O%E2%80%99Brien%3A%20%E2%80%98On%20radio%2C%20people%20still%20talk%20like%20no%20one%20is%20listening%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fjames-obrien-radio-people-still-talk-lbc-presenter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=James%20O%E2%80%99Brien%3A%20%E2%80%98On%20radio%2C%20people%20still%20talk%20like%20no%20one%20is%20listening%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fjames-obrien-radio-people-still-talk-lbc-presenter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20fb5379bdc30f64c77ce3197d257106f2884624%2F455_686_3621_2173%2F3621.jpg>
 Boris Johnson on the Vote Leave bus, May 2016. Photograph: Darren 
Staples/Reuters 
On Donald Trump: 
<http://www.lbc.co.uk/radio/presenters/james-obrien/james-despairs-at-trumps-death-threat/>
 ‘I couldn’t begin to explain to you how we have arrived in a place where a 
presidential candidate can call for a rival to be shot and we just sit here 
thinking: ‘Yeah, that’s a good topic for a conversation.’”

On the Daily Mail: 
<http://www.lbc.co.uk/radio/presenters/james-obrien/jo-cox-murderer-page-30-daily-mail-james-obrien/>
 “TheDaily Mail has chosen to put the murder by a neo-Nazi of a serving British 
MP… on page 30. And I don’t really understand why. Unless a murder by a 
neo-Nazi is less offensive to the sensibilities of the editor of this newspaper 
than a murder by a radical Islamist.”

On Amber Rudd’s plans to make companies identify foreign workers: 
<http://www.lbc.co.uk/radio/presenters/james-obrien/james-amber-rudds-speech-echoes-mein-kampf/>
 “If you’re going to have a sharp line of distinction between people born here 
and people who just work here, you’re enacting chapter two ofMein Kampf… 
Strange times.”
 