
Even at this early stage of the season there is a good chance Saracens and 
Wasps will contest thePremiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership> final at Twickenham next May. 
Titles are not won in October but this preliminary skirmish in north London 
again underlined how tough it will be to unseat the defending champions. 
Despite the absence of several key players, Sarries are back astride the table 
and will switch into European mode this week with justifiable optimism.

In isolation it was not the kind of game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/wasps-saracens-allianz-park-rugby-union-premiership>
 to inspire endless poetry but there is a certain thumbscrew beauty about 
Saracens’ ruthless method in big matches.

Wasps <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-wasps> had arrived unbeaten 
and as the league’s free-wheeling top scorers; they left having been outscored 
four tries to one by opponents who waited until the final quarter to flex their 
muscles most effectively. Two tries for the hooker Jamie George inside the last 
11 minutes ensured not just a bonus point but sent a clear message of intent to 
their next opponents, Toulon.

Along the way Saracens also proved it is humanly possible for players to 
hammer away for club and country within the same week,despite the bruising 
session their leading men endured 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/exeter-rob-baxter-jack-nowell-england-eddie-jones>
 at England’s training camp in Brighton. Billy Vunipola was again a serious 
handful, with his brother Mako getting his name on the score sheet alongside 
the prolific George, now the Premiership’s leading scorer with five tries in 
six games.

With Owen Farrell and Alex Goode potentially back from injury in time for the 
Toulon trip, the watching Eddie Jones will be suitably grateful, having endured 
a few turbulent headlines in the wake of this week’s injuries to Anthony 
Watson, Jack Nowell and Sam Jones. Wasps’ director of rugby, Dai Young, 
confirmed his players all returned feeling pretty weary and has pleaded for 
closer liaison in future between England’s management and the Premiership 
clubs. “The important thing is we review it,” said Young. “It cannot be England 
and clubs against each other … there cannot be a big brother in this 
relationship.

Exeter’s Rob Baxter slams England training camp after Jack Nowell injury
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/exeter-rob-baxter-jack-nowell-england-eddie-jones>
“They are not more important than us and we are not more important than them. 
The last thing we can do is knock a wedge between the national setup and the 
clubs. England want to win the World Cup, the clubs want to do well. If we want 
to achieve what we want, we won’t do it if we go our separate ways. It’s really 
important we all work in the same direction.”

A pre-arranged meeting between Jones and the Premiership directors of rugby on 
Thursday should help in that regard, with Saracens’ Mark McCall making clear it 
was the specific timing of the camp in the buildup to Europe that bothered him. 
Wasps, for their part, are now resigned to losing Jones for five months and 
have now picked up another injury to their England squad scrum-half, Dan 
Robson. With Tommy Taylor succumbing to a sick bug an hour before kick-off the 
anticipated hooking duel between the former Sale player and George never 
happened.

Instead, as widely predicted, it largely came down to whether Wasps’ attacking 
wit could pierce Saracens’ renowned defensive shield. For the first 35 minutes 
of the game the answer was emphatically negative, with Sarries happy to kick 
the ball to their opponents and back their energetic pressing defence to shut 
down any potential danger.

With Mako Vunipola having secured an early lead in the left corner following a 
well-worked lineout drive, the home side also proved adept at slowing down 
their opponents’ ball illegally, prompting a lecture for the captain, Brad 
Barritt, from the referee, Matthew Carley. The suffocating black blanket was 
not visibly affected and one shuddering collision between Billy Vunipola and 
Nathan Hughes could have been heard in Cricklewood.

The challenge for Wasps was to break free of the straitjacket imposed on their 
midfield and, to his credit, Danny Cipriani proved gloriously equal to the 
task. Not for the first time this season some lovely ghosting footwork took him 
outside and past an opponent, in this case Billy Vunipola, and a try for Josh 
Bassett was the instant reward. Just as Wasps’ hopes were rising, however, 
Sarries went straight back up the other end to put Mike Ellery over and ensure 
a 13-8 interval lead.

Maybe things would have been closer had Alex Lozowski, against his old club, 
not tracked back splendidly to outpace Cipriani as he threatened to score a 
magical solo try or if Maro Itoje had caused Wasps slightly less lineout hassle.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fsaracens-wasps-premiership-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60f4ea9e3f2a0796da34a0c1b85b79fd8ed7815c%2F0_0_3727_2451%2F3727.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jamie%20George%E2%80%99s%20tries%20send%20Saracens%20top%20with%20bonus-point%20win%20over%20Wasps&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fsaracens-wasps-premiership-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jamie%20George%E2%80%99s%20tries%20send%20Saracens%20top%20with%20bonus-point%20win%20over%20Wasps&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fsaracens-wasps-premiership-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60f4ea9e3f2a0796da34a0c1b85b79fd8ed7815c%2F0_0_3727_2451%2F3727.jpg>
 Jimmy Gopperth of Wasps is overwhelmed by the Saracens pack. Photograph: Tom 
Jenkins for the Guardian 
Saracens’ forwards, either way, grew progressively more dominant and George, 
whose low-slung centre of gravity makes him the ideal man to have at the back 
of a maul, put the outcome beyond doubt after Wasps had lost Bassett to the 
sin-bin for a high tackle on Sean Maitland.

McCall was understandably satisfied by the final margin but it was Young who 
hit the nail squarest on the head. “The better team won … I don’t think we were 
allowed to play and you’ve got to give them a lot of credit,” he conceded. 
“They really strangled us. We didn’t get the penetration with our ball carriers 
that we’ve had up until now.”

Saracens Maitland; Ellery (Gallagher, 68), Bosch, Barritt (capt; Tompkins, 
76), Wyles; Lozowski, Wigglesworth (Spencer, 71); M Vunipola (Lamositele, 76), 
Brits (George, 51), Figallo (Du Plessis, 58), Itoje (Hamilton, 76), Kruis, 
Rhodes (Wray, 52), Burger, B Vunipola.Tries M Vunipola, Ellery, George 2. Cons 
Lozowski, Spencer.Pens Lozowski 2. Wasps Miller (Eastmond, 57); Wade (Halai, 
71), Daly, Gopperth (capt), Bassett; Cipriani, Robson (Simpson, h-t); McIntyre 
(Mullan, 55), Cruse, Moore (Cooper-Woolley, 55), Symons (Rieder, 61), Myall 
(Launchbury, 37), Johnson (Gaskell, 61), Young, Hughes.Try Bassett. Pens 
Gopperth 3.Sin-bin Bassett 74. Referee M Carley (RFU). Att 9.911.
 