
“I don’t trust anyone who’s not a nerd,” says Jamie Lidell. “If you’re not 
really a nerd then you’re not really into something.” Anyone who saw Lidell’s 
live show a decade ago wouldn’t confuse him for a man who wasn’tinto what he 
was doing. Back in 2005 Lidell toured the UK in a jacket made out ofVHS tape 
and a helmet with a camera strapped to his head, alongside an audio visual 
sidekick by the name of Pablo Fiasco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2004/mar/16/classicalmusicandopera.popandrock>
.

Jamie Lidell: Building a Beginning review – swoonworthy soul-pop
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/13/jamie-lidell-building-a-beginning-album-review>
It was a ramshackle yet captivating live show that stood out on a bill he 
shared with the London Sinfonietta and fellow Warp records signeeSquarepusher  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/squarepusher>and felt more like a cyberpunk 
circus act than a conventional gig <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XkuiWgPzQwg>
. “It was a cool chance for me and my visual guy to cause a ruckus because 
everyone was very formal and we were super messy,” says Lidell. The organised 
chaos, partly enabled by a loop programme he developed himself, gave Lidell a 
new audience and brought his vision of nerd Nirvana to venues like London’s 
Royal Festival Hall.


But for all the gear and talk of nerding out, Lidell is most well-known for 
his more soulful work, where he puts the wires and gadgets to one side and 
places his vocals at the forefront. His new record Building A Beginning is a 
mix of upbeat soul and reflective ballads that recall the more somber work of 
Teddy Pendergrass and Al Green. It’s been calleda career best by some 
<http://www.thefader.com/2016/07/12/jamie-lidell-walk-right-back-building-beginning-interview>
, and will be released on his own label.

Originally from Cambridgeshire in the UK, Lidell now lives in Nashville with 
his wife and young son, after being encouraged to relocate from New York by 
director Harmony Korine, who Lidell met through their respective work on Warp, 
the revered electronica label which introduced the Aphex Twin to the world. 
Lidell collaborates with his wife – the photographerLindsey Rome 
<https://www.instagram.com/lindseyrome/?hl=en> – on lyrics, and has put 
together a band (the Royal Pharaohs 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SEc-TKLU2Yk>) who’ve worked with everyone from 
Beck and Elton John to Prince and Chaka Khan. It’s a dream set up for someone 
who grew up being the only kid in his school listening tothe purple one 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/feb/14/prince-playing-show-guardian>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dwd0Mj5oriWI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dwd0Mj5oriWI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dwd0Mj5oriWI&media=>
 Jamie Lidell – Believe In Me 
But for a while Lidell was looking like he might become a British soul singer 
of a different sort. Less smalltown happiness and self-published albums, more 
massive billboards with your name on and major label deals.

Around the time of his album Multiply in 2005, Lidell had tapped into renewed 
interest in British soul, led by Amy Winehouse. Not everyone was convinced by 
him though. The Guardian’s Caroline Sullivandidn’t see what all the fuss was 
about 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2008/apr/17/stilldontgetjamielidell>
 – “He looks authentically intense (spectacles, beard); well, so does Rolf 
Harris. So what am I not getting? Is it me, or does the emperor have no 
clothes?” Neither, initially, was his label Warp, who after a three-year wait 
for the album might have expected something similar to his more abrasive debut 
album,Muddlin Gear <http://jamielidellmusic.com/muddlin-gear/>.


“I handed it in to Steve [Beckett, boss of Warp] and he didn’t say anything. 
He called me and said is it not going to be a bit more fucked up? And I said 
‘No, I’m trying to make it more concise’ and it was a bit too pop for what they 
were used to on Warp, I guess,” he remembers. “It turned out to be a really big 
seller for Warp. I don’t think they knew that was going to happen. They put the 
brakes on it in terms of promotion, they didn’t really go that hard on it.

“But it sort of just went on its own. I was doing that and then the Amy 
Winehouse thing [Back to Black 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2009/nov/25/amy-winehouse-back-to-black>
] came out the next year. The time was perfect for that kind of sound. It’s 
really about luck.”

After the release of Multiply, Lidell followed the album up with his most 
mainstream record to date,Jim <http://pitchfork.com/reviews/albums/11467-jim/>. 
It was his brazen bid for the big time andearned him comparisons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/apr/20/popandrock22> to the blue-eyed 
soul of David Bowie’s Young Americans. “I was blatantly going for it. First 
time in my career and probably the last. I thought ‘let’s have a go’ … 
ultimately I don’t regret any of it,” he says.

He was getting invited to co-write with people like Lianne La Havas, and his 
music was popping up on TV shows such asGrey’s Anatomy 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kQShuGZIzkg>, but for Lidell there was a 
conflict between operating as an underground artist and knowing that with a few 
compromises perhaps he could have been much bigger. It’s not a goal he says 
that interests him now, but around the release of Jim, there wasserious 
interest from major labels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/apr/25/popandrock2>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fjamie-lidell-interview-building-a-beginning%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35366a835b7b773d07c9ddc7847774f4c5700a75%2F315_505_5653_3392%2F5653.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jamie%20Lidell%3A%20'I%E2%80%99m%20glad%20I%20didn%E2%80%99t%20lock%20myself%20into%20being%20this%20crazy%20electronic%20dude'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fjamie-lidell-interview-building-a-beginning%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jamie%20Lidell%3A%20%27I%E2%80%99m%20glad%20I%20didn%E2%80%99t%20lock%20myself%20into%20being%20this%20crazy%20electronic%20dude%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fjamie-lidell-interview-building-a-beginning%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35366a835b7b773d07c9ddc7847774f4c5700a75%2F315_505_5653_3392%2F5653.jpg>
 Jaime Lidell at Prospect Park with the Royal Pharaohs. Photograph: PR 
“I got a lot of major label offers in 2008, Columbia and all those biggies 
started sniffing around.Rick Rubin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/rick-rubin> [got in touch] I went and met 
him. But Steve wouldn’t let me go,” he says. He adds that Beckett told him any 
label that wanted him would have to pay a million pounds to release him from 
his deal with Warp (Beckett didn’t want to comment on the veracity of this 
claim).

“It made me a little bit like ‘fuck, I can’t get off this now’. I had a bit of 
a Prince moment.A mini slave moment. 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/lists/12-wildest-prince-moments-20160422/prince-writes-slave-on-face-changes-name-to-unpronounceable-symbol-1993-20160422>
 But at the same time I’ll always like Warp, they did a good job. I’ll never 
know what it would have been like had I side stepped it on to a major label at 
the high point of my career. Ultimately, it probably would have gone pretty 
well actually.”

Jim was his most successful release, but it came at a price artistically, and 
again asked the question of what kind of artist Lidell wanted to be: bedroom 
noodler with a jacket made out of videotapes, or a bonafide mainstream star? 
“To be honest after I’d done Jim I was a little gutted because I felt like I 
wasn’t really doing music I loved. I felt as if I watered I’d down a little bit 
to get on the radio.”

The radio play and sales led to a grueling tour schedule. That, coupled with a 
taste for hedonism, led a predictable burnout and period of self-reflection, 
which culminated in his last two albums, the Beck-producedCompass 
<http://pitchfork.com/reviews/albums/14273-compass/> and self-titled 2013 album 
<http://pitchfork.com/reviews/albums/17628-jamie-lidell-jamie-lidell/>, where 
he called out his own behaviour out on tracks like the self-explanatory I’m 
Selfish.

Building a Beginning sees him sing about his relationship with his parents, 
his wife and his son. It feels like Lidell writing about his own little world 
rather than trying to reach a bigger one outside. “You’ve got to be honest 
about where you’re at,” he says of his current approach. “I’m really glad I 
didn’t lock myself into being this crazy electronic dude, who can only do this 
and my brand is that. It would have messed with me.

“Things worked out great, I’m happy, I’m healthy. I don’t know: is it better 
to have loads of money? Maybe. But I might not have done stuff I really believe 
in,” he says. “It might have been terrible and I might have turned into a real 
dick, and started making music I hated. The slow and low has paid off for me. I 
see people pursue it and I see them peaking, and it’s hard to come back from.”

Building A Beginning is out Friday on Jajulin Records
 