
Jamie Mackie scored against his former club as QPR dented Reading’s 
Championship <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> promotion bid. 
Reading missed the chance to cut the six-point gap to the automatic promotion 
places as Mackie secured QPR’s third victory in a row in the league with a goal 
midway through the first half.

Morgan Schneiderlin joins Everton from Manchester United for initial £20m
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/12/morgan-schneiderlin-joins-everton-manchester-united>
It was the former Reading <https://www.theguardian.com/football/reading> 
loanee’s first strike of the season, having only returned in December following 
eight months out with an ankle injury. The hosts under-performed throughout but 
Yann Kermorgant almost levelled in the second half when his firm header struck 
the crossbar.

A minute’s applause in memory of former England manager Graham Taylor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/12/graham-taylor-watford-rescued-paul-mcgrath-aston-villa>
, who died aged 72 on Thursday morning, was held before the start.

Reading opened more positively, with Kermorgant setting up a chance with a 
clever chest down but Garath McCleary blazed his 20-yard shot too high.

QPR soon replied, with Mackie taking advantage of a mix-up between Joey van 
den Berg and Jordan Obita. However, Mackie wasted the time and space that he 
had been afforded when sending over an angled drive. Mackie was instrumental in 
another QPR opening, when drilling over a low cross, but with the Reading 
rearguard exposed, Idrissa Sylla was unable to make a firm connection on it.QPR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/qpr> tackled strongly in midfield and, 
with their five-man defence showing no weaknesses, Reading’s frustration began 
to grow.

Rangers were rewarded when they went ahead in the 28th minute after good work 
by Pawel Wszolek and Ryan Manning. It left Mackie with little to do and he 
tucked the ball home from close range at the far post. Mackie almost added 
another three minutes later but his goal-bound attempt was deflected narrowly 
wide.

Reading improved marginally after the break – in front of a crowd of only 
12,665, their lowest league gate of the season – but Kermorgant had no one in 
support when breaking clear. QPR had chances to increase their lead but Liam 
Moore blocked a Sylla effort on the goal-line and Mackie shot tamely at home 
keeper Ali Al Habsi.

Reading did go close to an equaliser on a rare break but Kermorgant nodded 
against the bar from a free header from McCleary’s cross. Kermorgant was 
narrowly off target with another header, from a Roy Beerens cross, but QPR held 
on with relative ease.
 