
Politicians and activists in India and Pakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> are campaigning to ban the popular 
Japanese cartoon cat Doraemon from television screens because they say it 
corrupts children.


Social conservatives have called on the authorities to banish Doraemon, a blue 
feline robot from the 22nd century, for encouraging children to misbehave at 
school and at home, according to media reports.

The new science of cute | Neil Steinberg
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/19/kumamon-the-new-science-of-cute> 
The campaign gathered momentum this summer when Malik Taimur, a member of the 
opposition Pakistan-Tehreek-e-Insaaf (PTI) party, said Punjab should ban 
24-hour cartoon channels and singled out Doraemon as the worst offender.

The assembly in the most populous province was due to discuss the resolution 
later this month, Japan’s Nikkei business paper said.

“The language that is used in the cartoons is destroying our societal norms,” 
the resolution said in urging the Pakistan Electronic Media Regulatory 
Authority to banish the cat from TV screens. The resolution also voiced concern 
that Doraemon was dubbed intoHindi <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d_MnF_jKHuE>
, rather than Urdu, for viewers in Pakistan. “Our children unconsciously learn 
Hindi words, which mar the purity of out language and distort our religious 
beliefs,” it said.

When the resolution was reported in August, social media users ridiculed the 
PTI, which is led by the former Pakistan cricket captainImran Khan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/imran-khan>. Moonraolive 
<https://twitter.com/Moonraolive/status/760783580704497664?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw> 
asked on Twitter: “Is Doraemon using any gadget against Imran Khan?” Some 
declared: “We are all Doraemon.”

Doraemon, which first appeared in manga form almost 50 years ago, has been 
held up inJapan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> as an example of the 
power of technology to improve people’s quality of life.

Doraemon’s detractors, however, say the show’s use of gadgets encourages 
children to depend on others rather than solve problems for themselves, the 
Nikkei said. They are particularly critical of its 4D Pocket, whose array of 
gadgets includes an“anywhere door” 
<http://blog.goo.ne.jp/genkan-genkan/e/9bde83c31767bbdd86f11d3e9f05c6ba> and 
“bamboo copter” <http://weekly.ascii.jp/elem/000/000/243/243570/>.

Ashish Chaturvedi, a prominent Indian social activist, has urged the 
government and broadcasters to ban Doraemon cartoons, despite their popularity 
in the country.

Chaturvedi told the Nikkei that Doraemon and its hapless schoolboy sidekick, 
Nobita, had set a poor example to children, who had started answering back to 
their parents and refusing to do their homework.

He even claimed an exam-fixing scandal involving government jobs and places at 
colleges in the state of Madhya Pradesh in 2013 had been partly inspired by 
Doraemon and Nobita’s antics.

Doraemon has attracted legions of fans in Japan and other countries with its 
teleportation powers, addiction to sweet bean pancakes and ingenious gadgets. 
The anime version has been translated into more than 30 languages.

The manga, created by Fujiko F Fujio, has sold more than 100m copies. In 2002, 
Time magazine named Doraemon one of its Asian heroes, and in 2008 it was 
appointed a Japanese cultural ambassador.

Japanese children’s cartoon Crayon Shin-chan branded pornography
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/24/japanese-children-cartoon-crayon-shin-chan-pornography-indonesia>
This isn’t the first time Doraemon has been labeled a corrupting influence. In 
2014, a Chinese newspaperaccused the character of political subversion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/09/china-media-accuse-doraemon-japan-manga-cat-subverting-youth>
 and of being part of a plot to portray Japan in a gentler light in the midst 
of a tussle over ownership of theSenkaku Islands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/senkaku-islands>.

Just a year later, however, it was praised for easing diplomatic tensions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/03/japanese-robot-cat-doraemon-eases-diplomatic-tensions-with-china>
, after Chinese parents and children packed out cinemas to watch the 3D 
animated film Stand By Me Doraemon.

Last year, another Japanese cartoon character, Crayon Shin-chan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/24/japanese-children-cartoon-crayon-shin-chan-pornography-indonesia>
, fell foul of the authorities in Indonesia, which warned broadcasters to 
censor images of the precocious five-year-old’s bare buttocks and other scenes 
deemed inappropriate for young viewers.
 