
Japan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> is to drop the use of the 
swastika and other confusing symbols on maps for foreign tourists following 
complaints that they are offensive or hard to understand.

With Japan due to host the Rugby World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rugby-world-cup> and the summer Olympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-games> in the next four years, the 
country’sGeospatial Information Authority <http://www.gsi.go.jp/ENGLISH/> has 
released a new set of pictograms it believes will clear up any 
misunderstandings among overseas visitors.

 The chief culprit is a symbol closely resembling Nazi Germany’s swastika, 
which is used to indicate aBuddhist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/06/zen-no-more-japan-shuns-its-buddhist-traditions-as-temples-close>
 temple. The swastika will be replaced with a three-storey pagoda symbol when 
the new designs are unveiled at the end of March.

Others have simply left visitors flummoxed. They include a simple “X” 
<https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/34/Japanese_Map_symbol_(Koban).svg/220px-Japanese_Map_symbol_(Koban).svg.png>
 – meant to represent two truncheons – for a police box that will be replaced 
with asaluting officer, 
<http://d1udmfvw0p7cd2.cloudfront.net/wp-content/uploads/2016/01/n-mapsymbols-g-201601131.jpg>
 and a cross that is supposed to symbolise a church but which could be mistaken 
for a graveyard.

“Japan needs to create an environment where foreign visitors can easily use 
transport and find accommodation,” the GSI said in a report quoted in theJapan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> Times. “For that purpose, it is 
especially important to disseminate multilingual maps that are easy for 
foreigners to understand.”

Japan is expecting an influx of foreign tourists for the 2019 Rugby World Cup 
and for the Tokyo Olympics a year later.

But a weaker yen and relaxed visa regulations for visitors from China and 
other Asian countries have already sparked a huge increase in the number of 
visitors, new tourism ministry figures show.

A record 19.74 million people visited Japan last year, the ministry said this 
week, an increase of more than 47% from 2014. The number of incoming tourists 
outstripped the number of Japanese people going abroad for the first time, it 
added.

Inbound tourism suffered in the aftermath of the March 2011 tsunami and 
Fukushima nuclear disaster, but it now looks likely that Japan will achieve its 
target of 20 million tourists next year, four years ahead of schedule.

The decision to replace the swastika came after the GSI polled more than 1,000 
people from 92 countries, including tourists, embassy officials and exchange 
students, about the clarity of 18 symbols commonly used on maps.

Despite the swastika’s origins in the ancient language of Sanskrit and its 
centuries-old association with Japanese Buddhism, the GSI found that many 
tourists still associated it with the Nazis.

Known as manji in Japanese, the swastika-like symbol used in tourist maps is 
in fact slightly different from the one preferred by Nazis. The legs on the 
former run anti-clockwise; in the latter, they flow in the opposite direction.

The changes will not apply to Japanese-language maps, and there is no 
suggestion that the temples themselves should remove manji from their premises.

The swastika wasn’t the only source of confusion. The research revealed that 
the symbol for a hotel, a capital H inside a circle, looked too much like the 
sign commonly used for a helipad, while the traditional symbol for apost office 
<http://www.clker.com/cliparts/9/1/d/1/122496153528510162Japanese_Map_symbol_(Post_office).svg.med.png>
 was similarly baffling.

Some of the old symbols will be retained, however, including the mark for an 
onsen 
<https://straycatsandonsen.files.wordpress.com/2014/10/large_onsen_mark.jpg> 
(hot spring), which some have jokingly pointed out could just as easily 
represent a bowl of steaming miso soup.

Of the 18 existing symbols, six will be replaced when the changes go into 
effect in the spring.

The decision to ditch the swastika drew criticism on Japanese social media, 
with some arguing that it should be retained, and that tourists educate 
themselves about its centuries-old connection to Buddhism.

One Twitter user blamed the change on “ignorant” foreigners, while another 
wondered if Britain would contemplate ditching the Union Jack because it 
happened to be displayed by a terrorist.

A tweeter based in Scotland agreed: “It is sad that Japan feel the need to 
censor the swastika for tourism when it had much nobler connotations 
pre-Nazism.”

The GSI conceded that the revamp was not to everyone’s liking. “Japanese users 
are divided in their opinions on the new symbols,” Takayuki Nakamura, a GSI 
official, told theJapan Times 
<http://www.japantimes.co.jp/news/2016/01/12/national/japan-revamps-map-symbols-baffle-tourists/#.Vp7n31N97BW>
.

“Some say we should change symbols for Japanese-language maps at this 
opportunity, while others say the traditional symbols should stay. Either way, 
it will take a while before any changes are made, as we need to coordinate with 
related government agencies.”
 