
A future in which human workers are replaced by machines is about to become a 
reality at an insurance firm inJapan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan>, 
where more than 30 employees are being laid off and replaced with anartificial 
intelligence <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/artificialintelligenceai> 
system that can calculate payouts to policyholders.

Fukoku Mutual Life Insurance believes it will increase productivity by 30% and 
see a return on its investment in less than two years. The firm said it would 
save about 140m yen (£1m) a year after the 200m yen (£1.4m) AI system is 
installed this month. Maintaining it will cost about 15m yen (£100k) a year.

The move is unlikely to be welcomed, however, by 34 employees who will be made 
redundant by the end of March.

The system is based on IBM’s Watson Explorer, which, according to the tech 
firm, possesses “cognitive technology that can think like a human”, enabling it 
to “analyse and interpret all of your data, including unstructured text, 
images, audio and video”.

The technology will be able to read tens of thousands of medical certificates 
and factor in the length of hospital stays, medical histories and any surgical 
procedures before calculating payouts, according to the Mainichi Shimbun.

While the use of AI will drastically reduce the time needed to calculate 
Fukoku Mutual’s payouts – which reportedly totalled 132,000 during the current 
financial year – the sums will not be paid until they have been approved by a 
member of staff, the newspaper said.

Japan’s shrinking, ageing population 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/07/japanese-village-dolls-ageing-population-nagoro>
, coupled with itsprowess in robot technology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/dec/31/erica-the-most-beautiful-and-intelligent-android-ever-leads-japans-robot-revolution>
, makes it a prime testing ground for AI.

According to a 2015 report 
<https://www.engadget.com/2015/12/04/robots-expected-to-run-half-of-japan-by-2035>
 by the Nomura Research Institute, nearly half of all jobs in Japan could be 
performed by robots by 2035.

Dai-Ichi Life Insurance has already introduced a Watson-based system to assess 
payments - although it has not cut staff numbers - andJapan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> Post Insurance is interested in 
introducing a similar setup, the Mainichi said.

AI could soon be playing a role in the country’s politics. Next month, the 
economy, trade and industry ministry will introduce AI on a trial basis to help 
civil servants draft answers for ministers during cabinet meetings and 
parliamentary sessions.

The ministry hopes AI will help reduce the punishingly long hours bureaucrats 
spend preparing written answers for ministers.

The automated city: do we still need humans to run public services?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/sep/20/automated-city-robots-run-public-services-councils>
If the experiment is a success, it could be adopted by other government 
agencies, according the Jiji news agency.

If, for example a question is asked about energy-saving policies, the AI 
system will provide civil servants with the relevant data and a list of 
pertinent debating points based on past answers to similar questions.

The march of Japan’s AI robots hasn’t been entirely glitch-free, however. At 
the end of last year a team of researchers abandoned an attempt to develop a 
robot intelligent enough to pass the entrance exam for the prestigious Tokyo 
University.

“AI is not good at answering the type of questions that require an ability to 
grasp meanings across a broad spectrum,” Noriko Arai, a professor at the 
National Institute of Informatics, told Kyodo news agency.
 