
Bicycle couriers begin their legal fight for employment rights next month, 
with four riders in London takingseparate tribunal cases against Citysprint, 
Addison Lee, Ecourier and Excel 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/business/battling-bike-couriers-head-for-november-tribunal-a3270191.html>
. Supported by the Independent Workers Union of Great Britain (IWGB), the 
couriers claim they are “workers” and not self-employed “independent 
contractors” as their companies classify them. The bike couriers work around 50 
hours a week for a single firm and earn £2-£3 per item delivered. They say they 
cannot deliver parcels for other firms or turn down work and are therefore not 
self-employed. If they win their tribunals, it would make a huge difference, 
says Jason Moyer-Lee, general secretary of the IWGB. “They would be entitled to 
earn the minimum wage, paid holidays, trade union representation and protection 
against less favourable treatment for part-time workers.”

The gig economy is here to stay. So making it fairer must be a priority | Will 
Hutton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/03/gig-economy-zero-hours-contracts-ethics>
Moyer-Lee is the dynamic 30-year-old driving force behind the IWGB, which was 
formed by a group of Hispanic cleaners four years ago. Since then it has made a 
name for itself championing the rights of poorly paid people working in the 
so-called “gig economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/03/gig-economy-zero-hours-contracts-ethics>
”. In addition to the bicycle couriers, the IWGB is also recruitingDeliveroo 
drivers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/aug/19/collective-action-via-social-media-brings-hope-to-gig-economy-workers>
 and will campaign for better pay and rights for the food delivery company’s 
3,000 riders in London. And afterfoster carers voted to join the IWGB 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/20/foster-carers-fight-working-rights-trade-unions>
 last month over concerns about their lack of employment rights, the union is 
looking at the viability of a legal test case to challenge their employment 
status. In all, it now has 1,000 members and 19 elected officials.

Moyer-Lee is a US citizen. His involvement in trade unions stems from his 
student days at Soas University of London. While there, as a fluent Spanish 
speaker, (he also speaks French, Portuguese, Italian and a smattering of Arabic 
and Chichewa) he helped the university’s cleaners – mostly from South America, 
many of whom had come to England on Spanish passports – improve their English. 
He then helped Unison’s 2011 campaign to get theoutsourced cleaners, security 
and maintenance staff at the University of London 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/student/news/victory-cleaning-staff-strike-at-university-of-london-wins-major-concessions-on-pay-and-conditions-8972785.html>
 the London living wage.

Following that campaign’s success, as a student activist Moyer-Lee helped 
organise the3 Cosas campaign 
<http://www.lrb.co.uk/blog/2013/12/03/harry-stopes/not-a-recognised-union/>. 
This successfully argued that there were three areas where disparity between 
university staff and contract workers was greatest and that they should also 
get the same sick pay, holidays and pension rights as direct employees of the 
university. The 3 Cosas campaign developed within the university branch of 
Unison, but in April 2013 many of the workers joined the IWGB.

The bicycle couriers’ tribunal cases are the culmination of 18 months’ efforts 
to improve their working conditions. The outcome will undoubtedly be influenced 
by the test case brought by19 drivers for the taxi-ride app Uber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/19/uber-drivers-court-tribunal-self-employed-uk-employment-law>
, who are also seeking “worker” status. A ruling isexpected imminently  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/12/uber-drivers-await-tribunal-verdict-employment-status-self-employed-taxi-app>
and has ramifications for the whole gig economy.

If we are not careful, tomorrow we will wake up and none of us will have the 
minimum wage, sick pay or paid holidays

Moyer-Lee says: “The so-called gig economy represents a dangerous trend in the 
UK whereby big profit-making companies have been able to get away with 
depriving their workers of the most basic rights. If we are not careful, 
tomorrow we will wake up and none of us will have the minimum wage, sick pay or 
paid holidays. The IWGB has been at the forefront of the struggle for decent 
working conditions for these low-paid workers and we will continue to fight 
until everyone has decent working rights.”

But Moyer-Lee’s efforts to help the low paid nearly came at the expense of his 
right to stay in the UK. After completing his PhD, he applied for a graduate 
entrepreneur visa to enable him to remain in the UK when his student visa 
expired at the end of 2014. Under the scheme, graduates from oustide the EU 
with a credible business proposal are sponsored by their university for an 
application to remain. Soasinitially turned Moyer-Lee down 
<https://www.timeshighereducation.com/news/soas-research-assistant-claims-bias-in-visa-decision/2017390.article>
 and he could have been deported, until the decision was reversed. From a 
workers’ rights perspective, he believes leaving the EU will be “a total 
disaster”. European courts tend to be more generous in their interpretation of 
statutes as they relate to workers’ rights than UK courts, he points out. And 
without the EU blocking it, “there’s nothing to prevent future Tory governments 
from shredding rights”, he adds. Furthermore, UK workers won’t benefit from any 
new protections the EU introduces. And as many of the IWGB’s members have 
Spanish passports, Brexit will “disproportionately” affect its members.

Moyer-Lee is very committed to helping the lowest paid, but is aware this 
makes the IWGB reliant on donors and grants to top up its funding. Members pay 
just £4-£9 a month in subs, nowhere near enough to cover the IWGB’s costs. 
“These are mainly low-paid workers who can’t afford to pay more, yet make a 
disproportionately high demand on our resources,” he says. So the union has 
launched acrowdfunding drive 
<https://www.crowdpac.co.uk/campaigns/216/the-independent-workers-union-of-great-britain>
 to help finance its campaigns.

Moyer-Lee has no immediate plans to return to the US, particularly given the 
“dismal” state of politics there. He grew up in Maine in a family of Democrats 
who have always been involved in politics. “My state is governed by a 
reactionary Tea Party governor, and the presidential choice is between bad on 
the one hand and utterly terrifying and repulsive on the other,” he says. “I 
voted Bernie Sanders in the primary and will be voting [Hillary] Clinton in the 
general.”

He adds: “It is sometimes tempting to go home and try and do something about 
the situation rather than despair on the sidelines.”

Curriculum vitae

Age 30.

Family Married.

Lives south London

Education Greely high school, North Yarmouth, Maine; American University of 
Paris, BA international economics; School of Oriental and African Studies, Msc, 
development economics, PhD economics.

Career 2016: general secretary, Independent Workers’ Union of Great Britain; 
2015-present: director, Grassroots Organiser Ltd; 2012-14: campaign organiser, 
3 Cosas campaign; 2014: branch secretary, then vice-president, IWGB; 2012: 
admissions assistant, Soas; 2010-13: ad hoc research assistant for academic 
Deborah Johnston.

Interests Dancing, politics.
 