
Jay Z and Coldplay are to share the bill when both play their first ever show 
in India. The two acts are to appear in Mumbai on 19 November, and the 
inaugural Indian leg of theGlobal Citizen festival 
<https://www.globalcitizen.org/en/festival/2016/outcomes/>.

Global Citizen, which is intended to encourage social awareness and activism, 
has taken place in New York annually since 2012, withChris Martin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/23/chris-martin-coldplay-glastonbury-opposite-of-walls-and-brexit>
 as creative director. Both acts have previously played the New York event – 
Jay Z in 2014 and Coldplayin 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/27/global-citizens-festival-review-beyonce-ban-ki-moon-and-big-bird-unite-for-all-star-variety-show>
. The festival is free for people who perform various charitable acts.

Chris Martin: ‘Coldplay are saying the opposite of walls and Brexit’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/23/chris-martin-coldplay-glastonbury-opposite-of-walls-and-brexit>
The Mumbai event hopes to raise money for orphaned children and provide 
funding for 25 children’s homes in India, via the crowdfunding siteKetto 
<https://www.ketto.org/>, as well as help fund education programmes in 
association with the non-profit organisationMiracle Foundation 
<http://www.miraclefoundation.org>.

“Our festival combines music with social causes that have an impact and 
Miracle Foundation has had a huge impact on vulnerable children,” saidGlobal 
Citizen India <https://www.globalcitizen.in/en/>’s spokesperson Arnav Sahni. 
“Fuelled by Ketto’s remarkable crowdfunding platform, we hope to raise money 
and awareness so the Miracle Foundation can continue to do their inspirational 
work.”

To earn the 30 points necessary to qualify for the draw to win two free 
tickets, fans have to undertake a variety of mainly online tasks – they can 
reach the target by tweeting their support for a variety of causes.

As well as Coldplay and Jay Z, Demi Lovato 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/04/demi-lovatos-out-and-out-summer-anthem>
 will be appearing at the Mumbai festival, along with a score of leading Indian 
artists and celebrities, including composerAR Rahman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/apr/01/ar-rahman-slumdog-millionaire>, 
film starAmitabh Bachchan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/03/amitabh-bachchan-bollywood-indian-cinema-shamitabh>
 and cricket legendSachin Tendulkar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2014/nov/06/sachin-tendulkar-launches-autobiography-playing-my-way-video>
.

 * Global Citizen India will take place in Mumbai on 19 November 
<https://www.globalcitizen.in/en/indian-festival/> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUowj8Yx7bbM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUowj8Yx7bbM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUowj8Yx7bbM&media=> 