
The president of the European commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/european-commission>, Jean-Claude Juncker, 
spent years in his previous role as Luxembourg’s prime minister secretly 
blocking EU efforts to tackle tax avoidance by multinational corporations, 
leaked documents reveal.

Years’ worth of confidential German diplomatic cables provide a candid account 
of Luxembourg’s obstructive manoeuvres inside one of Brussels’ most secretive 
committees.

The code of conduct group on business taxation 
<http://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/council-eu/preparatory-bodies/code-conduct-group/>
 was set up almost 19 years ago to prevent member states from being played off 
against one another by increasingly powerful multinational businesses, eager to 
shift profits across borders and avoid tax.

Little has been known until now about the workings of the committee, which has 
been meeting since 1998, after member states agreeda code of conduct on tax 
policies 
<http://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/business/company-tax/harmful-tax-competition_en>
 and pledged not to engage in “harmful competition” with one another.

However, the leaked cables reveal how a small handful of countries have used 
their seats on the committee to frustrate concerted EU action and protect their 
own tax regimes.

Efforts by a majority of member states to curb aggressive tax planning and to 
rein in predatory tax policies were regularly delayed, diluted or derailed by 
the actions of a few of the EU’s smallest members, frequently led byLuxembourg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/luxembourg>.

Luxembourg tax files: how tiny state rubber-stamped tax avoidance on an 
industrial scale
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/nov/05/-sp-luxembourg-tax-files-tax-avoidance-industrial-scale>
The leaked papers, shared with the Guardian and the International Consortium 
of Investigative Journalists <https://www.icij.org/> by the German radio group 
NDR <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Norddeutscher_Rundfunk>, are highly 
embarrassing for Juncker, who served as Luxembourg’s prime minister from 1995 
until the end of 2013. During that period he also acted as finance and treasury 
minister, taking a close interest in tax policy.

Despite having a population of just 560,000, Luxembourg was able to resist 
widely supported EU tax reforms, its dissenting voice often backed only by that 
of the Netherlands.

Among proposals popular in the code of conduct committee but opposed by 
Luxembourg were:

• Plans for tax authorities in each member state to subject their dealings 
with multinational businesses to peer review.

• An investigation into cross-border tax avoidance strategies, known as 
“hybrid mismatches”, often used by multinationals to conjure up artificial tax 
savings.

• Improved information sharing between member states on tax deals granted to 
multinationals in private.

A spokesperson for Luxembourg’s finance ministry refused to comment on the 
positions previous governments had taken in private EU discussions. “We have no 
knowledge of the communications you claim to have, and whether they are 
genuine, and therefore cannot comment on them,” he said.

The spokesperson added: “In recent years Luxembourg has been at the forefront 
of the global trend towards greater transparency in tax matters and the fight 
against harmful tax competition.”

The Guardian spoke to another former member of the code of conduct committee, 
who did not want to be named but corroborated claims in the leaked cables that 
Luxembourg was regularly among those looking to frustrate EU efforts to tackle 
tax avoidance.

Jean-Claude Juncker: I will lead EU campaign against tax avoidance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/nov/12/jean-claude-juncker-european-commission-campaign-tax-avoidance-luxembourg>
The source said the committee was no longer fit for purpose. They said it was 
unable to achieve much because it was governed by unanimity. “Each country is 
ready to block any agreement. Moreover, each country stands ready to bargain 
its position on tax against any other topic at stake in the EU,” they said.

Some tax experts contacted by the Guardian confirmed that Luxembourg had begun 
to move away from certain aggressive tax policies under the current prime 
minister, Xavier Bettel.

However, the leaked cables suggest the country has remained resistant to other 
changes. In 2016 it fiercely opposed efforts supported by many countries to 
strengthen and expand the code of conduct committee’s work.

Luxembourg particularly objected to a relaxation of the committee’s own rules 
on decision making, insisting there was no need to abandon the unanimity 
requirement.

France, Germany and Sweden argued unsuccessfully that removing unanimity had 
become essential to the committee’s effectiveness.

Luxembourg also opposed plans to identify member states that were standing in 
the way of reforms more clearly. One leaked cable noted: “It has become 
abundantly clear once again that a majority [of members states] are not 
interested in real reform. In particular, Luxembourg representatives said they 
would fundamentally object to any proposal to publish arguments made by 
Luxembourg in the committee.”

A later cable read: “It is impressive to see how some member states present 
themselves outwardly as proponents of [international tax reforms] and at the 
same time to watch how they actually behave in EU discussions, protected by 
confidentiality.”

The Guardian contacted Juncker’s office for comment. A spokesperson said it 
was not for the European commission to respond to questions about negotiating 
positions Luxembourg had taken, or about the country’s past tax policies.

Damaging revelations

Jean-Claude Juncker’s record as Luxembourg’s prime minister has cast an 
enduring shadow over his presidency of the European commission.

On paper, his marathon 18-year stint at the helm of the EU’s second smallest 
member state might be hailed a triumph. He recast the fading steel-based 
economy into a booming hub for international business, and when he departed in 
2013 Luxembourg had been transformed intoone of the richest countries in the 
world 
<http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2016/02/weodata/weorept.aspx?sy=2015&ey=2015&ssd=1&sort=country&ds=.&br=1&pr1.x=16&pr1.y=7&c=512%2C668%2C914%2C672%2C612%2C946%2C614%2C137%2C311%2C962%2C213%2C674%2C911%2C676%2C193%2C548%2C122%2C556%2C912%2C678%2C313%2C181%2C419%2C867%2C513%2C682%2C316%2C684%2C913%2C273%2C124%2C868%2C339%2C921%2C638%2C948%2C514%2C943%2C218%2C686%2C963%2C688%2C616%2C518%2C223%2C728%2C516%2C558%2C918%2C138%2C748%2C196%2C618%2C278%2C522%2C692%2C622%2C694%2C156%2C142%2C624%2C449%2C626%2C564%2C628%2C565%2C228%2C283%2C924%2C853%2C233%2C288%2C632%2C293%2C636%2C566%2C634%2C964%2C238%2C182%2C662%2C453%2C960%2C968%2C423%2C922%2C935%2C714%2C128%2C862%2C611%2C135%2C321%2C716%2C243%2C456%2C248%2C722%2C469%2C942%2C253%2C718%2C642%2C724%2C643%2C576%2C939%2C936%2C644%2C961%2C819%2C813%2C172%2C199%2C132%2C733%2C646%2C184%2C648%2C524%2C915%2C361%2C134%2C362%2C652%2C364%2C174%2C732%2C328%2C366%2C258%2C734%2C656%2C144%2C654%2C146%2C336%2C463%2C263%2C528%2C268%2C923%2C532%2C738%2C944%2C578%2C176%2C537%2C534%2C742%2C536%2C866%2C429%2C369%2C433%2C744%2C178%2C186%2C436%2C925%2C136%2C869%2C343%2C746%2C158%2C926%2C439%2C466%2C916%2C112%2C664%2C111%2C826%2C298%2C542%2C927%2C967%2C846%2C443%2C299%2C917%2C582%2C544%2C474%2C941%2C754%2C446%2C698%2C666&s=PPPPC&grp=0&a=>
 per capita.

Hundreds of the multinational corporations rushed to channel international 
profits through subsidiaries in the country, among them McDonald’s, Fiat, 
Amazon, Shire Pharmaceuticals and Skype.

The secret to this success was exposed in 2014 when the Luxleaks scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/nov/05/-sp-luxembourg-tax-files-tax-avoidance-industrial-scale>
 revealed the terms hidden within hundreds of private deals, known as “tax 
rulings”, that Luxembourg had handed out to multinational businesses behind 
closed doors.

The rulings effectively rubber-stamped complex tax structures that global 
corporations used to access ultra-low tax rates, often less than 1%, for 
profits shifted to Luxembourg.

Juncker conceded the scandal had damaged his reputation. While not illegal, he 
admitted Luxembourg’s tax system was also “not always in line with fiscal 
fairness” and may have breached “ethical and moral standards”.

Since then, Juncker has made a point of supporting the EU’s competition 
commissioner, Margrethe Vestager, as she pursues high-profile investigations 
into specific tax rulings, including deals Luxembourg granted separately to
McDonald’s <http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-15-6221_en.htm> and Amazon 
<http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-14-1105_en.htm>.

The investigations are examining whether the deals were so generous that they 
amounted to illegal state aid from Juncker’s Luxembourg.

Juncker has also campaigned hard for greater tax cooperation among member 
states <http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-15-5188_en.htm> in the battle 
against international businesses that avoid tax. The latest leaked cables, 
however, raise further questions about whether he is the right person to 
champion such reforms.
 