
The president of the European commission has said Brexit talks will be “very, 
very, very difficult” as he called for a fair deal for both sides.

Speaking to journalists in Strasbourg on Wednesday, Jean-Claude Juncker played 
down suggestions thatTheresa May’s speech was a threat to Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/prime-minister-vows-to-put-final-brexit-deal-before-parliament>
, and emphasised that a deal had to reflect the interests of Britain and the EU.


The former prime minister of Luxembourg said he had spoken to the British 
prime minister on Tuesday evening and told her that the commission was not in a 
hostile mood. “We want a fair deal with Britain, and a fair deal for Britain, 
but a fair deal means a fair deal for theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>,” he said.


But he added it would be “a very, very, very difficult negotiation” because 
Britain would be considered as a foreign country to the rest of the EU.


Related: Diplomats see reasons to be cheerful and fearful in May's Brexit 
speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/eu-diplomats-see-reasons-to-be-cheerful-and-fearful-in-mays-brexit-speech>

Sitting alongside him, Joseph Muscat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/joseph-muscat>, the prime minister of 
Malta – which currently holds the EU’s six-month rotating presidency – said he 
had not seen May’s words as “a declaration of war”.


Earlier on Wednesday, the Maltese leader had welcomed May’s decision to leave 
the single market as a “somewhat positive” sign that the British government 
understands it cannot cherrypick the best bits of the EU.


Muscat told MEPs in Strasbourg that negotiating Brexit would be an “arduous 
task” and, referring to the UK, said no one should underestimate “our 
colleagues on the other side of the table”.


Malta, the EU’s smallest member, took over the EU presidency on 1 January. 
Muscat noted the “historic irony” that his country – under British rule until 
1964 – would preside over EU business when the UK triggered article 50, the 
formal procedure for leaving the bloc.

Muscat, who once worked as an intern for Tony Blair, reiterated his 
determination that any Brexit deal had to be inferior to EU membership. That 
“should not come as a surprise”, he said. “Thinking it can be otherwise would 
indicate a detachment from reality.” Brexit was not a “happy event” for Malta, 
he said, noting Britain’s “great and mostly positive influence” on the island 
nation.

In the same parliamentary session, Juncker pledged to do everything to make 
sure “the negotiations will be according to the rules and yield good results”. 
He said: “To those who think the moment has come to deconstructEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and take it to pieces, they are 
completely wrong.”


The EU leaders devoted little time to Brexit  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/hard-brexit-will-hurt-uk-more-say-eu-diplomats-and-business-leaders>
in set-piece speeches intended to discuss the EU’s big challenges over the next 
six months.Europe’s migration crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/14/scores-dead-after-migrant-ship-capsizes-in-mediterranean>
, which called into question the continent’s open borders, was the dominant 
issue, followed by security and counter-terrorism.

Guy Verhofstadt, the European parliament’s outspoken Brexit representative, 
found a moment to attack Ukip MEPs, as he questioned why the British 
Eurosceptics continued to attend European parliament sessions.


 “Why are you still here?” he said. “I am asking myself. Go to the United 
States. Go to the inauguration of Mr Trump instead of being here.”

He was picking up on the US president-elect’s comments that Britain had been 
“smart” to vote for Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/15/trumps-first-uk-post-election-interview-brexit-a-great-thing>
. Verhofstadt said: “An American president openly saying other countries break 
away from the European Union. I have never seen it, never heard it.”

In November, Nigel Farage, who remains co-leader of the Ukip-dominated bloc in 
the European parliament, wassnapped grinning with Trump in front of the 
billionaire’s golden elevator 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/22/nigel-farage-uk-ambassador-us-donald-trump>
.

Verhofstadt, a well-known federalist, said Trump’s election should be a 
wake-up call for Europe: “Let’s face it, the turning point is already there, an 
American president, Trump, who is openly, in fact, against the European Union 
and saying that other countries will turn away. What turning point do we need?”
 