
The ever-taller story of modern skyscrapers is due to reach a new milestone in 
2018 – or rather, kilometre-stone. Upon completion, theKingdom Tower 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/aug/02/saudi-arabia-tallest-kingdom-tower>
 in Jeddah will rise at least 1,000 metres into the Saudi Arabian sky (its 
final height is still unconfirmed), thus stealing the coveted crown of world’s 
tallest building from Dubai’s 828m-tallBurj Khalifa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2010/jan/10/burj-khalifa-dubai-skyscraper-architecture>
.

The Kingdom Tower aims, in the process, to become the ultimate trophy 
building; a technical tour-de-force courtesy of its revolutionary structural 
engineering, state-of-the-art heat-shunning glass, and lifts that use carbon 
fibre to go higher than ever before. The project’s lead architect,Adrian Smith 
<http://smithgill.com/>, says the new tower will be “a gateway, a marker and a 
symbol for Saudi Arabia”.

To achieve all that, the project must overcome social concerns and economic 
omens that are hard to ignore with a building as ambitious as this. The Kingdom 
Tower’s context is the surrounding $20 billionKingdom City 
<http://www.calthorpe.com/kingdom-city> that will be built subsequently – and 
whose origins can be found in Le Corbusier’s 1922Ville Contemporaine 
<http://www.fondationlecorbusier.fr/corbuweb/morpheus.aspx?sysId=13&IrisObjectId=6426&sysLanguage=fr-fr&item>
, which established the idea of “towers in the park”. Countless failed 
tower-block social housing schemes, including St Louis’ infamousPruitt-Igoe 
complex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/apr/22/pruitt-igoe-high-rise-urban-america-history-cities>
, stemmed from this approach, before the vision transformed in the 1980s into 
new business districts such as London’s Canary Wharf.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F04%2Fjeddahs-kingdom-tower-how-much-higher-can-skyscrapers-go-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-50%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F2%2F1433260617440%2F999d00c7-30a6-45c7-9fe6-dbfa5c87a4b6-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jeddah's%20Kingdom%20Tower%3A%20how%20much%20higher%20can%20skyscrapers%20go%3F%20A%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2050&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F04%2Fjeddahs-kingdom-tower-how-much-higher-can-skyscrapers-go-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-50%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jeddah%27s%20Kingdom%20Tower%3A%20how%20much%20higher%20can%20skyscrapers%20go%3F%20A%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2050&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F04%2Fjeddahs-kingdom-tower-how-much-higher-can-skyscrapers-go-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-50%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F2%2F1433260617440%2F999d00c7-30a6-45c7-9fe6-dbfa5c87a4b6-1360x2040.jpeg>
 The tower will be the centrepiece of the $20bn Kingdom City. © Jeddah Economic 
Co/AS+GG 
This century, the high-rise masterplan has resurfaced in the 
petrodollar-fuelled cities of the Gulf states, giving rise to zoos of bizarre 
towers bordered by freeways in a syndrome the Qatari-based writer and artist
Sophia Al Maria <http://www.thethirdline.com/artists/sophia-al-maria/biography/>
 calls “gulf futurism”.

The Danish urbanist Jan Gehl, an evangelist for human-scaled cities, has 
roundly condemned this approach in books such asCities for People 
<http://islandpress.org/cities-people>. In 2010 he told a Melbourne audience 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KL_RYm8zs28> that modernist planners had “left 
the ground and the people dimension in planning, and started to fly over the 
whole thing, planning from a distance”. One result of that was buildings Gehl 
refers to as “birdshit architecture - the starchitects fly in, fly out, and 
drop some buildings here and there with no context”.

That’s unfair in the case of Smith’s tallest towers – while working for SOM 
<http://www.som.com/>, he designed the Burj Khalifa, whose shape follows from 
theHymenocallis <http://www.infobarrel.com/Media/The_desert_flower_Hymenocallis>
 desert flower, with setbacks evoking spiralling minarets. The Burj is popular 
too, its observation deck attracting almost 2 million visitors a year.

Kingdom City, designed by Adrian Smith and Gordon Gill Architecture 
<http://smithgill.com/> (AS+GG), recycles the Burj’s planning formula down to 
the surrounding moat and towers – only bigger. The buildings encircling the 
Kingdom Tower will rise from 20 storeys (for those nearest) to 60 storeys, so 
everyone in them should get a good view. Smith says they expect 3 million 
visitors a year – some delivered by the planned new metro system, the stations 
of which Norman Foster’s practice istipped to design 
<http://www.archdaily.com/553061/foster-partners-selected-for-12-billion-metro-project-in-jeddah/>
.

Right now, the $1.2 billion Kingdom Tower is an isolated, fortress-like hulk 
of concrete <http://www.skyscrapercity.com/showthread.php?p=123523545>, 
standing about 15 storeys tall in the forbidding desert landscape beside the 
Red Sea, separated by Abhur Bay from the city centre 15 miles to the south.

Jeddah is often described as a relatively liberal counterpoint to Saudi 
Arabia’s conservative capital, Riyadh. Mounib Hammoud, CEO of theJeddah 
Economic Company 
<http://www.kingdom.com.sa/investments/real-estate/jeddah-economic-company>, 
the project’s developers,told arabianBusiness.com 
<http://www.arabianbusiness.com/building-into-unknown-what-is-business-model-behind-jeddah-s-plans-for-world-s-tallest-tower--592798.html#.VWpwdqZv07D>
 that Kingdom City will “position the city of Jeddah on the international scene 
of modern regional cities, alongside the downtown of Beirut and Downtown Dubai”.

Saudis escape their ultra-conservative regime by holidaying in such places, 
and Hammoud wants some of that vacation wealth to stay at home. The complex’s 
open spaces will probably bustle, because everyone will have money and time to 
spend there. But what about those who can’t afford it, such as the migrant 
workers that built Kingdom City in the first place?

Since 2013, according to Human Rights Watch, Saudi Arabia has been conducting 
mass expulsions of its migrant workers 
<http://www.hrw.org/news/2015/05/09/saudi-arabia-mass-expulsions-migrant-workers>
. Across the Gulf states, the construction industry relies on migrant labour, 
and low pay and harsh conditions have beenwell documented 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/21/qatar-failing-migrant-workers-amnesty-international>
. The Kingdom Tower has not been linked with any abuse cases, and hopefully 
lessons have been learned from other projects in the region.

Asked if there would be separate entrances and circulation zones for men and 
women, as in many Saudi public buildings, Smith replies that “the Kingdom Tower 
is a truemixed-use tower 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/feb/12/shard-kingdom-tower-vertical-villages-skyscrapers-bad-cities>
, and it will have four separate entrances based on function, not gender” – 
just like London’s Shard.

Currently the $1.2bn Kingdom Tower is an isolated, 15-storey hulk of concrete 
in the desert beside the Red Sea
 The Kingdom Tower desert construction site in January 2015. Photograph: 
Jeddah Economic Company 
While Jeddah is Saudi Arabia’s second-largest city, in many ways the Kingdom 
Tower belongs to a very differentsecond city 
<http://www.chicagoreader.com/chicago/why-they-call-it-the-second-city/Content?oid=882456>
 – Chicago: home of theworld’s first skyscraper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/apr/02/worlds-first-skyscraper-chicago-home-insurance-building-history>
 in 1884, and the world’s tallest, the Sears (now Willis) Tower, between 1974 
and 1998. Smith started as a young architect in SOM’s Chicago office in 1967, 
going on to design skyscrapers worldwide including the Burj Khalifa. When he 
finally left to co-found AS+GG in 2006, he set up shop in a 1911 Chicago 
skyscraper – from where the Kingdom Tower was designed in 2009.


Chicago is also where the great American architect Frank Lloyd Wright hoped to 
build hismile-high skyscraper, The Illinois 
<http://unbuilt.tumblr.com/post/1042212792/the-mile-high-illinois-proposal-architect>
 – proposed in 1956. Though ultimately unsuccessful, the plan electrified 
Chicago and kept its dreams of height alive. And there seems more than a 
passing resemblance between the 252-storey Kingdom Tower and the 528-storey 
Illinois – both are slender, angular, straight-edged and taper to a sharp point 
– although Smith dismisses Wright’s tower as “more sculpture than 
architecture”. The Kingdom Tower, he says, is “an evolution of the Burj 
Khalifa”, tracing its lineage back to Mies van der Rohe’sunbuilt 1921 Berlin 
skyscraper 
<http://www.bdonline.co.uk/top-10-unbuilt-towers-friedrichstrasse-tower-by-mies-van-der-rohe/5025508.article>
, the first designed with glass curtain walls.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dt90zu387Rzs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dt90zu387Rzs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dt90zu387Rzs&media=>
Like the Burj, the Kingdom Tower has a Y-shaped cross-section with three wings 
separated by 120 degrees, one pointed towards Mecca. “Its specific form comes 
more from the image of a new palm about to spread its fronds,” Smith says. The 
wings emerge from a triangular core containing lifts and services, and the plan 
gives stability against skyscrapers’ traditional enemy: the lateral forces of 
wind.

A Starship Enterprise-like circular helipad, 30m across, protrudes out at 
level 157. This was originally designed to provide fast access to the 
penthouse, but the wind makes it a dangerous place to land, so instead it has 
become an observation deck – the world’s highest at 630m.

Wright dreamt of including 76 five-storey, “atomic-powered” lifts in the 
Illinois. The Kingdom Tower will have 57 of the non-atomic variety, including 
five of the world’s fastest “double-deckers” travelling at up to 10 metres per 
second (there are faster single-deck lifts, but apparently they can induce 
bladder problems). Conventional steel ropes limit a lift’s reach to about 500m, 
but Finnish manufacturer Kone’scarbon fibre-based UltraRope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/aug/01/new-lift-technology-ultrarope-cities>
 extends that, so here the lift shafts are designed up to 660m.

Kone 
<http://www.kone.com/en/press/press/kone-wins-order-for-saudi-arabia-s-kingdom-tower-the-world-s-tallest-building-2014-06-05.aspx>
 also provides “an occupant evacuation operation system for emergency 
situations” – but little more has been said about the security issues 
surrounding this landmark construction. Saudi Arabia faces a threat from 
terrorists with an even more fundamentalist religious ideology than the 
official one, and which has targeted ministers, foreigners and, as recently as 
May,Shias 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/22/saudi-arabia-suicide-bomber-shia-mosque>
. The cost of terrorism is unspecified in the Kingdom Tower’s$1.5 billion 
insurance policy 
<http://www.agcs.allianz.com/PageFiles/5341/PressRelease_AGCS_Tall_Buildings_Press_Release_ASIA.pdf?epslanguage=en-GB>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F04%2Fjeddahs-kingdom-tower-how-much-higher-can-skyscrapers-go-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-50%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F2%2F1433261531534%2Fd642fadd-fe17-4e0b-b79b-1ba651239dd2-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jeddah's%20Kingdom%20Tower%3A%20how%20much%20higher%20can%20skyscrapers%20go%3F%20A%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2050&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F04%2Fjeddahs-kingdom-tower-how-much-higher-can-skyscrapers-go-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-50%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jeddah%27s%20Kingdom%20Tower%3A%20how%20much%20higher%20can%20skyscrapers%20go%3F%20A%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2050&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F04%2Fjeddahs-kingdom-tower-how-much-higher-can-skyscrapers-go-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-50%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F2%2F1433261531534%2Fd642fadd-fe17-4e0b-b79b-1ba651239dd2-2060x1236.jpeg>
 New York’s Empire State Building took two decades to fill with tenants after 
its opening in 1931. Photograph: Alamy 
In 1999, the economist Andrew Lawrence noted how record-breaking skyscrapers 
often coincide with economic downturns – a phenomenon known as “the skyscraper 
curse”,graphically charted by the Economist 
<http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21647289-there-such-thing-skyscraper-curse-towers-babel>
. New York’sSinger Building 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/18/science/once-tallest-standing-then-the-tallest-to-come-down.html?_r=0>
 was built during the Panic of 1907 onwards; a century later came the Burj 
Khalifa and the last global financial crisis.


While the Kingdom Tower promises to house 121 serviced apartments 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2015/05/10/saudi-realestate-kingdom-idUSL5N0Y10HL20150510>
, 360 residential apartments, a 200-room Four Seasons hotel and much office 
space to boot, its top 85 floors will go unoccupied as they are too narrow for 
apartments or offices (some will house plant machinery and communications 
equipment). In truth, the developers are probably not that bothered if their 
tower takes time to fill up – this is often the case when exceptionally tall, 
speculative towers are marketed: the Empire State Building took two decades to 
fill with tenants.

The big question, though, given the economic and technical challenges faced by 
the Kingdom Tower, is how much higher our cities’ skyscrapers will go in the 
future. Several taller project proposals are waiting in the wings, in oil-rich 
countries from Kuwait to Azerbaijan – but oil revenues are not what they were.

“The materials are already available and the engineering is advanced enough to 
design and construct a building of a mile high and taller,” says Smith. “The 
question is how practical is it to go higher? It’s really a question of 
economics.”

The world's first skyscraper: a history of cities in 50 buildings, day 9
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/apr/02/worlds-first-skyscraper-chicago-home-insurance-building-history>
“I would guess that mankind will eventually produce a 1,500m tall tower,” says 
James von Klemperer, president of the global high-rise architectural practiseKPF
 <http://www.kpf.co.uk/>. “It won’t make practical sense, and it will involve 
some gigantic form of subsidy, but someone will make it happen.”

But while cities across the world now understand that densification can make 
them more efficient and socially productive places, there is also growing 
recognition that higher densities can be achieved without resorting to 
super-tall skyscrapers. Gehl says he detects “a change of paradigm” with 
planners to human-scale cities, citing his home city of Copenhagen as a model.


Is it possible, then, that Jeddah’s Kingdom Tower may turn out to be mankind’s 
last, tallest, trophy tower? And that one day, after humanity’s population has 
peaked and cities have contracted again, it could stand empty but heroic, like 
Shelley’s description of Ozymandias’s ruin: “Round the decay / Of that colossal 
wreck, boundless and bare / The lone and level sands stretch far away.”

 * Herbert Wright <http://www.herbertwright.co.uk> is a London-based 
journalist and author:@Herbhastosay <https://twitter.com/herbhastosay>

 * Catch up with the full History of Cities in 50 Buildings series here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/series/history-cities-50-buildings>
 