
Jennifer Scott, the director of the Holburne Museum <http://www.holburne.org/> 
in Bath, has been appointed the first female director of theDulwich Picture 
Gallery <http://www.dulwichpicturegallery.org.uk/> since it opened in 1817.

Beyond the Moomins: Tove Jansson's art gets major UK exhibition
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/oct/21/beyond-the-moomins-tove-jansson-art-gets-first-uk-exhibition>
Scott, who is leaving Bath after only two years in the post, said: “I am 
immensely proud to have been part of the history of this exceptional museum, 
particularly in leading our 100 Years Here celebrations throughout 2015. I feel 
I am leaving the Holburne in a position of great strength for the future. I now 
look forward with excitement to my new role at Dulwich Picture Gallery.”

Richard Fleck, chair of the Bath trustees, said they were very sad to lose 
her, but her appointment acknowledged the success and standing of the Holburne. 
It is the second time in the last few years that the museum has seen its 
director poached by a bigger museum: Scott’s predecessor, Alexander Sturgis, 
left to take over as director of the Ashmolean in Oxford.

The Dulwich venue, said to be the oldest purpose-built public gallery in the 
world, was designed by Sir John Soane to house a collection with an 
extraordinary history – and uniquely includes a mausoleum for its founders, the 
collectors and art dealers Noël Desenfans and Sir Francis Bourgeois.

In 1790 they announced that they had been commissioned to assemble a royal 
collection for the king of Poland. Unfortunately by the time it was complete, 
with masterpieces by Rembrandt, Murillo, Poussin and Rubens, Poland no longer 
existed and the king had been forced to abdicate. The collection was eventually 
left to Dulwich College, and the new building housing it opened in 1817, 21 
years before the National Gallery in Trafalgar Square.

Scott, who was previously a curator at the Royal Collection, will take over in 
April from Ian Dejardin, who is moving after 12 years to become chief executive 
of theMcMichael Canadian Art Collection <http://www.mcmichael.com/> in Ontario. 
 