
Google grants are relied upon to pay for adverts that counter search results 
that appear to deny that theHolocaust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/holocaust> happened, a Jewish heritage 
museum said on Wednesday.


The marketing director of the Breman Museum <http://www.thebreman.org/> in 
Atlanta, Georgia said it was “nauseating” that Google algorithms directed users 
to a neo-Nazi site as the top result for the phrase “did the Holocaust happen?”


He explained it cost the museum up to $2 (£1.60) a click to direct searchers 
to its own site via Google’s AdWords programme. The museum later made clear 
that the Breman is not a paid advertiser of Google, but in fact it receives a 
grant for free advertising from Google via its ad grants programme, which 
enables charitable and educational organisations like museums to apply to 
Google for  <https://www.google.co.uk/intl/en/grants/>free advertising to drive 
awareness and promote educational messages, up to a limit of $10,000 a month. 
The programme has been running for several years.

The director of the Breman Museum, Aaron Berger, said that according to the 
Southern Poverty Law Center, Georgia was one of the worst states in the US for 
active hate groups and using AdWords was an “incredibly important part of our 
approach in getting our site up the search results”.

A Google <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> spokesman said last 
week: “We never want to make money from searches for Holocaust denial and we 
don’t allow regular advertising on those terms.”

It comes after an intense three weeks of pressure on the company regarding its 
search results. It has consistently refused to take responsibility for 
directing Google users to hate content including a neo-Nazi site, Stormfront, 
for a search for “did the Holocaust happen”.

Leading academics said it was probably holding firm because to “edit” content 
on one subject would lead to calls to take action over other controversial 
topics. Frank Pasquale, professor of law at the University of Maryland, said it 
would be a tacit admission that it was a publishing company and not a “neutral” 
platform, as it maintains.

On Tuesday, however, Google told a search industry website it had decided to 
make a algorithmic change to combat the problem.

In a story, headlined Official: Google makes change, results are no longer in 
denial over ‘Did the Holocaust happen?’ a Google spokesman said the company had 
recently made “improvements to our algorithm that will help surface more high 
quality, credible content on the web”.

But Barry Schwartz, the founder of Search Engine Roundtable, a long-standing 
industry site, said: “There is no evidence of any change to the algorithm. We 
track these things very carefully and there’s nothing to suggest they have done 
anything.”
When asked why he thought Google had made the announcement at this time, he 
said: “It just seems like it must be a PR thing. That’s the only explanation I 
can see.”

Google confirmed that an algorithm change was under way. They said it was an 
ongoing process and would take some time to apply throughout the system.

The said: “When non-authoritative information ranks too high in our search 
results, we develop scalable, automated approaches to fix the problems, rather 
than manually removing these one-by-one.

“We constantly make improvements to our algorithm that help surface more high 
quality, credible content on the web, and will continue developing those 
efforts over time.”

Schendowich of the Berman Museum said Google was critical in getting the 
museum’s message about the Holocaust out: “Search is everything. It’s so 
powerful. People don’t respond to print. If you don’t show in search you are 
invisible.”

Its website does not show up on the first page of Google’s “natural” – ie 
not-paid for – search results for “Did the Holocaust happen”. Schendowich said 
the museum used very aggressive SEO techniques but it was hard because “Google 
is a big mystery. It’s a black box. Nobody knows how it works. Only Google.”

The museum’s director, Aron Berger, confirmed that the museum used the grant 
it received from Google to help it come higher up the search results than sites 
such as Stormfront via AdWords by targeting certain search terms.

Schendowich said: “We can’t afford to advertise that much because this is a 
very expensive search. It’s expensive because it’s popular. That’s how it 
works. You pay more to advertise Nike shoes than some other brand. This is the 
same. It’s a very hot topic and what bothers me is that a denier site is right 
at the top. It’s nauseating. Absolutely nauseating. I talk to so many people 
who survived it … it did happen. We have all the evidence. That’s what we’re 
doing. That’s why it’s so important.”

A Google spokesman said: “We have no interest in profiting from sites or 
organisations that promote hate, which is why we ban them from using our ads 
systems. Under some circumstances we allow advertising against offensive terms, 
typically by organisations whose mission involves educating people about the 
issues. Those organisations can and do apply for Ad Grants – free advertising 
to drive awareness and promote educational messages. We give hundreds of 
millions of dollars worth of free advertising to non-profit organisations 
through our Ad Grants programme.”

 * This article was amended on 24 December 2016. An earlier version was the 
subject of a complaint from Google. It stated that the museum claimed the 
search engine profited directly from displaying search results that denied the 
Holocaust through paid-for advertising.







































How to bump Holocaust deniers off Google’s top spot? Pay Google
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/17/holocaust-deniers-google-search-top-spot>


















 