
My father, Jim Low, who has died aged 88, was a rocket scientist. Not that he 
ever used the term himself. In his passport, he described himself always as a 
mathematician/physicist. But, as one of the early members of theEuropean 
Launcher Development Organisation 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/European_Launcher_Development_Organisation>
(Eldo) – the predecessor of theEuropean Space Agency <http://www.esa.int/ESA> – 
that was indeed what he was, at least for much of his career.

It was a career path that was all the more surprising, given his relatively 
humble origins in Cupar, Fife, as the son of James, a postman (who had fought 
in both the Boer and first world wars), and Mary (nee Collins). After attending 
Bell Baxter high school in the town, Jim, the youngest of four children, was 
the first in his family to go to university, thanks to a grant that was 
available after doing his national service – and, of course, to his 
intelligence and hard work.

He took a BSc in maths and physics at St Andrews University and graduated in 
1951, opening the way for a career in the nascent British aerospace industry. 
He worked first at De Havilland Aircraft Company in Hatfield, Hertfordshire, 
where he met Muriel Anthony (nee Chamberlain), a computer programming clerk. 
The couple married in 1957.

Jim next moved to AV Roe in Cheshire, then back south to Hawker Siddeley 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hawker_Siddeley> in London and, in 1964, to 
Eldo, which was formed out of an uneasy partnership of European governments 
aiming to create an alternative to the US and Soviet Union space programmes.

This was a huge and courageous leap in many ways, not least because it 
involved relocating our family to Paris, where Eldo was based, at a time when 
few Britons travelled abroad for holidays, let alone to live. We moved with our 
brand new passports, a reel-to-reel tape recorder and a pile of 
teach-yourself-French tapes – and little else.

Starting on a one-year contract, Jim’s assignment with Eldo lasted nine years, 
during which time he worked on the Europa rockets, the basis for the later
Ariane projects 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0920379699000368>. Returning 
to the UK in 1973, the family settled in Maidenhead, Berkshire, and Jim 
continued as a consultant forGeneral Technology Systems 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geoffrey_Pardoe>, working on aerospace projects 
before diversifying into pioneering alternative energy technology. He retired 
in 1990.

Always modest about his achievements, Jim focused far more on the interest 
that the projects brought rather than any kind of driving ambition, and his 
many years away from Cupar did little to alter his Fife accent.

Muriel died in 2009. Jim is survived by me.
 