
Neil Young – Rockin’ in the Free World

I could have picked an endless number of Neil Young songs. When the Freedom 
album was released it featured two versions of Rockin’ in the Free World, one 
acoustic and one with a full band. One recorded live, the other in the studio. 
One with full-on bombast, the other radiating from the heart of a troubadour, 
the guts of the song laid bare. I loved both while noticing that great songs 
can be performed in various formats. Different but still excellent. I had no 
preference, no need to compare. I accepted both just as they were. In fact, I 
was delighted to have different versions of a song that I instantly loved – 
because of its directness, because of its utter simplicity. The words, the 
melody, the soul of Neil Young was evident regardless. That is what I care 
about in songs. As with life, as with anything, it is what goes on at the core 
that really counts. Withthe election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-elections-2016> taking place today in 
America, a country we love, Rockin’ in the Free World is as poignant now as 
when it was released in 1989.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGfgC2Ph9VNE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGfgC2Ph9VNE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGfgC2Ph9VNE&media=>
Bruce Springsteen – Youngstown

I could have picked so many of Bruce’s epics, but I particularly relate to 
“grainy” songs that depict the hardship of many American blue-collar workers. 
This song also strikes a chord with many in Scotland who remember the 
devastation that occurred through the closure ofRavenscraig steelworks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/g2/story/0,3604,438063,00.html> in 1992. It 
signalled the end of large-scale steelmaking in Scotland, leading automatically 
to the direct loss of 770 jobs, and another 10,000 jobs linked to the plant.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOn1u4QhbkVA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOn1u4QhbkVA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOn1u4QhbkVA&media=>
The Dubliners – Rocky Road to Dublin

Growing up in the south side of Glasgow in the 60s meant I was exposed to 
almost as much Irish culture as my natural Scots. I came to identify with both 
and do so to this day. Frankly, I love both. Most of the songs I learned as a 
kid belonged to the Irish. Those were the ones that I heard most and was most 
familiar with. Along with many American country artists, the Dubliners featured 
heavily in my dad’s record collection. And, although by the time I had become a 
teenager I had turned my back on all that “Irish stuff”, many of the songs were 
the beginning of my appreciation of how melody and words could create powerful 
and beautiful emotions. I love Rocky Road to Dublin particularly. I know the 
words to every verse – which may seem strange when I can barely recall most of 
my own lyrics. The song is ingrained deep in me. It also means something more 
because my great grandfather was himself a Dubliner. That stuff matters more to 
you when you get older.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dp3nXku80y2Y&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dp3nXku80y2Y>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dp3nXku80y2Y&media=>
Lou Reed – Dirty Blvd

Simple Minds took their name from a Bowie tune. However, it was Lou Reed who 
made it possible for us and so many others to dare think that we could start 
our own band. I clearly recallCharlie Burchill 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charlie_Burchill> and me desperately trying to 
scrape money together for tickets to see him when he performed in Glasgow in 
74. I also recall over a decade later both Charlie and me in heaven as we stood 
stageside in Madrid, watching Lou Reed perform as our opening guest during our 
Street Fighting Years tour. Having Lou sing on our track This Is Your Land will 
always be a career highlight, and the story of how the rest of the night panned 
out after that recording session in Paris is still one that merits disbelief. 
One day I will get round to telling it.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4qRD9AeigZc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4qRD9AeigZc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4qRD9AeigZc&media=>
Chrissie Hynde – I Go to Sleep

I knew of Chrissie before she made records. She was one of the original mouthy 
journalists at NME in the mid 70s. Word got out that she (of all people) was 
putting a band together. I clearly recall the reaction from many to that news 
was: “This should be a laugh.” After all, not many women were in successful 
rock’n’roll bands in those days. Well, few were laughing after they’d heard the 
Pretenders’ first album. Most were mesmerised. I was one of them – and remain 
so.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQG8NsK_qOYs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQG8NsK_qOYs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQG8NsK_qOYs&media=>
 * Simple Minds Acoustic is released on Caroline International on 11 November.  