
The Champions Cup meeting between Wasps and Connacht 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/connacht> on Sunday promises a feast of 
tries. Both sides believe in flair play and Wasps will be bolstered by the 
presence of Kurtley Beale in the midfield, the Australian international’s first 
appearance for the club after recovering from a leg injury he sustained seven 
months ago.

A few years ago this fixture would have been in the Challenge Cup and 
attracted little attention.Wasps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-wasps> were struggling financially 
while Connacht, despite a few seasons in the European Cup by virtue of their 
league position, were regarded as the runt of the four Irish provinces and 
received less from central funds.

Now Connacht arrive in Coventry as Pro 12 champions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/28/connacht-leinster-pro12-final> 
and leaders of Pool 2 after victoriesover Toulouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/15/european-champions-cup-rugby-roundup-connacht-toulouse>
 andZebre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/23/connacht-zebre-stacey-ili-european-rugby-champions-cup>
. Wasps are also unbeaten, following the ritual slaughter of the Italians by
earning a draw in France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/23/toulouse-wasps-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
 inwhich they showed qualities they are not renowned for, doggedness and 
resilience, having learned from two semi-final defeats last season in the
Champions Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/23/saracens-wasps-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
 andthe Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/21/premiership-play-off-exeter-chiefs-wasps-match-report-rugby-union>
.

Beale, a versatile back who has appeared at full-back, centre, outside-half 
and on the wing for the Wallabies, starts at 12 against Connacht, the position 
occupied for most of the season by Jimmy Gopperth, whose late conversion of 
Nathan Hughes’s try earned Wasps the draw in Toulouse. He moves to outside-half 
because of Danny Cipriani’s absence with a calf strain. With Kyle Eastmond on 
the bench and the South Africa full-back Willie le Roux joining in the new year 
the club’s director of rugby, Dai Young, will find his selection meetings 
taking longer.

“Kurtley and Willie will add a lot to the team,” said Gopperth. “I am looking 
forward to seeing what they can do for the group and their presence will spur 
everyone on: we all want a place in the starting line‑up.

“We have made a good start to the season but the best is still to come and one 
of the highlights of our campaign for me was the victory at Worcester in the 
last round of the Premiership. We were without 18 first-team regulars. The 
result showed just how strong our squad is.”

Jimmy Gopperth’s late conversion earns Wasps a deserved draw in Toulouse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/23/toulouse-wasps-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
Gopperth was the club’s regular outside-half last season, but the recruitment 
of Cipriani left him uncertain about his role. “I thought I would be fighting 
for the 10 jersey with Danny and perhaps rotating but we had a few injuries and 
I found myself playing at 12,” he said. “I was just happy to be playing but I 
have come to really enjoy it. There is a lot less pressure than at outside-half 
and more freedom: you do not have the stress of trying to run the team.

“Having another decision-maker outside him makes Danny’s job easier and as a 
New Zealander I grew used as a 10 to having someone outside me of a similar 
style. It means you can play a lot smarter and our communication is good so 
that we exploit the opportunities we see.

“I am just happy to be able to run around a bit more and look for space.”

Gopperth’s haul of 148 points in 11 matches this season includes five tries. 
His value to the team extends beyond his goal-kicking and he has helped provide 
a measure of control that Wasps needed after falling away at the end of last 
season, one they started with the ambition of finishing in the top six and 
qualifying for Europe only to find themselves on a trophy trail.

“We took a lot out of the two semi-finals we lost last season to Saracens and 
Exeter,” said Gopperth. “We surprised a number of people by doing so well and 
perhaps we surprised ourselves a bit because it was a season we were meant to 
be rebuilding. Making the last four in the Champions Cup and Europe came a bit 
sooner than expected and it was the first time some players had experienced 
that level of rugby.

“It is about learning from those experiences and pushing on and we showed in 
Toulouse in the last round that we are stronger. It was a game we could have 
lost and we had to dig in for the draw. You could see the belief in players at 
the end in what we are trying to achieve: knowing where you want to go is 
different from getting there. We are still improving and we have a strong 
squad.”

It is almost a year since Wasps last lost at home at a ground where children 
under 10 are admitted free. They have won the 15 games at the Ricoh since, all 
bar two by a double-figure margin with an average score of 41-15; Connacht’s 
only away win this season came at Zebre.

“It is a great stadium with a good playing surface and gives us a real chance 
of putting in a performance,” said Gopperth. “Every team wants to make their 
home a fortress.”
 