
Just when you thought it was all over – the eight studio albums and the Coda 
compilation remastered, reissued and expanded – here come Led Zeppelin again. 
This time it’s withThe Complete BBC Sessions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/19/led-zeppelin-complete-bbc-sessions-compilation>
, expanding on the 1997 edition with nine further tracks. It’s sometimes 
forgotten, as guitarist Jimmy Page points out, that back in the late 1960s and 
early 1970s, they were a John Peel band: a couple of the sessions on the set 
were recorded for Peel’s Top Gear show, and he was the MC for a 1971 In Concert 
performance. “I’ve heard feedback about him liking us, and I didn’t know if he 
did at the time,” Page says now, “and when we played at the Bath festival for 
the first time [in 1969] we played on the John Peel stage, so there were 
connections all over the shop.”

You and John Paul Jones must have already done scores of BBC sets as session 
musicians, before Zeppelin ever went to record for the corporation …

Jimmy Page: I don’t think we actually did them together, but individually we 
surely must have done. I know that I played in the Aeolian Hall [where many 
live performance for the BBC were recorded] and certainly [the BBC studios in] 
Maida Vale, for solo artists – Tom Jones was one of them. I knew what equipment 
to take in, and John Paul Jones and I both had scaled down equipment which was 
useful. The recording was against the clock. The key thing to say is, some 
people say it took a while to break in England.

Led Zeppelin: The Complete BBC Sessions review – missing tracks restored
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/18/led-zeppelin-complete-bbc-sessions-review-lost-tracks>
Radio 1 at this point offered a toehold to underground music, through shows 
like Top Gear, didn’t it?

We didn’t do singles, so how were we going to get on the radio? We went in 
there and just really wanted to capture the energy. Or hope they would. Which 
they did. There was Top Gear. But one of the shows we recorded for was Chris 
Grant’s Tasty Pop Sundae, so that gives some idea of what it was all about and 
the climate then. We also did a World Service show, which again was purely 
about getting on the airwaves.

Given your perfectionism in the studio when you were making albums, was it 
trying to have to record a session in an afternoon?

It wasn’t even a whole afternoon! We’d do those things within an hour and a 
bit, the tracks and then the overdubs. You do the track, then Robert does the 
vocal, then you do the overlays – you’re pinpointing the bits that you want to 
be heard as the textures. So you had enough control to be able to do the 
overdub. But you basically had one pass at putting on the extra stuff. It never 
stressed me because the whole thing about those songs was that the early songs 
we were already playing, and some of the later ones were freshly recorded, so 
we were used to playing them. In those days you could include things in your 
set that you’d just recorded, even though the album might not be coming out for 
many, many months later. You couldn’t do that now because it would be straight 
on YouTube.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjrqMdja4eYs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjrqMdja4eYs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjrqMdja4eYs&media=>
Did you ever meet BBC engineers and producers with incomprehension when they 
insisted you couldn’t send the dials into the red?


We might have done, but I think I’ve forgotten. The one thing I do remember is 
that there were some good engineers there, and you’d go back to do another 
session and ask, “Where’s the engineer we had last time? “Oh, he’s been 
promoted – he’s a producer now.” “On a music programme?” “No, no, no – he’s on 
the World Service.” I always found that a bit odd, but that was the BBC’s whole 
tradition.

Was TV not a route open to you, or did you just prefer to do radio?

We did a pilot of an arts programme, which I’ve forgotten the name of – we did 
Communication Breakdown. There was an antiques dealer called John Jesse on it. 
But I don’t remember any more than that. TV wasn’t really catering for our sort 
of bands apart from Top of the Pops, and we weren’t gonna fit on that. Apart 
fromWhole Lotta Love – that was on every week 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JNQDzW-yPtE>!

Did the BBC offer you sessions, or was your manager Peter Grant out hustling 
them?


I think Peter Grant, because of his connections with Mickie Most and his bands 
– Herman’s Hermits and that sort of thing. He knew all the programmers.

1971 by David Hepworth review – the very best year in rock music?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/12/1971-never-a-dull-moment-rocks-golden-year-david-hepworth-review>
You were fortunate to be working at a time when the confluence of technology, 
cultural change and the spread of the underground made it possible to achieve 
such stature, is that right?


I think you’re absolutely right. It was a very, very healthy time for bands 
and for music in general. In those days the record companies would put a lot 
into A&R and finding new bands. It was definitely of its time,Led Zeppelin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/ledzeppelin>, and I’m happy that it’s of its 
time.

For a few years now, you’ve been promising a new band. Any sign of that coming 
together?


Things got in the way of my overall gameplan, which would have been to be 
playing now. But that’s got to be next year, because I don’t have the time. I’m 
not going to rush it. It’s pretty obvious it’s going to be next year. I want to 
do it and do it properly.

Last time we spoke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/24/jimmy-page-interview-robert-plant-led-zeppelin-remasters>
, my final question was to ask you to tell me something about Led Zeppelin that 
had never appeared in an article. You said you wouldn’t, but you would someday. 
Go on then.


That’s not fair! Maybe next time.

 * The Complete BBC Sessions is out now on Rhino.  