
Jo Miller, the chief executive of Doncaster council, insists that better times 
lie ahead for the town that was emblematic of Britain’s industrial age and whose
residents, disillusioned with the broken promises of modernity, economic 
transition and European integration 
<http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/02757206.2016.1219354>, voted 
overwhelmingly to leave the EU 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-south-yorkshire-36617899>.

“We want to shape the skills system to ensure good growth, where nobody 
is left behind,” she says.

When Miller, 48, took over at the council four years ago, it was seen as an 
unredeemable failure. In 2009, it was considered one of theworst-performing 
councils 
<http://www.localgovernmentexecutive.co.uk/news/doncaster-council-appoints-director-childrens-services>
 in the country and primary schoolshad been failing for years. 
<http://www.yorkshirepost.co.uk/news/education/minister-to-demand-answers-from-four-councils-in-the-region-over-primary-school-test-scores-1-7431412>
 The running of the council was in effect taken over by a government department 
and its children’s services – which had been through along period of problems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/jul/16/michael-gove-council-child-protection>
 revealed in a series of damning reports – were handed over to a children’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/oct/01/doncaster-child-protection-company-launched>
 trust. It was the first local authority to be stripped of its children’s 
services in this way.

Local government leadership: what Birmingham can learn from Doncaster
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2014/jul/28/local-government-leadership-birmingham-doncaster>
So why did Miller want the job? “I could just see the sense of possibility,” 
she says, fuelled by a belief that places and people can either prosper or be 
held back by good public services and civic leadership, and a fury about health 
inequality that leads toDoncaster <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/doncaster> 
residents dying on average 10 years earlier than people living in the more 
affluent south-east of England. Miller grew up on an estate in Liverpool, the 
daughter of a dinner lady, and believes in unlocking Doncaster’s potential by 
creating more and better jobs, growth in its local economy and better education 
for all. She claims that since getting the job, which she was determined would 
be hers, the turnaround has been palpable.

The statistics bear her out. This year’s Ofsted inspections show  
<http://www.doncasterfreepress.co.uk/news/education/revealed-doncaster-s-best-rated-schools-1-7965476>
that almost two-thirds of Doncaster schools are now good or better. In 2014, 
the council was released eight months early 
<http://www.publicsectorexecutive.com/Public-Sector-News/doncaster-council-out-of-special-measures>
 from the special measures in which it had been placed by the government. And 
since 2010, there has been a41% reduction 
<http://www.doncasterfreepress.co.uk/news/business/unemployment-figures-down-in-doncaster-1-7690349>
 in the number of jobseekers.

As for children’s services, Miller says she and the council did not think a 
trust was the right answer, but says they have worked to make sure the trust 
would get the best possible results – a view echoed by Ofsted in September, 
which praised Doncaster’s “significant progress” for children’s services. But 
Miller thinks the improvement was in spite of the trust structure, not because 
of it. “Yes, services to children have improved  
<http://www.doncasterchildrenstrust.co.uk/news/ofsted-praise-significant-progress-for-childrens-services-in-doncaster->
since the trust came along,” she says. “But so have all the services in the 
council. Children’s services haven’t improved any quicker – and the trust costs 
a lot more money.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fjo-miller-doncaster-council-chief-executives-solace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe48bd64a8a98172952d8bf1c89ea110f8006ab56%2F0_89_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jo%20Miller%3A%20%E2%80%98Councils%20can%E2%80%99t%20take%20more%20shocks%20to%20an%20already%20shocked%20system%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fjo-miller-doncaster-council-chief-executives-solace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jo%20Miller%3A%20%E2%80%98Councils%20can%E2%80%99t%20take%20more%20shocks%20to%20an%20already%20shocked%20system%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fjo-miller-doncaster-council-chief-executives-solace%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe48bd64a8a98172952d8bf1c89ea110f8006ab56%2F0_89_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Nigel Farage, then Ukip leader, speaking at the party’s conference in 
Doncaster in 2015. The town voted overwhelmingly for Brexit in June. 
Photograph: Anna Gowthorpe/PA 
Local government in England stands in a precarious place. Budgets have been cut
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/sep/01/local-government-association-cannot-cope-further-cuts>
 by up to 40% in some areas over the past six years. “We can’t take more shocks 
to what is already a shocked system,” says Miller. But the way councils are 
funded is shifting away from direct central government grants. By 2020, 
councils will retainall their local business rates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/oct/05/osborne-to-allow-local-councils-to-keep-26bn-raised-from-business-rates>
 to fund services. This leaves places such as Doncaster heavily reliant on 
attracting new businesses – something Miller says is already happening.

One of the two new campuses for the National College for High Speed Rail 
<http://www.doncaster.gov.uk/services/business-investment/national-college-for-high-speed-rail>
, which will train thousands of engineers in rail technology, is based in 
Doncaster. Those engineering jobs, Miller points out, could pay £45,000 – well 
above the national average salary, in an area where people have some of the
lowest average wages 
<http://www.doncasterfreepress.co.uk/news/business/wages-in-doncaster-are-among-lowest-in-uk-1-6824497>
 in the country.

A solicitor by training, who has worked in both the private sector and local 
government, Miller She rsays she regards running the council as similar 
to managing a business.

“When I came to Doncaster, I was told people are far more dependent here than 
anywhere else,” she says. “They are not. They’re as able and as bright and as 
sharp as anywhere else. But the state had made them more dependent. So we have 
more people in residential care than the city of Sheffield, where 200,000 more 
people live. We can’t afford that.” Miller says what’s needed is a “whole shift 
about how you get people to live at home more, how you provide a system for 
them that works”.

You’d think the 'northern powerhouse' only consisted of men, if you judged it 
by the voices that are heard

She acknowledges there is no more money to come from central government. So 
Doncaster has to find ways of spending more efficiently and wresting greater 
power from central government, through devolution deals, she says.

Miller believes many areas could negotiate more effectively to get greater 
power from central government. As the newly elected president of Solace, the 
association that represents local authority chief executives, she says one of 
the roles for the organisation is to bring together council bosses to think 
beyond their own geography. “Greater Manchester stole a march and then we’ve 
gone for it place by place, rather than have a really good conversation about 
what good devolution would really look like, or what we might have learned from 
Scotland and Wales,” she says. “It’s one of the things local government should 
kick itself in the shins about.”

She admits that local politicians in some areas, such as the north-east, have 
struggled to agree on what they want from devolution. For Miller, moving more 
power from Westminster to local areas can only be a good thing. “I think at a 
local level you need to be able to pull the levers that make a difference.”

But she is concerned that the lever-pullers are predominantly white men, and 
is determined to champion women and greater diversity in local government 
during her year as Solace president. “You’d think the ‘northern powerhouse’ 
only consisted of men, if you judged it by the voices that are heard,” she told 
the association’s annual conference last month. She would like what she calls 
“proper” devolution: real scope locally to work on developing skills and 
apprenticeships to support the government’s industrial strategy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fjo-miller-doncaster-council-chief-executives-solace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faaaf07d28ee8c97cb05f50759efd7e54542b87df%2F0_200_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jo%20Miller%3A%20%E2%80%98Councils%20can%E2%80%99t%20take%20more%20shocks%20to%20an%20already%20shocked%20system%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fjo-miller-doncaster-council-chief-executives-solace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jo%20Miller%3A%20%E2%80%98Councils%20can%E2%80%99t%20take%20more%20shocks%20to%20an%20already%20shocked%20system%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fjo-miller-doncaster-council-chief-executives-solace%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faaaf07d28ee8c97cb05f50759efd7e54542b87df%2F0_200_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Funding is shifting away from direct central government grants and Doncaster 
will have to rely heavily on attracting new businesses. Photograph: Gabriel 
Szabo/Guzelian 
In next week’s autumn statement, Miller says local authorities particularly 
want to see the huge gaps in adult social care funding plugged by government 
and extra money so councils can meet their obligations to assist unaccompanied
migrant children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/01/calais-camp-children-refugees>
. “We are already seeing councils at a very fragile stage. This is further 
straining highly stretched services. Something has got to give.”

Curriculum vitae


Age 48.

Family Married with two sons, aged 14 and 7.

Lives Shipley, West Yorkshire.

Education St Hilda’s girls’ school, Liverpool; Southampton University (law 
degree); Chester Law College

Career 2012-present: chief executive, Doncaster metropolitan borough council; 
2009-12: deputy chief executive, Local Government Association; 2007-09: deputy 
chief executive, Bradford council; 2004-07: director, corporate & customer 
services, Knowsley council; 2000-04: solicitor and secretary, Wirral council; 
1998-2000: deputy borough solicitor, Wirral council; 1997-98: partner, 
Devonshire solicitors; 1994-97: principal solicitor, Liverpool city council; 
1992-94: assistant solicitor, Nottingham city council; 1990-92, trainee 
solicitor, Nottingham city council.

Public life President of Solace, lead for skills for Sheffield city region.

Interests Family, travel, Liverpool FC.
 