
The chief architect of a major review of Australia’s welfare system has urged 
the government to intervene in regional communities to create jobs, warning 
that the lack of opportunities is fuelling support for fringe political groups.

It has almost been two years since Patrick McClure released his sweeping review
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/feb/24/disability-payment-to-be-means-tested-in-mcclure-welfare-shake-up>
 of the social security system, which called for a complete overhaul of the 
payment system and a new approach to reducing long-term dole dependence.

Trump-style political disaffection taking hold in Australia, review says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/20/trump-style-political-disaffection-taking-hold-in-australia-review-says>
McClure told Guardian Australia that the government had since moved on some of 
his recommendations, including improving family and youth payments, and 
investing in the Department of Human Services’ IT system.

But McClure said the government still needed to “do quite a bit of work” to 
stimulate job opportunities in failing regional economies, where welfare was 
often people’s only option.

He warned failing to do so would cause disaffection with government, which he 
said was now “expressing itself in more extreme [political] groups” in 
Australia, the US, and Britain.

“It does really need intervention, it’s not enough to say let the market play 
out,” McClure said. “In a lot of those regional areas, corporates may have 
foreclosed, manufacturing plants may have closed down.

“So how do we intervene to provide alternative jobs and alternative training? 
Because otherwise people vote for increasingly extremist groups.”

He said such disaffection had driven support for figures such as Pauline 
Hanson and Donald Trump.

McClure’s review identified a series of ways to build community capacity in 
regional Australia, including government interventions to encourage 
micro-business, social enterprise and cooperatives. “I think those are the 
interventions that are required in times like this,” he said. “I don’t think we 
can rely on the market.”

McClure said it was unfair to brand mature-aged welfare recipients as “dole 
bludgers” if there were no jobs available for them. He said the “cheap slogan” 
was appropriate in some circumstances, including for “young people who have 
made a lifestyle choice”.

“But when it’s mature-aged people that actually want a job, and have families 
to support, it’s a bit unfair to say that if there’s no job opportunities for 
them to go to,” McClure said.

A key recommendation of McClure’s review was for the government to adopt an 
“Australian investment approach” to welfare,modelled on the New Zealand system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/03/dont-copy-our-welfare-cuts-new-zealand-experts-warn-australia>
.

That approach identifies groups who are most likely to depend on income 
support for long periods but have the potential to work. Efforts are then 
focused on supporting those groups to employment.

Fears Centrelink online glitch may send welfare recipients to debt collectors
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/19/fears-centrelink-online-glitch-may-send-welfare-recipients-to-debt-collectors>
As part of that approach, McClure’s review called for jobs plans to give 
opportunities to Australia’s most disadvantaged groups, initially people with a 
disability or mental health issue. That was acted upon in May, when the 
government announced $96m tohelp at-risk groups move away from welfare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/20/coalition-to-reveal-plan-to-tackle-welfare-dependence-across-generations>
.

McClure’s report also called for a simplification of the welfare system, which 
provided 20 different income support payment types and 55 supplementary 
payments.


He urged the government to reduce the number of payments to five; a supported 
living pension, the aged pension, a means-tested payment for carers, a tiered 
working-age payment, and a child and youth payment.

McClure said he believed that the social services minister, Christian Porter, 
was committed to simplifying the welfare system. But he said the government 
would need to show courage to push the reforms through an intransigent Senate.
 