
Vice-President Joe Biden has discussed his decision not to run for the White 
House in 2016, which he announcedat Rose Garden press conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/21/joe-biden-not-running-president-2016-election>
 this week.

Joe Biden's optimistic speech hints at campaign that might have been
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/21/joe-biden-presidential-run-speech>
Biden toyed with entering the race for the Democratic nomination for some 
time, with the process widely reported to be affected heavily – both ways – by
the death of his son Beau in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/06/beau-biden-funeral-joe-biden-obama-clinton>
.

His Rose Garden speech, delivered with his wife, Jill, and Barack Obama by his 
side, contained a forceful defence of the Obama White House record andseemed to 
many observers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/21/joe-biden-presidential-run-speech>
 to have been adapted from an announcement that he would run on that record, as 
he advised the three remaining Democratic candidates to do.

In an excerpt of an interview 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/videos/preview-vice-president-biden/> scheduled to be 
broadcast on CBS’s 60 Minutes on Sunday night, Biden, 72, appeared with his 
wife, casually dressed and warmly lit while sitting on a couch. He discussed 
the moment he made his final decision.

He said: “I came home and Hunter, our son, was upstairs with mom, with Jill. 
And I walked in and I said ‘You know, I just don’t think there’s time. I’ve 
decided I just don’t think there’s time to run the kind of campaign we have to 
run to be able to win.

“And I remember Jill just got up off the couch, gave me a big hug and said: ‘I 
think you’re right.’”

Asked if she was disappointed or relieved, Jill Biden said: “I think I was 
disappointed. I mean, I thought Joe would be a great president, and you know, 
in the 40 years we’ve been together, I’ve seen the strength of his character 
and his optimism, his hope.”

Smiling and interjecting, Joe Biden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/joebiden> said: “I’m glad we’re doing this 
interview. I like to hear Jill say all that stuff.”

Jill Biden concluded: “I believed he would’ve been the best president.”

Hillary Clinton's triumphant October sees political observers' doubts fade
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/24/hillary-clinton-howard-dean-democratic-frontrunner-campaign>
Biden has run two presidential campaigns 
<http://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2015/aug/9/joe-bidens-two-failed-presidential-bids-could-haun/?page=all>
: in 1988, when he dropped out of the race after being accused of plagiarising 
a speech by the British Labour leader Neil Kinnock, and in 2008, when he was 
well beaten in the primary by Obama and Hillary Clinton.

Clinton is seen to be the 2016 candidate likely to benefit most from Biden’s 
absence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/24/hillary-clinton-howard-dean-democratic-frontrunner-campaign>
. She leads the Vermont senator Bernie Sanders in national polls, with former 
Maryland governor Martin O’Malley in a distant third. Clinton’s polling numbers 
are stronger without Biden, another establishment figure, in the contest.

This week, former Virginia senator and Reagan navy secretary Jim Webb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/20/jim-webb-drops-bid-democratic-president-nomination>
 andformer Rhode Island governor Lincoln Chafee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/23/democrat-lincoln-chafee-drops-out-2016-presidential-race>
 dropped out of the Democratic race.
 