
Joe Marler will face a misconduct hearing on Tuesday, 5 April over his “Gypsy 
boy” slur against the Wales prop Samson Lee.

World Rugby has confirmed an independent judicial committee will rule on the 
issue after both the Rugby Football Union andSix Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sixnations> cleared the England prop.

The Harlequins prop escaped with a reprimand after insulting the Scarlets 
forward in England’s 25-21 win over Wales earlier this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/12/england-wales-six-nations-match-report>
 but now faces a retrospective ban.

Marler avoided a potential four-week suspension after Six Nations chiefs 
judged his remorse,apology at half-time during the Wales match 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/16/engalnd-joe-marler-cleared-gypsy-boy>
 and subsequent admonishing by England as sufficient punishment.

World Rugby’s move to launch independent action outlines a level of 
dissatisfaction with that move, leaving the Six Nations disciplinary process 
under almost as much scrutiny as Marler himself.

In setting the date for Marler’s hearing, World Rugby confirmed a three-man 
panel.

“World Rugby can confirm that the Joe Marler misconduct hearing is scheduled 
to take place on 5 April in London,” read the governing body’s statement.

“The case will be heard by an independent judicial committee, assembled by the 
independent judicial chairman in accordance with World Rugby regulation 18. The 
committee will comprise Terry Willis (chair, Australia), Jean-Noel Couraud 
(France) and Alan Hudson (Canada).”

The RFU chief executive, Ian Ritchie, attempted only last week to move past 
the Marler storm, insisting the Six Nations’ decision to clear the 25-year-old 
should be“the end of the matter” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/22/joe-marler-gypsy-boy-england-wales-rfu-ian-ritchie-six-nations>
.

The Harlequins man came off the bench in the 31-21 victory over France in 
Paris that secured England’s first grand slam since 2003 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/19/england-eddie-jones-fantastic-grand-slam-winners>
 and returned to club action on Saturday.

Harlequins’ director of rugby, Conor O’Shea, has offered a staunch defence of 
Marler,insisting his player is in no way racist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/23/harlequins-joe-marler-racist-conor-oshea>
 and claiming that Lee hurled abuse at Marler in their heated exchange during 
the Wales match.
 