
The Rugby Players’ Association has said the prolonged disciplinary process 
hanging over the England prop Joe Marler “defies belief”. In a strongly worded 
statement on Tuesday, Damian Hopley, the players’ union chief executive, gave a 
robust defence of Marler and said he was the victim of an “excruciating media 
witch hunt”.

Marler faces a misconduct hearing on 5 April  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/28/rugby-union-joe-marler-gypsy-boy-england-wales-misconduct-hearing>
after calling the Wales front row Samson Lee “Gypsy boy” duringEngland’s 25-21 
victory at Twickenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/12/england-wales-six-nations-match-report>
 on 12 March.

World Rugby ordered that the case be heard by an independent judicial 
committee because of its misgivings over the original investigation conducted 
by theSix Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sixnations>, which failed 
to punish Marler despite his admission of guilt.

Marler, 25, was reprimanded by England but received no sanction, while the 
Rugby Football Union chief executive, Ian Ritchie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/22/joe-marler-gypsy-boy-england-wales-rfu-ian-ritchie-six-nations>
, declared that the inquiry’s verdict should be the “end of the matter”.

Hopley claimed World Rugby’s intervention meant Marler, who apologised to Lee 
at half-time during the Six Nations match 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/13/england-joe-marler-apologises-gypsy-boy-samson-lee-wales>
, is to be tried twice for the same offence.

“Now that the World Rugby hearing date has finally been set – over three weeks 
since the matter was concluded by the Six Nations – it is important to place on 
the record how we have watched the events around this ongoing disciplinary 
process unfold in a state of disbelief,” Hopley said.

“As people throughout the game know, Joe is no racist. He made a comment when 
provoked and is now being hung out to dry in this excruciating media witch-hunt 
whilst World Rugby have intervened against the RFU and the Six Nations.

“To put Joe in this position after he apologised to the opposition player, 
admitted his error of judgment and also received a severe rebuke from the RFU 
and the tournament smacks of double jeopardy.

“Everyone recognises there is no place in the game for these provocations but 
let’s be absolutely clear, Joe is not racially motivated and this matter should 
have been closed when it was originally dealt with three weeks ago.

“We will be watching the ensuing process extremely carefully but the thought 
of World Rugby calling for yet another hearing and therefore prolonging this 
episode defies belief. The apology was accepted, Joe held his hand up and it is 
now time to draw a line and move on.”
 