
Johanna Konta <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/johanna-konta> is as 
surprised as anyone familiar with her formerly fragile psyche to learn she is 
now the best player under pressure in women’s tennis – although opponents who 
have witnessed her rise through the rankings into the top 10 will need no 
reminding of her resilience.

Related: Johanna Konta grinds out Australian Open win in valuable first-round 
outing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/17/johanna-konta-grinds-out-australian-open-win-in-valuable-first-round-outing>

According to a survey released here this week, the world No9 is tougher in the 
clutch points than evenlast year’s Australian Open finalists, Angelique Kerber 
and Serena Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/30/serena-williams-angelque-kerber-australian-open-final-tennis>
, both of whom are through to the second round with her.

Konta needed all her determination several times during a deceptively quick 
7-5, 6-2 win over the world No70 Kirsten Flipkens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/17/johanna-konta-grinds-out-australian-open-win-in-valuable-first-round-outing>
 that propelled the 25-year-old into a match against the excellent young 
Japanese prospect Naomi Osaka on Thursday.

“Really?” she laughed when told that the Tennis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> Australia Game Insight Group, a 
collection of sport science experts, had trawled a year of data and concluded 
Konta was the coolest player under stress among all entrants at this first 
major of the season.

Konta comes first with 65.8% of clutch serves made and 46.3% of returns, ahead 
of Williams, Garbiñe Muguruza, Dominika Cibulkova, Kerber, Ekaterina Makarova, 
Agnieszka Radwanska, Jelena Jankovic, Carla Suárez Navarro and Eugenie Bouchard.

Konta said: “Sorry, I don’t know why that’s funny but it makes me laugh! It’s 
a nice compliment, though, a nice stat to hear.” She added, between giggles: 
“Does it surprise me? I’m neither here nor there about it. I think every single 
girl you face is good at handling pressure. That’s part of why they’re 
successful on a regular basis from season to season and over a lot of years. 
They are incredibly good in tough situations. If you look at the likes of 
Agnieszka Radwanska and Svetlana Kuznetsova, they’ve been around a long time 
and been successful for a long time. That speaks volumes for them.

“But I guess being top of this list suggests what I’m trying to do is working. 
I’m constantly trying to be strong, to be calm when things get tough. The 
biggest part of that is keeping things in perspective, not being afraid of 
playing long matches, not putting too much pressure on yourself. It can’t be 
all or nothing, right here right now.”

That showed in her steady performance to grind down Flipkens over an hour and 
36 minutes, as she acknowledged. “I know this sounds like a broken record for 
me but it’s about little battles. So each point accumulates and, if you do that 
well enough, you’ll get there. Take this match. She made it incredibly tough 
and has a real ability to frustrate an opponent. She’s been around a long time, 
so she has a bucketload of experience – and she used that.”

Konta may find 19-year-old Osaka, who is ranked 48 in the world and beat 
Thailand’s Luksika Kumkhum 6-7 (2-7), 6-4, 7-5 in the first round, a greener 
but more expansive opponent.

The British No1 recognises the danger because, as she has pointed out in the 
past, for a long time she was the hunter rather than the hunted. “When any 
player is playing someone who’s top 10, there’s a freedom that comes with that, 
so I’m now having to be ready for opponents who bring a new level, who come 
with inspired tennis. That’s a privilege I’m getting used to and hopefully I’ll 
have it for a long time to come.”

Osaka, who hits hard and accurately from a 5ft 11in vantage point, remembers 
losing to Konta in their only match – in two sets in qualifying at the 2015 US 
Open. “She had a real good serve and a really good return,” the teenager said. 
“I think it’s awesome how she rose so high and quickly. She’s a really good 
player. I look forward to playing her.”

Not that one of the Tour’s most individual and precocious talents is overawed. 
“Shejust won a tournament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/13/johanna-konta-agnieszka-radwanska-sydney>
, so of course [she is] a threat. But I don’t know. I’m just going to try to 
see her as a player, and I’m a player, and we’re just going to try our best.”

Konta once was a bundle of doubts – which makes her transformation all the 
more admirable. The former British No1 Sam Smith remarked during the win over 
Flipkens that Konta’s many years of struggle have made a formidable opponent. 
Konta, almost reluctantly, agreed. “I think that’s the case in everyone’s 
career. It’s the trials and tribulations that really test a person, and coming 
through those difficulties is what shapes a person’s character. You don’t 
really know who you are until you’ve come through some difficulties on your 
journey. Every setback, as well as every positive, is something I take lessons 
from and absorb into every match I play.”

There have been many more ups than downs since she made the semi-finals here 
last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/28/johanna-kontas-fairytale-australian-open-run-ended-by-angelique-kerber>
, ranked 47 in the world. Her progress won her the WTA’s most improved player 
of the year award and she has since grown in confidence, with a more 
aggressive, straightforward game. Against Flipkens, she hit 23 clean winners 
and won 20 points in 31 visits to the net.

Underpinning Konta’s growth has been a steadfast commitment to her core values 
such as family. Her sister, who lives in Sydney, where they were both born, has 
an eight-week-old baby and will not be making the trip to Melbourne to watch 
her play. Konta understands and supports that.

“I think it’s about the people around you – I’m very fortunate with my family 
and my team, and that it’s the fact that it’s all about the daily work we put 
in.

“Like I said to you here last year, I didn’t cure cancer. I’m just lucky 
enough to play a sport I love. I’m very blessed and fortunate, and that’s a 
pretty incredible career to have. As long as my focus remains one of just 
getting better all the time, there’s not much to get carried away with.”

Heather Watson says an encouraging British charge in the first round of the 
2017Australian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>, the 
best start since 1987, has had a mutually galvanising effect on one of the 
tournament’s smaller but still dangerous battalions that might yet reap further 
rewards.

The 24-year-old world No81 on Thursday seeks to get out of the second round 
against Jenny Brady, who took only 72 minutes to beat the experienced Swede 
Johanna Larsson 6-3, 6-2 in trying heat on Tuesday.

Watson, meanwhile, had a more demanding struggle beating Australia’s perennial 
underachiever on home soil, Sam Stosur, 6-3, 3-6, 6-0 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/17/heather-watson-dumps-samantha-stosur-out-of-australian-open>
 in two and a quarter hours in a packed Margaret Court Arena that offered only 
end-of-court shade from the soaring mercury.

It followed Kyle Edmund’s 6-2, 7-5, 6-3 win over the Colombian world No91 
Santiago Giraldo.

Watson said of the Monday successes of Andy Murray and Dan Evans: “It really 
motivates me when I see everyone winning on day one and then I followed Jo 
[Konta’s] match on that court today. I think it’s great and I use it to push 
myself. I try to keep up with them all now.”

Naomi Broady could not match the success of her compatriots and despite a 
gutsy performance was beaten 6-3, 4-6, 5-7 by the 22nd seed Daria Gavrilova of 
Australia.

Also on Watson’s side of the draw, is Serena Williams, who advanced with 
ominous ease bybeating Belinda Bencic 6-4, 6-3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2017/jan/16/serena-williams-belinda-bencic-australian-open-first-round-live>
, but admitted: “I made a few errors on some key points but, for the most part, 
I still was going for everything and I was able to close it out.”

Related: Heather Watson dumps Samantha Stosur out of Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/17/heather-watson-dumps-samantha-stosur-out-of-australian-open>

The world No2, seeking a 23rd slam that would take her past the Open-era 
record of Steffi Graf, wore a T-shirt emblazoned with the word Equality and 
said later: “With today being Martin Luther King Day, it’s important to spread 
the message of equality, which is something he talked about a lot.”

Edmund, who looked good beating Giraldo, said he had no recurrence of the 
cramping problems that have hindered him in the heat here in the past. “It 
definitely wasn’t like I reached my limit after three sets,” he said. “If I 
needed to play another set I could have.”

In the second round, he plays Pablo Carreño Busta, the Spaniard seeded 30, who 
took nearly two and a half hours to beat the Canadian lucky loser, Peter 
Polansky, who retired in the fifth set.
 