
John Legend has said he is “disappointed” with Kanye West for his meeting with 
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, which he has 
described as a “publicity stunt”.

West met with the president-elect at Trump Tower in New York and said that he 
did so in order to discuss “multicultural issues”.

Singer-songwriter Legend, who has collaborated with West in the past and who 
has connections with West’s GOOD Music record label, expressed his opinions 
about the encounter to French media outlet Clique.

Legend said: “I don’t think it’s impossible to talk to him about issues, but I 
won’t be used as a publicity stunt. I think Kanye was a publicity stunt.

John Legend: Darkness and Light review – musical weirdness and lyrical 
bleakness
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/01/john-legend-darkness-and-light-review>
“I’m pretty disappointed with Kanye that he says he would have voted for 
Trump. I think Trump has been corrosive, his message has been corrosive to the 
country.”

He said: “I think the things he has promised to do have been very concerning 
for a lot of people, and for Kanye to support that message is very 
disappointing.”

He added: “Whatever’s in his mind, I disagree with him.” 

West and Trump spoke about “issues including bullying, supporting teachers, 
modernising curriculums, and violence in Chicago”, the rapper revealed in a 
tweet.

In what was his first Twitter post for almost two months, West wrote: “I feel 
it is important to have a direct line of communication with our future 
president if we truly want change.”
KANYE WEST (@kanyewest) 
pic.twitter.com/tNMBk0sZJw <https://t.co/tNMBk0sZJw>
 <https://twitter.com/kanyewest/status/809071452708360192> December 14, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/kanyewest/status/809071452708360192> 
West previously announced his own plan to run for president in 2020, but 
tweeted “2024” after the meeting with Trump.

He also tweeted a photo of a copy of Time magazine’s person of the year 
edition, with Trump on the cover, autographed by the president elect with the 
inscription: “To Kanye, you are a great friend. Thanks.”

The 39-year-old posed for photos in the lobby of Trump Tower with the 
president-elect after the meeting, and when asked why he was not speaking 
replied “I just want to take a picture right now”.

Trump said the two were “just friends” and that they discussed “life”, 
describing the musician as a “good man”.

Last month, the star, who is married to Kim Kardashian West, said he did not 
vote in the US elections, but if he had done so, he would have backed Mr Trump.
 