
Somehow I always associate John Peel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/johnpeel> with the word “nice”. A long as I 
can remember he has been calling everything nice. Hamsters are nice. Malayan 
seven-string guitars are nice. The Pig is nice. So is walking in the park. 
Nice. Really nice.

VD isn’t nice, but then he didn’t say it was. “I had clap once and it wasn’t 
nice,” he told us. All over247 metres 
<http://www.bbceng.info/Technical%20Reviews/r1-bournmouth-and-poole.htm> on the 
radio, he said it.

It would be very easy for us to play safe and play the tracks from the LPs 
that we know will leap into the charts
John Peel 
Mary Whitehouse didn’t think that was nice either, because she tried to get 
him banned, didn’t she?

On the other hand, most of us admired his honesty. Just as, though we may have 
thought that hamsters smelled and that walking around parks was sissy, we knew 
he meant that, too. It was all bound up in jumbly fashion with believing in 
Captain Beefheart and Beethoven, Buffalo Springfield and Roger McGough. The 
clap own-up fits somewhere in there, maybe in among the total conviction that 
Liverpool football team is the greatest in the world andUstad Vilayat Khan 
<http://www.medieval.org/music/world/vk.html> is a wow.


Essentially, he is a paradox only in our own minds, a gentle, straightforward 
man whose gentle straightforwardness we have difficulty in believing because, 
with him, they seem such absolute qualities. It becomes a compulsion to dig for 
the base metal. The tripwires and the snares are forever being laid, but he 
manages to blunder through them with only a few scratches.

Yet the irony of it all is that we who grew up with The Perfumed Garden and 
Night Ride and Top Gear, and who believe him to be one of the very few good 
things that have come out of the underground, have really turned him into a 
museum piece, and nobody is interested enough to blow the dust off. Once, he 
was almost one of the Magic Band, the Captain’s lieutenant; but no one believes 
in magic anymore.

How John Peel created our musical world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/25/how-john-peel-created-our-musical-world>
He is the twin victim of the current pop depression and the idiom’s appetite 
for new faces and charisma. Maybe, if the Corporation let him talk more about 
guinea pigs and ouds and JRR Tolkien and social diseases again, he would cease 
to be the institution that we all take for granted.

Honesty has never been in large supply in the pop business, after all.

We are sitting in the narrator’s room at the BBC’s Paris Studios in Lower 
Regent Street, London. A small, functional-looking room with hard leather seats 
and a wooden table placed squarely under a large clock. On either side of the 
clock are green and red lights, which flash on and off at intervals for no 
apparent reason that John Peel can imagine.

Peel is dressed in an olive sweater and a pair of scruffy jeans, which have a 
badge stuck in the flies. I am at a loss to know what the badge stands for, 
because I don’t care to look too closely in the direction.

“I can’t think why you want to interview me,” he says. “I would’ve thought 
everybody was bored to death by now with the thoughts of John Peel. Anyway,” – 
the touch of self-deprecation – “I’m sure nobody listens to Top Gear or the 
Sunday shows now.”

So what shall we talk about? Top of the Pops, he suggests.

 “I’ve only done Top of the Pops once, and then I forgot Amen Corner’s name 
and was never asked back. God, when anybody ever remembers that I always get so 
embarrassed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F30%2Fjohn-peel-1971-interview-melody-maker-michael-watts-rocks-backpages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F30%2F1443621718056%2Ff852997d-2ce9-478b-a329-30beff2ba7ba-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=John%20Peel%3A%20'If%20something%20has%20me%20confused%2C%20I%20want%20to%20play%20it%20on%20the%20radio'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F30%2Fjohn-peel-1971-interview-melody-maker-michael-watts-rocks-backpages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=John%20Peel%3A%20%27If%20something%20has%20me%20confused%2C%20I%20want%20to%20play%20it%20on%20the%20radio%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F30%2Fjohn-peel-1971-interview-melody-maker-michael-watts-rocks-backpages%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F30%2F1443621718056%2Ff852997d-2ce9-478b-a329-30beff2ba7ba-2060x1236.jpeg>
 John Peel at Reading festival, c1971. Photograph: Keystone/Getty 
“Panic-stricken, that’s what I was. The thing is, I quite enjoy television, 
although if I was given a choice between doing a weekly programme on television 
and doing what I’m doing now, I’d choose the radio. I’ve got to go on at the 
end of April on one of Mike Raven’s programmes about The Ten Commandments and 
discuss “thou shalt not kill”. It’s this thing, you know, about DJs being 
regarded as major social figures so that we’re asked our opinions on 
everything. I suppose you’ve got to have somebody to talk about it, but it 
seems a bit funny to have DJs.”

Ah yes, DJing. Some people were saying that his programmes reflected the 
public’s disillusioned attitude towards music on the BBC.

He jumps right in without a pause. “I think part of the problem,” he says, “is 
that something I was always campaigning for has happened, and it’s had the 
inevitable result. There was a time when Top Gear was the only programme 
catering for this end of the music spectrum, and now there are quite a few – 
Sounds of the 70s, and Pete Drummond’s programme, and now I’m having a 
competition with myself a bit with the Sunday concerts. And so it’s no longer 
unique.

“I find that I’m now in the same position with the programme as I was in 1967, 
which is basically that of saying, well, there’s a lot of popular stuff, but at 
the same time as you’re listening to that, why don’t you listen to this, which 
has its own merit. The kind of people we have on Top Gear now are not the sort 
we’ve chosen because they’re obscure, but they’re people who we think are very 
good and who aren’t getting the exposure they merit.”

Sometimes, I say, I don’t feel he is selective or critical enough.

John Peel was my second father
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/jun/14/john-peel-was-my-second-father-mary-anne-hobbs>
“Well,” he laughs, “that’s hard. The thing is, it would be very easy for us to 
play safe and put on groups that we knew people were going to listen to, and 
play the tracks from the LPs that we know will leap into the charts. It’d be a 
much more popular programme and have a much wider audience, and would win the 
polls and everything, because I think this year we’re going to experience a 
slight fall from grace when it comes to the Melody Maker polls.”

That bothers him? “It does. The obvious thing, of course is to say no. But it 
does a little bit, because it’s nice. It’s stupid to pretend. I get quite 
chuffed about it, honestly.”

The basic idea behind his programmes, he says, is to find a group with some 
merit that is not widely known or heard. The problem is that what sounds good 
in a club does not necessarily come across on the radio.

“But once we’re committed to broadcasting it, we’re committed. You tend to get 
carried away by atmospheres in the studio which don’t come across on the radio. 
The classic example of that wereMott the Hoople 
<http://peel.wikia.com/wiki/Mott_the_Hoople>, who came down and did very much 
the same thing they’d do in a club, which was ‘Clap your hands, come on 
everybody,’ which is nice in a club and went all right in the studio, but when 
it went out on the radio it sounded silly, really. It’s trying to put out a 
three-dimensional thing over a two-dimensional transmitter. You’re just bound 
to lose part of it.

“So we do have things that don’t work. But if you’ve got Deep Purple and Black 
Sabbath and Ten Years After and Emerson, Lake & Palmer, then the programme 
would be enormously popular. But those bands have lost the spark somewhere down 
the line, and are basically going through a routine.

“It’s really like Bob and Alf Pearson 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/obituaries/alf-pearson-singer-who-moved-successfully-from-music-hall-and-variety-to-radio-and-television-8120614.html>
. They don’t need to be doing Top Gear or The Sunday Show, whereas other people 
do and you have to take that into consideration.”

Wouldn’t he say, though, that another part of the problem was that pop music 
was going through a low period, probably because there are few “stars” around 
anymore?

When I first heard T Rex had made No 1, I was driving up the M1 and I stopped 
and had a little cry
John Peel 
“Oh definitely, yeah. That’s right. Because it was always stars round about my 
age and it’s very difficult for 15-year-old kids to relate to people who are 
twice as old as them. The whole pop scene is obviously a cyclical thing, where 
you get these great spurts of action, then it dies down again, then, whooomph, 
off it goes. I think it must be fairly close – the next phase that’s going to 
suddenly sweep the world by storm. It must be just around the corner.

“But at the moment we’re going through a very sterile period. People are 
basically more hung up on images than they are on music. They’d much rather go 
and see somebody famous than hear somebody good. You see, you get a situation 
where a Beatles or a Stones or an Elvis Presley are both good and glamorous, 
but there isn’t anybody who’s both at the moment, or both on that scale.

“Part of the reason Dandelion [Peel’s record label] hasn’t sold enormously 
well is because the records which do sell are records which sound sufficiently 
like something else so as not to tax people’s imaginations too much. In other 
words, a Black Sabbath will sell because it sounds like something else. You get 
a process where each band that is successful is a watered-down version of 
something else.

“Your Hendrixes and your Creams – and I think Led Zeppelin, too, in the sense 
that they are originators – spawn whole hordes of lesser groups and imitators, 
and sometimes, as a result of imitation, the imitators can be more successful 
than them.”

I am glad he mentioned Dandelion. Dandelion Records, I say, has always struck 
me as being high on worthiness and integrity, but low on artistic quality. For 
the first time in the interview he looks upset and, yes, slightly angry.

Reaction, of course, hadn’t been gratifying but as far as the actual recording 
and music went he is very pleased. Look at Island! They had started off from 
scratch — and look at them now!

“They made mistakes along the way and so have we, and we began with people no 
one had heard of, unlike companies like Vertigo or Harvest, who started off 
with known quantities such as Pink Floyd. We have this little plot in the dark 
corner of the garden and along come the critics and … over the wall. I’m not 
saying the records are great and should leap to No 1, but they all have an 
identity. There are no Dandelion records you can play and say they are someone 
else.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F30%2Fjohn-peel-1971-interview-melody-maker-michael-watts-rocks-backpages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F693a3dd237d7a1d31e5c8cb502d1850a6b56bb3b%2F47_188_4517_2712%2F4517.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=John%20Peel%3A%20'If%20something%20has%20me%20confused%2C%20I%20want%20to%20play%20it%20on%20the%20radio'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F30%2Fjohn-peel-1971-interview-melody-maker-michael-watts-rocks-backpages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=John%20Peel%3A%20%27If%20something%20has%20me%20confused%2C%20I%20want%20to%20play%20it%20on%20the%20radio%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F30%2Fjohn-peel-1971-interview-melody-maker-michael-watts-rocks-backpages%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F693a3dd237d7a1d31e5c8cb502d1850a6b56bb3b%2F47_188_4517_2712%2F4517.jpg>
 Peel favourite Bridget St John in 1973: ‘I think her new album is a new Sgt 
Pepper.’ Photograph: Brian Cooke/Redferns 
“Of course I think we have artistic quality! It’s just that some of the 
records may not be artistically developed. We’re just trying to get the thing 
going. Some of the records I think have been knocked out, like the Gene 
Vincent, which happened, incidentally, to be the bestseller. I’ll agree with 
that. But the new album by Bridget St John – I think it’s a new Sgt Pepper. 
When I first heard it I thought it was a masterpiece.

“If Warner Brothers will only stay with me, I think we can do something. They 
do seem interested, but sometimes a bit perplexed. The difference between 
making it and not is that if we had a hit it would provide us with capital to 
go on for a long time, and I think with Medicine Head and Bridget St John, 
interestingly.

“Look, T Rex was a classic example. When I started digging them, people said, 
come on, what’s this? Larry The Lamb! I thought then that Marc was a hit writer 
and would have a No 1, and now I’m right: You know, when I first heard they’d 
made it, I was driving up the M1 and I stopped and had a little cry.

“Dandelion, you see, is a very personal thing. I’m not a commercially 
orientated person, and all we can get people to do is listen to the records.”

Over-commercialisation: that’s one of his pet hates. The other is the 
intellectualisation of the music. It occurred in jazz, didn’t it, he says, and 
we all know what happened to that.

People like Tony Palmer and Geoffrey Cannon, he remarks, have never influenced 
him to go out and experience anything. He goes further: they are very 
destructive.

“Because the whole strength of pop music – and it is pop music, whatever name 
you want to give it, progressive or rock or whatever – the one distinguishing 
feature of successful Progressive music with a capital P, is that under no 
circumstances should it progress an inch, because if it does, people don’t want 
to know. As long as it isn’t progressive, then they’ll buy it. If it is, ie 
something like Kevin Ayers, they won’t touch it with a bargepole, and I think 
that’s sad.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-3WAQW2a8Q0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-3WAQW2a8Q0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-3WAQW2a8Q0&media=>
 Listen to Bridget St John’s 1971 Dandelion album Songs for the Gentle Man here 
“Jazz was essentially a people’s music, as rock is, and it was taken up by the 
intellectuals and built up to the point where they said, well, you can’t 
appreciate this because you haven’t got a college degree, have you? And the 
fact is, you’ve got people reviewing rock records in the Observer, and stuff 
like that. Nowadays your Hampstead liberal is listening to rock records instead 
of Dave Brubeck.

“I’m sure that a lot of people who now buy Captain Beefheart records don’t 
like them, but they’re a fashionable thing to have. OrWild Man Fischer 
<http://peel.wikia.com/wiki/File:Wild_Man_Fischer_-_The_Wild_Man_Fischer_Story>
. One of the reasons we played Wild Man Fischer was because I didn’t know if it 
was good or bad; I didn’t even really know if I liked it or not, and if 
something has got me that confused then I want to play it on the radio, because 
it’s good to have something that messes your mind about. And I think the thing 
with Beefheart is that people don’t know if it’s good or bad, but it’s 
fashionable.”

As a DJ, he tries to avoid absolute statements. His own evaluation of music, 
therefore, is not connected in any way with technical skills, because he admits 
he really knows nothing about the techniques of music – “honestly”. He judges a 
record only by his personal, emotional reaction. In other words, if it makes 
him feel good. And he cites Duane Eddy to prove his point.

“He was an incredibly duff guitarist, right? If you’d have said, Hey Duane, 
play us The White Cliffs of Dover, he couldn’t have done it. But the thing was 
that, when he got on stage or on his records and started playing away on that 
bass string, you got that feeling up your back – ‘Oooohh, that feels good,’” – 
he throws his back back in simulated ecstasy. “Really, that kind of sensation.

“That’s why it’s good to work with John Walters [his Radio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> 1 producer], because he’s a 
musician. He will tell me, if I hear something that I like, if it’s crap 
musically, although he’ll still let me play it. The whole thing of rock is that 
it’s emotional and it’s direct – that’s its strength. That’s why I think the 
music of Ten Years After and Deep Purple is not emotional. They go through all 
the motions, but somehow it doesn’t add up.

Last night John Peel saved my life
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2004/oct/28/johnpeel> 
“Now the first time I saw Ten Years After was when I went to the Roundhouse 
with Andy Roberts, and we came back and I felt the same way as I had done with 
Duane Eddy. I was really knocked out, because there were all these grubby lads 
from Leicester, or wherever it was, and Alvin Lee’s playing was just great, 
incredible to listen to. Flash, but there’s nothing wrong with being flash if 
you mean it, as long as it’s committed flashness rather than just going through 
it for an audience. But that’s what’s happened to them now, because the last 
time I saw them, which I admit was a year and a half ago, I was awfully 
depressed. It just wasn’t the same kind of thing that Andy and I saw at the 
Roundhouse.

“You see, because of the intellectualising of the music, most of the rock 
musicians have seen it as a red light to go ahead and begin to flex their 
A-levels and O-levels in geography and English language – which is all I’ve got 
myself. A lot of the lyrics and expressions you get from the artists are 
frankly embarrassing. They tend to moralise. They go along with the current 
fashion of sloganising because chanting slogans is a lot easier than actually 
thinking about things or doing anything.

“I really think all the great music is emotional, whatever people try to do to 
it. If it’s just completely clinical and emotionless, it wouldn’t last. I think 
so little of the stuff that’s happening now will.”

He is not complaining, mind. He is, he remarks convincingly, “ecstatic”. What 
he does he has wanted to do since he was eight. In fact, he has remarkably few 
hang-ups.

Like most figureheads of the underground, he come from the middle-classes. 
Upper middle class, actually.

His father, a wealthy Liverpool cotton broker, died last year of lung cancer. 
He was never, he says, a terribly happy man, and they never really knew each 
other until he was dying.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F30%2Fjohn-peel-1971-interview-melody-maker-michael-watts-rocks-backpages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F841cad82e24f6d583589a67e060f85b03a98646b%2F0_123_2672_1604%2F2672.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=John%20Peel%3A%20'If%20something%20has%20me%20confused%2C%20I%20want%20to%20play%20it%20on%20the%20radio'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F30%2Fjohn-peel-1971-interview-melody-maker-michael-watts-rocks-backpages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=John%20Peel%3A%20%27If%20something%20has%20me%20confused%2C%20I%20want%20to%20play%20it%20on%20the%20radio%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F30%2Fjohn-peel-1971-interview-melody-maker-michael-watts-rocks-backpages%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F841cad82e24f6d583589a67e060f85b03a98646b%2F0_123_2672_1604%2F2672.jpg>
 Lock up your groceries, it’s Peel pick Wild Man Fischer: ‘It’s good to have 
something that messes your mind about.’ Photograph: Michael Ochs Archives/Getty 
Images 
“When me and my two brothers and my dad used to go for walks in Delamere 
forest in Cheshire, he’d drop the facade and he was a lovely man, but until he 
was dying he could never drop it all the time. That’s really sad; I regret that 
enormously.

“When he was dying I used to go and sit on his bed and we’d look at 
photographs of himself when he was a kid. But the whole time I knew him, I 
don’t think I ever touched him at all.”

His mother resembles Peel much more in that quality of openness. Apparently, 
she smokes a pipe and cigars, and is a great Captain Beefheart fan.

The Ravenscrofts – his real name – lived out in the Cheshire countryside, and 
he was, he says, a terribly introverted kid. “To show you how shy I was, I’d 
only been out with one girl in my life by the time I’d reached my 21st 
birthday, and I’d only been out with her once.”

His parents were divorced when he was 17, and as a reaction to the restricting 
upper-middle-class world of his youth he upped and split to the States, where 
he was a computer operator in Texas for a time before becoming a DJ in 
California.

His early 20s seem to have been a period of readjustment, as he took to the 
booze.

“And smoking, too. I was always stoned. I lived in the San Bernardino Valley 
by an orange grove, with lots of other kids, and we’d get out of our heads. The 
trouble was that I had this radio programme at 6am on KMEN. We’d all be out of 
our heads by two in the morning, but while they’d be going to sleep, I’d have 
to get up and go to work.

“I’d be asleep over the controls and have to wake up to put on the next 
record. It was horrifying, because you have to talk with this smile in your 
voice. My style on Perfumed Garden was a reaction to all that.”

When he returned to England he joined Radio London and was in at the birth of 
the British underground. He admits now to being naive enough to believe that 
the ethics and ideals that were being spawned in 1967 would be substantiated. 
Consequently, his bitterness at the state of the underground today is great.

“The trouble is,” he remarks, “that the whole of your underground is 
essentially very much of a middle-class situation, because most of the people 
don’t have the opportunity to drop in, let alone bloody drop out.

Brian Eno’s John Peel lecture: what we learned
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/sep/28/brian-enos-john-peel-lecture-what-we-learned>
“With the sort of government we’ve got now [Edward Heath’s Conservatives] the 
chances, of course, of ever being able to drop in are correspondingly fewer. 
One reviewer of Richard Neville’s book,Play Power 
<http://www.clivejames.com/books/metcrit/neville>, which I enjoyed very much, 
said something to the effect that it was a chilling description of the sowing 
of the seeds of fascism, which I think it is, because you can see already that 
the underground as such has become incredibly intolerant.

“All the whining for acceptance has been replaced by condemnation of people 
who don’t want to live that way, people who are quite happy doing something 
else providing they’re left alone. If people want to live in a semi-detached 
house in Surbiton and spend the whole time watching television and polishing 
the car, then I think they should be allowed to, frankly.

“Everybody in the world is a poseur — I am, and so are all the people who’ll 
be reading this article — but it’s the degree. If you’re trying very hard to 
eliminate it and to not say and do things that you know are fraudulent, that’s 
about the best you can hope to get, really.

“And a nice thing about doing what I do now is that really for the first time 
in my life – and it’s my fault because I’ve always been a loner very much, and 
incredibly neurotic and hung-up – I find I’ve got a lot of real friends.”

What was it, then, which has won him this unique position in radio? “I dunno. 
I dunno. I think it’s just the fact that it’s somebody on the radio trying to 
be themselves, rather than projecting some kind of angle. I like to think I 
might have helped to make it possible for people like Bob Harris, who’s an 
amazing man, to be on the radio. If he wins the Melody Maker poll this year I 
shall be knocked out.

“And it’s connected with the fact that most of the kids in the country are 
basically hung-up and confused. One of the things I thank public school [in 
Shrewsbury] for is that it screwed me up so completely that I was 10 years late 
in beginning to develop at all, and so the changes I was going through at 26, 
27 and 29 were the same that most people were going through in their late 
teenage period. I think a lot of people would identify with those situations.”
 