
In the bar of the north London rehearsal studio complex, John Lydon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/oct/18/john-lydon-dyed-hair-brussels-sprout-food-london-childhood-sid-vicious>
, wearing a typically loud shirt, a pair of unorthodox dark spectacles and the 
kind of “colourful” straw hat Bob Hope might don for a round of pro-celeb golf, 
is treating all and sundry to his remarkable impression of an avant-garde lager 
lout.


I don’t think the English actually read, do they? They just look at the 
pictures

 Downing the pint beakers of foaming Holsten Export at an alarming rate, he’s 
roundly belching at regular intervals, using the wastepaper basket in the 
corner as his personal spittoon, and taunting some Liverpudlians (members of a 
young band called Big Still) with his abrasive chant of “Arsenewall! 
Arsenewall!” (this, a reference to Lydon’s favoured footer team).

 The Liverpool boys and girls, somewhat in awe of the legendary rock person, 
take the extravagant behaviour in good part. “Did you really used to be sick in 
airports then, eh, John?”

“Fuck off! Of course, I didn’t,” cries our hero, the Johnny Rotten of old, in 
that well-worn sneery tone, aiming a jet of spittle at the bespattered 
receptacle and missing by millimetres. “Shouldn’t believe all that garbage 
that’s been written about me, you know! Welcome to thereal world!”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fjohn-lydon-have-i-mellowed-classic-interview-q-1989%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F73552bc9bf51a15f0a6a18dcbdae95b498015970%2F0_0_2850_4272%2F2850.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=John%20Lydon%3A%20'Have%20I%20mellowed%3F%20Absolutely%20f***ing%20not'%20%E2%80%93%20a%20classic%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fjohn-lydon-have-i-mellowed-classic-interview-q-1989%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=John%20Lydon%3A%20%27Have%20I%20mellowed%3F%20Absolutely%20f%2A%2A%2Aing%20not%27%20%E2%80%93%20a%20classic%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fjohn-lydon-have-i-mellowed-classic-interview-q-1989%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F73552bc9bf51a15f0a6a18dcbdae95b498015970%2F0_0_2850_4272%2F2850.jpg>
 John Lydon in 1981. Photograph: Marcia Resnick 
 On the television screen, the BBC comedy series Last of the Summer Wine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jun/02/last-of-the-summer-wine> is 
silently playing. “Oh, look,” hisses John with mischief and glee when that 
shabby and rather revolting character Compo appears in his wellingtons and 
disgusting old jacket, “he’s wearing one ofVivienne Westwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/sep/20/vivienne-westwood-we-will-all-be-migrants-soon-climate-change>
’s latest designs, hahaha”.

 Heeeeere’s Johnny! Unwinding after a hard day’s rehearsing for Public Image’s 
forthcoming tour of America (with New Order and theSugarcubes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2006/nov/20/bjork>) ... Issuing a torrent of 
(jovial) abuse when a member of Big Still makes the mistake of describing his 
band’s music as “a sort of funky U2” ... Belching. Spitting. Laughing. 
“Arsenewall! Arsenewall!” Saying “Humans, eh? What an awful fucking breed we 
are.” And that sort of thing ...

 John Lydon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2014/oct/15/john-lydon-russell-brand-revolution-video>
 was to be found earlier perched beside a rickety table on wasteland amongst 
what he called “the lovely English weeds” outside the studios, and I asked him 
if he had, ahem, “mellowed” over the years. The early recorded offerings of his 
post-Sex Pistols project, Public Image Ltd – Public Image Limited (’78), Metal 
Box (’79), The Flowers Of Romance (’81) – were often “difficult” and “obscure” 
(sometimes downright unlistenable); the seventh album, Album, was a monstrous 
brute of neo-heavy metal; the eighth, Happy?, was all “industrial” gloom and 
doom. But the new one, 9, has some proper tunes on it. Heaven help us, it’s 
almost pretty in parts. And even the hair of the ex-punk rawker has gone quite 
sensible, a modest bleached shock taking the place of the untoward and 
less-than-kempt flaming red dreadlocks that “graced” his head until recently.

 “Have I mellowed? Absolutely fucking not,” he sneers. And that seems to be 
that. “Listen, dear boy, I’m a hell of a lot more easier going than a lot of 
people would like to believe, but I’m not easy going when it comes to making 
music. I’ve no time for laziness. Idemand quality. And all we set out to do 
with this album was to make a fine piece of music. Too many outfits at the 
moment just use computers and they have no talent and can’t write songs and 
can’t play, and why should I be a part of that? I never was a part of that. I 
just want to write good music,thank you, and if that upsets a lot of posers out 
there – or shall we call thempurists – that’s their jolly bad luck. I haven’t 
mellowed. I’m not going for the fast buck. The amount of time we spend writing 
these songs in itself defies the possibility of earning vast amounts of money.”

John Lydon: I dyed my hair green, and Dad called me a brussels sprout
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/oct/18/john-lydon-dyed-hair-brussels-sprout-food-london-childhood-sid-vicious>
 Public Image is a democracy, he insists, a proper group (Lydon, guitarist 
John McGeoch, drummer Bruce Smith and bass player Allan Dias – second guitarist 
Lu Edmonds has had to leave the band due to hearing problems), one to be taken 
seriously and definitelynot to be trifled with.

 “Here’s an interesting little story for you. This album we were meant 
originally to do with [producer] Bill Laswell, but he told me that my band 
couldn’t play, we had no songs, we were all completely incompetent, and as far 
as he was concerned the best move I could make would be to sack the band and 
work on the 10 songs he had. In a ‘U2-type vein’. Because this would be good 
career-wise for me. He wanted to turn me into Bono. Bozo. So bye bye, Bill 
Laswell. I’ll never speak to him again for that. Major, major stupidity. I will 
not be dictated to by arseholes.”

 Pleased as he is with 9 (which was eventually produced by Stephen Hague and 
Eric Thorngren), Lydon refers to Public Image records as “just casual 
interludes”. What is far more important, says the man who, when he was Rotten, 
claimed that playing on stage was the most “booooring” thing in the world, is 
live work.

 “That’s what Public Image is. It’s a live performing outfit. Too few bands 
appreciate that mentality. A lot of bands just take the easy way out: oh, 
there’s a computer, that’ll solve all the problems. I’m sorry, but I prefer 
human beings any day over technology.”

 We have now been conversing for almost five minutes. Time, surely, for Lydon 
to deliver one of his caustic blasts against one or another of his musical 
contemporaries. Yes, indeed. He gulps some Holsten, issues a lusty burp and ...

 “A bad example of how bad things can be is Depeche Mode 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/may/29/depeche-mode-review>, who I 
absolutely hate. They are completely lifeless. There’s no love in what they do. 
When you see them live it’s a tragedy. They don’t move, they’re not excited by 
what they do ...” Burp. “Same thing withThe Pet Shop Boys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jul/20/pet-shop-boys-alan-turing-enigma-proms-tribute-interview>
 – exceptthey don’t even have the bollocks to get up live. They’re all 
computer-generated, same as Michael Jackson, and I find it all a bit pathetic 
and sad.”

Remember Johnny Rotten? Squatting on stages, clutching a fag and staring 
venomously, derisively, at his audiences? Undaunted, unshaken by the brouhaha, 
determined to offend. Nothing seemed likely to “faze” that punk. It’s hard to 
believe, then, that the grown-up version, MrJohn Lydon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/john-lydon>, could suffer terribly and 
acutely from stage fright. But he says he does.

All I want to say is that I mean my music and I am honest and I am not going 
to go away

“I get frantic,” he says as he puffs away on another Marlboro cigarette. 
“Can’t cope with it. Get terrified. Can’t eat. Because it’s absolutely so 
fuckingimportant to me. You got a lot of people out there screaming blue murder 
for you and that hits the stomach. When I was in my First Band...” as, with a 
languid sneer, he is wont to refer to theSex Pistols 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/sexpistols>, “ ...when I was in my First 
Band, I used to hide behind a barrage of alcohol, for instance, because that 
has a certain calming effect. With my First Band, and when I first did gigs 
with Public Image, there were certain situations where I wouldn’t actually 
remember doing the gig the next morning and I found that to be a tragedy. If 
you’re asking people to pay money and you’re up there presenting your ideas, 
your lifestyle, and all you’ve got to offer is a drunken piece of debauchery, 
that’s really just not on. They say, Oh well, ha ha ha, that’s rock’n’roll, 
isn’t it,maaaaan, that stance of just wrecking yourself to amuse others? I see 
no enjoyment in watching people destroy themselves.”

 On their last tour of America (it’s still difficult for Lydon to organise 
tours in Blighty, where he’s been banned from various venues since the Sex 
Pistols played there), Public Image supported INXS. INXS, it seems,were 
frightfully“rock ‘n’ roll”.

 “I was disappointed in how lazy they were live. I thought it was very silly 
of them. They were just going through the motions of big rock stars, and the 
Mick Jagger moves from A to Z were fully copied. Bit sad. The fact that they 
didn’t allow us any soundchecks or anything like that was well and fine, 
because it didn’t stop us being as good as we are. Because we canplay, you see. 
The worse the – for want of a better word –sabotage became, the harder we 
played, and we won over their rock ’n’ roll audience night after night, so when 
the first bunch of reviews came out, INXS’s attitudes changeddramatically. They 
startedrehearsing etcetera etcetera. They had to work, the silly sods, and we 
just sat around backstage drinking tea and having ajolly good time. It was a 
wonderful competition to see if Public Image could win over a rock audience 
like that. Much more extreme than playing to a load of rowdy old punks ...”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fjohn-lydon-have-i-mellowed-classic-interview-q-1989%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F932cbe6da5438cb951bb784e97bcac9023aff844%2F0_0_3508_2480%2F3508.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=John%20Lydon%3A%20'Have%20I%20mellowed%3F%20Absolutely%20f***ing%20not'%20%E2%80%93%20a%20classic%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fjohn-lydon-have-i-mellowed-classic-interview-q-1989%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=John%20Lydon%3A%20%27Have%20I%20mellowed%3F%20Absolutely%20f%2A%2A%2Aing%20not%27%20%E2%80%93%20a%20classic%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fjohn-lydon-have-i-mellowed-classic-interview-q-1989%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F932cbe6da5438cb951bb784e97bcac9023aff844%2F0_0_3508_2480%2F3508.jpg>
 Johnny Rotten and Steve Jones of the Sex Pistols. Photograph: Ian 
Dickson/Redferns 
 He entertains your average middle-of-the road “rock” audience. He has homes, 
with his German wife Nora Forster (the mother of Ari Upp, former singer with 
the Slits) in Venice Beach, California, in Fulham, London, and in Germany. He 
eats posh food in the finest restaurants. Some folk accuse John Lydon – Rotten 
as was – of, ahem, “selling out”. John Lydon, Rotten as was, is a trifle weary 
of such predictable accusations.

 “Oh, look, dear boy, it’s all an absurdity. If given the opportunity I’m sure 
there’s no one on this planet who’d say no to a good meal. As long as I’m not 
paying the bill, I’ll eat anything that’s put in front of me. That includesmeat
, Chrissie Hynde! I’m not supposed to eat expensive food, I’m not supposed to 
live in a nice house, all these absurdities that I’m accused of. Butlook, I am 
NOTthe Royal Family: you have no right to put these demands on me. On the other 
hand, it doesn’t matter what you write about me because I don’t think the 
English actuallyread, do they? They just look at the pictures.”

 John Lydon still takes a great, some might say perverse, pleasure in seeing 
himself as somehow apart from the musical establishment, “skirmishing on the 
outskirts”, as he’s fond of putting it.

 “I don’t want the establishment to accept me in any shape or form, because I 
despise them so much,” he says. “It’s bullshit and I don’t want a pat on the 
back from Phil Collins,thank you. To me that would be the worst possible 
insult. I don’t want to be rubbing shoulders with Guns N’ Roses at some Rock 
‘n’ Roll Hall of Fame sort of nonsense award ceremony, slapping the lads on the 
back and saying, Yeah, aren’t we all jolly good fellows because we’re 
too-fast-to-live-and-too-young-to-die-hope-I-die-before-I-get-old, aren’t we 
great and all that bullshit. Hello? Hello? Let’s wakeup here, right?”

 He talks of the troubles he’s anticipating with the video for the new Public 
Image single,Disappointed <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b6Bv887-JlM>, in 
which the parts of the girl backing singers are played by a triumvirate of 
Barbie dolls: “It’scheaper to use plastic girls, ha ha ha. Far less trouble, 
muchmore convenient. But the company that own the copyright on these particular 
little models is not thrilled at all and so I don’t think MTV in America are 
going to pick up on it because it’s too contentious. It’s absurd, isn’t it? You 
know, Madonna can be up there having it off with Christ andthat will get on the 
telly, but John Lydon with a few plastic things, oh, dearieme, no. We can’t be 
havingthat at all, can we now?”

 Yes, he still savours being a rebel of sorts, but it’s a funny old world and, 
in America, where 10 years ago he was despised as a vile and vulgar irrelevance 
to the glorious “movement” that is rock ‘n’ roll, he no longer seems very 
dangerous at all. Up to a point, he’s accepted: that fortress of rock 
conservatism, Rolling Stone magazine, has re-evaluated Rotten/Lydon’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/aug/08/john-lydon-q-and-a> role 
in the rich tapestry of rock history and the man has become a Rock Icon, a 
Celeb, the Last Great British Eccentric. And Never Mind the Bollocks … Here’s 
the Sex Pistols is just there behind Sgt Pepper in Rolling Stone’s “definitive” 
list of the most miraculous LPs of the last 20 years. To Lydon this is all a 
bloody joke.

 “Ha!” he yelps. “It’s not me that’s the Rolling Stone icon, it’s Johnny 
Rotten, who has long ceased to exist if he ever did in the first place. It’s 
bloody stupidity, really. As I’ve always said aboutRolling Stone and similar 
American magazines and ways of thinking, it is consistently 15 years out of 
date. And the fact that my First Band are now so fuckingheroic more than proves 
my point, doesn’t it? It’s the past, my First Band is now as safe as houses. I 
think that my First Band fits in neatly now with Barry Manilow, John Denver, 
Jim Croce. All the threat is gone. The Sex Pistols don’t exist anymore. They 
are a piece of cosy little nostalgia and they are fashionably accessible and it 
just shows that these people can’t accept the present and have no inclination 
to think towards the future. It’s all major stupidity. I’ve donefar much better 
work since the Sex Pistols.”

 We know.

 A flicker of surprise on the Lydon features: “Oh.”

 There is no history of the Sex Pistols 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/nov/14/thats-me-in-picture-sex-pistols-100-club-1976>
, says Lydon, only myth.

 “It’s all lies and garbage what people think they know about my First Band. 
It’s all myth because it’s so easy and convenient for the plebs, the morons, 
the talentless people out there who live in other people’s shadows to believe 
in the bullshit.”

 Would John like to take this opportunity to clear up some of the “bullshit”? 
No, he wouldnot. Because that’s all going in his book.

 “I’m writing a book about the truth and it will be incredibly unpopular with 
all the people who love the bullshit and a lot of people better look out. If I 
have my way I’m going to interview Malcolm [McLaren], but I doubt if the old 
fool will go along with it. Or knowingthat liar, he’ll read this interview and 
try to get his own book out before me.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fjohn-lydon-have-i-mellowed-classic-interview-q-1989%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Facd6281162236d0ff32a7ed90b7ad678255cb520%2F0_0_1904_2984%2F1904.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=John%20Lydon%3A%20'Have%20I%20mellowed%3F%20Absolutely%20f***ing%20not'%20%E2%80%93%20a%20classic%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fjohn-lydon-have-i-mellowed-classic-interview-q-1989%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=John%20Lydon%3A%20%27Have%20I%20mellowed%3F%20Absolutely%20f%2A%2A%2Aing%20not%27%20%E2%80%93%20a%20classic%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fjohn-lydon-have-i-mellowed-classic-interview-q-1989%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Facd6281162236d0ff32a7ed90b7ad678255cb520%2F0_0_1904_2984%2F1904.jpg>
 John Lydon in 1976. Photograph: Richard Young/Rex USA 
 We talk of the myth of the Sex Pistols as seen on the silver screen. The 
Great Rock ’n’ Roll Swindle. “Appalling. Tedious and appalling.”Sid And Nancy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/mar/06/sid-nancy-reel-history-alex-cox>
. “Appalling. I couldn’t really have asked for that film to be more worse, 
could I? And I think it was pretty damned disgusting work of Mr Alex Cox [the 
director] to have not at any point during the making or writing of that 
so-called film to have asked me or Steve Jones or Paul Cook or Malcolm for our 
point of view. For research he used an arsehole like Joe Strummer, who was in 
another band and who’s bound to give unfavourable reports, and Sid’s mother, a 
registered heroin addict – lethal stuff. And then to present this as a 
semi-documentary was laughable. I laughed all the way through it – up until the 
point when they started to glorify that heroin-addiction side of things. They 
definitely indicated that being a stupid junkie is what rock ’n’ roll is all 
about and I’m afraid it ain’t, or shouldn’t be, not by my book of rules, that’s 
for certain. And that terrible ending where Sid and Nancy go off to rock ’n’ 
roll heaven, you know, in the taxi. Ouch! If just one person out there thought 
that that was a good way to live, to become a heroin addict and imitate Sid’s 
life, then Mr Alex Cox should be had up for murder. Sorry, but that’s the 
truth. All you have on this planet is your life.” An imploring tone enters 
Lydon’s voice: “What comes after life, please little people, wait as long as 
possible for. I ain’t seen no evidence of God. Nowhere. Have you?... God is 
probably Barry Manilow...”

 In flight, and in his cups, the man can become quite impassioned. Yet more so 
when we come to the subject of The Greening Of John Lydon.

 John Lydon is studying for a degree in marine biology. One day, when his 
Pistols story is out of the way, he will write a book about sharks. When he’s 
in California he goes out on the ocean to look at the whales and the dolphins 
and the seals and the sharks and spends much time with beer before the telly 
watching the Discovery Channel (nothing but nature programmes) on cable. He’s 
concerned about this planet. He’s a Green.

 “Yes, I bloody am and they’re not hippies with Fair Isle sweaters that 
everybody thinks, neither. That’s just bad PR, that’sThe Sun for you. Just look 
at theevidence: according to all scientific reports, except for the 
government’s, ha ha, the planet will have less than 25 years to survive at the 
current rate of dilapidation of the ozone, of the rainforests, of the whole 
works … But if you think I’m going to do a Sting – Stink – no, I am bloody not. 
Because he does it for all the wrong reasons in the most pompous way possible 
and that alienates a lot of people. The evidence is good enough so let us 
decide for ourselves; it doesn’t need people like Sting cashing in on it. 
People like Sting do more harm than good. If Sting came up to me with his 
begging bowl, I’d be bloody angry, actually.Bloody angry. That man’s got more 
than enough money to save quite a few ventures so he should put his money where 
his mouth is and stop feeling so sanctimonious. Instead of finding religion, 
he’s found a cause. You know, that escapism when rock stars feel that they’re 
fading and they’re running out of ideas and they start propping themselves up 
with all this nonsense. Bob Dylan did it with God knows how many religions and 
now Sting’s doing it. It’s bloody pathetic and insulting to the public.”

 When they tour America with New Order, Public Image will be sponsoring a 
Greenpeace tent which will be set up in the lobbies of venues to dish out 
information. “That way people can decide for themselves,” says Lydon, “but what 
youwon’t get is a lecture off me about it because I think that’s wrong. I hate 
it when Sting or Jim Kerr or whoever adopts the stance where theyknow more than 
you, posturing and lecturing. Let people decide forthemselves, for fuck’s sake. 
The only person I had any faith in at all in all this was Bob Geldof, because 
he actually believed in what he was doing. But then everybody jumped on the 
bandwagon and then we got the Free Nelson Mandela situation...”

If Sting came up to me with his begging bowl, I’d be bloody angry

 Lydon sups more beer, the better to present the forthcoming point.

 “Free Nelson Mandela. So-rreee! Were all those pop stars trying to tell me 
that all their information was 100% correct and all the information against 
Nelson Mandela is all a lie?Prove it to me! I’d like to know why they never 
dealt with any of the issues against Nelson Mandela when they set up that 
institution, that concert, e.g. that this man supports terrorism, e.g. murder. 
This wasn’t mentioned. And it was unfashionable to mention it. And now I’m 
mentioning it. You can support causes, but forfuck’s sake understand why...”

 “’Cos, after all, all I’m doing here is making pop music to the best of my 
mediocre little talents, so forfuck’s sake let’s go to the bar.”

 John wants to go to the bar for the presumed purposes of carousal, merriment, 
and being rather loud in general.I want to ask more questions before any such 
jollities get in the way. Like ... how’s the wife?

 “She’s perfect. We’re very happy.”

 How’s the acting (his one screen appearance to date was as Harvey Keitel’s 
cop-killing co-star in The Order of Death)?

 “Well, there’s a film coming up next year, but I can’t tell you anything 
about it because the financial backing might pull out because they still think 
that I’m just going to be an outrageous lout and can’t act and whatever so I 
have to be careful. But Ican tell you that I can act properly. I have no 
problems and I can do that stuff much, much better than the opposition, e.g. 
your Stings and your David Bowies and your musicians who do films for all the 
wrong reasons. They pay no attention to the role they’re given and it’s all to 
do with how good they look and the camera angles, which isn’t my style. Maybe 
I’m lucky. I was born ugly.”

 How are the finances?

 “Bloody marvellous, hahaha. Actually, bloody ridiculous. I’m quite fine if I 
keep things to a minimum but things like hit singles really wouldn’t be doing 
me a favour. That would hurt me because England is my home base – this is my 
land and I’ll never surrender it, even though you’re a society of ostriches – 
and it alwayswill be my home base but I bitterly resent the ridiculous taxes 
that are imposed on me and a hit single would put it up to 75% again and that’s 
aridiculous amount of money to be taking out of every pound to support a 
political system I loathe and despise. Hello? Well,isn’t it?”

 How’s the...

 “Oh, for fuck’s sake! How’s the bar? That’s the only question any of us are 
really interested in, isn’t it? All I want to say is that Imean my music and I 
am honest and I amnot going to go away. Whether you like it or not... How’s the 
bar?”

 The bar’s just fine (except that with Lydon’s tax rate possibly soaring to 
75%, it’s your impoverished reporter who’s buying …)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqAKfTd3sT8Q&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqAKfTd3sT8Q>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqAKfTd3sT8Q&media=>
 “Arsenewall! Arsenewall!” The raucous chant of the Last Great English 
Eccentric stifles the ponderous riffing of Guns N’ Roses that’s blaring from 
the bar’s loudspeakers. Here, tonight, John Lydon, a-swigging and a-spitting 
and impressing as the rascal, has held forth on many a topic: from acid house 
(doesn’t much care for acid house: “music for the criminally stupid”) to the 
French (doesn’t much care for the French) to the English abroad (doesn’t much 
care for the English abroad: “I am not a snob, but their arrogant behaviour 
makes you despair”), to journalists (doesn’t much care for journalists: “Howdare
you be a decent human being, you’re ajournalist!”), to Glen Matlock (doesn’t 
much care for the Sex Pistols’ original bass player who, according to John, has 
become a born-again Christian) to ... himself. On which subject he is ever 
strident and defiant: “I’m a persistent little bastard. I know what I’m doing 
is right. And nobody’s been able to prove otherwise.”

 Well into the evening the bar becomes a late night meeting place and watering 
hole for heavy metal persons who stream in with their mighty wafts of hair, 
reeking of mascara and other HM accoutrements. John Lydon is tickled pink at 
this turn of events. “I’m going to get right up these people’s noses,” he 
promises me. “Theyhate me!”

 “Arsenewall! Arsenewall!” he cries.

 But the heavy metal “muthas” don’t hate John at all. They want to come and 
shake his hand. They want to be snapped with him in chummy drinking situations. 
No, he no longer gets up the nose because he is a-hem, a Living Legend. He can 
deride Guns N’ Roses and Aerosmith and the other acts they’re playing in here 
as long and as loud as he likes, he can shout, “You reap what you sow, you 
silly so-and-sos”, but they’ll love him all the same. In the small hours, John 
Lydon is in an arms-round situation with some burly fellow in studded belts and 
resplendent HM regalia. The two seem dangerously close to doing a party piece 
knees-up to the Def Leppard disc that’s playing away, so I make my excuses to 
leave. Lydon thrusts a bottle of Grolsch into my hand and declares that I am a 
“boring old fart”. Sounds quite like old times. “Look at me!” he cries and the 
whole crowded room is looking at him with smiles. The centre of attention, he 
relishes it.

 “Arsenewall! Look at me. Ooh, I lead such an interesting life, ha ha ha...”

 © Tom Hibbert, 1989
 