
Barack Obama’s plan for military intervention in Syria was abruptly derailed by
David Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> and British 
members of parliament, US secretary of state John Kerry claimed on Thursday.

Russia hacking: US intelligence chief hits back at Donald Trump's 
'disparagement'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/jan/05/russia-election-hacking-hearing-congress>
The American president said he would bomb the Syrian regime if it used 
chemical weapons but he did not follow through on his promise. The failure to 
enforce his stated “red line 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/apr/23/chemical-weapons-red-line-obama>
” after President Bashar al-Assadused sarin gas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/22/syria-chemical-weapons-eyewitness>
 in a Damascus suburb in August 2013 isseen by some 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/17/obama-presidency-defined-failure-face-down-assad-syria>
 as the worst stain on Obama’s legacy.

The British parliament’s vote against airstrikes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/aug/31/syria-commons-vote-cameron-miliband>
 has long been cited by Obama and others as a causal factor but Kerry made the 
link explicit just a week aftera diplomatic spat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/29/theresa-may-john-kerry-comments-israel-palestine-un-resolution>
 with the UK’s prime minister, Theresa May, over a United Nations resolution 
that condemned Israel.

Asked by reporters at a farewell press conference in Washington if the “red 
line” episode was a nadir of the modern presidency, Kerry argued that the media 
had not properly analysed, assessed or reported exactly what took place.

“The president of the United States of America, Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama>, did decide to use force and 
he announced his decision publicly and he said we’re going to act, we’re going 
to do what we need to do to respond to this blatant violation of international 
law and of warnings and of the red line he had chosen,” he said.

“Now, we were marching towards that time when, lo and behold … Prime Minister 
David Cameron went to the parliament … and he sought a vote for approval for 
him to join in the action that we were going to engage in. And guess what, the 
parliament voted no, they shot him down.”

MPs voted by 285-272 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/aug/30/cameron-mps-syria> to rule 
out joining US-led strikes, triggering diplomatic shockwaves across the 
Atlantic.

In his unusually frank account, Kerry recalled: “So as we were briefing 
Congress – and I was on one of those briefing calls with maybe a hundred 
members of Congress on the call – many of them were saying, ‘Well, you’ve got 
to come to us. You’ve got to go through the constitutional process, get 
permission from us to do something.’

“And the president had already decided to use force but then the question 
became, ‘Do I need to go to Congress to get that permission?’

“It was a big debate in the security group. I was part of that, I remember the 
debate. And we felt that we’d quickly get Congress’s approval because this was 
such a blatant violation.

“I got a call Friday night, we met Saturday morning and the president decided 
that he needed to go to Congress because of what had happened in Great Britain 
and because he needed the approval and that was the way we’d do something like 
that.”

In the meantime, Kerry said, he held a press conference in London and was 
asked if there was anything Assad could do to avoid being bombed. He replied 
yes, he could agree to get rid of his weapons, and within an hour and a half 
Kerry received a phone call from Russian counterpart Sergey Lavrov suggesting 
they cooperate on such a deal – something Obama and Vladimir Putin had 
previously discussed.

 “All of a sudden Lavrov and I were thrown together by our presidents,” Kerry 
said, “in an effort to try and achieve that and guess what, we did achieve it, 
before Congress voted.

“The president never said, ‘I won’t drop a bomb.’ What happened was people 
interpreted it. The perception was that he was trying to find a different road. 
And I will acknowledge to you, absolutely, I heard it all over the place. The 
perception hurt, yes.”

He added: “The perception came about despite the fact that we actually got a 
far better result of getting all of the weapons of mass destruction out ofSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> without dropping a bomb. If we had 
dropped a bomb, there is no guarantee we would have got any of them out.”

Despite the removal of most of the Syrian chemical arsenal, Assad gained 
strength with Russian and Iran support. The civil war worsened – its death toll 
now approaches half a million and a huge refugee crisis continues. Obama’s 
fateful act of omission is much debated as he nears the end of his presidency.

Kerry also parted company with Britain over Israel. Last week, in the wake of 
a UN resolution that condemned the continued expansion of settlements, Kerry 
criticised Benjamin Netanyahu’s government as the “most rightwing coalition in 
Israeli history”.

A spokesperson for May said: “We do not believe that it is appropriate to 
attack the composition of the democratically elected government of an ally.” 
That statement prompteda rebuke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/29/theresa-may-john-kerry-comments-israel-palestine-un-resolution>
 from Kerry’s state department.

Trump to name ex-senator Dan Coats as director of national intelligence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/05/dan-coats-trump-national-intelligence-director>
There were wrinkles in the relationship with Cameron too. In an interview with 
the Atlantic Monthly last year, Obama made critical comments about the UK and 
France regarding their participating in military action in Libya in 2011 that
removed Muammar Gaddafi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/oct/20/colonel-muammar-gaddafi>, but 
failing tostop the country becoming a “mess” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/19/british-stabilisation-plan-post-gaddafi-libya-select-committee>
.

Cameron became “distracted by a range of other things”, the president said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/10/david-cameron-distracted-libya-conflict-barack-obama>
.

In the same interview, Obama acknowledged the impact of the British vote on 
Syria in a decision he made while walking on the south lawn of the White House 
with his chief of staff.

But he said the most important factor was “our assessment that while we could 
inflict some damage on Assad, we could not, through a missile strike, eliminate 
the chemical weapons themselves”.

“What I would then face,” he said, “was the prospect of Assad having survived 
the strike and claiming he had successfully defied the United States, that the 
United States had acted unlawfully in the absence of a UN mandate, and that 
that would have potentially strengthened his hand rather than weakened it.”

 * This article was amended on 6 January 2017. The headline was clarified to 
more accurately reflect Kerry’s comments.  