
John Glenn, who has died aged 95, was the first American to orbit the Earth 
and later the oldest person ever to be sent into space. During his long career 
he transformed himself from a highly decorated combat pilot and astronaut – one 
of the “Mercury Seven” group of military test pilots selected in 1959 byNasa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/nasa> to become America’s first astronauts 
– into one of his country’s longest-serving and most effective senators.

His historic space flight on 20 February 1962, when Glenn performed three 
orbits of the Earth in the Friendship 7 spacecraft, travelling 81,000 miles at 
more than 17,000mph, was broadcast live around the world. Unbeknown to Glenn, 
the control centre had received signals early in the flight showing that the 
heat shield appeared to have broken loose. In the capsule itself the attitude 
controls had failed. By the time Glenn learned of the heat shield problem 
during his third orbit, he was reconciling himself to the likelihood that he 
would have to calculate his own angle of re-entry. If he got it wrong, the 
capsule would burn up. If he got it right, failure of the heat shield might 
well produce the same outcome.

John Glenn – a life in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/gallery/2016/dec/08/john-glenn-a-life-in-pictures>
In the event the attitude controls partially recovered at the last moment and 
the heat shield problem turned out to be a faulty indicator. But it had been a 
grim few minutes. In the final stages of his five-hour flight the astronaut’s 
heartbeat had risen from 87 to 132 and on his splashdown in the Atlantic Ocean, 
America went crazy. He was greeted at Cape Canaveral by President John F 
Kennedy, who gave him the distinguished service medal, and 4 million people 
turned out for his tickertape welcome to New York.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fjohn-glenn-former-astronaut-us-senator-died-aged-95-video-obituary&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=John%20Glenn%2C%20former%20astronaut%20and%20US%20senator%20%E2%80%93%20video%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fjohn-glenn-former-astronaut-us-senator-died-aged-95-video-obituary>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=John%20Glenn%2C%20former%20astronaut%20and%20US%20senator%20%E2%80%93%20video%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fjohn-glenn-former-astronaut-us-senator-died-aged-95-video-obituary&media=>
John Glenn, former astronaut and US senator 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/video/2016/dec/08/john-glenn-former-astronaut-us-senator-died-aged-95-video-obituary>
The president now saw a splendid opportunity to capture a Senate seat in Ohio, 
Glenn’s home state. The candidacy of the local superhero would be unbeatable. 
Glenn declined the proposal, but continued to meet the president and his 
brother Bobby on a regular basis. After President Kennedy’s assassination in 
1963, Glenn announced that he would run for the seat. But the campaign had 
barely started when he fell heavily in his bath, sustaining a severe concussion 
and an injury to his inner ear. He was forced to withdraw.

Following Bobby Kennedy’s assassination in 1968, Glenn decided that he would 
make another run for the Senate in 1970. But his political inexperience meant 
that he did not get through the Democratic primaries. However, he managed to 
capture a position in the post-Watergate election of 1974, racking up a 
majority of more than 1 million. When he next faced the electorate, in 1980, he 
achieved the largest margin of victory in the state’s history and eventually 
became the first Ohio senator to win four consecutive terms.

But he hated leaving the limelight. When he decided in 1996 that the 1998 
congressional elections would end his 24-year-term, he badgered the head of 
Nasa,Daniel Goldin <http://history.nasa.gov/dan_goldin.html>, to let him make 
one more space flight.

The idea was received coolly at first but the agency’s doctors eventually 
decided that the 77-year-old was fit enough to jointhe crew of the Discovery 
<https://www.nasa.gov/centers/glenn/about/bios/shuttle_mission.html> in the 
relatively undemanding role of a payload specialist for the space shuttle’s 
92nd mission. They ruled that Glenn’s flight could provide useful data about 
the impact of weightlessness on his ageing body, and so Glenn went on the 
nine-day mission.

There were allegations that the flight was a publicity stunt by a space agency 
worried by the lack of interest in manned space flights and the potential 
impact on its budget. It was also widely viewed as Glenn’s reward for party 
loyalty and as a consolation for an earlier ruling by President Kennedy not to 
risk a national hero like Glenn flying to the moon.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fjohn-glenn-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9fea09b0a98c27ce373d9d9f19e5718c8e263eed%2F0_97_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=John%20Glenn%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fjohn-glenn-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=John%20Glenn%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fjohn-glenn-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9fea09b0a98c27ce373d9d9f19e5718c8e263eed%2F0_97_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 John Glenn getting a hand from white room technicians moments before boarding 
the US space shuttle Discovery. Photograph: AFP/Getty Images 
Like many American boys in the 1920s, Glenn was obsessed with aeroplanes. In 
1903, the Wright brothers had flown just 275 yards (250 metres) in their 
12-horsepower Flyer 1. By the time Clare (née Sproat) and John Glenn of 
Cambridge, Ohio, were celebrating their son John Jr’s arrival 18 years later, 
there was already a well-established airmail service between New York and 
Washington, and flying circuses were barnstorming the country.

So these were heady times for any young man with a sense of adventure and 
sporting skills. On leaving New Concord high school, Bud Glenn, as he was 
universally known, joined a government scheme training civilian pilots. Showing 
a natural aptitude, he secured a commercial pilot’s licence even before he 
started his university career.

Within months the Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor and Glenn dropped out of 
Muskingum College to join the US army air corps. To his frustration the army 
made no call on him so he went into the naval reserve. The flying skill he 
showed during combat training marked him out as suitable for service in the 
marine corps, into which he was commissioned as a second lieutenant in 1943, 
the same year he married Anna Castor, whom he had met at college.

In dive-bombing missions against the Japanese he logged more hours than any 
other pilot in his squadron and earned the first of his many decorations. By 
the end of the war he had been promoted to captain and became a career marine 
pilot.

He was briefly involved in attacking communist forces during the Chinese civil 
war but served mainly as a flying instructor until the outbreak of the Korean 
war in 1950. By then a major, he became notorious for maintaining his 
bomb-aiming path regardless of anti-aircraft fire. He returned from one raid 
with 203 holes in his plane. When the armistice was agreed in 1953 he had been 
awarded a further seven combat medals.

After exhaustive aptitude tests had eliminated most, Glenn became one of seven 
astronauts to join Project Mercury

He then made the choice that shaped the rest of his life: applying to become a 
test pilot. The dogged single-mindedness for which he was by now renowned got 
him through and he was assigned to help develop the US navy’s newest fighter, 
the F8U Crusader.

The aircraft’s engine needed to be tested to the limit before it could go into 
service. Glenn dreamed up the idea of doing it by using the plane to make the 
first non-stop supersonic flight across the US. He overcame official reluctance 
and on 16 July 1957 piloted the plane from Los Angeles to New York in the 
record time of 3 hours 23 minutes. It not only got his name into the record 
books but brought enormous personal publicity, celebrity appearances on 
television, and the feeling that he was a man to be watched.

Three months later, the US was stunned by the launch of Sputnik I 
<http://history.nasa.gov/sputnik/>, showing that the Soviet Union now had the 
capacity to orbit weapons over the US. The National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration (Nasa) was quickly established and began checking the 
credentials of military test pilots as potential astronauts.

Lt Col Glenn was plainly well qualified technically, but not physically. The 
limited lifting capacity of early US rockets required passengers to weigh less 
than 13 stone (182lbs). In short order Glenn managed to shed nearly two stone 
(28lbs) to join 508 potential recruits. After exhaustive aptitude tests had 
eliminated most of them, he became one of seven astronauts to join Project 
Mercury.

Rather than indulge in the off-duty drinking and womanising of the other six, 
he pursued a punishing physical regime. It did not make him popular and his 
habit of telling colleagues where their duty lay made him even less so. In 
particular it led to considerable friction between Glenn andCpt Alan Shepard 
<http://www.jsc.nasa.gov/Bios/htmlbios/shepard-alan.html>.

Glenn was desperate to become the first American in space and suffered a 
severe blow when a vote among his fellow astronauts resulted in Shepard’s 
selection. The national adulation that greeted Shepard’s 15-minute sub-orbital 
flight in 1961 was even more galling to Glenn, who regarded his selection for 
America’s first manned orbital flight (an ape had already done two circuits) as 
very much second best.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fjohn-glenn-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff238c03cc7e84a226004a152f1c9c70636bed9c2%2F0_0_3222_4096%2F3222.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=John%20Glenn%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fjohn-glenn-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=John%20Glenn%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fjohn-glenn-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff238c03cc7e84a226004a152f1c9c70636bed9c2%2F0_0_3222_4096%2F3222.jpg>
 Glenn and Friendship 7 Photograph: Nasa/EPA 
He soon had to revise that view when a media frenzy broke out around him and 
his family, adding to the strains imposed by the uncertainties that plagued the 
project. Bad weather forced repeated postponements during December 1961 and 
January 1962. On one occasion Glenn stayed kitted up in his space suit in the 
tiny Mercury capsule for five hours before heavy cloud cover dictated yet 
another postponement.

As he lay there, 100ft in the air with the Atlas rocket’s 80 tonnes of liquid 
oxygen being held at minus-293 degrees, the thin metal casing constantly 
contracted and twisted beneath him. Given that several rockets had previously 
blown up on launch, he needed every bit of his well-attested phlegm before 
eventually making history a month later.

Glenn’s long tenure as US senator reflected his solid legislative record. He 
was an early exponent of environmentalism and fought to secure cabinet rank for 
theEnvironmental Protection Agency <https://www3.epa.gov/>. He also supported 
such touchstone liberal issues as the unsuccessfulequal rights amendment 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Equal_Rights_Amendment> to the constitution and 
the right to an abortion.

But his principal, and often lonely, battle was against nuclear proliferation. 
When he wrote the 1978 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Act to impose stringent rules 
on the sale to other countries of the US’s nuclear materials, it provoked a 
tidal wave of industrial and diplomatic pressure on him and other legislators 
before it became law.

His rising status in the Senate led him to believe it was reflected in the 
country and in 1984 he made a brief and disastrous run at the Democratic 
presidential nomination. It made little impact on the country but left Glenn 
$3m in debt. It was against this background that he became entangled in the 
so-calledKeating scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/02/savings-and-loan-charles-keating-dies-aged-90>
.

Glenn and five other senators attended a meeting in 1987 to persuade federal 
regulators not to act against Charles Keating, who had contributed to their 
campaigns and whose small savings and loan business was in trouble. Keating was 
later convicted of fraud and the senators’ involvement in his case was referred 
to the Senate ethics committee.

Glenn was eventually accused of poor judgment but cleared of any wrongdoing. 
But the episode had such a serious impact on his popularity in Ohio that, 
though he was unopposed in the 1992 primaries, he scraped home at the general 
election with 51%, his lowest-ever poll.

Following his political career, and his return to Earth from the Discovery 
mission, Glenn worked with students at Ohio State University in Columbus. In 
2012, on the 50th anniversary of becoming the first American to orbit Earth, he 
spoke to the crew of the International Space Station 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/video/2012/feb/21/john-glenn-international-space-station-video>
. In the same year, he was awarded the Presidential medal of freedom.

He is survived by his wife, Annie, his children John and Carolyn, and two 
grandchildren.

• John Herschell Glenn Jr, pilot, astronaut and politician, born 18 July 1921; 
died 8 December 2016
 