
It is Saturday evening and a queue of clubbers stretches around Hope House, an 
old metal foundry built in 1820 in theLeeds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/leeds> neighbourhood of Mabgate. Inside, German 
house music specialist Motor City Drum Ensemble is performing a sold-out show. 
Revellers undulate to the bass around four towering, homemade wooden sound 
systems.


It’s an unconventional fundraising strategy for an educational programme aimed 
at children excluded from school – but an effective one. The club night is in 
service of Music and Arts Production (Map <http://musicandartsproduction.org/>
), a charity which provides at-risk young people with access to a range of art 
and music courses. Map is partly funded by events like this – named Cosmic Slop 
– and by hosting independent creative traders and art exhibitions in the Hope 
House building itself.

It is a fragile way to fund a charity – and one which will not, with any 
likelihood, work for much longer. This month, Leeds’ new, glisteningVictoria 
Gate shopping centre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/oct/16/victoria-gate-leeds-review-john-lewis>
 opened near Mabgate. Complete with a super casino, high-end boutiques and a 
towering John Lewis department store, it’s an imposing cultural and economic 
statement with the power to change whole neighbourhoods.

Tom Smith, co-founder of Map, fears they will bear the brunt of that change. 
Their 10-year lease expires in 2019. “The landlord bought the property knowing 
there’s going to be aJohn Lewis <https://www.theguardian.com/business/johnlewis>
 shopping centre next door, and it will be worth a fortune in five or 10 years, 
so they’ve sat on it,” he says. But not any more: “They’re on their 14th 
amendment of an application for planning permission now – it’s just the 
heritage committee that is holding it back.”


Mabgate is something of a hidden gem in artistic circles. It’s a gritty, 
graffiti-smeared space on the fringe of the city centre, and until recently was 
home to a red-light district. Peppered with empty takeaway wrappers and 
abandoned two-storey industrial mills, it has also long been the unofficial 
‘Leeds arts quarter’, home to all manner of artists, musicians, writers, 
photographers and designers, attracted by the cheap rents and sense of freedom.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fregeneration-leeds-arts-quarter-mabgate-under-threat-victoria-centre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fafde37eae68be687c0c6a8f5ccd1500165a5a227%2F310_180_1689_1419%2F1689.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=John%20Lewis%20blues%3A%20could%20regeneration%20destroy%20Leeds'%20much-loved%20arts%20quarter%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fregeneration-leeds-arts-quarter-mabgate-under-threat-victoria-centre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=John%20Lewis%20blues%3A%20could%20regeneration%20destroy%20Leeds%27%20much-loved%20arts%20quarter%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fregeneration-leeds-arts-quarter-mabgate-under-threat-victoria-centre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fafde37eae68be687c0c6a8f5ccd1500165a5a227%2F310_180_1689_1419%2F1689.jpg>
 The Victoria Gate mall in Magbate was built to house a huge new John Lewis shop
As the John Lewis store prepared to open, locals began to see a change in the 
area. Property developers began circling; the sex tradewas effectively legalised
 <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-35987536> in another part of the city centre, 
drawing away the prostitutes. It became clear that the neighbourhood was being 
cleaned up with an eye to wholescale “regeneration”.

“We found out through tricking one of the surveyors, by telling him we knew 
about the plans for the area,” says Simon Walker, who manages the Temple of 
Boom music venue in Mabgate. “We got him to show us a front elevation for this 
area. The place we’re sat in now was completely flattened.”

Few people here own their land, and with leases expiring, locals would be 
powerless to resist the new plans.

“It was gutting to see because over the years we’ve financed all the 
maintenance of these buildings, and it has become the beating heart of what we 
call the arts quarter,” says Walker. “It’s not nice to see landlords or the 
council making any plans behind our backs. It would be nice to think that we 
can convince them that what we’re doing is worthwhile and is of value.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fregeneration-leeds-arts-quarter-mabgate-under-threat-victoria-centre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fddb1bfc037f95c3efc813a1ca04621480615133d%2F168_187_3774_3710%2F3774.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=John%20Lewis%20blues%3A%20could%20regeneration%20destroy%20Leeds'%20much-loved%20arts%20quarter%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fregeneration-leeds-arts-quarter-mabgate-under-threat-victoria-centre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=John%20Lewis%20blues%3A%20could%20regeneration%20destroy%20Leeds%27%20much-loved%20arts%20quarter%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fregeneration-leeds-arts-quarter-mabgate-under-threat-victoria-centre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fddb1bfc037f95c3efc813a1ca04621480615133d%2F168_187_3774_3710%2F3774.jpg>
 One of several Sex Pistols covers by Jamie Reid, who had a studio in Temple 
Works. Photograph: Alamy 
For evidence of how regeneration can flatten a cultural community, locals 
point to Holbeck, an area on the other side of Leeds city centre, home toTemple 
Works <http://www.templeworksleeds.com/temple-works-leeds/>. 

This vast Victorian flax mill has an Egyptian-style facade that gives it the 
air of something out of Indiana Jones; it is one of the few Grade-I listed 
buildings in the area. Until earlier this year, Temple Works housed 65 resident 
artists, hosted fundraising events and held an artistic education programme. 
Jamie Reid, who designed the Sex Pistols’ graphics, had a studio here.

The manager was Susan Williamson, a social scientist by trade. “I was 
originally there to sort out what we could do in terms of planning to turn it 
into a big cultural venue like the Tate Modern,” she says over the phone from 
her new office in London. “But, due to ownership and funding, we ended up 
running it as an alternative, underground place.”

For nearly a decade, Temple Works was a cornerstone of the local creative 
community. Then the council announced the area was being regenerated, and the 
owners wanted to sell.

“I myself found a wonderful buyer for the place,” Williamson recalls. “But 
they were gazumped by Burberry and we all had to leave.”

Though the opening of the fashion brand’s new distribution centre was put on 
hold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/14/burberry-puts-new-leeds-factory-on-shelf>
 after the Brexit vote, the artistic centre that was Temple Works is now gone 
for good.

“It was a really inspiring place,” says artist Dave Lynch, citing a project 
<https://www.newscientist.com/article/dn27838-rider-in-the-sky-stars-in-first-cloud-movie/>
 he worked on with the scientist Mile Nix to project images on to clouds. “It 
was the size –being in such a big space allows you to think about big things. 
The cloud projection is a big thing really, a ridiculous idea. But I was in a 
place where I could test out things on a large scale.”

Reid, too, says his work was influenced by the surroundings there. “It always 
is. That’s why working in sterile galleries can result in dull exhibitions.”

How did he feel when Temple Works was shuttered? I don’t like it but it’s 
always been like that,” he says, noting that there is an irony to such 
developments. “Croydon was ‘regenerated’ in the 60s at the expense of the 
community, and now the regeneration is being knocked down and regenerated. The 
Victorian parts they missed in the first wave are now the ‘heritage quarter’.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fregeneration-leeds-arts-quarter-mabgate-under-threat-victoria-centre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd3e0610344f285316cc737edd38012c19277b575%2F0_182_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=John%20Lewis%20blues%3A%20could%20regeneration%20destroy%20Leeds'%20much-loved%20arts%20quarter%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fregeneration-leeds-arts-quarter-mabgate-under-threat-victoria-centre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=John%20Lewis%20blues%3A%20could%20regeneration%20destroy%20Leeds%27%20much-loved%20arts%20quarter%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fregeneration-leeds-arts-quarter-mabgate-under-threat-victoria-centre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd3e0610344f285316cc737edd38012c19277b575%2F0_182_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 Byron Street Mills, one of the shared workspaces in Mabgate that are 
threatened by new development. Photograph: Paul Jones 
In an emailed statement, a Leeds City Council spokesperson argued that “much 
of the regeneration that has taken place has been anchored by the creative and 
digital sectors” and it has created significant employment. They added: “In 
relation to Temple Works, after the temporary licence for artists expired, the 
council successfully supported all organisations located there to find new 
facilities where they wanted to stay in the city. We also provided logistical 
and property support to enable them to find new locations.”

The statement described Leeds’ bid to become the European Capital of Culture 
in 2023 <http://www.leeds-2023.co.uk/>. “It will be supported by a new culture 
strategy for the city, which will include a plan for future cultural 
infrastructure. This may not always take the form of major capital investments 
but rather consider alternatives such as studio spaces, maker spaces, community 
centres and parks.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fstik-shoreditch-new-mural-artist-london-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stik%20in%20Shoreditch%3A%20the%20artist%E2%80%99s%20hidden%20tribute%20to%20a%20sold-off%20London%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fstik-shoreditch-new-mural-artist-london-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stik%20in%20Shoreditch%3A%20the%20artist%E2%80%99s%20hidden%20tribute%20to%20a%20sold-off%20London%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fstik-shoreditch-new-mural-artist-london-video&media=>
The last painter in Shoreditch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/video/2016/oct/06/stik-shoreditch-new-mural-artist-london-video>
Meanwhile, cultural infrastructure such as Map is fighting to stay alive. “We 
are helping a lot of kids in Leeds who are in really bad situations,” Smith 
says. “If we have to move into a different place, we’ll definitely have to 
downsize. Which means we’ll be a much less effective organisation with a lot 
less benefits to young people.”

They are working with a network of partners on a bid to buy the whole building 
of Hope House, in order to provide a collective sanctuary for independent 
creatives who work in the same areas as the charity does: music production, 
illustration and more. Smith dreams of offering an apprenticeship scheme within 
that network.

But there’s nothing to guarantee that they won’t be outbid, just like Temple 
Works. If that happens, the loss to the neighbourhood could be profound.

“It’s really important for people to be able to express themselves; to be part 
of a scene,” says Smith. “There are a lot of people that come to live in Leeds 
purely because of the music and art. I don’t think the council always 
appreciate the indirect revenue it brings in.”

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion





• This article was amended on 8 November 2016 to clarify that Victoria Gate is 
near, rather than in, Mabgate and that Leeds has more than two Grade I listed 
buildings
 