
Senator John McCain <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/johnmccain> passed 
documents to the FBI director, James Comey, last month alleging secret contacts 
between the Trump campaign and Moscow and that Russian intelligence had 
personally compromising material on the president-elect himself.


The material, which has been seen by the Guardian, is a series of reports on 
Trump’s relationship with Moscow. They were drawn up by a former western 
counter-intelligence official, now working as a private consultant. BuzzFeed on 
Tuesdaypublished the documents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2017/jan/10/buzzfeed-publishes-donald-trump-russia-documents-ethics-questions>
,which it said were “unverified and potentially unverifiable” 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/kenbensinger/these-reports-allege-trump-has-deep-ties-to-russia>
.

Explainer: what is in the Trump-Russia dossier John McCain passed to the FBI?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/trump-russia-dossier-explainer-details>
The Guardian has not been able to confirm the veracity of the documents’ 
contents, and the Trump team has consistently denied any hidden contacts with 
the Russian government.

A spokesman for the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, on Wednesday denied 
Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> has collected compromising 
information on Trump and dismissed news reports as a “complete fabrication and 
utter nonsense”. Dmitry Peskov insisted that the Kremlin “does not engage in 
collecting compromising material”.

Trump’s transition team did not immediately respond to a request for comment, 
but late on Tuesday,Trump tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/818990655418617856>: “FAKE NEWS – A 
TOTAL POLITICAL WITCH HUNT!” He made no direct reference to the allegations.

An official in the US administration who spoke to the Guardian described the 
source who wrote the intelligence report as consistently reliable, meticulous 
and well-informed, with a reputation for having extensive Russian contacts.

Some of the reports – which are dated from 20 June to 20 October last year – 
also proved to be prescient, predicting events that happened after they were 
sent.


One report, dated June 2016, claims that the Kremlin has been cultivating, 
supporting and assisting Trump for at least five years, with the aim of 
encouraging “splits and divisions in western alliance”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdonald-trump-press-conference-president-elect-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20attacks%20media%20and%20intelligence%20community%20in%20press%20conference%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdonald-trump-press-conference-president-elect-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20attacks%20media%20and%20intelligence%20community%20in%20press%20conference%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdonald-trump-press-conference-president-elect-video&media=>
Donald Trump calls the unverified documents ‘fake news’ leaked by ‘sick people’ 
during his first press conference as President-elect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/11/donald-trump-press-conference-president-elect-video>
It claims that Trump had declined “various sweetener real estate deals offered 
him in Russia” especially in developments linked to the 2018 World Cup finals 
but that “he and his inner circle have accepted a regular flow of intelligence 
from the Kremlin, including on his Democratic and other political rivals.”

Most explosively, the report alleges: “FSB has compromised Trump through his 
activities in Moscow sufficiently to be able to blackmail him.” The 
president-elect has not responded to the allegations.

The story of the Trump dossier: secret sources, an airport handoff, and John 
McCain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/trump-russia-report-opposition-research-john-mccain>
CNN reported on Tuesday 
<http://www.cnn.com/2017/01/10/politics/donald-trump-intelligence-report-russia/index.html>
 that the FBI was still investigating the credibility of the documents but 
added that the intelligence chiefs had included a summary of the material in a 
secret briefing on Russian interference in the election delivered last week to 
Barack Obama and Donald Trump.

The emergence of the documents is potentially explosive, 10 days before 
Trump’s inauguration and on the eve of his first planned press conference since 
July last year.

Despite glowing references from US and foreign officials who have worked with 
the source, there are some errors in the reports. One describes the Moscow 
suburb of Barvikha as “reserved for the residences of the top leadership and 
their close associates”, but although it is a very expensive neighbourhood, 
there are no restrictions on who can own property there. The document also 
misspells the name of a Russian banking corporation.

The FBI <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> does not normally make any 
comment on ongoing counter-intelligence investigations but was under increasing 
pressure from Democrats and some Republicans to act before the inauguration, 
particularly because of Comey’s announcement of a continuing investigation into 
Hillary Clinton’s email server 11 days before the election, which many of her 
supporters believe cost her the presidency.


The reports were initially commissioned as opposition research during the 
presidential campaign, but its author was sufficiently alarmed by what he 
discovered to send a copy to the FBI. It is unclear who within the organisation 
they reached and what action the bureau took. The former Democratic Senate 
leader, Harry Reid, has lambasted Comey for publicising investigations into 
Hillary Clinton’s private server, while allegedly sitting on“explosive” material
 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/harry-reid-letter-fbi-james-comey-clinton-emails-trump-russia-ties-hatch-act/>
 on Trump’s ties to Russia.

Another Democratic senator, Ron Wyden, questioned Comey insistently at a 
Senate intelligence committee hearing on Tuesday on whether the FBI was 
pursuing leads on Trump campaign contacts with Russia.

“Has the FBI investigated these reported relationships?” Wyden asked. 

Comey replied: “I would never comment on investigations … in a public forum.

The Guardian can confirm that the documents reached the top of the FBI by 
December. Senator John McCain, who was informed about the existence of the 
documents separately by an intermediary from a western allied state, dispatched 
an emissary overseas to meet the source and then decided to present the 
material to Comey in a one-on-one meeting on 9 December, according to a source 
aware of the meeting. The documents, which were first reported on last year by
Mother Jones 
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2016/10/veteran-spy-gave-fbi-info-alleging-russian-operation-cultivate-donald-trump>
, are also in the hands of officials in the White House.

James Comey refuses to tell Senate if FBI is investigating Trump-Russia links
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/10/james-comey-trump-russia-links-investigation-senate>
McCain is not thought to have made a judgment on the reliability of the 
documents but was sufficiently impressed by the source’s credentials to feel 
obliged to pass them to the FBI.

The Senate armed services committee, which Senator McCain chairs, launched an 
inquiry last week into Russian cyber-attacks during the election.

McCain was reluctant to get involved, according to a colleague, for fear the 
issue would be dismissed as a personal grudge against Trump. He pushed instead 
for the creation of a special Senate committee to look into connections between 
campaign staff and Moscow, but the proposal was blocked by the Republican 
leadership.

McCain told the NBC programme 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/meet-the-press/meet-press-january-8-2017-n704481> Meet 
the Press on Sunday: “I would like to see a select committee. Apparently that 
is not in agreement by our leadership. So we will move forward with the armed 
services committee and I’m sure foreign relations and intelligence committee 
will as well.”

But the senator added: “It is possible if enough information comes out, that 
that decision could be reversed. I still think it’s the best way to attack the 
issue.”

Asked on the same programme on whether an investigation was ongoing into 
campaign links to Moscow, Senator Lindsey Graham, another conservative 
Republican said: “I believe that it’s happening.”

According to the report passed to Comey, Russian intelligence allegedly 
gathered compromising material during Trump’s stay in Moscow in November 2013, 
when he was in the city to hostthe Miss Universe pageant 
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2016/12/russian-intelligence-trump-moscow>.


Another report, dated 19 July last year said that Carter Page, a businessman 
named by Trump as one of his foreign policy advisers, had held a secret meeting 
that month with Igor Sechin, head of the Rosneft state-owned oil company and a 
long-serving lieutenant of Vladimir Putin. Page also allegedly met Igor 
Divyekin, an internal affairs official with a background in intelligence, who 
is said to have warned Page that Moscow had “kompromat” (compromising material) 
on Trump.

Two months later, allegations of Page’s meetings surfaced in the US media 
<https://www.yahoo.com/news/u-s-intel-officials-probe-ties-between-trump-adviser-and-kremlin-175046002.html>
, attributed to intelligence sources, along with reports that he had been under 
FBI scrutiny.

Page, a vociferous supporter of the Kremlin line 
<http://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2016/09/the-mystery-of-trumps-man-in-moscow-214283>
, was in Moscow in July to make a speech decrying western policy towards 
Russia. At the timehe declined to say 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-election-adviser-russia-idUSKCN0ZN294> 
whether he had been in contact with Russian officials, but in September he
rejected the reports 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/josh-rogin/wp/2016/09/26/trumps-russia-adviser-speaks-out-calls-accusations-complete-garbage/>
 as “garbage”.

The Guardian has learned that the FBI applied for a warrant from the foreign 
intelligence surveillance (Fisa) court over the summer in order to monitor four 
members of the Trump team suspected of irregular contacts with Russian 
officials. The Fisa court turned down the application asking FBI 
counter-intelligence investigators to narrow its focus. According toone report 
<https://heatst.com/world/exclusive-fbi-granted-fisa-warrant-covering-trump-camps-ties-to-russia/>
, the FBI was finally granted a warrant in October, but that has not been 
confirmed, and it is not clear whether any warrant led to a full investigation.

 A month after Trump’s surprise election victory, Page was back in Moscow 
saying he was meeting with “business leaders and thought leaders”, dismissing 
the FBI investigation as a “witch-hunt” and suggesting the Russian hacking of 
the Democratic Party alleged by US intelligence agencies, could be a false flag 
operation to incriminate Moscow.

Another of the reports compiled by the former western counter-intelligence 
official in July said that members of Trump’s team, which was led by campaign 
manager Paul Manafort (aformer consultant 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/01/us/paul-manafort-ukraine-donald-trump.html> 
for pro-Russian politicians in Ukraine), had knowledge of the DNC hacking 
operation, and in return “had agreed to sideline Russian intervention in 
Ukraine as a campaign issue and to raise US/Nato defence commitments in the 
Baltics and Eastern Europe to deflect attention away from Ukraine”.

A few days later, Trump raised the possibility that his administration might 
recognise Russia’s annexation of Crimea andopenly called on Moscow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/27/donald-trump-russia-hillary-clinton-emails-dnc-hack>
 to hack Hillary Clinton’s emails.

In August, officials from the Trump campaign intervened in the drafting of the 
Republican party platform, specifically toremove a call for lethal assistance 
<http://www.npr.org/2016/08/06/488876597/how-the-trump-campaign-weakened-the-republican-platform-on-aid-to-ukraine>
 to Ukraine for its battle against Moscow-backed eastern rebels.

Trump campaign denies report of Trump Organization tie to Russian bank
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/31/trump-organization-server-russia-bank-slate-report>
Manafort stepped down in August as campaign manager and the campaign steadily 
distanced itself from Page. However, Trump’s praise of Putin and defence of 
Moscow’s actions in Ukraine and Syria remained one of the few constants in his 
campaign talking points.

Manafort has denied secret links with Moscow calling the allegation “an 
outrageous smear being driven by Harry Reid and the Clinton campaign”.

Since then, Trump has consistently cast doubt on Russian culpability for 
hacking the Democratic National Committee, defying a consensus of 17 national 
intelligence agencies. After Obama deported 35 Russian diplomats in retaliation 
for Moscow’s intervention, Trump praised Putin for not carrying out tit-for-tat 
deportations of US diplomats. “I always knew he was very smart,” he tweeted.

An FBI spokesman declined to comment after the CNN report.

 