
A leading Republican voice on national security matters says he doesn’t care 
what president-electDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> says, the United States will 
not reinstate waterboarding.

Senator John McCain <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/johnmccain> of 
Arizona, chairman of the armed services committee, said on Saturday that any 
attempt to bring back harsh tortures such as waterboarding, which simulates 
drowning, would quickly be challenged in court.

John McCain: Trump's 'offensive' comment merits apology to military families
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/20/john-mccain-donald-trump-military-families-apology>
“I don’t give a damn what the president of the United States wants to do or 
anybody else wants to do. We will not waterboard. We will not do it,” McCain 
said to applause during a panel discussion at the Halifax international 
security forum.

McCain, who was tortured as a prisoner of war during the Vietnam War, said 
extreme interrogation techniques are banned under US law and theGeneva 
conventions <https://www.theguardian.com/law/geneva-conventions>.

During the campaign, Trump said he would push to change laws that prohibit 
waterboarding, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/28/donald-trump-ohio-rally-isis-torture-tpp-rape>
 which was used against suspected terrorists during the George W Bush 
administration.

McCain, the 2008 Republican presidential nominee, said waterboarding didn’t 
work and made it hard for the US to claim moral superiority.

“What does it say about America if we’re going to inflict torture on people?” 
he asked.

McCain also expressed support for the North American Free Trade Agreement with 
Canada and Mexico and said the United States should not back out of the 
not-yet-implemented Trans-Pacific Partnership. As a candidate, Trump said Nafta 
should be renegotiated andopposed the TPP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/06/donald-trump-hillary-clinton-tpp-survey>
, arguing that such trade agreements cause significant job losses in the US.

“I think we are going to pay a terrible price for abandoning the TPP,” McCain 
said.

“You are going to see Chinese assertion of economic influence in the region, 
and possible dominance. All of these countries are now going to join with China 
in trade agreements and we’re going to be out in the cold.

“Historians will judge us very harshly.”
 