
Rough Trade Records HQ on a late autumn afternoon. The new Sleaford Mods album 
hollers above the desks and CD shelves. Libertines-branded bags slump against 
piles of new vinyl. The duo who are among the label’s newer signings sit on a 
sofa in the middle of the chaos, reflecting on the minor controversy they have 
caused.

“Most of the people complaining about us,” says Josienne Clarke, fresh from 
some tea and cake, “are sixtysomething men with beards called Brian.”


Josienne Clarke and Ben Walker: Overnight review – exquisite ballardry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/13/josienne-clarke-and-ben-walker-overnight-review-rough-trade>
“One of them emailed me to complain about a gig we’d just done when I was in a 
taxi on my way home from it,” adds her bearded bandmate Ben Walker. Together,
Clarke and Walker <http://josienneandben.com/>, both 34, are one of Britain’s 
biggest folk acts, with five albums of beautifully textured, twilit songs, many 
years of treading the dusty boards of folk sessions and festivals, and a 
coveted Radio 2 folk award for best duo between them.

When they won the Radio 2 award, they had to play live in front of 1,500 
people, and be filmed. “If you fuck that up, that is going to be on the 
internet forever,” Clarke says, with a grimace. “And it was brilliant, 
obviously, to win, but at the same time, we were: Argh! Does this mean that we 
just have to do this now?’”

But they’ve since branched out and the proverbial’s hit the fan. “We’d played 
with a chamber orchestra,” Walker explains, with an existential look of despair 
on his face. “It had been an absolute arse-ache to organise, and this bloke 
said he was ‘sorely disappointed’ because we’d done something that ‘wasn’t 
expected’.”

Clarke is a similarly spirited grump on this subject, blue-varnished 
fingernails itching at her scarf with irritation. “Yes, we could make an album 
for him, with just the two us and a guitar, and it’d be a real money-spinner. 
But is it really wrong to want to do something new?”


This is the story of a duo who accidentally fell into folk, or rather the 
story of “two comprehensive school noobs who turned up in this world which lots 
of people are born into … trying to make it look like this hadn’t been a 
terrible mistake.” Clarke loved singing from childhood, she says, but her 
parents weren’t musical at all (“they were encouraging, but had no fucking idea 
how to help me”). Her low, elegant voice was noted by her teachers and she 
started training as a classical performer, before dropping out of a music 
degree. “I’d only started reading music at 15, and couldn’t really sight-read, 
so I could barely study anything.” She shrugs. “But I wanted to sing.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAasxfd0sl6g&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAasxfd0sl6g>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAasxfd0sl6g&media=>
 Josienne Clarke and Ben Walker: Something Familiar – official video 
Instead, Clarke focused on other singers she liked, including Sandy Denny and 
Joan Baez, and sang traditional songs they had popularised; her 2010 solo 
record, One Light Is Gone, saw her getting reviews on folk blogs as a result. 
“But folk was a term that was applied to me rather than me actually actively 
going out and seeking it. Plus people forgetSandy Denny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/sandy-denny> was as much a songwriter as she 
was an interpreter.”

Original songs have been part of Clarke and Walker’s arsenal since day one, 
and their latest album, Overnight, includes seven of them: beautifully drawn 
miniatures full of a melancholy reminiscent of early-70s singer-songwriters. 
Clarke writes the songs, “the squishy, lyrical stuff”, while Walker’s the 
arranger and planner: “I’m totally bubble-chart and he’s spreadsheet.”

Walker was in an indie band when he and Clarke met. He loved Dire Straits as a 
child and Interpol as a teenager, and still obsesses over the electronica of 
Warp Records and Jon Hopkins. They became a duo in 2011, releasing a collection 
of traditional songs, The Seas Are Deep, a tool to make more people listen to 
them, more than anything else, they confess. It was released by the folk label 
Navigator Records – and, Clarke says: “That was it. We were officially folk.” 
Invitations flooded in for them to play traditional sessions and festivals, 
which taught them a lot. “To share folk songs that you really love with people 
who were there when they were being played the first time round is amazing,” 
she says.

“But it felt like that Big Train sketch about Ralph McTell 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=p1YNEtaHbzA>, where all the audience are 
screaming for Streets of London,” Walker adds. “We were desperate to do other 
things.”

A wider audience has been gradually assembling, including celebrity fans: take 
the man who approached Walker at the 2015Shirley Collins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/31/shirley-collins-sing-past-generations-standing-folk-music>
 birthday gig at London’s Cecil Sharp House. “This bloke from Wolverhampton 
went: ‘Hello, I’m Robert, I thought you were great.’ ‘We know who you are, Mr 
Plant!’” Then another, untypical character started attending their gigs, a 
quiet fellow who’d launched the careers of the Smiths and the Strokes. When 
they found out it wasGeoff Travis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/04/rough-trade-geoff-travis-playlist-holly-herndon-jlin>
, they were delighted; his label had been on their wish list. “What makes Rough 
Trade so good is that they just do what they want,” Walker says, “and let the 
music go where it goes.” People forget the other similar records they’ve put 
out, too, Clarke adds, by theUnthanks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/the-unthanks>, Sufjan Stevens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/sufjanstevens> and Alasdair Roberts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/alasdair-roberts>. 


For Overnight, the pair went to Rockfield Studios to expand their sound 
further, and the mix of styles on the record is well served by the rich, 
winter-lit production.Gillian Welch’s Dark Turn of Mind 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/jun/26/harrow-and-harvest-gillian-welch-review>
 sits next to a stunning version of folk standard Weep You No More Sad 
Fountains, that will definitely satisfy the Brians, and a space-pop, bossa 
nova-flavoured single called The Waning Crescent, that might not.


But Clarke and Walker know that a warmer, more traditional sound will always 
be part of their world. “I make this joke on stage now about how when a few 
people heard about Rough Trade, they were like: ‘Guys, er, isn’t that a punk 
label?’” Clarke laughs. “And I say Ben and I are so punk that we’ve gone full 
circle. We don’t even have to be irreverent. We’re corduroy-wearing punks!” 
Surely, even the Brians should be happy with that.


 * Overnight is out now on Rough Trade Records  