
1. Disorder <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9ryJB-FF_Jg>

Tony Wilson, speaking in 2007, said it best of all. “Punk enabled you to say 
‘fuck you’, but it couldn’t go any further. It was a single, venomous, 
two-syllable phrase of anger. Sooner or later, someone was going to say more; 
someone was going to want to say ‘I’m fucked.’” That someone was Joy Division. 
A gang of surly ruffians fromManchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/21/joy-division-fan-plans-museum-after-buying-former-home-of-ian-curtis>
, led by a disgruntled civil servant,they formerly sounded like nothing more 
than also-ran Sex Pistols or second-rate Buzzcocks. But then they changed 
everything: they took punk’s poison, but rather than lashing out, they turned 
their anger inwards. It all seemed to click once they’d changed tack. In 1978, 
they switched their name from Warsaw to Joy Division and released the so-so An 
Ideal For Living EP. By 1979, they had produced debut LP Unknown Pleasures. On 
album one, side one, track one is Disorder, fizzing with dread and worry. 
Everything, from Stephen Morris’s dry, rattling drumsand Bernard Sumner’s 
tight, claustrophobic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/oct/06/bernard-sumner-chapter-and-verse-new-order>
guitar, sounds clear and clean and cruel and cold. Then comes Ian Curtis’s 
voice, a deep croon that’s just hankering for some – any – comfort or 
connection. “I’ve been waiting for a guide to come and take me by the hand,” he 
confides. “Could these sensations make me feel the pleasures of a normal man?” 
Forget the filth and the fury; this is the scarred, scared sound of fear.

2. She’s Lost Control <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CYA-KtCfN6Q>

Listen to the nervy horror of She’s Lost Control now, and it’s hard to shake 
the feeling that it’s been cursed by some crooked finger of fate. It all seems 
spookily predestined that Curtis would write the lyrics when, in his 
nine-to-five job at the Department of Disabled Services in Manchester, he 
witnessed a young woman collapse with an epileptic fit. Later he’d learn that 
she died of a seizure; and eventually he’d be diagnosed with the condition 
himself. But even without the foreshadowing, She’s Lost Control would still 
sound starkand stern, like the last waltz at the death disco, coiled around
Peter Hook’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/mar/19/peter-hook-if-my-son-joined-new-order-at-least-theyd-get-the-bass-played-properly>
 rumbling bass. Curtis goes way beyond physical trauma lyrically too, turning 
the sight of jerking, flailing limbs into a cerebral crisis. Lostcontrol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/mar/05/readers-recommend-songs-about-control>
 means lost dignity, and the longer the song goes on, his voice becomes less 
steady, too: “She’s clinging to the nearest passer by / She’s lost control / 
And she gave away the secrets of her past,” he barks.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQVc29bYIvCM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQVc29bYIvCM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQVc29bYIvCM&media=>
3. Insight <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iXt6CNKqLVQ>

It’s straightforward for students of the Fab Four: when paying tribute to 
George Martin’s production work with John, Paul, George and Ringo, you just dub 
him ‘the fifth Beatle’ and be done with it. There’s no such easy shorthand when 
it comes toMartin Hannett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/aug/15/joy-division-new-order-tapes-sale>
 and Joy Division, however. His role was part guardian angel, part evil sod: a 
sullen weirdo who, legend has it, was so tyrannical he once forced Morris to 
dismantle his drum kit and reassemble it using parts from an old toilet. Both 
Hook and Sumner felt he’d sullied Unknown Pleasures by muting the wild energy 
of their live shows in favour of austere, cavernous atmospheres. But time 
proved Hannett to be right, and the icy bleakness of Unknown Pleasures is owed 
as much to him as to Joy Division. Insight, in particular, is full of devilish 
tricks and touches. It was his idea to record the creepy clatter of the rickety 
old lift at Strawberry Studios and use it for the song’s opening, setting the 
tone for the moribund guitar and laser-like synths that follow. Curtis’s voice 
– recorded, as per Hannett’s instructions, down a telephone line to make it 
sound as distant as possible – sounds defeated. “I don’t care anymore, I’ve 
lost the will to want more,” he sings. But there’s still danger ahead: “And all 
God’s angels beware / And all you judges beware.” Whatever’s out there, the end 
is nigh, and there’s no escape from his, and Hannett’s, grip.

4. Transmission <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rYaN2w6rcgk>

Look beyond both Unknown Pleasures and 1980 swansong Closer, and you’ll find 
some of Joy Division’s choicest treats. Transmission, released as a stopgap 
single between albums, is among the finest of them all, a heavy danse macabre 
of scorched-earth bass, spidery guitar and doomsday drums that destroys all 
that stands in its way. And while it could be easy to draw a line between its 
pulsating, pounding beat and the sound New Order would later perfect, Curtis’s 
grim-as-you-like lyrics make it quintessentialJoy Division 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/joydivision>. It’s an Orwellian nightmare: 
his voice ringing out as if at a dystopian rally, trying to wake a population 
of people who’ve become mindless, all-obeying automatons. “Listen to the 
silence, let it ring on / Eyes, dark grey lenses frightened of the sun,” he 
howls. “And we would go on as though nothing was wrong / And hide from these 
days as we remained all alone.” How perfect, then, that its manic, wild-eyed 
chorus has grown into a cruel joke over the years, a soundtrack that still 
tricks barflies into missing the point at every indie disco from Land’s End to 
John o’Groats. “Dance! Dance! Dance! Dance! To the radio!”

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6dBt3mJtgJc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6dBt3mJtgJc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6dBt3mJtgJc&media=>
5. Atrocity Exhibition <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5AqeqAQ1ILI>

It’s the empty spaces that make Unknown Pleasures so scary, the fear of what’s 
lurking in those shadows. Closer, though, is entirely different: it’s harrowing 
because all of the pain is present, and it’s spilling in every direction. 
Curtis’s personal life became even trickier when he began a relationship with 
Belgian journalist Annik Honoré, despite having a wife (Deborah, who he married 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/nov/21/touching-from-a-distance-deborah-curtis-ian-joy-division-review>
 in 1975) and a young daughter. The push-pull between two separate lives and 
the guilt that came with it is all over Closer, and it’s laid bare in the 
rattle-and-flinch opener of Atrocity Exhibition. Lifting its title from JG 
Ballard’s experimental novel, in which people’s personal lives are pored over 
by by mass media, it’s one of Curtis’s most disturbing compositions. It’s easy 
to imagine he’s picturing himself as the one being strung up and flayed while 
people gawp: “Asylums with doors open wide / Where people had paid to see 
inside / For entertainment they watch his body twist / Behind his eyes he says 
‘I still exist.’” It sounds sonically sick, too – Sumner playing his guitar 
like he’s sawing bone, Morris hitting his drums like he’s thwacking cadavers – 
until it’s one big, evil horror show, with Curtis hollering: “This is the way, 
step inside!”

6. Isolation <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-bkcPS3GHQY>

They say it’s the hope that gets you, and it’s the hope that punctures Closer: 
the remarkable Isolation is a trap you can’t help stumbling into; it starts off 
seeming like it’s going to give you a cheery leg-up after the queasy Atrocity 
Exhibition, and just as quickly pulls it away. It’s built around a crisp, 
breezy synth – almost pleasing, almost friendly – until Curtis arrives to spoil 
the party: “Surrendered to self preservation / From others who care for 
themselves,” he chirps incongruously. “A blindness that touches perfection / 
But hurts just like anything else.” The awful simplicity of his grand 
confession stings: “Mother I tried please believe me, I’m doing the best that I 
can / I’m ashamed of the things I’ve been put through, I’m ashamed of the 
person I am.” A ghoulish wolf in sheep’s clothing.

7. Decades <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PMAB3r6EjcM>

The bitter, brittle finale of Closer, in which Curtis conjures up his very own 
anthem for a doomed youth. Here, he sounds utterly exhausted: flat and tired 
and defeated, his voice low and sombre, backed by morbid, washed-out synths. 
There’s echoes of Wilfred Owen and Siegfried Sassoon in his words – like Curtis 
has dragged himself off a blood-splattered battlefield – as he wonders what all 
the suffering’s been for. “Here are the young men, the weight on their 
shoulders / Here are the young men, well where have they been?” he intones. “We 
knocked on the doors of Hell’s darker chamber.” This, after all the angst 
that’s gone before, is a transmission from the heart of darkness, and it’s 
clear he’s given up. “Weary inside, now our heart’s lost forever / Can’t 
replace the fear, or the thrill of the chase,” he sighs. Away from the studio, 
things were more troubled than ever for Curtis. His epilepsy was increasingly 
uncontrollable, Deborah had finally filed for divorce, he was still entangled 
with Annik and he was dreading the heavy slog of Joy Division’s first ever US 
tour. It was too much: on the evening before he was scheduled to fly to the US, 
Curtis hung himself in his kitchen. Closer, released two months later, would be 
his – and Joy Division’s – final ever album.


8. Atmosphere <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1EdUjlawLJM>

And to think that the French nearly got to keep the magnificent Atmosphere all 
to themselves. In 1980, across the Channel, the Sordide Sentimental label 
released it as a France-only limited-edition single, and it wasn’t until 
Curtis’s death that it was reissued in the UK. Since then, it’s become a 
unbreakable testament to their brilliance: a glacial, glittering masterpiece 
that serves so beautifully as their final farewell, the song handpicked by John 
Peel to be played on the airwaves after announcing Curtis’s death. It’s so 
delicate and pristine, it feels like it could evaporate at any moment; 
everything from those sparse, subtle drums and low bass to the shimmering, 
gossamer-like keyboards that rise and swell and then sink again is in its right 
place. And has Curtis’s voice ever sounded as rich, and heavy, as it does here? 
“Walk in silence / Don’t turn away, in silence,” he sings wearily. “See the 
danger / Always danger / Endless talking / Life rebuilding.” A perfect goodbye.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1EdUjlawLJM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1EdUjlawLJM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1EdUjlawLJM&media=>
9. Dead Souls <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MhEm4S-4v_U>

There’s a fantastic snippet in Sumner’s autobiography Chapter and Verse, 
released last year, in which he details howhe hypnotised Curtis just two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/oct/06/bernard-sumner-chapter-and-verse-new-order>
 weeks before his suicide. The full transcript of their ersatz therapy session 
is an eerie thing, as Curtis rambles about a past life as a mercenary who 
fought in the hundred years’ war. That same sense of being transported into a 
weird otherworld is found in Dead Souls, the original B-side to Atmosphere. 
Here, Curtis sounds like he’s being pulled by ghostly apparitions, trapped in a 
place “where figures from the past stand tall / And mocking voices ring the 
halls”. “Someone take these dreams away / That point me to another day / A duel 
of personalities / That stretch all true realities,” he sings, and the music 
behind him sounds like it’s in a trance, too, a menacing wall of noise that 
snakes on a loop and finally explodes into a giant crescendo. This is Curtis’s 
musical seance with the spirits of yore, a dreadful, hypnotic spell that 
freezes your limbs and can’t be shaken off.


10. Love Will Tear Us Apart <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zuuObGsB0No>

“I remember standing in the audience at London University,” remembers Factory 
Records’s sleeve designer Peter Saville in Grant Gee’s 2007 documentary, Joy 
Division. “And thinking: ‘Oh fuck – now they’ve got a single.’” Back in 1979, 
he’d just witnessed Joy Division playing a new song for the very first time, 
and he’d been rendered totally dumbstruck. “Oh fuck” is still the best response 
to Love Will Tear Us Apart now, too. It’s Joy Division’s whole history carved 
into one stone tablet: the legend that’s inscribed on Curtis’s memorial stone, 
and an entire legacy distilled into 3m 46 sec of perfect pop music. It’s also 
unlike anything else in their entire back catalogue. There’s no heavy murk or 
gothic doom, just that gorgeous, squirrelling synth that’s sad and sweet, 
vulnerable and lost. And while Curtis’s words are so often rooted in morbid 
fantasy worlds, there’s no highfalutin concepts here: just the harsh reality of 
a relationship withered and gone wrong. “Why is this bedroom so cold? You’ve 
turned away on your side,” he asks, bitter and bruised, as two people lie next 
to one another but can’t bring themselves to talk or touch. “You cry out in 
your sleep, all my failings exposed,” he adds later, “and there’s a taste in my 
mouth / As desperation takes hold.” Sometimes, it might seem perverse that Love 
Will Tear Us Apart has grown into Joy Division’s defining statement – here, 
after all, is a band who journeyed into the void and returned from some 
hopeless event horizon with such torrid, terrible tales, and now they’re best 
remembered for singing a pop single about lost love. But what else could it be 
but a song that’s so wickedly, wonderfully devastating it’ll still have you 
whispering “oh fuck” every time you hear it?

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzuuObGsB0No&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzuuObGsB0No>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzuuObGsB0No&media=> 