
Juan Gabriel, the legendary Mexican singer-songwriter , has died suddenly at 
his home in California. He was 66.

Gabriel was Mexico’s leading singer-songwriter and top-selling artist, with 
sales of more than 100m albums. His ballads about love and heartbreak and 
bouncy mariachi tunes became hymns throughout Latin America and Spain, as well 
as with Spanish speakers in the United States.

Readers recommend: songs of Mexico and Central America – results
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/07/readers-recommend-songs-of-mexico-and-central-america-results>
He brought many adoring fans to tears as they sang along to hits such as Hasta 
Que Te Conoci (Until I Met You) and Amor Eterno (Eternal Love). His hit Querida 
(Dear) topped Mexico’s charts for a whole year.

Juanes, the Colombian star who recorded Querida with Gabriel in 2015, told 
Billboard 
<http://www.billboard.com/articles/news/7486856/juan-gabriel-juanes-marc-gabriel>
: “Juan Gabriel is our Elvis.”

A flamboyant performer, Juan Gabriel, whose real name was Alberto Aguilera 
Valadez, liked to wear jackets covered in sequins or dress in shiny silk 
outfits in hot pink, turquoise blue or canary yellow, and he was known for 
tossing his head before dancing or jumping around the stage.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dga5Bo4YdgH4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dga5Bo4YdgH4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dga5Bo4YdgH4&media=>
“He has passed on to become part of eternity and has left us his legacy 
through Juan Gabriel, the character created by him for all the music that has 
been sung and performed all around the world,” his press office said in a 
statement.

It gave no details on his death. His publicist, Arturo de la Mora, told 
Associated Press that he died at 11:30am in his home. He said the family would 
provide a statement later.

Juan Gabriel performed to packed auditoriums, including Madison Square Garden 
in New York and the Kodak Theater in Los Angeles. His last concert was on 
Friday night at the Forum in Inglewood, California. He was scheduled to perform 
on Sunday in El Paso, Texas.

Mexican president Enrique Pena Nieto said through his official Twitter 
account: “I regret the death of Juan Gabriel, one of the great musical icons of 
our country. My condolences to his relatives and friends.”
Javier Colon (@Javstwtr) 
So shocked & saddened by the news of the passing of #JuanGabriel 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/JuanGabriel?src=hash>. What a legend & icon in 
Latin music. One of the best ever.#Hewillbemissed 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Hewillbemissed?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/Javstwtr/status/770044077832282113> August 28, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Javstwtr/status/770044077832282113> JORGE RAMOS 
(@jorgeramosnews) 
If you want to understand Latinos and, why they won't talk politics for a 
while, you better learn how to pronounce JuanGa.#JuanGabriel 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/JuanGabriel?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/jorgeramosnews/status/770029968638238724> August 28, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/jorgeramosnews/status/770029968638238724> Anna Núñez 
(@nunez_anna) 
No one equaled #JuanGabriel <https://twitter.com/hashtag/JuanGabriel?src=hash>
, the master of passionate Spanish ballads, esp when love went wrong#LaFarsante 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/LaFarsante?src=hash> https://t.co/pRiqRBFB6q 
<https://t.co/pRiqRBFB6q> @YouTube <https://twitter.com/YouTube>
 <https://twitter.com/nunez_anna/status/770042322474135556> August 28, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/nunez_anna/status/770042322474135556> 
Juan Gabriel broke ground in Mexico in 1990 by becoming the first commercial 
singer to present a show atMexico <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico> 
City’s majestic Palace of Fine Arts, until then a forum reserved for classical 
musicians. The proceeds from the three sold-out concerts went to support the 
National Symphony Orchestra and became his most celebrated performances. His 
album Juan Gabriel live from the Palace of Fine Arts set record sales.


A six-time Grammy nominee, Juan Gabriel was inducted into the Billboard Latin 
Music Hall of Fame in 1996 and received countless industry awards, including 
ASCAP Songwriter of the Year in 1995, Latin Recording Academy’s Person of the 
Year 2009, and a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame that same year.

The singer, who was born on 7 January 1950, wrote his first song at age 13 and 
went on to compose more than 1,500 songs.

“There are no rules when I compose songs,” he said, according to a biography 
published by Mexico’s Society of Music Authors and Composers. “There are times 
when I’m really happy and I write something really sad, and vice versa.”


Artists across Latin America and in the United States covered many of his 
songs, including Paul Anka and Marc Anthony, who broke into the salsa music 
world in the US with Juan Gabriel’s Hasta Que Te Conoci. Juan Gabriel also 
wrote and produced albums for artists such as Mexican singer Lucha Villa and 
Spain’s Rocio Durcal.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Fjuan-gabriel-legendary-mexican-singer-songwriter-dies-aged-66%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d30f44cb40818e80edf88b6240d929dcddafe2f%2F0_73_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Juan%20Gabriel%2C%20legendary%20Mexican%20singer-songwriter%2C%20dies%20aged%2066&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Fjuan-gabriel-legendary-mexican-singer-songwriter-dies-aged-66%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Juan%20Gabriel%2C%20legendary%20Mexican%20singer-songwriter%2C%20dies%20aged%2066&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Fjuan-gabriel-legendary-mexican-singer-songwriter-dies-aged-66%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d30f44cb40818e80edf88b6240d929dcddafe2f%2F0_73_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Juan Gabriel had been due to perform in Texas on Sunday. Photograph: Rodrigo 
Varela/Getty Images 
He was born the youngest of 10 children in the western state of Michoacan. His 
father, Gabriel Aguilera, was a farmer and his mother, Victoria Valadez, a 
housewife. The family lost contact with his father after he was taken to a 
psychiatric hospital in Mexico City when Juan Gabriel was still a baby. Unable 
to support her children, his mother moved the family to the border city of 
Ciudad Juarez, where he grew up as she worked as a maid.

Juan Gabriel said his mother was one of the people he most loved in his life 
even though he spent most of his childhood away from her. Unable to care for 
him, she sent him to an orphanage.

He said he wrote Eternal Love, one of his greatest hits, thinking about his 
mother, who died in 1974.

“Even though I don’t have my mother’s love today, I have the love of 
millions,” he told the newspaper La Jornada in an interview in 2012. “Her love 
comes through all the mothers of Mexico.”

He went to school only until fifth grade after he escaped the orphanage, where 
he met music teacher and mentor Juan Contreras. He said his artistic name came 
from Contreras and his father.

He traveled to Mexico City as a teenager and slept on the streets and in train 
stations while trying to break into the music business.

During that time he was accused of robbery and sent to jail. “I was good 
writing songs, but I was innocent for many other things and when I ended up in 
jail I didn’t know how to defend myself,” he told La Jornada.

The prison director and his wife helped get Juan Gabriel freed.

He signed his first record contract in 1971 and had his first big hit with No 
Tengo Dinero (I Don’t Have Any Money), according to his biography by Mexico’s 
Society of Music Authors and Composers.

At the height of his fame, he had problems in Mexico and the United States for 
not paying taxes. He was also linked to the Cali drug cartel when Fernando 
Rodriguez, son of Colombian drug trafficker Gilberto Rodríguez Orejuela, wrote 
in his book The Son of Chess Player that Juan Gabriel sang at a party in 
Colombia for the cartel leaders. The singer denied the claim.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Fjuan-gabriel-legendary-mexican-singer-songwriter-dies-aged-66%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc423847611ada23912838170719fc652efa91c36%2F0_34_3512_2108%2F3512.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Juan%20Gabriel%2C%20legendary%20Mexican%20singer-songwriter%2C%20dies%20aged%2066&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Fjuan-gabriel-legendary-mexican-singer-songwriter-dies-aged-66%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Juan%20Gabriel%2C%20legendary%20Mexican%20singer-songwriter%2C%20dies%20aged%2066&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Fjuan-gabriel-legendary-mexican-singer-songwriter-dies-aged-66%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc423847611ada23912838170719fc652efa91c36%2F0_34_3512_2108%2F3512.jpg>
 Juan Gabriel, pictured performing in 2012, was known for his outlandish 
costumes. Photograph: Eduardo Verdugo/AP 
Juan Gabriel rarely gave interviews. When he did, he avoided talking about his 
private life.

Although his former personal secretary, Joaquin Munoz, described their 
homosexual relationship in a book, Juan Gabriel and I, the singer neither 
admitted nor denied being gay. His fans were surprised when years later it 
became known that he had fathered four children with his friend Laura Salas.

“I’m not married; I don’t ever plan to marry. I’m happy single,” Juan Gabriel 
is quoted as saying in his biography by Mexico’s Society of Music Authors and 
Composers. “I have many loves but the most important are: my mother, my 
children, my sister, my brothers, my nieces and nephews and my songs.”
 