
1. Victim of Changes <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EKSU1W0ZUmQ>

The early Judas Priest <https://www.theguardian.com/music/judas-priest> albums 
contained an eclectic mix of styles. Out-and-out rockers sat alongside acoustic 
ballads, the odd quirky cover and ambitious multi-part epics that owed as much 
to Queen as to Black Sabbath. This song from the second album, 1976’s Sad Wings 
of Destiny, is one of the best of the epics, still appearing in live sets 
decades later. The end section showcases Rob Halford’s remarkable falsetto 
screams, his voice as much a lead instrument as the twin guitars of Glenn 
Tipton and KK Downing.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSePK19t-5Xw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSePK19t-5Xw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSePK19t-5Xw&media=>
2. Exciter <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=02V2XWbpf1s>

“Fall to your knees and repent if you please!” Their fourth album, 1977’s 
Stained Class, marked the point where the Judas Priest sound as we know it 
today began to emerge, a move away from the proggier elements towards 
straight-ahead metal that would come to define the genre in the coming decade. 
The galloping rocker that opened the album set the pace, beginning with a 
fusillade of drums, and the twin lead guitar harmony break towards the end is a 
delight. The fire-and-brimstone imagery of the avenging angel set by God to 
punish the wicked would become a recurring theme throughout their career. When 
Judas Priest were sued over the incident in which two fans shot themselves 
after listening to Stained Class, Halford highlighted the ridiculousness of the 
claim that they had been driven to do so by subliminal messages on the record 
when he pointed out that the chorus of Exciter, played backwards, appears have 
him singing: “I asked her for a peppermint.”

3. Beyond the Realms of Death <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y60Mo_Nmydg>

The last and greatest of the big epics from the early years is their closest 
equivalent to Stairway to Heaven or Stargazer. It uses the quiet-loud-quiet 
dynamic to great effect, guitar arpeggios on the verse leading into that 
monstrously heavy riff on the chorus, coupled with powerful, if enigmatic, 
lyrics on the theme of depression and alienation. If that wasn’t enough, 
Tipton’s masterful extended solo lifts things to another level.

Judas Priest's Rob Halford: I've become the stately homo of heavy metal'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jul/03/judas-priest-rob-halford-quentin-crisp-interview-redeemer-of-souls>
4. Hell Bent for Leather <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mpCfWn5TQkI>

When Halford came out as gay, there were those who were shocked and surprised, 
and those for whom it confirmed what they’d already guessed. The campy elements 
of songs like this ought to have given the former a clue; especially when live 
performances featured the leather-clad Halford whipping a motorcycle on stage. 
Aside from the themes, this short and punchy number, less than three minutes 
long, still finds room for a delightful if brief burst of classical guitar.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbTQz1ABtzek&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbTQz1ABtzek>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbTQz1ABtzek&media=>
 Video:Judas Priest perform Hell Bent for Leather live 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bTQz1ABtzek> 
5. Rapid Fire <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1LJLyU6H0jI>

Released in 1980 when the New Wave of British Heavy Metal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/sep/07/the-new-wave-of-british-heavy-metal-10-of-the-best>
 was hitting its stride, the band’s sixth album, British Steel, was their 
breakthrough record. The long-established Judas Priest weren’t a NWOBHM band, 
but they rode the wave and catapulted themselves into the big time, and the UK 
tour to promote the album saw a fledgling Iron Maiden as support – the only 
support tour Maiden ever did. The record spawned several chart singles, but the 
standout has to be this face-melting opener. New drummer Dave Holland is a 
force of nature here, the result is the sound of the apocalypse taking place 
within a West Midlands steel foundry.

6. Breaking the Law <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L397TWLwrUU>

One of the three big hits from British Steel, this story of the hopelessness 
of life –later claimed by Halford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jul/03/judas-priest-rob-halford-quentin-crisp-interview-redeemer-of-souls>
 to be a commentary on Thatcher’s Britain – is probably their best-known song. 
Its instantly recognisable riff makes it Judas Priest at their most commercial, 
but it has become a much-covered rock standard, with versions by artists as 
varied asthe Meteors <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GgqQa5ojsTw> and Babymetal
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_StXrRVpQPM>. Even if no laws were broken, 
milk bottles were still harmed in the making of this video.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DL397TWLwrUU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DL397TWLwrUU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DL397TWLwrUU&media=>
 Video:Breaking the Law by Judas Priest 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L397TWLwrUU> 
7. Screaming for Vengeance <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yw51MNAp9IY>

The radio-friendly album Point of Entry, recorded in the wake of chart 
success, lacked the fire of its predecessor, and the singles from the album 
failed to storm the charts. So with the 1982 follow-up Judas Priest reverted to 
a harder, heavier sound, typified by this belter of a title track, with its 
uncompromising in-your-face guitars and archetypal Halford screams. This is 
quintessential Judas Priest, at a time when they had become the very definition 
of metal.

8. Freewheel Burning <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M_s-49rNCdw>

Defenders of the Faith (1984) picked up where Screaming for Vengeance left 
off. The opening number and lead single from the album is another face-melter 
coming from the same place, musically at least, as Rapid Fire. Lyrically it’s 
closer to a biker anthem, with just as much fire but a little less brimstone. 
The rapid-fire middle-eight is yet another great example of how Halford’s 
vocals serve as a lead instrument alongside those twin guitars. Judas Priest at 
their best are always over the top, larger than life, and frequently teetering 
on the edge of self-parody, but that’s a major part of their appeal.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DH3hhmCmp0jw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DH3hhmCmp0jw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DH3hhmCmp0jw&media=>
 Video:Judas Priest perform Freewheel Burning on The Tube 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H3hhmCmp0jw> 
9. Turbo Lover <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JhY9GOhFwN4>

With 1986’s Turbo, Judas Priest introduced electronics and guitar synthesisers 
into their sound. The synthesised opening provoked revolt from some of their 
more traditionalist fans, who accused them of sounding like a poor man’s ZZ 
Top. Even if aspects of the production sound a little dated now, it was a bold 
attempt to try something different, though the fan backlash might have been one 
reason the material they later recorded with Stock, Aitken and Waterman never 
saw the light of day.

10. Future of Mankind <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OpKk7R73UEc>

After Halford left the band in 1992, Judas Priest did what has now become 
commonplace with ageing classic rock bands who mislaid their singers – they 
recruited the frontman from a tribute act. That replacement was Tim “Ripper” 
Owens from the band British Steel. His story inspired the Hollywood film Rock 
Star, although the storyline bore little resemblance to the reality, in which 
Owens eventually stepped aside to make way for Halford’s return. Since Halford 
returned to the fold in 2003, the band have recorded a further three studio 
albums. The most interesting of those is 2008’s Nostradamus, an ambitious 
double album with elements of metal, progressive rock and musical theatre, 
telling the life story of the seer. It’s the sort of thing Kiss tried and 
failed to do decades earlier with Music from the Elder, but in this case 
Halford has the gravitas to make it work, turning what could have been pure 
hokum into something profound. The final number brings the album to a close in 
suitably grandiose fashion, with melodramatic vocals and some splendid 
classical-style guitar flourishes.

 