
The US Department of Defense has been given a week to explain why it has not 
yet complied with a federal court order to list the individual exemptions for 
the disclosure of over 2,000 photographs depicting military abuse of detainees 
inAfghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> and Iraq.


At a district court hearing in Manhattan on Wednesday, judge Alvin Hellerstein 
described the consequences of the government’s decade long court battle to 
suppress the photographs, as a way “to obtain a very substantial delay” on 
disclosure.

“I have a feeling where we are at this point – to make up a phrase – at a line 
in the sand,” Hellerstein said, instructing counsel for the Defense Department 
to submit in writinghow long it would take to comply with the ruling made in 
August 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/oct/21/us-withholding-torture-photographs-iraq-afghanistan>
, or to appeal the order.

The American Civil Liberties Union has been fighting a transparency case 
against the Defense Department since 2004. Some photographs, which document 
treatment of detainees in detention facilities after the September 11 attacks, 
are said to be more disturbing that theinfamous images of detainee abuse at Abu 
Ghraib 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2004/apr/30/television.internationalnews> 
uncovered in 2004.

Both the district court in 2005 and the second circuit court of appeals in 
2008 held that the images should be released. But legislation was subsequently 
introduced through the senate to exempt the photographs from Freedom of 
Information laws, as they would jeopardize national security.

In 2012, then Defense secretary Leon Panetta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/leon-panetta> reclassified all the 
photographs, having been presented with a small selection of the collection. 
Panetta’s move was subsequently challenged, with Hellerstein ruling last year 
for the individual exemptions to be made.

On Wednesday, Hellerstein reiterated his scepticism for the blanket 
reclassification, stating he was “highly suspicious of something certified in 
gross”. The judge has already been presented with a small sample of the images, 
and has indicated that there were not clearcut national security exemption 
grounds for some that he saw.

Hellerstein also indicated he could be willing to review the entire collection 
of images. However, he added: “I did not enjoy seeing the pictures the first 
time, I would not want to see them again.”

It remains unclear how many images are being held by the department, but 
former Connecticut senator Joe Lieberman – one of those who introduced the 
legislation to prevent disclosure in 2009 – said there were almost 2,100.

The potential disclosure would follow the publication of a damning report into 
the CIA’s use of torture against high value detainees at ‘black sites’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/dec/09/cia-torture-report-released> 
following the September 11 attacks. The report found that the CIA’s use of 
torture – including waterboarding, rectal feeding, and the use of stress 
positions – was both brutal and ineffective, and that the CIA repeatedly misled 
Congress and the executive branch about its effectiveness.
 