
This decade has been a struggle for the four Welsh regions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/28/wales-wipeout-pro12-play-offs-regions-the-breakdown>
, hit finally by the recession and then by a long running dispute with their 
union that at one point led to them talking with the Premiership clubs about 
joining the English system.

They are at last looking up and relations with the Welsh Rugby Union have 
improved to the extent that both sides now have a mutual benefit approach. The 
collaboration hashelped swell ticket sales for Saturday’s Judgement Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/26/wales-regions-judgement-day-cardiff-ospreys-newport-scarlets>
 at the Millennium Stadium, where Cardiff Blues will take on Ospreys before 
Newport Gwent Dragons face the Scarlets, the only region with a realistic 
chance of finishing in the play-off positions in the Pro12.

Wales risks wipeout in Pro12 play-offs but regions have reason for optimism | 
Paul Rees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/28/wales-wipeout-pro12-play-offs-regions-the-breakdown>
A crowd of around 70,000 is expected for the fifth year of Judgement Day, with 
ticket sales at the start of the week well above last year’s record of 52,762 
and the interest shown has been the greatest in the regional era. The hope of 
the four teams involved is that some of those watching for the first time will 
be tempted to follow one regularly, boosting attendances that have rarely hit 
the five-figure mark this season.

“It is going to be a huge day,” said Ken Owens, the Scarlets’ captain and 
Wales hooker. “To play in atmospheres like this should inspire the boys: 
playing in front of packed houses in the best stadiums in the world is what 
rugby is about. We have lost our last couple of games and know we have to beat 
the Dragons to have a chance of finishing in the top four.”

The Wales centre Scott Williams returns for the Scarlets for his first 
appearance sincesuffering a knee injury against England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/28/wales-scott-williams-hallam-amos-ruled-out-rugby-world-cup>
 at Twickenham in the World Cup. Wayne Piva, the region’s head coach said: “It 
has been a difficult season because of the World Cup, but we have played some 
good rugby and have been in the top four for the most part. We need to pick it 
up again for the last two games.”

Pro12 has grounds for improvement but it must come from within
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/07/pro12-grounds-improvement-attract-crowds-the-breakdown>
Cardiff Blues <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cardiffblues> have never 
beaten Ospreys on Judgment Day, but they have recovered from a dismal start to 
the season to challenge for a place in the top six and qualification for next 
season’s European Champions Cup. They have lost just once in their last five 
matches while Ospreys, for so long Wales’s standard bearers in Europe, are in 
severe danger of losing their ever-present status in the Champions Cup and its 
previous incarnation.

“While we still have a mathematical chance of qualifying for the Champions 
Cup, we will go for it,” said Ospreys’ head coach, Steve Tandy. “We were in 
Exeter’s group in this season’s tournament and they looked pretty much dead and 
buried going into the final round of matches. They beat us and ended up going 
through. You can never say never. There will be a great atmosphere at the 
ground but we must not get distracted by the occasion.”

The Blues’ wing Tom James is looking for a favourable judgement from the Wales 
coaches afterbeing dropped for the final three matches of the Six Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/16/wales-tom-james-cardiff-blues-france-six-nations>
, having fought his way back into the side after a six-year absence. His 
failure to finish off an 80-metre break against Scotland was put down to a lack 
of match fitness after injury problems.

“I was unable to do a lot of training in the summer and it showed when I made 
that break,” he said. “After six years of out the international game, I found 
the intensity a lot different. I got dropped and had to deal with it, digging 
in and training hard. My goal now is to do well for the Blues and make Wales’s 
summer tour to New Zealand.”
 