
The three judges who ruled that the UK government would have to pass an act of 
parliament before it could trigger article 50 to leave the EUhave come in for 
intense criticism domestically 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/04/enemies-of-the-people-british-newspapers-react-judges-brexit-ruling>
.

But in examples from around the world this week, the judiciary has been on the 
frontline in the defence of freedom. Far from being seen as the enemy of the 
people, judges are often viewed as their most trusted allies.

An independent judiciary can be a last bulwark against corruption, press 
censorship and an overweening executive, whereas a weakened judiciary subjected 
to political influence gives governments a free hand.

Who are the judges who ruled that MPs should vote on Brexit?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/-three-judges-mps-vote-brexit-article-50-high-court>
In Hong Kong, for instance, many people hope the judiciary will help their 
fight against Beijing’s growing encroachment on the city’s autonomy. A judge 
there will shortly rule on whether two young pro-democracy politicians who have 
refused to swear an oath of allegiance to Chinese rulecan be recognised as 
legislators 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/02/hong-kong-beijing-intervene-pro-democracy-activists-basic-law>
.

The judgment will determine the independence of the legislature, assuming the 
Chinese government does not in effect overrule the courts.

In South Africa, a country still learning to love its constitution, high court 
judges and the former public protector Thuli Madonsela have played a key role 
in exposing corruption allegations against the president, Jacob Zuma, and the 
ruling ANC party. This week Zumadropped his opposition to the publication of a 
report by Madonsela 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/02/jacob-zuma-protest-pretoria-south-africa-report>
 that recommends a commission of inquiry headed by a judge be set up within 30 
days to investigate alleged influence peddling in government.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fjudges-actions-around-world-no-enemy-people-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffb22428c18f83c3188bf9a87b771ef9cff5728f9%2F0_114_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Judges'%20actions%20around%20the%20world%20show%20they%20are%20no%20enemy%20of%20the%20people&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fjudges-actions-around-world-no-enemy-people-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Judges%27%20actions%20around%20the%20world%20show%20they%20are%20no%20enemy%20of%20the%20people&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fjudges-actions-around-world-no-enemy-people-brexit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffb22428c18f83c3188bf9a87b771ef9cff5728f9%2F0_114_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 Pro-Beijing supporters outside the high court in Hong Kong. Photograph: Jerome 
Favre/EPA 
Similarly, in Zimbabwe, independent judges have repeatedly challenged Robert 
Mugabe’s efforts to ban public demonstrations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/14/zimbabwe-protest-leader-calls-for-more-strikes-against-mugabe-rule>
.

In Brazil a federal judge, Sérgio Moro, could topple the recently installed 
president, Michel Temer. Morohas become the public face 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/18/brazil-judiciary-democracy-sergio-moro-impeach-dilma-rousseff>
 of the battle to uncover corruption across Brazil. He ordered the arrest of 
four members of the senate’s own internal police force, who have been accused 
of obstructing an investigation intothe Petrobras scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/22/brazil-raids-petrobras-corruption-investigation-odebrecht>
.

In India <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>, journalists and media 
organisations are asking judges to intervene after the government was accused 
of censorship reminiscent of the country’s 1970s emergency. A network was 
ordered off the air over its reporting of an attack by Pakistan-based militants.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fjudges-actions-around-world-no-enemy-people-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff843500710e9ea032b3a2beee388890c52148214%2F33_0_2310_1386%2F2310.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Judges'%20actions%20around%20the%20world%20show%20they%20are%20no%20enemy%20of%20the%20people&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fjudges-actions-around-world-no-enemy-people-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Judges%27%20actions%20around%20the%20world%20show%20they%20are%20no%20enemy%20of%20the%20people&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fjudges-actions-around-world-no-enemy-people-brexit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff843500710e9ea032b3a2beee388890c52148214%2F33_0_2310_1386%2F2310.jpg>
 Federal judge Sérgio Moro has become the public face of the battle to uncover 
corruption across Brazil. Photograph: Rodolfo Buhrer/Reuters 
In an example of the dangers of a non-independent judiciary, Venezuela’s 
supreme court, which is controlled by government sympathisers, this week 
allowed President Nicolás Maduro to remove budgetary authority from the 
congress, the country’smain source of political opposition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/13/venezuela-opposition-national-assembly-deadlock-resign>
.

And in Turkey, where opposition MPs were arrested early on Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/04/turkey-arrests-pro-kurdish-party-leaders-mps>
, the chances of judges intervening are slim. A law passed this year has gutted 
the bulk of the judiciary. A total of 3,700 judges have been arrested or 
prosecuted. MPs havelost their immunity from prosecution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/20/turkish-mps-vote-lifting-immunity-from-prosecution>
 andpress censorship has been imposed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/29/stop-the-press-turkey-crackdown-journalists-overdrive-since-coup>
.


Meanwhile, the rightwing attack on the British judiciary comes at a time when 
the role of Britain as an international legal beacon is under pressure. Theresa 
May in her brief leadership campaign may have shelved plans to remove Britain 
from the European convention on human rights and introduce a British bill. But 
the persistence of the attack on the ECHR by ministers has had an impact.


Equally, the government has removed a reference in the ministerial code to the 
requirement that ministers comply with international law. The government said 
it was merely an innocent tidying-up process, but it comes at a time when the 
foreign secretary, Boris Johnson, frequently makes reference to plans to bring 
Russian or Syrian perpetrators of war crimes to justice in international courts.

Moreover, the current attorney general, Jeremy Wright, like his predecessor, 
Dominic Grieve, underlines “the intense public scrutiny that the UK’s 
government actions attract on the world stage and the importance of 
international law to both frame and defend those actions.”

With African nations from South Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica> to Gambia rushing to leave the 
international criminal court, it is arguably even more important that British 
ministers, starting with the lord chancellor, Liz Truss, speak out to defend 
the rule of law, as is their statutory duty, rather than through silence 
connive in judicial intimidation.

For all its faults, the UK judiciary is seen as fair and predictable. It is 
the international gold standard, and one of the key sources of the UK’s soft 
power.
 