
Judith Rodin’s new book, The Resilience Dividend 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/resilience-dividend.html>, begins with her 
surveying the destruction wrought bySuperstorm Sandy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hurricane-sandy> in October 2012. “There 
were the low-lying neighbourhoods of Staten Island exposed to sea rise, 
flooding and storm surge, where people had died in the storm. I saw damaged 
dunes and other soft, natural infrastructure that had been washed away, leaving 
neighbourhoods completely unprotected ... I saw homes destroyed, neighbourhoods 
disrupted, people’s lives destroyed.”


Rodin, who became president of US philanthropic organisation the Rockefeller 
Foundation in 2005, had already made building the resilience of cities and 
communities one of the foundation’s key objectives. But Sandy confirmed to her 
that “it was the most important work we could do”. Hence, the emphasis on the 
foundation’s100 Resilient Cities <http://www.100resilientcities.org> programme, 
and now this book. “In a time as turbulent as ours,” she writes, “we have no 
choice: we must all work to build greater resilience.”

The Rockefeller Foundation partners the Guardian Cities website, and to mark 
both the publication of her book in the UK and the site’s first anniversary, 
Rodin recently paid a visit to the Guardian’s London office. Time was short but 
she talks fast and shoots from the hip, and we covered a lot of storm-ravaged 
ground.

Rodin defines resilience as “the capacity to bounce back from a crisis, learn 
from it, and achieve revitalisation”. Her gameplan for building resilience is 
threefold – being prepared, responding to the immediate crisis, and then, 
perhaps most important of all, developing something better in its place. “Never 
let a good crisis go to waste,” she says, quoting Churchill.

“Crisis is becoming the new normal,” she warns. “Globally, in 2011, we spent 
$320bn just on recovery from natural disasters. That’s not sustainable given 
all the other types of disasters we have to confront.” But hasn’t the world 
always been faced with one crisis or another? “They are becoming far more 
expensive – the data show that.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjan%2F27%2Fjudith-rodin-warning-world-crisis-new-normal-rockefeller-foundation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F26%2F1422298023727%2F83656da3-2c52-4454-a074-0a463ddc03ba-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Judith%20Rodin's%20warning%20for%20the%20world%3A%20'Crisis%20is%20becoming%20the%20new%20normal'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjan%2F27%2Fjudith-rodin-warning-world-crisis-new-normal-rockefeller-foundation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Judith%20Rodin%27s%20warning%20for%20the%20world%3A%20%27Crisis%20is%20becoming%20the%20new%20normal%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjan%2F27%2Fjudith-rodin-warning-world-crisis-new-normal-rockefeller-foundation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F26%2F1422298023727%2F83656da3-2c52-4454-a074-0a463ddc03ba-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The aftermath of Superstorm Sandy: ‘New York viewed itself as quite resilient 
... yet Sandy was catastrophic’. Photograph: Julio Cortez/AP 
Trained as a psychologist, with a first degree from the University of 
Pennsylvania in the mid-1960s and then a PhD from Columbia, she is very keen on 
data rather than guesswork. “There have always been challenges and crises, but 
they tended to be big events and then they ended. Now it’s much less episodic. 
Disasters are much more frequent, and because we’re so globally interconnected, 
their impact affects everything in the world. TheBangkok flooding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2011/oct/25/bangkok-flooding-waters-in-pictures>
 [in 2011] took down a third of the global supply chain.”


At the root of much of this is climate change. “It has dramatically upped the 
stakes in terms of the number of crises,” Rodin says. “Then there’s rapid 
urbanisation: it’s estimated that at the rate at which urbanisation is 
occurring, particularly in the developing world, 40% of the infrastructure that 
will exist in 35 years is not yet built. We can get that right, or we can get 
it horribly wrong.”


Rodin cites the example of Brazil, which is rapidly growing and urbanising: 
“You can simply build a city grid, or you can build one with smart-grid 
technology that allows you to sample from whatever source of energy is most 
available, thus reducing your dependence on fossil fuels – and with a smart 
switch that allows you to delink from a piece [of infrastructure] that’s 
failing, so you don’t get half a city being taken down.”


The eventual 100 “resilient cities” selected for Rockefeller’s programme (to 
date,67 have been announced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/dec/03/st-louis-resilient-cities-china-london-paris-sydney>
) will be the most visible part of the initiative. But really, Rodin wants to 
change mindsets everywhere, and usher in “a new way of thinking about how we 
invest our resources, whether it’s a building or a city or a business”.


Superstorm Sandy sharpened her approach because it made her realise how 
complacent cities could be. “New York has viewed itself as quite resilient, and 
there was a great deal of real and significant attention and investment after 
9/11 to becoming more resilient – and yet Sandy was catastrophic.”

Unless resilience is built into the culture of cities, Rodin says, there is 
always the prospect of disruption turning into disaster. Disruptions, in her 
way of thinking, are inevitable; disasters aren’t. Indeed, with an integrated 
approach to resilience, disruption can be turned to advantage. Every crisis is 
an opportunity. The Chinese were there way before Churchill.


Rodin traces her interest in the idea of resilience back to her days as a 
psychology student. “Some of my early work was in the question of why, when you 
have children who grow up in equally disadvantaged neighbourhoods, a few of 
them succeed while most of them catastrophically fail. When I came to the 
University of Pennsylvania [she was the first female president of an Ivy League 
university] we were situated in the midst of what had become a horrifically 
disadvantaged neighbourhood, and I realised that some of the capacity building 
and the thinking about resilience that I had done around individuals could also 
be applied to the community level.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjan%2F27%2Fjudith-rodin-warning-world-crisis-new-normal-rockefeller-foundation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F26%2F1422297454668%2F50e6b520-1a3a-4160-8dcd-0f1c20f474d0-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Judith%20Rodin's%20warning%20for%20the%20world%3A%20'Crisis%20is%20becoming%20the%20new%20normal'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjan%2F27%2Fjudith-rodin-warning-world-crisis-new-normal-rockefeller-foundation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Judith%20Rodin%27s%20warning%20for%20the%20world%3A%20%27Crisis%20is%20becoming%20the%20new%20normal%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjan%2F27%2Fjudith-rodin-warning-world-crisis-new-normal-rockefeller-foundation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F26%2F1422297454668%2F50e6b520-1a3a-4160-8dcd-0f1c20f474d0-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Rodin pictured in 2013 with then New York mayor Michael Bloomberg and World 
Bank Group president Jim Yong Kim. Photograph: Ramin Talaie/Getty Images 
Rodin worked to revitalise not just the university but the community in which 
it was situated, and wrote a book calledThe University and Urban Revival 
<http://www.upenn.edu/pennpress/book/14337.html> to demonstrate how elite 
institutions could galvanise wider society. “The important part of the book is 
summed up in the subtitle – Out of the Ivory Tower and Into the Streets,” she 
says. “It’s about the obligation of these elite institutions in terms of what 
they can and should be doing with their neighbourhoods.”


This was all by way of preparation for her current work: “I came to 
Rockefeller in 2005. ThenKatrina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/hurricanekatrina> hit and 7/7 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/july7> hit. We intervened heavily in Katrina, 
and I realised this was a much bigger issue and a much bigger domain, and that 
we could do something transformational if we invested heavily, worked in a 
really creative way, took some risks.”

This was when Rodin placed what one observer called her “big bet” – adjusting 
the focus of a philanthropic organisation that had established its reputation 
in global public health programmes to this new-fangled idea of resilience. “I 
hope it is paying off,” she says, though she clearly isn’t in much doubt that 
it is. “Most of all it’s paying off in lives around the world, which we have 
shown are really helped by those investments.”


But what does “resilience” actually mean? It covers so many different types of 
crisis – climate change, natural disasters, cyber-attacks, even thefinancial 
crash of 2007/8 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/may/27/-sp-special-report-an-outsiders-guide-to-the-city-of-london>
, which, she says, was the result of having a “very brittle and non-resilient 
economic system globally, so one piece took everything down”. Is the term so 
broad as to be almost useless?


“That’s something my board ask me all the time,” she admits. “They say, 
‘Convince us that you’re not just trying to be all things to all people.’ But I 
think it is quite specific, and that’s why in the book I talk first about the 
five characteristics of resilience 
<http://www.rockefellerfoundation.org/blog/city-resilient>, because those 
anchor it.”

Those characteristics are awareness, diversity, integration, the capacity for 
self-regulation, and adaptiveness; a community needs all five to be resilient, 
Rodin says. While the number of threats against which she is trying to build 
resilience looks ludicrously numerous and varied, she believes the specificity 
of the rules laid down makes the programme manageable.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjan%2F27%2Fjudith-rodin-warning-world-crisis-new-normal-rockefeller-foundation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F26%2F1422298658858%2F1668f4e2-c71e-441c-9fdf-45b6e060712c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Judith%20Rodin's%20warning%20for%20the%20world%3A%20'Crisis%20is%20becoming%20the%20new%20normal'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjan%2F27%2Fjudith-rodin-warning-world-crisis-new-normal-rockefeller-foundation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Judith%20Rodin%27s%20warning%20for%20the%20world%3A%20%27Crisis%20is%20becoming%20the%20new%20normal%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjan%2F27%2Fjudith-rodin-warning-world-crisis-new-normal-rockefeller-foundation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F26%2F1422298658858%2F1668f4e2-c71e-441c-9fdf-45b6e060712c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Floating houses near Amsterdam, built to combat sea-level rise; the 
Netherlands is painted in heroic terms in Rodin’s book. Photograph: Ashley 
Cooper/Alamy 
Most strikingly, Rodin rejects the idea of “stability” as an overriding 
ambition. “I differentiate resilience from stability, because stability is the 
tendency – both in engineering terms and psychological terms – to try to get 
back to normal, to rebalance. This [book] is really saying, ‘what made you 
vulnerable in the first place was that equilibrium’, so you’ve got to use this 
hit, if it does happen, to adapt and grow and revitalise. New Orleans has done 
that.”

Her idea of resilience is a dynamic condition: one is not so much resilient as 
forever working towards resilience, and the benefits of that striving are the 
“dividend” she believes will accrue regardless of whether the disaster actually 
hits. The Netherlands is painted in heroic terms in the book: in the face of 
the threat from the sea, the Dutch have created a resilient, integrated, 
socially inclusive society that can withstand not just potential inundation but 
lots of other things besides. And that’s the dividend: a society that doesn’t 
function properly can’t be resilient; a society that isn’t resilient doesn’t 
function properly.

Rodin and the foundation are also committed to encouraging fairer, more 
equitable societies – but she admits that is proving a tougher nut to crack. 
“Out of our original strategic planning, our two pillars initially were 
building greater resilience and achieving more equitable growth; we saw them 
going together. But that was pre-2008. We were working on more equitable 
growth, but then the bottom fell out of the economy and there wasn’t much 
growth. We had to reframe what this new period was going to be all about, and 
we have come to more shared prosperity, more inclusive economies.”


On the day we met, Oxfam had just published a report showing that 1% of the 
world’s population held half of all global wealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jan/19/global-wealth-oxfam-inequality-davos-economic-summit-switzerland>
. Creating more equitable societies is going to be some task. “Clearly, there 
are forces that oppose this kind of narrative about the worry for the poor and 
vulnerable, but that’s true in all of the things we do. We have always tried to 
focus attention on the people who often get forgotten by the policy-makers. We 
don’t expect to be the people who solve these problems, but we use them as the 
lens to form the initiatives we launch on the ground.”

The Ebola outbreak <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ebola> in west Africa 
came too late for the book. She says it demonstrates a lack of resilience both 
in the region affected and among international health bodies, and also 
criticises the “over-responsiveness” of the authorities in the US, which 
reacted with near-panic and threatened to stop people from west Africa entering 
the country.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjan%2F27%2Fjudith-rodin-warning-world-crisis-new-normal-rockefeller-foundation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F26%2F1422298420018%2Fea8ea0ed-1ea8-4e41-9725-afc9fc88755e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Judith%20Rodin's%20warning%20for%20the%20world%3A%20'Crisis%20is%20becoming%20the%20new%20normal'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjan%2F27%2Fjudith-rodin-warning-world-crisis-new-normal-rockefeller-foundation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Judith%20Rodin%27s%20warning%20for%20the%20world%3A%20%27Crisis%20is%20becoming%20the%20new%20normal%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjan%2F27%2Fjudith-rodin-warning-world-crisis-new-normal-rockefeller-foundation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F26%2F1422298420018%2Fea8ea0ed-1ea8-4e41-9725-afc9fc88755e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 According to Rodin, Norway showed impressive resilience in the wake of the 
mass killings on Utoya island in 2011. Photograph: Lefteris Pitarakis/AP 
While Rodin says it’s too early to judge whether the French response to the 
attacks on Paris <https://www.theguardian.com/world/charlie-hebdo-attack> can 
be termed “resilient”, she draws a parallel with theBreivik killings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jul/23/norway-attacks> in Norway in 
2011, which are dealt with in great detail in her book. She admires the way the 
country responded to that horrific and unprecedented event: “The resilience 
narrative around that is that they didn’t let the anti-Muslim and 
anti-immigration fervour of the killer divide them as a society.” Despite the 
slaughter, Norway didn’t become any less Norwegian.


I suggest that, as philanthropists go, she is a pretty tough one, willing to 
cut off NGOs the foundation is funding if they are no longer deemed to be 
performing. “They have to be producing,” Rodin says. “We’re not in the business 
of only keeping civil society going. If they’re not producing some impact, they 
may have gone past their time of productivity.” She also says it’s important 
that philanthropic organisations work with commercial firms and try to get them 
to adapt their behaviour. Capitalism will not be overturned but perhaps made 
more equitable – and more efficient too.


The US is a country with numerous multimillionaires and a great reputation for 
philanthropy, yet remains in many ways a dysfunctional society. Is philanthropy 
papering over the cracks and making up for political failures? “Philanthropy is 
not charity,” she insists. “Charity assists until we can get it right. The role 
of philanthropy is to change the model so that [the underlying problem] doesn’t 
occur.” She argues that because philanthropic organisations get tax breaks, 
their money should be considered as risk capital and be used to innovate and 
challenge. Hence her big bet on resilience.


Rodin clocks up 10 years at the Rockefeller Foundation this year. Most past 
presidents have done a decade, so is she eyeing the exit? “I’m loving what I’m 
doing,” she says. Then she returns to the gambling theme: “When you take on 
real change in the organisation you lead, you get a stack of chips and you 
start using them up – and when they’re gone you gotta go. So you have to 
determine when that is.” She says it in such a way that you expect her to be at 
the table for a while yet.


The Resilience Dividend: Managing Disruption, Avoiding Disaster and Growing 
Stronger in an Unpredictable World, by Judith Rodin, is published by Profile 
Books (RRP £20). Order a copy for £16 from theGuardian Bookshop 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/resilience-dividend.html>, or call 0330 333 
6846.
 