
England have earned a place in the World Cup final by proving beyond doubt 
that they are still masters of European rugby. Whether Will Carling's grimly 
purposeful team can follow up their away wins against Scotland and France with 
a triumph at the expense of the Antipodes is open to doubt - yet at Twickenham 
the hosts are bound to have an excellent chance of becoming world champions.

 England demonstrated at Murrayfield that they are a pitiless machine prepared 
to sacrifice themselves, their opponents and even the game itself to grind out 
another awesome, not to say awful, victory. This match was the apotheosis of 
set-piece domination, the nadir of rugby as a handling game, and the sort of 
example that could drive spectators and potential converts away in their 
thousands.

 Within their self-imposed limitations England hammered the Scots into 
oblivion with a remorseless display of scrummaging power. Time and again the 
powerful English pack caused Scotland's scrum to buckle and splinter like a 
brave ship slowly foundering on a huge lump of bedrock.

 Scotland had fleeting chances to take a winning initiative despite their 
fearful clobbering up front. But crucially their fate depended on their 
full-back Gavin Hastings kicking his penalty goals just so long as his 
counterpart Jonathan Webb kept missing the target. Sadly Hastings, who had a 
magnificent game, failed with the boot when it mattered most, at 6-6.

 The Scots were found wanting in other departments. Their vaunted back row of 
Jeffrey, White and Calder rarely functioned as an effective marauding unit, 
partly because they had to live off the merest scraps of loose ball, partly due 
to a palpable lack of pace. It was a subdued farewell for Jeffrey in his last 
game at Murrayfield.

 England, of course, made no apologies for the joyless character of their 
chosen strategy. Clearly the coaches, Geoff Cooke and Roger Uttley, believe 
that the end amply justifies the means which involves making their 
three-quarters redundant. What Carling really thinks about this sterile version 
of a complex game is open to conjecture, especially as his creative skills have 
often reflected a more flamboyant style.

Cooke said: 'If England win the World Cup then thousands of schoolchildren up 
and down the country will feel inspired to play rugby.' Yet surely England need 
to show in the final that the game includes variety, running and handling and 
even a bit of passion to persuade kids and adults alike that there is any real 
point to it. At the moment Carling's side play a kind of anti-rugby that 
inhibits freedom of expression and kills the game as a spectacle.

 One suspects, though, that this hard-nosed England team, like Rhett Butler, 
simply don't give a damn. The players perform to satisfy only themselves as 
though the game were a private ritual that can cut itself off from wider 
responsibilities to a paying public. ITV, who invested Â£7million to transmit 
the World Cup, are entitled to regard this semi-final as a sporting disaster.

When John Hart, the New Zealand coach, remarked: 'God help rugby if England 
win the World Cup,' he may not have been merely firing off another salvo in the 
competition's propaganda war. England may well possess the capacity to stretch 
and perhaps overcome Australia but success under their terms threatens to 
propel the game into a cul-de-sac for years to come.

Not that England - in terms of philosophy anyway - are capable of looking 
beyond the next game. As their coaches point out when they habitually drop into 
soccerspeak, the overriding priority is how you are going to perform on the 
day. In that respect England's key players, Webb apart, were mightily effective 
with Ackford and Dooley dominant in the line-out, Winterbottom quick and 
aggressive around the fringes, and the front row a model of concentration and 
technique in the scrums.

Behind the scrum Hill was cool and precise, taking his time before flicking 
the ball out to Andrew, who kicked for position and for touch with relentless 
accuracy. The England fly-half may have reverted to the ultra-conservative mode 
of the mid-eighties but nowadays the important difference is the way his 
monolithic pack exerts tight control while he works the touchline with a slide 
rule. As Ian McGeechan, the Scottish coach, remarked: 'England strangled the 
game while we tried to bring it alive'.

 Despite their overwhelming possession England trailed for the best part of an 
hour largely because Webb was so out of sorts that he could only kick penalty 
goals from directly in front of the posts. In the ninth minute Hastings gave 
Scotland the lead with a confident 35-metre penalty after Winterbottom fell 
offside just on the half-hour a second penalty, following an offence by Probyn, 
offered Scotland a tantalising whiff of victory.

Yet it was only a matter of time before the Scottish scrum's habit of 
collapsing would prove costly. When David Sole's beleaguered pack collapsed to 
counter pushovers close to their posts in the 32nd and 57th minutes even the 
nervous Webb was able to pot the resultant short-range penalties and level the 
scores.

On the hour came the turning point when Hastings unaccountably missed the kick 
of a rugby lifetime from the edge of the 22, screwing his penalty attempt to 
the right of the posts from a very good angle.

Five minutes from time Scotland's doom was effectively sealed when Andrew, 
lurking to the right of the scrum in the left corner, dropped a crisp goal to 
the delight of the huge England contingent in the crowd. Like Andrew's winning 
kick, England's strategy was always predictable - but, give or take a moment's 
hesitation, it always looked like working, too.
 