
Christine and the Queens – It 

Christine recently covered my Beats 1 show while I was away in New York. 
Little did she know I was cooking breakfast to her music in an apartment in 
Williamsburg, Brooklyn, every single morning. I’m completely mesmerised by this 
beautiful track from her albumChaleur Humaine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/03/christine-and-the-queens-chaleur-humaine>
. I don’t speak a word of French but Christine makes me feel like I do. She 
originally released this album in her native language and then blessed us (me) 
with a rerelease, with the majority of it translated into English. I’m still 
undecided on which version I prefer. I’m happy to see she’s playing quite a few 
shows worldwide over the rest of this year – gonna make it my aim to see her
live at least once 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/19/christine-and-the-queens-heloie-letissier-live-review-koko>
!

Skepta ft A$AP Nast and D Double E – Ladies Hit Squad 

I was ever so fortunate enough to have sat upstairs while D Double E recorded 
his verse. For any D Double E fans – I’m sure you’ll understand the excitement 
of hearing him say “muuuu-eeeeeee muuu-eeeeee” or even just hearing him record 
the adlibs. I haven’t been able to stop listening to the track ever since. Even 
when [Julie’s brother] Skepta’s albumKonnichiwa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/06/10-things-we-learned-from-skeptas-konnichiwa>
 album was released, I still went straight to this track before checking out 
the rest of it . And if you’veseen the video 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4eMeVQjTlgQ>, you’ll get an even better idea 
of what emotions I’m going through as I sing “twerk f’me”.

Jordan Mackampa – Same Faces

This is my “drive to south London” song. The only thing I look forward to 
whenever I make the journey from Palmers Green, north London, to my friends’ 
houses. I stumbled across Jordan Mackampa online very randomly, which I think 
has contributed to my deep feelings for his soothing voice – sometimes I feel 
like I’m lucky to have him. One wrong click and I could have been back on 
Twitter retweetingmy brother 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/08/skepta-konnichiwa-review>. But 
instead I got to hear (then eventuallymeet and have on my Beats 1 show 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/post/idsa.1471bd95-dff8-11e5-83af-7451b42d905e>) 
this talented young man, who also happens to be a chef, who has saved me from 
one-hour journeys of boredom. Now I’m singing non-stop as I cruise through the 
Blackwall tunnel. Thank you, Jordan.

Drake – Controlla 

This track does one of my favourite things in the whole world. It loops 
seamlessly. Dear artists and producers: please aim for this (if your track is 
really good). This is a very hard track to walk away from. Sometimes, I carry 
my portable speaker out of the house with me because I don’t want the track to 
stop while I’m starting up my car. Obsessed much? I think so. It’s just so 
awesome! People keep calling this a summer song. This is my every season song. 
I also become a very different person when in a club dancing to this. Very, 
very different.

Hiatus Kaiyote – Breathing Underwater 

Another one of my favourite things in the world is when I’m in love with a 
song and it’s more than five minutes long. It’s like the artist knew that the 
song was way too good to stop at three minutes and 30 seconds.Hiatus Kaiyote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/sep/30/hiatus-kaiyote-new-band> are 
outer-space aliens who breathe music (and also apparently underwater). The 
first track I heard from them was Laputa, and I had it on repeat until my 
producer saw them live, and has to this day never stopped talking about them. 
Driving at night time to this track is a completely different experience. 
London can be the perfect backdrop at night-time, and this track is the perfect 
accompaniment.

 * Julie Adenuga’s show is on Beats 1 <http://applemusic.tumblr.com/beats1> at 
8pm, Monday to Thursday. Listen again on demand via Connect on Apple Music.
 