
Jean-Claude Juncker’s self-styled state of the European Union address 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/14/juncker-european-unity-brexit-vote-eu>
 set out to turn the page on Britain’s vote to leave and persuade the bloc that 
if it is to weather a perfect storm of crises it must stop bickering, promise 
less and deliver more.

The European commission <https://www.theguardian.com/world/european-commission>
 president barely mentioned the UK referendum result beyond urging London to 
get a move on, reiterating that there could be no “à la carte” access to the 
single market and calling on the EU27 not to let Brexit distract them.

Instead, and in place of the lofty rhetoric of 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/09/refugee-crisis-eu-executive-plans-overhaul-of-european-asylum-policies>
, Juncker’s 50-minute speech unveiled concrete economic and security proposals, 
including the establishment of an EU defence headquarters to work towards a 
common military force.

European commission president decries attacks on Poles since Brexit vote
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/14/juncker-european-unity-brexit-vote-eu>
Two days before a brainstorming session of EU heads of state – minus Theresa 
May – in Bratislava, he sought above all to establish common ground among 
members, whom he said were more divided than he had seen in three decades of 
European politics, on a possible roadmap to reboot the bloc and make it more 
relevant to its citizens.

Juncker wanted a better Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> 
that was a real driving force across the continent. He said the EU “should not 
only preserve our European way of life, but also empower those who are living 
it”.

Key to that will be the union’s capacity to bolster the fundamental security 
of Europeans, not just in the face of the terror threat seen in the attacks in 
Paris and Brussels, but of globalisation, the migration crisis, economic 
fragility and unemployment.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fjunckers-speech-was-all-about-concrete-ideas-to-heal-a-divided-eu%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F584508f0a8e357c1a7f3b95012054724da5fcba5%2F0_217_3252_1951%2F3252.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Juncker%E2%80%99s%20speech%20was%20all%20about%20concrete%20ideas%20to%20heal%20a%20divided%20EU&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fjunckers-speech-was-all-about-concrete-ideas-to-heal-a-divided-eu%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Juncker%E2%80%99s%20speech%20was%20all%20about%20concrete%20ideas%20to%20heal%20a%20divided%20EU&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fjunckers-speech-was-all-about-concrete-ideas-to-heal-a-divided-eu%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F584508f0a8e357c1a7f3b95012054724da5fcba5%2F0_217_3252_1951%2F3252.jpg>
 With Europe in the midst of a migration crisis, Juncker called for the EU’s 
new border and coastguard force to start work. Photograph: Angelos 
Tzortzinis/AFP/Getty Images 
Juncker said the planned European defence HQ and common military force – plans 
which Britain has long opposed, and which France and Germany will present in 
greater detail in Bratislava – would be “complementary with Nato”.

He said greater defence cooperation would also make sense economically by 
reducing wasteful duplication of effort by member states, and called for a 
defence fund by the end of the year for common research projects.

Juncker also proposed doubling both the size and the duration of his signature 
European investment programme to €630bn by 2022, in a bid to boost the 
continent’s economy and create more jobs by helping projects ranging from 
airports to providing wireless internet in every EU city.

With Europe in the midst of its biggest migration crisis since the second 
world war, he also called for the EU’s new border and coastguard force to start 
work soon, with 200 guards and 50 vehicles to be deployed on the 
Bulgarian-Turkish border by next month. He also unveiled an ambitious 
investment plan for Africa to stem the flow of migrants.

Juncker’s highly centralising commission has come under heavy fire from 
Eurosceptic parties - in founding states such as France and the Netherlands in 
the west and governments in newer eastern members such as Hungary and Poland - 
for pushing too hard for integration at the expense of national freedoms.

EU is facing existential crisis, says Jean-Claude Juncker
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/13/jean-claude-juncker-eu-is-facing-existential-crisis>
In comments addressed more at national leaders than at the MEPs to whom he was 
speaking, Juncker said that improved cooperation and solidarity between the 
member states and with Europe’s institutions would be essential if the union 
was to survive existential challenges and the shock of Brexit.

Germany and France both face elections in the coming year, and although more 
major change in the union looks unlikely, north-south political tensions over 
fiscal policy in the eurozone and a deep east-west split over taking in 
refugees risk further jeopardising the cohesion of the bloc.

“We have to stop this war according to which all success is national, and all 
failure is European,” he said. The EU “does not have enough union. There is 
fragmentation out there that is leaving scope for galloping populism.” The 
people of Europe “don’t want this petty envy between the various institutions. 
They want results”.
 