
Justin Bieber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/23/footage-appears-to-show-justin-bieber-punch-a-fan-who-reached-into-car>
 will headline this year’s British Summer Time Hyde Park 2017, bringing his 
Purpose world tour to the annual event.

Scheduled for 2 July, the Canadian pop star is the latest big name to be added 
to next year’s series of concerts, topping the bill alongsidePhil Collins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/08/phil-collins-to-play-biggest-ever-solo-show-in-hyde-park>
, Green Day and Kings of Leon.

Bieber will have support on the day from EDM producer Martin Garrix, 
Scandi-pop artist Tove Lo andBrits critics’ choice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/08/ragnbone-man-wins-2017-brits-critics-choice-award>
-shortlisted singer Anne-Marie.

Justin Bieber review – pop idol lacks bounce, despite bringing a trampoline
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/12/justin-bieber-review-o2-arena-london-purpose-tour>
A fixture in the British festival calendar, BST has previously featured the 
Rolling Stones, Carole King, the Who, Kylie Minogue, Taylor Swift and Stevie 
Wonder. “Justin Bieber has proven himself to be a master singer, songwriter and 
live performer,” said James King, the senior vice-president of AEG Live, which 
runs the event. “Bringing the Purpose tour to Hyde Park next summer is without 
question the pop show of the summer.”

Bieber’s gig will be a UK festival exclusive and his only London show of 2017. 
It arrives amid a huge tour to promote his global No 1 albumPurpose 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/15/justin-bieber-purpose-review-a-grown-up-sorry-sort-of>
. This year the singer has faced criticism for his unpredictable behaviour on 
the tour. He told a London audience in October he was dissatisfied with their 
loud responseto his performance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/12/justin-bieber-review-o2-arena-london-purpose-tour>
, and left the stage duringa Manchester show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/31/justin-bieber-im-not-a-robot-stage-walk-off-manchester-twitter>
 in the same month.

He later apologised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/31/justin-bieber-im-not-a-robot-stage-walk-off-manchester-twitter>
 for his rants, saying: “There’s going to be times where I say the wrong thing, 
because I’m human. But I don’t pretend to be perfect and I hope to God that, 
you know, I don’t say the right thing all the time, because if that was the 
case then I’d be a robot, and I’m not a robot. There are times when I get upset 
… times when I get angry, there are times when I’m going to be frustrated. But 
I’m always going to be myself on this stage.”
 