
Juventus <https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus>, the current Italian 
champions, have unveiled a new club crest – with club president Andrea Agnelli 
claiming the unusual, minimalist design has been one year in the making.

The Joy of Six: weird and wonderful football club crests | John Ashdown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/dec/13/joy-of-six-weird-wonderful-club-crests>
Agnelli unveiled the new logo 
<https://twitter.com/juventusfcen/status/821101166767521792>, a stylised black 
and white letter J in the shape of a shield, at a ceremony in Milan, saying 
“this new logo is a symbol of the Juventus way of living.”

“We spent a year trying to find out what the new markets want, but also to 
show a sense of belonging and looking to the future,” Agnelli added.

The event was attended by a number of first-team regulars, including Leonardo 
Bonucci and Claudio Marchisio, while legendary Italian electronic musician 
Giorgio Moroder played at the event.

“I saw the future of music in the 1970s. Now, Juventus have seen the future of 
football,” Moroder said.
JuventusFC (@juventusfcen) 
Life is a matter of Black and White. #2beJUVENTUS 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/2beJUVENTUS?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/qQgiPf0nKV 
<https://t.co/qQgiPf0nKV>
 <https://twitter.com/juventusfcen/status/821100084188348416> January 16, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/juventusfcen/status/821100084188348416> 
The launch of the new logo was supported by a promotional video, which 
appeared on Twitter with the slogan ‘life is a matter of Black and White’.

Juventus’ current logo features the silhouette of a charging bull, a symbol of 
the club’s home city of Turin that also appears on the crest of local rivals 
Torino. The club has largely used a variation of this design since 1971, while 
their logo in the 1960s and 1980s featured a zebra.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fjuventus-unveil-new-crest-serie-a%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4daedfe4d94a24fed97ad86a45b993e991fab77%2F0_0_1334_1992%2F1334.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Juventus%20unveil%20bold%20new%20club%20crest%20at%20ceremony%20in%20Milan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fjuventus-unveil-new-crest-serie-a%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Juventus%20unveil%20bold%20new%20club%20crest%20at%20ceremony%20in%20Milan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fjuventus-unveil-new-crest-serie-a%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4daedfe4d94a24fed97ad86a45b993e991fab77%2F0_0_1334_1992%2F1334.jpg>
 The current logo of Juventus has been in use since 2004. Photograph: Getty 
Images 
Juventus have played in black and white stripes since 1903, when Notts County 
famously sent the club a set of shirts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2011/sep/08/juventus-new-stadium-notts-county>
 to replace their original pink jerseys.

Juventus have won the last five Serie A titles and currently lead the table by 
one point from Roma,despite a 2-1 defeat to Fiorentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/16/paulo-sousa-hunchback-taunts-juventus-fiorentina-dans>
 on Sunday. In Monday’s game, Milan fought back from 2-0 down at Torino, Andrea 
Bertolacci and a Carlos Bacca penalty earning a draw.
 