
Police in Indian-controlled Kashmir <https://www.theguardian.com/world/kashmir>
 have detained a prominent activist hours after he was blocked from boarding a 
flight to Geneva to attend a UN human rights council summit.

Associates of Khurram Parvez said his arrest on Friday morning was 
unprecedented and underscored the desperation of Indian authorities over 
Kashmir, after more than two months of violent clashes between police and 
anti-government protesters.

Kashmir braces for Eid bloodshed amid summer of violent protests
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/12/kashmir-braces-for-eid-bloodshed-amid-summer-of-violent-protests>
More than 80 civilians have died and thousands have been injured in the 
disputed region’sbloodiest summer in five years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/12/kashmir-braces-for-eid-bloodshed-amid-summer-of-violent-protests>
.

Parvez, 39, was taken into custody from his home in Srinagar about 12.30am on 
Friday. Zahir-ud-Din, a fellow activist and journalist, said a magistrate 
ordered administrative detention for at least five days over allegations of 
breaching the peace.

Administrative detention orders, which have been criticised by the Indian 
supreme court as “lawless laws”, allow for detainment without trial and can be 
extended indefinitely. The most recent publicly data shows 3,200 people were in 
prison inIndia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> under such orders as 
of December 2014.

A senior member of the Jammu Kashmir Coalition of Civil Society (JKCCS), 
Parvez said he was turned away from Delhi airport on Wednesday evening after 
trying to board a flight to Switzerland, where he planned to submit a “civil 
society stakeholder’s report” to the UN human rights council.

He said he was given no official reason for the travel ban but was told it was 
at the instruction of India’s intelligence bureau.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fkashmiri-activist-detained-and-barred-from-leaving-india-to-attend-un-summit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d6f8d88d29b2a466ce85cfc46f3a2ebec782d24%2F0_160_2920_1751%2F2920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kashmiri%20activist%20barred%20from%20leaving%20India%20to%20attend%20UN%20summit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fkashmiri-activist-detained-and-barred-from-leaving-india-to-attend-un-summit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kashmiri%20activist%20barred%20from%20leaving%20India%20to%20attend%20UN%20summit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fkashmiri-activist-detained-and-barred-from-leaving-india-to-attend-un-summit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d6f8d88d29b2a466ce85cfc46f3a2ebec782d24%2F0_160_2920_1751%2F2920.jpg>
 Protesters in Srinagar this week. Photograph: Umer/Pacific/Barcroft Images 
Two colleagues, including the lawyer Parvez Imroz, were permitted to board the 
flight to Geneva. Imroz said in a statement that Parvez’s arrest represented “a 
real and imminent security threat” and was an attempt to intimidate the 
activist. Senior police officials in Kashmir could not be reached for comment.

Parvez, who has not previously been arrested for his work, is a prominent 
critic of alleged abuses by Indian security forces in Kashmir, but was 
regularly invited to lead workshops on the conflict at public institutions, 
said Gul Mohammad, a professor of political science at Kashmir University.

“He was never stopped [at the airport] before, nor stopped in doing his human 
rights work in Kashmir,” he said. “It is quite surprising [but] part of a 
larger clampdown on human rights activists.”

The JKCCS was the first to draw attention to thousands of mass graves in 
remote parts of Kashmir and to demand that the government investigate them to 
make clear who the dead were and how they died.

Kashmir conflict ebbs as new wave of militant emerges
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/11/kashmir-conflict-new-wave-militants>
The group has also written scathing reports about brutality involving some of 
the hundreds of thousands of Indian troops in the region and highlighted 
widespread powers granted to troops that it alleges have led to a culture of 
impunity and widespread rights abuses.

Internetand mobile phone use have been heavily restricted across Kashmir this 
week as the summer’s protestscontinued throughout Eid al-Adha 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/12/kashmir-braces-for-eid-bloodshed-amid-summer-of-violent-protests>
, one of the two holiest events in the Islamic calendar. Two civilians were 
killed on the first day of the festival, and mosques across the region were 
shut.

The latest wave of unrest was triggered by the death of Burhan Wani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/11/kashmir-conflict-new-wave-militants>
, a separatist militant who was cornered by Indian security officials in the 
remote area of Kokernang and shot in early July.

Wani, thought to be have been aged 21, had garnered a strong following on 
social media, but analysts say the 68 days of protests that followed his 
funeral also reflect deeper frustration with stalled efforts to extend the 
region’s autonomy from Delhi.

Kashmir has been the subject of two wars between India and Pakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> and seven decades of simmering 
tension since its division between the two countries in 1947.

JKCCS estimates more than 1,000 protesters have been detained over the past 
nine weeks. A Kashmiri engineer working in the central Indian state of 
Chhattisgarh wascharged with sedition 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/06/world/asia/india-facebook-sedition-kashmir.html>
 in August for allegedly sharing or liking a Facebook post calling for the 
Indian government to withdraw from the former princely state.
 