
Ronny Deila admitted he was relieved after watching his Celtic team ease into 
the quarter-finals of theScottish Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup> with a 2-0 victory over 
Lowland League side East Kilbride at Airdrie’s Excelsior stadium.

Back-to-back defeats against Ross County in the League Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/31/ross-county-celtic-scottish-league-cup-semi-final-match-report>
 semi-final andAberdeen in the Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/03/aberdeen-celtic-scottish-premiership-match-report>
 had piled pressure on Deila, with the Norwegian and his players booed off by 
Celtic’s supporters at half-time on Sunday as they led only by Leigh 
Griffiths’s 20th-minute goal.

Paul Hanlon earns Hibernian a cup replay with equaliser against Hearts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/07/hearts-hibernian-scottish-cup-match-report>
However, Deila and the Celtic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> 
fans were able to relax after Colin Kazim-Richards, making his first start, 
added a second in the 51st minute with his first goal since joining the club 
from Feyenoord last week.

Asked if it was a relief to be through to the quarter-finals, Deila said: 
“Yes, of course. I think it would have been very hard had we lost today, I 
admit that. So it was a crucial victory.

It is now a question of when not if Celtic look beyond Ronny Deila | Ewan 
Murray
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/feb/06/celtic-ronny-deila-moyes-oneill-stubbs>
“You never know in football but that would have been the biggest surprise in a 
lot of years but it didn’t happen and I am very happy for that.

“But I was quite comfortable during the 90 minutes and I will give a lot of 
credit to East Kilbride, they fought really hard and tried to play football as 
well so that was a positive.”

He added: “I thought we controlled the game pretty well, we could have created 
more. I didn’t think we were accurate enough and the surface was a little bit 
difficult for us and also some new players and new relationships in the team so 
we could have played better but we went through and that is the most important 
thing.

“We wanted to score more goals and we had our chances but nobody will remember 
that if we win the cup.”

On a blustery day in Lanarkshire, it never really looked like a shock was on 
the cards. The part-timers from East Kilbride were organised and diligent in 
defence and, with a noticeable height disadvantage, they did well to lose only 
two goals from Gary Mackay-Steven corners.

However, working so hard to stem the constant stream of Celtic attacks meant 
they offered little going forward. But that did not stop Billy Ogilvie, the 
East Kilbride manager, describing it as “probably the proudest moment I have 
ever had in football, that 90 minutes today”.

He added: “It is pretty difficult to put into words. I am so proud of them but 
I think I am even beyond that. To an absolute man they worked ever so hard and 
they kept their discipline, it was phenomenal.

“ When you make Celtic score their goals from set pieces, you must be doing 
something correct in open play and that is how well we did today in open play. 
We closed Celtic down and made them work hard.”


 