
Keir Starmer <https://www.theguardian.com/law/keir-starmer>, the shadow Brexit 
secretary and former director of public prosecutions, is being prevented by 
parliamentary rules from speaking in a debate about the rights of crime victims.

The decision to bar Starmer, one of the Commons’ leading experts on the issue, 
from Tuesday’s session on the policing and crime bill has been backed by 
Labour’s whips office and the Speaker on protocol grounds.

Victims' law could boost rights to challenge crime investigation process
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jan/25/keir-starmer-victim-law-challenge-investigation-process-child-abuse-report-duty>
Before becoming Labour’s Brexit spokesman, Starmer, the MP for Holborn and St 
Pancras, introduceda private member’s bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jan/25/keir-starmer-victim-law-challenge-investigation-process-child-abuse-report-duty>
 to strengthen the right of victims to challenge decisions about criminal 
investigations and compel people who suspect child abuse to report it.


The bill was written with the help of the anti-stalking charity Voice4Victims 
and attracted cross-party support. At the last election, the Conservatives 
promised to introduce a victims’ law, but a bill has yet to appear.

Parliamentary practice is that frontbench spokespeople such as Starmer speak 
only on their departmental responsibilities, though they can ask for special 
dispensation to address other issues. Labour’s home affairs team, led by Diane 
Abbott, is understood to support Starmer’s participation in Tuesday’s debate.

Victims already have the right to review Crown Prosecution Service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/crown-prosecution-service> decisions not to 
prosecute, but Starmer’s bill would have extended the right to question police 
decisions.


Starmer’s bill did not gather enough support to become law. However, many of 
its provisions were attached as amendments to the policing and crime bill, 
which returns to the Commons on Tuesday. The amendments, coordinated by Starmer 
and adopted by theHouse of Lords <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/lords>, 
empower the victims’ code with legal authority, require professional training 
on the rights of victims, and compel a “homicide review” to be held in cases 
where no one has been charged or where there has been an acquittal.

Starmer said: “The key question is whether the government, having put a 
commitment to a victims’ law in its manifesto, is now going to support these 
clauses.”

Asked about his enforced silence in the 90-minute debate, Starmer said: 
“That’s the rules. I’m not grumbling.”

In an article for LabourList 
<http://labourlist.org/2017/01/keir-starmer-today-mps-have-the-chance-to-right-an-injustice-and-put-victims-at-the-heart-of-the-justice-system/>
, he said the amendments “would not deliver all the progress that is so 
desperately needed on victims’ rights, but they would be an important step 
forward.


“They mirror the proposals I put forward last year in my private Member’s 
bill, the victims of crime bill. After much hard work from victims’ groups and 
members on all sides, they have now won the support of the House of Lords. If 
the government shows the will in theHouse of Commons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/houseofcommons>, they can finally become 
law.”

Supporters believe the government is unlikely to reject the amendments because 
the Conservative election manifesto pledged to introduce “a new victims law 
that will enshrine key rights for victims”.


Change is long overdue for sex abuse victims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2014/apr/02/victims-law-keir-starmer> 



Harry Fletcher, co-director of Voice4Victims, said: “The issue of enforceable 
rights for victims has been ignored by successive governments. If the Lords 
amendments are rejected it will be seen as yet another insult to victims of 
serious crime. It is imperative that ministers act to reassure victims of their 
future intentions now.”

 * This article was amended on 10 January 2017. An earlier version stated 
Starmer had written an article for the Guardian. The piece was published on 
LabourList.
 