
One of Keith Curle’s first acts as Carlisle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/carlisle> United manager was to stage a 
“truth and honesty session”.

At the time, just over two years ago, the Cumbrian team were rock bottom of 
League Two <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> and Curle 
recognised the need for shock therapy. “All the players stood 6ft apart,” he 
recalls. “I kept pulling two names out of a hat and they had 40 seconds to 
speak about each other in a negative way and 40 seconds to talk positively. 
They were too nice. Players at the top level are more critical of each other 
because their expectations are higher.”

After the flood, a small miracle on the pitch: Carlisle’s community spirit is 
reborn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/24/carlisle-reborn-in-wake-of-floods>
Since then the former Manchester City, Wimbledon and England defender has 
conducted a metaphorical fumigation of a squad that is now radically remodelled 
and which has become increasingly “self-policing”. Its new-found blend of 
professionalism, perfectionism and ruthlessness is reflected in an unbeaten 
start to the season – they are the only Football League side yet to taste 
defeat – and a current eight-match winning streak.

Five of those victories have come in League Two, helping propel Carlisle into 
second place, four points behind Plymouth Argyle and four ahead of Doncaster 
Rovers. With the free-scoring Jason Kennedy excelling in midfield, the 
inspirational captain, Danny Grainger, adding six goals in six games from 
left-back and Mark Gillespie impressing in goal, they are feared opponents.

On Friday Curle – 53 next Monday and a rare black manager in the English game 
– collected a League Two manager of the month award and on Saturday his side 
visit bottom-placed Newport County aiming to take another small step towards 
promotion.

This renaissance has coincided with a long, tedious, often dislocating, 
mopping-up job in the wider region following the floods that struck Cumbria in 
early December last year.

Brunton Park, Carlisle’s home, is situated in Warwick Road, one of the main 
arteries leading into the city centre and an area particularly hard hit by 
Storm Desmond. The water flooding the pitch reached crossbar level, ruined 
ground-floor offices (Curle’s included) and resulted in the loss of one of the 
club’s two prized goldfish, and the damage to nearby homes was frequently 
devastating.

As the flood’s first anniversary approaches most residents have returned 
following several rootless months spent camping out with relatives or occupying 
rented accommodation but the process of drying out, repair and restoration 
proved frustratingly slow, leaving many householders exiled until the summer 
and beyond.

Yet if the skips loaded up with fragments of sodden carpet and pieces of 
wrecked furniture have largely gone, a sense of reconnection with Carlisle 
United remains. Curle has rarely felt as proud of his players as when they 
persistentlyvolunteered to help neighbouring residents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/09/carlisle-united-community-rallies-round-flood-hit-football-club>
 clear out and clean up their homes last December.

“Being close to people experiencing that degree of hardship gave them an 
increased sense of responsibility and pride,” he says. “By helping out wherever 
they could they began feeling more responsibility to produce performances the 
community could be proud of.”

As a defender Curle blended elegance with edge and he is attempting to recast 
Carlisle in a similar image. Although seeking to play slick passing football 
and building from the back, his team have learnt how to look after themselves 
physically while also being unafraid to deploy the long throw as an attacking 
weapon.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fkeith-curle-carlisle-louise-taylor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6612493b30aa6445e376369f9fba4591a959c9a3%2F0_0_2785_1747%2F2785.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Keith%20Curle%E2%80%99s%20tough%20love%20helps%20Carlisle%20turn%20corner%20and%20reconnect%20with%20city%20%7C%20Louise%20Taylor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fkeith-curle-carlisle-louise-taylor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Keith%20Curle%E2%80%99s%20tough%20love%20helps%20Carlisle%20turn%20corner%20and%20reconnect%20with%20city%20%7C%20Louise%20Taylor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fkeith-curle-carlisle-louise-taylor%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6612493b30aa6445e376369f9fba4591a959c9a3%2F0_0_2785_1747%2F2785.jpg>
 Curle celebrates at the end of Carlisle’s FA Cup win at St Albans City last 
weekend. Photograph: Paul Childs/Reuters 
Almost three years after giving up alcohol and reinventing himself as a 
thoughtful, innovative coach, the articulate, intelligent Bristolian is on an 
upward trajectory. His players’ robustness has been nurtured by visits to the 
Lake District’s Cassius Camps during the past two summers. Head-quartered in a 
Georgian mansion close to Lake Windermere, this “outdoor challenges” business 
has much in common with an SAS induction facility.

Patronised by sports teams and business executives, its guests are pushed to 
their “outer limits” while scaling sheer fell-sides carrying boulder-filled 
rucksacks and swimming across Windermere’s freezing depths.

Paul Lambert sees good and bad sides of Wolves after agreeing to take over | 
Nick Ames
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog/2016/nov/07/wolves-rob-edwards-paul-lambert-manager-derby>
“Nothing scares the players now,” says Curle. “Mentally they’ve become a very 
hard bunch. We took them a long way out of their comfort zones but they were 
surprised at what they could achieve as a team.”

Carlisle have certainly travelled a long way since the 2014-15 season when 
their frustrated manager claimed his side lacked the “male genitalia” necessary 
for success. Such candour, at times, made Curle deeply unpopular.

“It was a difficult club when I came in,” he concedes. “There was a lot of 
disgruntlement and, at first I upset a few people because I decided things 
should be done differently. It’s taken two years but the pleasing thing is that 
now a lot of people are enjoying being part of the environment we’ve created.”
 