
Roma pounced on two dreadful Lazio <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lazio>
 mistakes to claim a 2-0 win in a hot-tempered derby which was boycotted by 
their own supporters on Sunday.

The Lazio defender Wallace handed Roma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/roma> the lead in the 64th minute when he 
tried to dribble his way out of defence but was easily dispossessed by Kevin 
Strootman, who chipped over the helpless Lazio goalkeeper, Federico Marchetti.

Roma doubled their lead 13 minutes later when Radja Nainggolan caught 
Marchetti napping with a low shot from 35 metres that bounced twice as it 
entered the net at the goalkeeper’s unguarded near post.

There was an unsightly scuffle involving players and officials from both teams 
after the first goal, sparked when Strootman squirted water at the Lazio 
substitute Danilo Cataldi who grabbed the Dutchman’s shirt by the collar. 
Strootman was booked and Cataldi was shown a straight red card.

The unforgettable own goal that changed Paolo Negro, Lazio and Roma
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-gentleman-ultra/2016/dec/03/lazio-roma-rome-derby-own-goal-paolo-negro>
There was also controversy in the first half when Roma’s Bruno Peres appeared 
to be tripped on the edge of the penalty area by Lucas Biglia. The referee 
initially awarded a free-kick to Roma, then pointed to the penalty spot on the 
advice of the goal-line official, then changed his mind again, reverting to his 
initial decision.

Lazio, who were technically the home side in the Stadio Olimpico, have not won 
any of their last seven meetings against Roma,a run going back to the 2013 
Coppa Italia final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/may/27/lazio-roma-coppa-italia-final>
.

Roma’s Curva Sud area was empty as their hardcore supporters continued a 
long-running stay-away campaign in protest at security measures which they say 
have destroyed their fan culture.

Roma stayed second in Serie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> on 32 points, level with 
Milan and four behind leaders Juventus. Napoli, Lazio and Atalanta are a 
further four points behind.

Milan needed a late goal from Gianluca Lapadula to beat bottom side Crotone 
2-1 after M’Baye Niang had earlier missed a penalty.
 