
Lord Goldsmith

Attorney-general, 2001-07

Goldsmith comes out badly from the Chilcot report – maybe second only to Blair 
in terms of damage to his reputation.

He initially argued that military action would require a second United Nations 
resolution but it never came. In spite of that, he said there was legal cover.

Chilcot concludes that the circumstances in which it was decided that there 
was a legal basis for UK military action “were far from satisfactory”.

The military and the civil service both asked for more clarity on whether 
force would be legal. Goldsmith did so but failed to provide written advice 
explaining his decision.

Sir John Scarlett 

Chairman of the joint intelligence committee, the umbrella group for the 
intelligence agencies, 2001-04


Scarlett emerges from the Chilcot report with his reputation badly damaged, 
mainly for failing to rein in some of the wilder conclusions by Blair in 
claiming that Saddam Hussein had weapons of mass destruction, the basis for 
going to war.

Scarlett produced the first draft of the “dodgy” dossier in September 2002, 
which included the infamous claim that a British target – the UK base in Cyprus 
– was only 45 minutes from an Iraqi attack.

Sir Richard Dearlove

Head of MI6, 1999-2004


References to Dearlove are dotted throughout volume four of the report dealing 
with the faulty intelligence about Saddam allegedly possessing weapons of mass 
destruction.

The criticism of Dearlove is less pointed than that of Scarlett. It is largely 
implicit, blaming him for providing faulty intelligence thatIraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> was pursuing a chemical and biological 
weapons programme and that it had been seeking uranium from Niger to build a 
nuclear weapon.

Chilcot blames MI6 for failing to inform No 10 or others that the source who 
had made claims about alleged weapons of mass destruction in September 2002 had 
been lying.

Eliza Manningham-Buller

Head of MI5, 2002-07
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fkey-figures-scrutinised-in-the-chilcot-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc465656e34c41e8a0e0238c82628e97e7944262c%2F0_118_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Key%20figures%20scrutinised%20in%20the%20Chilcot%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fkey-figures-scrutinised-in-the-chilcot-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Key%20figures%20scrutinised%20in%20the%20Chilcot%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fkey-figures-scrutinised-in-the-chilcot-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc465656e34c41e8a0e0238c82628e97e7944262c%2F0_118_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Eliza Manningham-Buller leaving the Chilcot inquiry after giving evidence in 
2010. Photograph: Carl Court/AFP/Getty Images 
She is one of the few to come out of the report with her reputation enhanced. 
Manningham-Buller told the Chilcot inquiry that the invasion of Iraq 
substantially increased the terrorist threat to the UK and helped to radicalise 
young British Muslims.

The Chilcot report notes that in volume four of his diaries, Alastair Campbell
wrote: “Eliza [Manningham-Buller] gave a very gloomy picture of the terrorist 
scene here, said that even though al-Qaida were not directly linked to Iraq, 
they would use an attack on Iraq to step up activity here. TB [Tony Blair] was 
looking really worried at that point.”

The joint intelligence committee (JIC) repeatedly warned of the dangers of an 
increased terror threat. On 10 February 2003, less than two weeks before the 
invasion, Chilcot notes that the JIC echoed Manningham-Buller that “the threat 
from al-Qaida will increase at the onset of any military action against Iraq. 
They will target coalition forces and other western interests in the Middle 
East. Attacks against western interests elsewhere are also likely, especially 
in the US and UK, for maximum impact. The worldwide threat from other Islamist 
terrorist groups and individuals will increase significantly.”


Admiral Lord Boyce

Chief of the defence staff, 2001-03


He is criticised in the report for failing to properly articulate to his 
commanders the scope and direction of Britain’s strategy in southern Iraq after 
the invasion.

The report notes that “it was the responsibility of the chiefs of the defence 
staff and the chief of joint operations to ensure that appropriate rules of 
engagement were set, and preparations made to equip commanders on the ground to 
deal with it effectively. They should have ensured that those steps were taken.”

Boyce, however, appears to have been cut out of Blair’s early thinking on 
joining the US effort to topple Saddam. He told the inquiry he was unaware of 
the discussions that Blair had had with President Bush in April 2002.

General Sir Mike Jackson 

Head of the army, 2003-06

The report heavily criticises the Ministry of Defence for sending troops into 
Iraq without proper equipment, such as vehicles tough enough to withstand 
explosive devices and sufficient helicopters for transporting troops around.

Jackson said the problem was “partly financial but also systemic”. He 
acknowledged the vulnerabilities of the lightly armoured Snatch Land Rover and 
the muddled attempt to find a replacement vehicle for it.

General Sir Nicholas Houghton

Director of military operations, 1991-2002; now chief of the defence staff


As well as the poor performance of British troops in southern Iraq, there were 
multiple problems over lack of proper equipment.

Houghton, noting in 2006 the problems with equipment, said: “Do not look for 
too big a dividend this year … The reality is that Warrior [an armoured 
vehicle] gives us confidence and a protective edge … The boys can manage Snatch 
- just: but they have no inherent confidence in it.”

Alastair Campbell

Prime minister’s director of communications and strategy, 1997-2003

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fkey-figures-scrutinised-in-the-chilcot-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F747174c02e474c6b57fb37a7b8dab432231054b0%2F0_32_1564_938%2F1564.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Key%20figures%20scrutinised%20in%20the%20Chilcot%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fkey-figures-scrutinised-in-the-chilcot-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Key%20figures%20scrutinised%20in%20the%20Chilcot%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fkey-figures-scrutinised-in-the-chilcot-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F747174c02e474c6b57fb37a7b8dab432231054b0%2F0_32_1564_938%2F1564.jpg>
 Alastair Campbell in 2003. Photograph: Johnny Green/PA 
Campbell has long been linked with the “dodgy” dossier of September 2002 
alleging Saddam was pursuing a weapons of mass destruction programme.

Although Campbell chaired a committee overseeing the dossier, Chilcot makes it 
clear that it was Scarlett that drew up the dossier and Blair that wrote the 
foreword.

Campbell is one of the few to emerge relatively unscathed from the report. Far 
from attempting to “sex up” up the dossier, Campbell comes across as one of the 
voices of reason.

The report quotes Campbell telling Scarlett that the dossier “must be, and be 
seen to be, the work of you and your team and that its credibility depends 
fundamentally on that”. Campbell added: “It goes without saying that there 
should be nothing published that you and they are not 100% happy with.”

Jack Straw

Foreign secretary, 2001-06


Straw has to take responsibility for the failure to pursue the diplomatic 
options through to the point at which they were exhausted, which Chilcot 
pointedly said they had not been.

Straw contends the options had been exhausted. He also said that he did not 
take at face value the intelligence claiming there had been weapons of mass 
destruction.

Straw also identified the need for a “Plan B” for the UK not to participate in 
military action in the event that the government failed to secure a majority in 
the parliamentary Labour party for military action.


Straw told Blair: “We will obviously need to discuss all this, but I thought 
it best to put it in your mind as event[s] could move fast. And what I propose 
is a great deal better than the alternatives. When Bush graciously accepted 
your offer to be with him all the way, he wanted you alive not dead!”

Clare Short

International development secretary, 1997-2003

Short, though an opponent of the war, repeatedly pressed for plans for the 
aftermath of the invasion. But she is included in the failure to undertake 
post-invasion planning.

The report notes: “The UK failed to plan or prepare for the major 
reconstruction programme required in Iraq.”

At key points, Short’s department for international development “should have 
considered strategic questions about the scale, focus and purpose of the UK’s 
reconstruction effort in Iraq”.

Geoff Hoon

Defence secretary, 1999-2005

He is criticised for failing to make the case for the military ahead of the 
invasion and for being not a strong enough personality to stand up to pressure 
from Downing Street.

The report notes that Hoon – early in 2002, before Blair went to see Bush in 
Texas in April – identified Iran as being a bigger problem for the UK than Iraq 
in terms of weapons of mass destruction proliferation. But he did not follow 
through on this and joined the rush to war in Iraq.

Hans Blix

Chief United Nations weapons inspector in Iraq, 2000-03
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fkey-figures-scrutinised-in-the-chilcot-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8fdb84e0ee9a92a156769e34a2853bd0c3146530%2F0_6_2048_1228%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Key%20figures%20scrutinised%20in%20the%20Chilcot%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fkey-figures-scrutinised-in-the-chilcot-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Key%20figures%20scrutinised%20in%20the%20Chilcot%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fkey-figures-scrutinised-in-the-chilcot-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8fdb84e0ee9a92a156769e34a2853bd0c3146530%2F0_6_2048_1228%2F2048.jpg>
 Hans Blix with Tony Blair in 2003. Photograph: Stephen Hird/AFP/Getty Images 
Blix comes out well from the Chilcot report, pushing to the end for a 
diplomatic solution and insisting the UN weapons inspectors had successfully 
achieved what they had set out to do in tracking down and destroying Saddam’s 
programme of weapons of mass destruction.

The report notes that he told the UN security council in the run-up to the 
invasion that Iraq had promised to provide full cooperation in checks that it 
had no weapons of mass destruction, in spite of scepticism expressed by British 
intelligence.

He told Iraq that many countries still believed it had WMD. But the council 
wanted to offer Iraq a last opportunity, one that the UK and the US in the end 
did not wait for.

John Williams 

Former head of press at the Foreign Office, 2000-06

Williams, who was Campbell’s counterpart at the Foreign Office and was also a 
former political editor at the Daily Mirror, is quoted in the Chilcot report 
offering various media strategies.

According to the report, he is quoted as saying there was a need to “encourage 
support from sympathetic newspapers and carry the argument to those likely to 
criticise our policy”. Journalists who were “too easily inclined to discount 
the threat Saddam poses” should be “forced by the weight of facts” to justify 
their position.
 