
Derzhprom, the House of State Industry, is a large governmental building at 
the centre of Kharkiv, Ukraine’s second-largest city. It is also arguably the 
most interesting – and one of the least known – buildings of the “heroic age” 
of modern architecture in the interwar years.

One reason why it isn’t as famous as it could be is that Kharkiv is not 
particularly well-known outside of Ukraine; another because the architects who 
designed it were not among the theory-spinning ideologues and stars of the 
modern movement. Had it been built in Berlin or Paris, however, you’d 
definitely know all about it.

Occupying the centre of a vast circular plaza are three clusters of 
concrete-and-glass towers, whose height ranges from five to 10 storeys. They’re 
symmetrical, but you can only tell if you stand right in the middle of the 
square. On their own these would be impressive enough – an instant skyline of 
mini-skyscrapers built up all at once – but what really makes Derzhprom is the 
series of interconnecting skybridges between each cluster, shooting across and 
up as high as eight storeys.

Here are the motifs of western architecture in the 1960s: an angular, 
ultra-metropolitan architecture of vaulting bridges and clustered high-rises, 
invented several decades early in easternUkraine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine>. Here is “brutalism”, three decades 
before the term was coined.

Having withstood numerous swings from Ukrainisation to Russification and back, 
Derzhprom stands ​both ​dynamic and still

Sometimes the building turns up in architectural histories, but always as if 
someone has chanced upon it. Usually it is miscredited in terms of its age, its 
architects and its function – sometimes as an office block, sometimes a 
factory. The reality is more dramatic.

To understand the building’s crazed ambition, its monumental scale and its 
determined avoidance of any historic reference or cliche, you need to know that 
Kharkiv was the capital of “Soviet Ukraine” from 1919 to 1934. An industrial, 
Russophone city, this was where the Ukrainian Bolsheviks placed their capital 
after an uprising at Kiev’s Arsenal plant failed in early 1918, suppressed by 
the vaguely social democratic Ukrainian People’s Republic that then ruled the 
city as the Russian Empire collapsed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F20%2Fkharkiv-derzhprom-building-europe-first-skyscraper-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F14%2F1429030439914%2Fbd8283b6-7e1a-44ff-adaa-b25ff857ecb7-2060x1617.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kharkiv's%20Derzhprom%3A%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20first%20skyscraper%20complex%20%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2019&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F20%2Fkharkiv-derzhprom-building-europe-first-skyscraper-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kharkiv%27s%20Derzhprom%3A%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20first%20skyscraper%20complex%20%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2019&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F20%2Fkharkiv-derzhprom-building-europe-first-skyscraper-history-cities-50-buildings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F14%2F1429030439914%2Fbd8283b6-7e1a-44ff-adaa-b25ff857ecb7-2060x1617.jpeg>
 The plan for the building was put forward at a public competition in 1925, by 
local architect Viktor Trotsenko. Photograph: R Jakimenko/RIA Novosti 
The Derzhprom was intended as the central building, the Houses of Parliament 
as it were, of an entire country – a function which became obsolete in less 
than a decade after it was built.

Many Ukrainian Bolsheviks considered any concession to local nationalism to be 
“bourgeois”, but Lenin disagreed, forcing them into a coalition with the 
Borotbists, a left-wing Ukrainian nationalist party. After victory in the 
post-revolutionary civil war and joining the new USSR in 1922, the new 
Ukrainian Soviet Republic took federation seriously.


Its laws and policies were often more radical even than those of the Russian 
Soviet Republic, while a determined effort was made to “Ukrainise” the 
Russophone cities – in government, education, the press and the arts (something 
pursued especially avidly by the “national communist” commissar of education, 
Mykola Skrypnyk).

“Away from Moscow!” was the slogan propounded by avant-garde groups such as 
New Generation <http://elib.nplu.org/object.html?id=1132>. Kharkiv was intended 
to be a real rather than a ceremonial capital, but unlike Kiev, the rival 
Ukrainian People’s Republic’s capital and the historic capital of Kievan Rus, 
it lacked big, declarative public buildings. This problem was to be solved at 
one stroke.

At a public competition in 1925, a plan put forward by the local architect 
Viktor Trotsenko was accepted. The governmental centre would take the form of a 
circus penetrated by an enormous wedge of empty space – now called Freedom 
Square, thesecond-largest square in Europe 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_city_squares_by_size> at the time it was 
built. The team of Sergei Serafimov, Samuel Kravets and Mark Felger – obscure 
young academic architects from Odessa and Vilnius – proposed to fill this with 
towers in a minimal, unpretentious modern idiom, modelled more on the style of 
the glassy “daylight factories <http://buffaloah.com/a/archsty/daylight/>” of 
Detroit and theinterconnected skyscrapers of Chicago 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wrigley_Building)>, than on Le Corbusier or the 
Bauhaus.

By 1926 it was under way, and was finished in 1928 when the Ukrainian Soviet 
Republic’s central committee, commissariats, planning commissions, various 
industrial enterprises, a library and even a hotel were aptly clustered 
together in its towers. It became the first complex of skyscrapers inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, and perhaps unsurprisingly, 
had many visitors.

While numbers of “tourists of the revolution” stopped to be awed by these 
towers with their rush of glass surfaces – full-height, 10-storey glazed 
stairwells and long skyways lined with windows – the avant-garde of Soviet 
architects, the likes of El Lissitzky or Ivan Leonidov, didn’t think it went 
nearly far enough. Ironically, theirunbuilt and unbuildable buildings 
<http://www.utopia.ru/english/item.phtml?id=170&type=graphics&sortby=author&start=250>
 are more famous.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F20%2Fkharkiv-derzhprom-building-europe-first-skyscraper-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F14%2F1429030551549%2F5b36c9b0-fdf1-47a2-b368-d00427006f5c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kharkiv's%20Derzhprom%3A%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20first%20skyscraper%20complex%20%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2019&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F20%2Fkharkiv-derzhprom-building-europe-first-skyscraper-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kharkiv%27s%20Derzhprom%3A%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20first%20skyscraper%20complex%20%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2019&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F20%2Fkharkiv-derzhprom-building-europe-first-skyscraper-history-cities-50-buildings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F14%2F1429030551549%2F5b36c9b0-fdf1-47a2-b368-d00427006f5c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Ukrainian Soviet Republic’s central committee, commissariats, planning 
commissions, various industrial enterprises, a library and a hotel were 
clustered together in Derzhprom’s towers. Photograph: Vova Pomortzeff/Alamy 
However, this is one of the very few built structures to give an impression of 
what a constructivist city might have been like: a delirious crashing together 
of Americanism and communism.


But for the purpose it was built, as the headquarters of Ukrainian communism, 
its days were numbered almost as soon as it opened. As early as 1929, the 
“national communists” began to be repressed; by 1932, famine was raging in the 
countryside around, and refugees flocked to Kharkiv. Mykola Skrypnyk, the 
commissar who had tried hardest to reconcile Ukrainian cultural nationalism and 
Bolshevik communism, shot himself in his office in one of the towers in 1933.

The following year, the Ukrainian Republic moved to Kiev, and the building 
became the House of State Industry – shortened to Derzhprom in Ukrainian, and 
Gosprom in Russian.

The building survived several attempts by its Nazi occupiers to blow it up in 
1942-3 – as well as the re-cladding of its modernist neighbours in heavy 
neoclassical style in the 1950s; the placing of a radio transmitter on top of 
one of the towers in the same decade; an inept partial renovation 50 years 
later (a white paint job that stopped at the front facade); and the destruction 
of the Lenin statue in front of it last year.

Having withstood numerous swings of local politics from Ukrainisation to 
Russification and back, it stands both dynamic and still. No building in the 
former Soviet Union expresses so vividly the undercurrents of utopian socialism 
and Americanised modernism that ran through the Communist revolution’s early 
years.

 * Which other buildings in the world tell stories about urban history? Share 
your own pictures and descriptions with GuardianWitness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/mar/23/50-buildings-great-stories-urban-history>
, on Twitter and Instagram using #hoc50 or let us know suggestions in the 
comments below  