
“We don’t really know how to say kyriarchy, but we do know what it is,” claim 
Sidonie Bertrand-Shelton and Elena Guthrie. As hosts ofKicking the Kyriarchy 
<http://kickingthekyriarchy.org/> (iTunes), they get straight down to business: 
they are white and privileged, but determined to give a voice to those who 
aren’t. Gender equality isn’t where feminism ends, so their “intersectional 
feminist podcast” tackles issues faced by disabled, black, white and 
transgender women.

The 50 best podcasts of 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/21/the-50-best-podcasts-of-2016>
Periods and beauty are covered, and there is an episode on “Why is my 
curriculum so white?” This is a podcast that prefers to ask questions and get 
knocked back, rather than play it safe. It is a good technique, particularly in 
the episode about sex workers. Guest Isla shuts down a question about how much 
she earns, as many people would. “I’ve learned that the best way I can fight 
the patriarchy is making them pay for every ounce of my time with them,” she 
says. It is her personal theory, but perhaps not one that rings true for the 
whole of her profession.

Shelton and Guthrie wisely let their guests speak for themselves, rather than 
framing the conversation with too many questions, but they step in when it is 
necessary to make complicated issues more simple. “Can you explain quickly what 
subbing and domming is,” they ask Isla. They invite guests and listeners to 
“call them in” rather than call them out if they are making the wrong 
assumption or using an incorrect term. Although the hosts have a habit of 
describing most good things as “amazing” or “kickass” in early episodes, they 
find their stride later on and, fortunately, that melts away.

The latest instalment, which is about consent 
<http://kickingthekyriarchy.org/kickingthekyriarchy/2016/12/31/episode-07-consent>
, is a hard-hitting, anger-inducing podcast. Guest Nadia Wager, who has 
researched gender violence, spells out the unfairness of bringing a rape case 
to court – and the way that women feel cheated out of the chance to tell their 
story. “The court case is not about you telling what happened,” she says. “It’s 
about the defence really having the chance to pick away at the case and just 
ask the questions they want.” These podcasters aren’t afraid to argue or admit 
when they are wrong, and they are definitely not afraid to push their cause 
further.

If you like this, try … Feminist Current 
<http://www.feministcurrent.com/about/>.
 