
When Larry Clark’s opus to the lawlessness of the New York City skateboarding 
community hit cinemas in the mid-1990s, international media reacted in uproar. 
Critics broadly panned the film for its graphic depictions of teen debauchery 
and confronting narratives.

Few picked up on the fact Kids was, to the initiated, an ode to inner-city 
skateboarding tribes and the culture that connected them.

Harmony Korine on Kids: 'It would be impossible to make that film now'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/22/harmony-korine-kids-20th-anniversary>
Twenty years and a multimillion-dollar industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2011/dec/05/rise-fall-skateboard-chic>
 later, the real-life “kids” of the film are regrouping to tell their story in 
a documentary.

At a time when Supreme is a super-brand which sees queues around the block 
whenever they release new wares 
<http://www.dazeddigital.com/fashion/article/19459/1/nypd-shut-down-supreme-nike-sneakers-launch-store-public-safety-riot-concerns>
, it’s tough visualizing the New York of the early 1990s, when city ledges 
could be skated and the streets were open for exploration.

The kids who inspired and were featured in Larry Clark’s breakthrough film 
were pioneering the “pro era” of the first street-skate companies. Zoo York’s 
office sat in the meatpacking district between warehouses of butchered animals, 
and Supreme was a lonely skate shack in a strip of furniture shops on Lafayette 
Street.

Skateboarding <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/skateboarding> in New 
York was largely uncharted. There were no written directions, let alone GPS – 
you had to follow the sound of wheels hitting pavement. Skaters from every 
borough shared their spots in an inner-city “no man’s land” only with the 
homeless.

Alex Corporan, a Kids cast member, one of the first skateboarders for Supreme, 
and a cultural attaché for lifestyle brands, started out as a metal head in 
lace-up Doc Martens.

“Skateboarding in New York, prior to Kids, was a clubhouse,” he says. “No one 
really liked us, no one cared about us. We were part of a scene that no one 
understood – a bunch of mixed-race kids together, hanging out.

“We shared everything, did everything together. It was a circle of trust; you 
had that, and that’s all you had.”
 High and Justin Pierce on the subway. Photograph: Mel Stones 
The 1995 release of Clark’s film arrived on the cusp of the first wave of east 
coast skate culture. The few lo-fi videos broadcasting skateboarding to the 
world via VHS were a static contrast to Clark’s uncomfortable close-ups of 
violence and pre-teen sex acts.

Much of Kids’ shock value was magnified by a storyline Clark introduced to tie 
the film’s verite-style scenes together. HIV-positive character Jennie’s (Chloë 
Sevigny) quest to track down Telly (Leo Fitzpatrick) was a device to lend 
dramatic gravitas to what otherwise would be more of a social documentary.

Chicago Sun-Times critic Roger Ebert observed that, for Kids’ central 
character: “Life has given him nothing that interests him, except for sex, 
drugs and skateboards. His life is a kind of hell, briefly interrupted by 
orgasms.”

The much-hyped “hell” that Kids represented, however, disregarded the vital 
signs of a vibrant New York skateboarding culture. East coast street skating 
was to become the foundation of a fast-growing industry over the next decade, 
transitioning from a niche-DIY sport to a coveted lifestyle category.

The storyline created a dichotomy between girls and boys, purity and 
corruption, innocence and violence. High (whoalong with Mel Stones is 
chronicling the period <http://www.thatsacrazyone.com/> but preferred not to be 
identified for this article) was barely 14 years old when she started hanging 
out with a young Alex Corporan, Justin Pierce, Harold Hunter, Hamilton Harris, 
Gio Estevez, Mel and Loki (who preferred not to be identified for this article) 
at her home on Saint Mark’s Place. Along with Mel, she was one of the rare few 
with a camera to document the scene, pre-Kids, from 1991 to 1995.

High says the added storyline was a distortion: “The true story [of Kids] is 
about a bunch of kids who grew up with literally nothing,” she says. “We might 
have been from different areas and different races but we came from the same 
income bracket of broke. We learned how to take care of each other at a time 
that was one of the rougher periods in New York City’s history.

Neil Young – the new face of Supreme
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/feb/17/neil-young-the-new-face-of-supreme>
“The film portrays segregation between girls and guys, which wasn’t reality. 
The main point [of the film] – the whole virgin-fucking, misogynistic thing – 
was not necessarily how we lived our lives.”

Peter Bici, another Kids cast member and an original rider for seminal skate 
companies such as Think, Television, Zoo York and Supreme, agrees: “The guys 
were always nice to girls. You had a couple of horny guys – who wasn’t when you 
were 16? I think the true depiction of our crew at the time was off, because we 
were skatingall the time. It was a film [that took place over] 24 hours – but 
we were skating like eight hours of the day. We took it seriously.”

Jefferson Pang, the first New York-raised skateboarder to go pro, first met 
Larry Clark <https://www.theguardian.com/film/larry-clark> through Mark 
Gonzalez. Mark and some friends were teaching Clark’s kids to skate with some 
friends.

“Larry rolled with us and the natural trail of everything was you’d wind up at 
Washington Square Park. I remember Larry snapping away, shooting tons of 
photographs of us,” says Pang.

Time has added perspective for Kids cast member Hamilton Harris, who is 
spearheading an all-access documentary on the real-life “kids”. To Harris, 
skateboarding and its social structure was not only a support network for a 
group of lost boys in the city – it was about escaping hardship at home as well.

“As a skater you’re physically at risk jumping down a flight of stairs or 
sliding down a bannister [but] if you were in an abusive relationship at home, 
then falling down stairs is a joke; you’ve been hurt deeper,” he says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Faug%2F19%2Fkids-film-larry-clark-skateboarding-culture-new-york-east-coast-supreme%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F18%2F1439928555091%2F8a8071af-0d46-455b-b0f3-6db08deb74a4-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kids%20from%20Larry%20Clark's%20Kids%3A%20'We%20were%20like%20the%20United%20Nations%20of%20skateboarding'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Faug%2F19%2Fkids-film-larry-clark-skateboarding-culture-new-york-east-coast-supreme%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kids%20from%20Larry%20Clark%27s%20Kids%3A%20%27We%20were%20like%20the%20United%20Nations%20of%20skateboarding%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Faug%2F19%2Fkids-film-larry-clark-skateboarding-culture-new-york-east-coast-supreme%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F18%2F1439928555091%2F8a8071af-0d46-455b-b0f3-6db08deb74a4-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Peter Bici and Gio Estevez on a rooftop with Chris Keeffe, founder of New York 
City skate shop DQM. Photograph: Sammy Glucksman 
To Harris, the group was ahead of its time in a country mired in racism and 
recession. Intuitively post-racial in a colour-conscious society, the crew 
formed its own world around skateboarding despite being tethered to a 
socioeconomic bracket that deemed it invisible.

“In the early 90s we were dealing with crack, the Aids epidemic, racism and 
all kinds of social injustices. We were totally aware of the social dynamic in 
the world around us. We were constantly trying to change that, and foster that 
change as an example,” he said.

Skateboarding encouraged kids to develop board skills and explore the city 
beyond their immediate neighborhoods. “Most kids our age were staying in our 
local park or maybe going to the local mall. Skateboarding made us search, 
discover new roads, new towns,” said Bici.

While it was hard to find spots to skate, finding someone to film you was 
harder. Bici remembers when to skateboard seriously meant making a pilgrimage 
to the west coast. “We followed the Hollywood dream – go to the Embarcadero, 
skate, get footage,” he said.

Skateboarding wasn’t cool. We’d show up to the party and people said: 'Ugh, 
who invited the skaters? Hide the beer'
Gio Estevez 
Jefferson Pang returned home to skate in the early 90s. “California companies 
started cherry-picking pros from the east coast,” he says. “Prior to that it 
was the Bones Brigade coming to the Brooklyn Banks and a bunch of California 
skaters on the streets of New York. I don’t know why the fuck it took everyone 
so long to realize this was the best place to skateboard.”

By the time Kids was released, Bici and Pang were riding for Zoo York and the 
east coast had started to establish its style. Companies such as Supreme and 
Zoo York continued to shape what would become a world-renowned east coast 
aesthetic. Supreme opened in 1994, at the same time Kids was filming, with Gio 
Estevez at the helm.

“We were very ‘do it yourself’, ‘teach yourself’,” Estevez says. “You can 
YouTube anything now and cut your steps in half. We saw some skate videos, but 
they were rare.”

“The city made us,” says Bici. “Our style and, being in New York in the 90s, 
hip-hop ... We had such an eclectic group of friends. We listened to every type 
of music. We didn’t look at people – how they looked, how they talked – as if 
they were different. We were like the United Nations of skateboarding.”

When Zoo York released “Mixtape” in 1997, the east coast scene was in full 
swing. By the late 1990s, merchandise was being sold all over the world.

Five anti-style lessons from Larry Clark’s Kids
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/shortcuts/2015/jul/28/five-anti-style-larry-clarks-kids-1990s-20-years-chloe-sevigny-unisex-branding-skater>
“It’s everywhere now,” says Estevez. “Skateboarding wasn’t [always] cool. We’d 
show up to the party and everyone would get bummed out, like ‘Ugh, who invited 
the skaters? Fuuuuck. Hide the beer.’”

The turn of the millennium brought a cold sobriety with the tragic deaths of 
Justin Pierce (2000), Keenan Milton (2001) and Harold Hunter (2006).

Friends have set up the Harold Hunter Foundation to continue to support the 
transformative culture of skateboarding, at a time when skate parks are 
recognized by town planners as a civil necessity.

“People have been able to see a much broader world than just being out of the 
neighborhoods we came from and the education that we had,” High said.

Jessica Forsyth, part of Harold Hunter’s adopted family, a social worker and 
founder of the Harold Hunter Foundation, said: “For Harold, when everyone was 
getting into bad stuff, skateboarding wasn’t a normal identity for a black kid 
from the projects.

“Now, at least two-thirds of the skateboarding population are black and Latino 
boys. We’re trying to build something that will do the positive things that 
skateboarding did for Harold but also try to protect them from the negative 
influences.”

Alex Corporan still skates every Sunday, perfecting slappy grinds at a spot 
near the base of the Williamsburg Bridge they call Boca.

“The generation now is rad,” he says. “I feel the focus is a little lost 
because the majority of kids aren’t skating for love, they’re skating for, 
‘I’ve gotta throw myself down 30 stairs because I’m gonna get sponsored.’ 
That’s not going to happen. But skateboarding is well-rounded: you gotta have 
passion, you gotta have character – of course you gotta rip – but at the end of 
the day you have to take it for what it is. I’m not a critic. I’m a lifer.”

The documentary The Kids is part of a Kickstarter project 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/thekidsfilm/the-kids-a-documentary-about-the-kids-who-inspired>
.
 