
Whether it’s the Radical Childcare Hub 
<http://birmingham.impacthub.net/mission/radicalchildcare/> in Birmingham 
exploring parent-led co-operatives, or an experimental nurserylocated within a 
care home in Seattle <http://www.presentperfectfilm.com/>, designers and 
innovators are coming to the same conclusion: in order to build the perfect 
city for children, you have to create the right environment for all ages.

As the groundbreaking kindergarten architect, professor Takaharu Tezuka, puts 
it: “It’s important to design a society that is interdependent. We can put the 
elderly right next to the kindergarten – actually that is how society used to 
be. These days, society tries to solve all its problems by dividing life into 
small puzzles, but if you put them together, you can see the bigger picture.”

This holistic approach to design for children was a key theme of Making Space 
2016 <http://www.childreninscotland.org.uk/project/making-space-2016>, an 
international award and conference hosted by Children in Scotland last month, 
where Tezuka delivered a keynote address on design for children. He has 
garnered global plaudits for his oval-shapedFuji Kindergarten 
<http://ideas.ted.com/inside-the-worlds-best-kindergarten/>, near his native 
Tokyo, where there are no physical boundaries between classrooms and the 
outdoors, and the roof forms part of the playground.

Seattle has a preschool for under-fives located in an elder care facility, 
with an average age of 92

Designed around a philosophy that values children’s right to play as well as 
learn, Tezuka is determined to change the way we design for the youngest people 
in society. “We need discussion and debate on an international platform about 
whether the needs and rights of children to play and learn, uninhibited, are 
sufficiently understood and taken into account during the architectural design 
process,” he explains.

“If you go to some kindergartens, their playgrounds are covered in plastic, 
everything’s flat, and there’s no challenge in their life. Maybe the children 
feel safe there when they’re small, but they’ve lost the chance to learn as 
they grow up.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJ5jwEyDaR-0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJ5jwEyDaR-0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJ5jwEyDaR-0&media=>
The Fuji Kindergarten is quite the antidote to these sanitised designs: built 
in the shape of an oval with a perimeter of 183 metres, it is conceived as a 
single village for around 500 children. The interior is an integrated space 
with classrooms and recreational areas softly partitioned with furniture. Three 
25-metre high preservedzelkova trees 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zelkova_serrata> project up through the interior 
and roof decking for children to explore during break times.

To achieve such a holistic approach, designers must engage with children as 
well as adults, says Diarmaid Lawlor, director of place at conference partner
Architecture and Design Scotland <http://www.ads.org.uk/>.

“Designers often ask the wrong questions at the wrong time,” Lawlor says. “The 
question of space comes after the primary question of ‘what does learning look 
like for you?’ When you ask this question of carers and learners, you get a 
sense of their daily routine, and what spaces could accommodate that.” In 
making time to have these discussions, he adds, it’s also essential to keep in 
mind that people – not architects – are the experts in their own lives.

According to Lawlor, the best-designed city for children would comprise three 
inter-locking elements: intergenerational spaces, life-long learning (linking 
early years education with the world of work), and putting special educational 
needs at the heart of learning, to create whole communities of learners.

The first idea is perhaps best captured in the work of Seattle’s 
Intergenerational Learning Center 
<http://www.pbs.org/newshour/bb/what-happens-when-a-nursing-home-and-a-day-care-center-share-a-roof/>
, where a preschool for under-fives is located in an elder care facility, which 
has an average age of 92.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fhow-build-perfect-city-children-kindergarten-architect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4916b947a346d1754e83959b5053e22abb715b62%2F0_0_5536_3321%2F5536.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kids%20and%20the%20city%3A%20how%20do%20you%20build%20the%20perfect%20space%20for%20children%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fhow-build-perfect-city-children-kindergarten-architect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kids%20and%20the%20city%3A%20how%20do%20you%20build%20the%20perfect%20space%20for%20children%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fhow-build-perfect-city-children-kindergarten-architect%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4916b947a346d1754e83959b5053e22abb715b62%2F0_0_5536_3321%2F5536.jpg>
 The walls of the oval-shaped building are made of glass, which open as sliding 
doors so the courtyard is an integral part of the children’s day. Photograph: 
Koji Sasahara/AP 
Five days a week, the residents and more than 100 children come together for a 
variety of planned activities such as music, dancing, art, lunch, storytelling 
or just visiting. Most interestingly, the parents of the students have said 
they don’t send their children primarily for the experience with older people, 
but because they appreciate the quality of the learning that is fostered by 
this unusual environment.

When children get wet … they get changed. And they never melt. They are much 
stronger than an iPhone
Takaharu Tezuka 
Of course, numerous studies have shown that increased social interaction has a 
significant and positive effect – not only on loneliness and depression, but 
also delaying mental decline, lowering blood pressure, and reducing risk of 
disease in older people. But children who have early and sustained contact with 
their elders are also known to be less likely to exhibit ageism.

In Birmingham – in a less dramatically intergenerational exercise – the 
Radical Childcare project <http://www.amyrozelmartin.com/radical-childcare/> is 
thinking how best to redesign the childcare system to fit both children and 
parents as the world of work changes quickly and dramatically.

One idea being fleshed out, “cooperative childcare 
<http://www.cloresocialleadership.org.uk/co-produced-childcare>”, is based 
around two guiding principles: to make the most of new technologies to connect 
supply and demand in more efficient ways, and use the skills and knowledge of 
communities to become “co-producers” of childcare, rather than parents 
remaining peripheral to planning.

Aside from these intergenerational experiments, there are other factors at 
play in designing ideal spaces for children. According to Tezuka, it’s 
important to ensure public and private spaces are designed in a way that 
respects children’s rights to play. But he warns this can be harder to design 
when the prevailing culture is so risk averse.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fhow-build-perfect-city-children-kindergarten-architect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc01a93b3321941d927184bd05c9a39330019b943%2F0_0_5184_3456%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kids%20and%20the%20city%3A%20how%20do%20you%20build%20the%20perfect%20space%20for%20children%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fhow-build-perfect-city-children-kindergarten-architect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kids%20and%20the%20city%3A%20how%20do%20you%20build%20the%20perfect%20space%20for%20children%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fhow-build-perfect-city-children-kindergarten-architect%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc01a93b3321941d927184bd05c9a39330019b943%2F0_0_5184_3456%2F5184.jpg>
 Takaharu Tezuka with the model for Fuji Kindergarten. Photograph: Koji 
Sasahara/AP 
“The situation is the same all over the world – but especially in Asian 
countries, like China, where many families have only one child,” Tezuka says. 
“They don’t like taking children to the mountains or rivers, and by restricting 
the movement of children, they don’t know how to take care of themselves in 
nature. But human beings are capable of adjusting to many different kinds of 
environment; they live in Dubai and Alaska. That is how we were supposed to be.”

Tezuka gives the example of his own 11-year-old son, who can dive underwater 
to catch fish. “These things used to be common, but then people started saying, 
‘Oh it’s too dangerous.’ They warn that children can drown in water that’s only 
a metre deep – but they drown because they have never been trained.”

Tezuka’s Fuji Kindergarten is certainly based around a different set of 
principles. First of all, there’s the famous roof – designed as an endless 
circuit but with obstructions, like those trees popping up through the 
roof-floor. “There are so many ways to explore, so they can make choices,” 
Tezuka explains. “It’s not a training facility, but an opportunity. Some 
children cover more than 4,000 metres before lunchtime; that is eight times 
more than in a normal kindergarten.”

The popsicle test: what makes a city good for children?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/aug/21/city-good-children-popsicle-test-crime-property-play>
The second element is the lack of boundary between outside and inside. “Of 
course in the cold weather between end of November and mid-March we close the 
windows, but most of the time the space is kept open. There was one specialist 
who visited us and asked: what happens if children get wet? I told him: in 
Japan, when children get wet, it’s quite simple, they get changed. And they 
never melt. They are much stronger than an iPhone!”

Tezuka also makes a fascinating claim – which is yet to be fully researched – 
that the lack of physical boundaries leads to fewer psychological divisions 
between the children, and thus stamps out bullying. “When you make a boundary 
around a group, they make a hierarchy,” he says. “But when you take that away, 
there is no bullying, because there is no hiding place.”

Finally, the Fuji Kindergarten is deliberately noisy. Humans have an amazing 
capacity for noise cancellation, says Tezuka. “In school design, we are doing 
it to an extreme, trying to make very quiet environments, but we need noise to 
hear other people. In the jungle, silence is the sign that a predator is coming 
to eat you, so silence equals danger.”

Even so, Tezuka cautions against architects’ nostalgia “about a past that 
didn’t exist”. “The answer is already within your society,” he adds. “You just 
don’t know how to look at it.”

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> to join the discussion, and 
explore our archive here <https://www.theguardian.com/cities>
 