
Hi Jamie, how have you been?

Great, I've been cracking on!

Your second album was famed for taking a long time (1) <> … but this third one 
(2) <> has taken even longer! 

That's true, yeah. We were very particular with it. I think this time we knew 
what we wanted. With the second record it was very much off the cuff, whereas 
with this one we were clear that we wanted to make an electronic dance record. 
From our very first track we said we were subversive pop musicians and I think 
we remembered that while making this record.

What strange influences went into this?

It's about us being honest about our position. It's songs inspired by the 
group and our experiences. The inspiration was probably the making of the 
record. The first record was a lot about objects, whereas this one is about 
ideas. And it's more openly emotionally and personal.

What techniques did you use?

We dived into the Oblique Strategies <http://www.rtqe.net/ObliqueStrategies/> 
at times. With guitar playing, particularly. One of my favourite things is 
"Listen outside the room". You think "I don't quite know what's wrong with 
this" but if you step outside the studio all of a sudden it starts to make 
sense.

When you first emerged as new rave <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/New_rave> (3) 
<> scene leaders people talked about you being a dance band, but you weren't 
really, were you?

No, we lied – we were a punk band. We used dance influences but in a punk-band 
setting. Now the punk thing isn't so much there. It was quite a big learning 
curve. In 18 months we went from opening up a laptop and literally not knowing 
what it did to being able to self-produce our own single. But we went in with 
the absolute masters(4) <> and they showed us how they went about their 
business!

Your early shows were pretty chaotic – how much of a shambles were you back 
then?

Oh, we were awful! We were literally rolling around on the floor unable to 
play our instruments. There were times I would be yelling at the sound man 
because I thought it was his fault – then I'd realise I hadn't actually plugged 
my guitar in. An absolute car crash, but brilliant, too.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F_ig533RJgGg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F_ig533RJgGg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F_ig533RJgGg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
You were known for being equally wild offstage – did you ever worry the drug 
stories overshadowed talk about your music?

I don't know if it overshadowed anything. I think it was just something we 
were happy to be open about and it came as part of the package. We were 
encouraged [to talk about drugs]. It was like: "You guys are wild, let's run 
with it!" And we were cool with that. My mum gave me the all clear and we went 
with it.

Hang on … your mum gave you permission to be a debauched pop star?!

Yeah! She knew how it was. We talked about it recently, actually. She said: 
"You were a party band, that was what you were doing." I thought, Mum, this is 
incredible, thank you!

Did your parents ever read features about you taking ayahuasca 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/aug/08/ayahuasca-bees-klaxons-devendra-banhart>
(5)? <>

There were some frowns, particularly from my dad, over that. There were 
definitely conversations to be had. But I think my mum especially realised it 
was more about personal spiritual growth than me getting absolutely battered.

Looking back, was it really about spiritual growth? 

I believe so, yeah. We definitely progressed as human beings. We're not the 
wild car crash we were.

What's the most inappropriate place you've ever been off your head?

God, the list goes on. New Rave was like the 60s – if you can remember it then 
you weren't there.

How healthy are the band these days?

Tip top! Simon has recently run a marathon, in just over four hours, so he's 
become my absolute hero and now I'm on that tip too. I did my first 10k last 
week.

How did it make you feel?

It's fair to say I'm becoming addicted to endorphins. My legs are killing me 
though, because I broke one leg and dislocated the other knee. The broken leg 
was from jumping off stage in France. So I was wary about getting involved. But 
I got the right gear, got some shoes and knee supports, and now I'm out there 
loving it.

Did you go the full hog and buy awful-looking running shoes? 

They're a branded, multicoloured running shoe with additional support for my 
knees.

Does a pop star get self-conscious while out jogging? 

Yeah, I don't need that. My method is: don't look anyone in the eye, 
straightforward, crack on with it.

So are Klaxons' wild days over? 

We're still a party band. But how much, really, are you going to have a mad 
one when you're putting another 10k in the next morning?

Did fame mess with your head?

Maybe for a couple of months I stopped getting the tube. I didn't like being 
recognised as that bloke off my face on the television. But it was a very 
short-lived period.

How do you view the second album, produced by nu-metal overlord Ross Robinson, 
now?

I just love it. All of our albums are actually pretty similar, it's just the 
production that's different. Our songwriting is always the same. With the 
second record there's a need to show that we weren't chancers, that we could 
play our instruments.

You were seeing a shaman around the making of that record. Is that something 
you're still doing?

I haven't for some time. I moved on and remembered I'm a musician and 
concentrated on that. He's still doing his thing, healing people. People come 
to him with all sorts of different problems, from physical to emotional 
problems, and he deals with those through silent meditation. It's very 
interesting. But for me I had to remind myself I'm first and foremost a 
musician and I need to crack on with that. I think something along those lines 
could be right for me later in life.

My colleague Harriet <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/harriet-gibsone> on 
the music desk says that you once came up to her in a pub and shouted "What 
would be the first dance at your wedding?" in her face. She's still wondering 
why ...

Really? Was it during the time a lot of my friends were getting married? I'm 
always looking for that killer tune.

I don't feel like there's a Klaxons <https://www.theguardian.com/music/klaxons>
 first dance yet written.

Yeah, good shout. Maybe we need to focus on that, and we were thinking a 
Christmas version of Show Me a Miracle would be good too.

I hope you're not just going to lazily throw some sleigh bells over the top of 
it …

That's what E17 did and it worked an absolute killer.
 James Righton and Keira Knightley: Keira does the dancing. Photograph: 
JABPromotions/REX/Rex Features 
What was the first song at James [Righton's] wedding to Keira Knightley  
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-2319395/Keira-Knightley-wedding-Actress-marries-James-Righton-daisies-hair-skipping-La-Mairie.html>
(6) <>

I don't remember, but I do remember us crowdsurfing him to Lucky Man by the 
Verve. There was a crowdsurf at the wedding! We also sang James's favourite 
song. We choseWhat a Day for Me by Harumi 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RGtDH3HmBUc> because he loved that song and 
lyrically it means a lot. I also changed some of the words to be more 
appropriate for a wedding. It was probably the most petrifying gig I've ever 
done but it seemed to go down very well seeing as nobody knew that song before.

Was it more nerve-wracking than a big concert?

Of course. There's no microphone. It's very immediate and you're looking to 
make people very happy and hoping that it happens. Luckily it did.

Has Keira had a chance to contribute musically to the band?

It's more on a dance level, you know what I mean? She contributes via dance.

So you can tell if a track works by her reaction?

Exactly, as played during soundchecks.

What you're saying here is that Keira Knightley is the testing ground for all 
Klaxons material?

[Tentatively] Yeah ... I think maybe A New Reality got the best reaction.

What kind of moves did she break out to that?

Erm … just moves … as you'd imagine. [Laughs]. Oh God, you've stitched me up, 
I shouldn't be talking about Keira!

OK, let's end on these rumours I've heard about your forthcoming reggae and 
country directions …

We've already made Roll Me a Miracle, which is the dub version of Show Me A 
Miracle. And our new drummer came up with the genius idea of getting the Easy 
Star All-Stars(7) <> to make a version of our debut called Spliffs Of the Near 
Future. I've got to say, I think he's on to something.

Footnotes

 <>(1) Surfing the Void arrived three years after 2007's Myths of the Near 
Future.

 <>(2) Love Frequency – out on 16 June – arrives four years after 2010's 
Surfing the Void.

 <>(3) Every teenager in Britain went flourescent for about five months in 
2007.

 <>(4) The Chemical Brothers' Tom Rowland produced the record. Erol Alkan, 
Gorgon City and James Murphy were also involved.

 <>(5) A psychedelic brew that induces vomiting and wild hallucinations in 
those who drink it.

 <>(6) The couple tied the knot in 2013.

 <>(7) Reggae collective who produce covers albums such as Dub Side of the 
Moon and Radiodread.
 