
Jonathan Davis is most comfortable in a dark place. “It’s more familiar to 
me,” says the lead vocalist and songwriter of alternative metal band Korn. To 
Davis,the darkness stirs a fight-or-flight reaction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/21/korn-jonathan-davis-ive-pulled-bodies-out-of-cars-rocks-back-pages>
. He knows he can draw inspiration there, but when you’re fighting – and also 
winning – the daily battle of living with anxiety and depression, it’s a place 
for him to heal.

Korn: The Serenity of Suffering review – darker, nastier and more commanding
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/20/korn-the-serenity-of-suffering-review-darker-nastier-and-more-commanding>
“I started thinking about where I came from on this record,” Davis says. His 
band is back with its 12th studio album, The Serenity Of Suffering, which has 
been lauded as a return to form for that band that is nastier and darker than 
their recent output, which has included – of all things – a dubstep album and
country outing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/29/korns-jonathan-davis-goes-to-work-on-country-record>
. Soft-spoken and reflective, one would never guess they were speaking to the 
singer of Korn, a band that has spent more than 20 years building on intense 
guitar, scats and growls, and, in its earlier days, straight-up screams.


But unlike Davis, guitarist Brian “Head” Welch, who rejoined Korn in 2013 
following a seven-year hiatus, doesn’t feel comfortable in a dark place. “I 
like to be happy,” says the 46-year-old, who rediscoveredJesus Christ and 
spirituality 11 years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/jan/22/popandrock.reviews> after a 
destructive methamphetamine addiction tore apart his marriage. “There was a 
root of hatred in me then,” he goes on. “I did drugs to mask that pain, and 
then I got suicidal.”

Welch, who was born in Harbor City, California, says he was picked on as a 
child. “From getting bullied, I didn’t really like myself,” he recalls. Growing 
up, he wanted to be a rockstar and spent most of his time practicing guitar. 
But when that dream turned into reality, there was a void that couldn’t be 
filled. “Even the success in Korn and the fans and the millions of records 
couldn’t make me like myself.”

So Welch started going back to church, and the first half of his 11-year 
journey to self-love and sobriety was spent exploring dark places and even 
darker emotions, a place he no longer wishes to return to. Unlike Davis, it 
wasn’t safe for him; Welch found safety in the other side of the spectrum.

As well as the individual member’s battles, the band has been through a lot 
during their 20-year career. “We were little kids when we made our first 
record,” Davis laughs. The band recently wrapped up a tour that celebrated 20 
years of their debut, and to the singer, it felt bittersweet. “I had no idea 
then that my pain would help so many people.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fkorn-serenity-of-suffering-jonathan-davis-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb59dbd86bbd3ad848308085292b3d84ac078548d%2F121_0_2624_3280%2F2624.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Korn%3A%20'We%20totally%20destroyed%20what%20people%20thought%20metal%20should%20be'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fkorn-serenity-of-suffering-jonathan-davis-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Korn%3A%20%27We%20totally%20destroyed%20what%20people%20thought%20metal%20should%20be%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fkorn-serenity-of-suffering-jonathan-davis-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb59dbd86bbd3ad848308085292b3d84ac078548d%2F121_0_2624_3280%2F2624.jpg>
 Jonathan Davis: ‘I had no idea then that my pain would help so many people.’ 
Photograph: Herbert P Oczeret/AFP/Getty Images 
Back when Korn came out in the mid-90s, they were the freaks of the freaks. 
Dressed in Adidas tracksuits with tattooed arms and twisted dreadlocks, gold 
chains hanging from their necks, the five-piece was unlike any other. “We were 
the black sheep,” Davis recalls. “We totally destroyed what people thought the 
metal scene should be.”

No one really knew what to do with Korn. They did tours with No Doubt, 
Pennywise, KMFDM; they bounced between genres and were eventually lumped into 
nu-metal by critics. But Davis “always felt weird in metal culture”, a scene he 
says welcomed the band but was still one they never felt totally comfortable 
in. “I was always fighting the title of what a metal band was,” he says.

He thinks the metal scene is a big place where people who don’t fit into the 
norm are accepted. (I ask him to define “the norm”, which he says is a culture 
where people who never go against the grain settle.) But the thing about scenes 
that accept a non-polished act is that there’s room to be raw, to be honest, to 
be real, to talk about things that aren’t rainbows and butterflies. Korn had a 
safe space to heal not only themselves, but fans who found their darker lyrics 
relatable.

“The things I fight … if I can help people, if I can make them see that they 
can get through the bullshit in their lives, that’s why I still do it 22 years 
later,” Davis says. “Nothing brings more joy into my fucking heart than seeing 
our music help a kid who is depressed, or suicidal, or going through an 
episode. That’s the payoff to me, that’s why we keep coming out here, that’s 
why we keep making records. Because we like to see people smile.”

Nothing brings me more joy than seeing our music help a kid who is depressed, 
or suicidal, or going through an episode
Jonathan Davis 
He’s lost count of how many times a fan has told him, “You don’t know how much 
you’ve got me through this,” whatever this is. But he does, because back in the 
day, it was his bands that got him through: Duran Duran, The Cure. Once, a kid 
gave Davis the military uniform of his dead brother, who was killed in action; 
he said the band’s music helped him through his deployment.

“We have [sick] fans whose last dying wish is is to come and hang out with 
us,” Davis continues. “That is fucking heavy. How do you express yourself when 
someone says: ‘I’m going to die and I want to meet you before I do’?”

For Welch, who has authored two autobiographical books (one about addiction 
and spirituality; the other about his daughter’s struggles with self-harm), it 
was like “taking out all the junk, dirt and stains”. Any vulnerability he felt 
was erased when he saw how many people were able to relate. “When I share those 
struggles, I put to peace something inside of me and I’m able to forgive 
others, forgive myself for my mistakes,” he says.

Same goes for Davis, who writes in a stream of consciousness that is less 
personal and more universal. “I’ll sit there with a pen and paper and I’ll 
start writing,” he says. “Sometimes, I have no clue what the fuck I’m talking 
about.”

Once he gets a song out of his mind, it’s gone for good, a therapy Davis says 
he “couldn’t go on without.” “I’m constantly trying to evolve as a singer,” he 
says. “But having that pressure on me is getting a little bit more difficult, 
even though I’ve put out 12 fucking records.”

Davis encountered terrible writer’s block on the new album. “It was hard to 
do, trying to capture the love I had for heavier music,” he says. The Serenity 
of Suffering is the band’s most intense release in a decade, and there was a 
lot of history to revisit. Their producer, Nick Raskulinecz, helped the band 
rediscover their essence. “It was a challenge, but we kicked its ass.”

Welch says there’s a new energy in Korn that hasn’t been there for a while. In 
its darkness, the band found their light. “It’s what we’ve done since 1993,” 
Davis says. “That’s just how we roll.”
 