
African Americans helped to build Venice a century ago, gifting Los Angeles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/los-angeles> a coastal resort, but were 
banned from owning homes along the boardwalk and canals, which were reserved 
for white folk.

Instead a one-square-mile cluster of streets a mile inland, away from tourist 
view, was set aside for black residents. It was called Oakwood and became a 
tight-knit community with vibrant street life, neighbours saluting each other 
from porches.

Its nickname, Ghost Town, possibly alluded to life in the shadows. It was one 
of the only enclaves for blacks, and later Latinos, close to the ocean on the 
entire US west coast.

These days Ghost Town has a new meaning. 

“All the people that used to live here have moved out,” said Charles 
Williamson, 84, a retired clerk. “Took the money and run. Or couldn’t afford to 
live here. Or got harassed out of it.”

Venice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/sep/08/venice-frank-gehry-home-los-angeles-architect>
, a chameleon that has been an oil town, bohemian idyll, crumbling ghetto and 
tourist mecca, is adopting a new guise: tech citadel.


Tech-driven gentrification is also transforming San Francisco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/21/death-by-gentrification-the-killing-that-shamed-san-francisco>
,Oakland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/31/oakland-eviction-notices-affordable-housing-crisis-rent-bay-area>
 and other California cities but in Venice there is a twist. A police gang 
injunction is allegedly accelerating the process by hounding black and Latino 
residents.

A drastic measure adopted in 1999 to contain gang violence has endured even 
though Oakwood is now largely peaceful, with gang members dead, retired or 
dispersed. The injunction covers parts of adjacent Abbot Kinney Boulevard, a 
parade of chi-chi boutiques, cafes and restaurants whichGQ dubbed the coolest 
block in America 
<http://www.gq.com/gallery/abbot-kinney-boulevard-shopping-venice-california>.

Members of Oakwood’s dwindling population of colour allege police use the 
injunction’s extensive powers to harass them while turning a blind eye to 
infractions by white arrivals.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fvenice-gentrification-oakwood-african-american-california%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34d42f7d68bc22aedf64297d465e14a1ce6e2c21%2F0_48_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=LA's%20black%20enclave%20buffeted%20by%20police%20pressure%20and%20tech-driven%20gentrification&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fvenice-gentrification-oakwood-african-american-california%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=LA%27s%20black%20enclave%20buffeted%20by%20police%20pressure%20and%20tech-driven%20gentrification&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fvenice-gentrification-oakwood-african-american-california%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34d42f7d68bc22aedf64297d465e14a1ce6e2c21%2F0_48_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 Donald Coulter, centre, playing dominos with friends in Oakwood park, Venice. 
Photograph: Rory Carroll 
“We don’t feel welcome here. Wrong complexion,” said Donald Coulter, 61, a 
lifelong resident, who was playing dominos with black friends in the park.

Another man in his 60s, who declined to be named because he felt targeted by 
the injunction, said he could be detained just for greeting a friend in the 
street while whites rode bikes without lights and walked dogs off leashes, 
trivial-seeming violations that underlined racial inequity.

Robin Rudisill, a former neighbourhood council member, shook her head when 
asked about gentrifiers. “Gentrifuckers,” she corrected.

Census and city figures show that since 1980 the proportion of black residents 
has almost halved from 9.6% to 5.4%, a trend probably amplified by the current 
real estate boom.

Soaring property values 
<http://la.curbed.com/2016/7/13/12180860/venice-canal-highest-price-noriega-ortiz>
 – Venice is pricier per square foot than Beverly Hills, Bel Air and San 
Francisco – have tempted many to cash in on properties inherited from parents 
and grandparents. Some have moved to other parts of LA, others out of 
California altogether.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fvenice-gentrification-oakwood-african-american-california%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F235af2c51b8f43b58e8ac03e4231a1f50fb8d3ac%2F0_48_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=LA's%20black%20enclave%20buffeted%20by%20police%20pressure%20and%20tech-driven%20gentrification&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fvenice-gentrification-oakwood-african-american-california%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=LA%27s%20black%20enclave%20buffeted%20by%20police%20pressure%20and%20tech-driven%20gentrification&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fvenice-gentrification-oakwood-african-american-california%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F235af2c51b8f43b58e8ac03e4231a1f50fb8d3ac%2F0_48_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 Jataun Valentine outside her Venice home, built by her grandfather in 1925. 
Photograph: Rory Carroll 
Jataun Valentine, 79, who lives in a house her grandfather built, said 
long-term neighbours and the wooden bungalows they called home were vanishing, 
giving way to high fences and mansions of steel and glass. “The new neighbours 
are all hiding. You never see them. Everything is like a fortress.”

Ira Koslow, president of Venice’s neighbourhood council, said sellers were 
just as culpable as the buyers who replaced airy bungalows with “monster” 
homes. “It’s heartbreaking. But it’s an economic issue not a race issue. This 
is capitalism. People who have owned property since forever got a huge bonus.”

The gang injunction, however, injects an additional factor. A civil court 
order, it imposes parole-like restrictions on suspected gang members, for 
instance socialising with other suspected gang members, including relatives. Or 
wearing colours associated with a gang. Violators can can be charged with 
contempt and jailed for six months.

LA has used such injunctions since the late 1980s when the city became a 
byword for drive-by shootings. Homicide rates in LA County have sinceplunged 
from 2,589 in 1992 to 649 last year 
<http://www.laweekly.com/news/despite-recent-spike-crime-in-la-aint-what-it-used-to-be-7074803>
, and LA is now one of the US’s safest metropolises. But the injunctions endure.

The American Civil Liberties Union filed a federal lawsuit 
<https://www.aclusocal.org/pr-yjc-v-la/> last month to stop the enforcement of 
46 separate injunctions against approximately 10,000 people covering 75 square 
miles, or 15%, of LA. The suit complained authorities often obtained an 
injunction against a gang, not individuals, but that police were then free to 
slap restrictions on anyone.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fvenice-gentrification-oakwood-african-american-california%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F502309ba4611bbfb14ac2b874fd31a31fe96c380%2F0_48_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=LA's%20black%20enclave%20buffeted%20by%20police%20pressure%20and%20tech-driven%20gentrification&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fvenice-gentrification-oakwood-african-american-california%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=LA%27s%20black%20enclave%20buffeted%20by%20police%20pressure%20and%20tech-driven%20gentrification&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fvenice-gentrification-oakwood-african-american-california%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F502309ba4611bbfb14ac2b874fd31a31fe96c380%2F0_48_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 Jataun Valentine viewing family portraits in the Venice house her grandfather 
built. Photograph: Rory Carroll 
“Those who have been on the injunction for decades feel like they’re under 
constant scrutiny. It’s used as a tool of harassment,” said Catherine Wagner, 
an ACLU attorney who specialises in policing in southernCalifornia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california>.

Melvin Hayward, a gang-prevention activist with the Helper Foundation, called 
the Venice injunction obsolete and unjust. “We call it blanket suppression.” 
Affected people could not leave home together, even if related, he said.

The harassment fuelled gentrification, Hayward said. “Definitely a connection. 
You’re seeing black and brown being targeted.”

Josh Green, of the not-for-profit Urban Peace Institute, cited one man, out 
from jail, who was returning home from his job as a security guard when police 
stopped and detained him because his cousin was giving him a lift. He was sent 
back to prison.

“Whether or not it was an original tool of gentrification,” Green said, “it 
became a component. People feel fear about being in their communities so they 
work very hard to stay out of sight or just move out.”

The LAPD did not respond to an interview request for this article.

Matthew Royce, an architect and neighbourhood council member who has built 
property in Oakwood, said there was bias against residents of colour but that 
crime remained an issue. “While living in Oakwood I heard shooting several 
times. Pop pop pop.”

A hooded man shot and killed a traffic worker in August. 

For Mark Ryavec, head of the Venice Stakeholders Association, the notion that 
police act as gentrification agents is “a bunch of radical bullshit”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fvenice-gentrification-oakwood-african-american-california%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc720afc3a482c9180275abb55422e061a54df84%2F0_24_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=LA's%20black%20enclave%20buffeted%20by%20police%20pressure%20and%20tech-driven%20gentrification&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fvenice-gentrification-oakwood-african-american-california%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=LA%27s%20black%20enclave%20buffeted%20by%20police%20pressure%20and%20tech-driven%20gentrification&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fvenice-gentrification-oakwood-african-american-california%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc720afc3a482c9180275abb55422e061a54df84%2F0_24_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 Residents complain that they are harassed by police while white newcomers’ 
transgressions, such as failing to control their dogs, are ignored. Photograph: 
Rory Carroll for the Guardian 
Residents, he said, were cashing in on soaring property values and resettling 
in comfortable homes in cheaper areas. “A large population of black Americans 
who may have owned from Abbot Kinney’s time voluntarily took their equity and 
left,” he said, referring to the tobacco baron who conceived Venice.

Oakwood’s transformation unfolds largely unseen by the 150,000 tourists who 
throng the carnivalesque boardwalk of buskers, drum circles, painters, 
bodybuilders and exhibitionists every weekend.

Guests at the Airbnb properties which now sprinkle Oakwood can see the 
building blitz but the glass and steel stucco boxes are indistinguishable from 
the others popping up across Venice.

Either from temptation or pressure the slow-motion exodus seems set to 
continue.

The tech cash wave fuelling property prices and a homelessness crisis – 
hundreds sleep in Venice’s doorways and on the beach – is about to become a 
tsunami. The social media company Snap, which hosts 600 employees across 
Venice, is expected to debut on the stock market next year with a $25bn 
valuation.

How much longer Oakland’s ageing African American population clings on is 
anyone’s guess.

Some, like Ricky, 54, a low-income housing resident on disability benefit, who 
declined to give a last name, are philosophical. Most days he sits on a porch, 
watching the new buildings go up. “We’re getting used to the white folks,” he 
said. “Blacks are moving out all the time. You have to change with the times. 
That’s the way life is.”
 