
Richard Eyre’s <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/richardeyre> 1994 
production of Verdi’s La Traviata has long been a Royal Opera mainstay, 
carefully moulded over the years to the many casts that have appeared in it. 
Its latest revival, overseen by Andrew Sinclair, is among its finest, notable 
above all for its focused dramatic integrity and subtlety of insight.

Joyce El-Khoury <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TK0kqYuGyH4> and Sergey 
Romanovsky <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vEtKSIFMPxE>, both debutants, play 
Violetta and Alfredo, charting the couple’s tragic relationship with detailed 
veracity. You sense the mutual attraction from the outset. He hides desire 
behind a rather lofty reserve, and obsession lurks tellingly beneath his 
gloriously voiced ardour. She, clearly smitten, is confused and unusually 
calculating in her initial response. Her smoky tone can harden at the top:
Sempre Libera <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LoZ2QtJfCRU> brings with it some 
moments of effort, but is rightly about conflict rather than display.
 Artur Ruciński (Germont) and Sergey Romanovsky (Alfredo) in La Traviata. 
Photograph: ROH/Tristram Kenton 
Artur Ruciński <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Rh-QEFFLkoo>’s Germont, 
gritty-voiced yet expressive, is the catalyst that pulls their affair apart. 
The father-son relationship is superbly delineated, with both men stiff-backed 
in their demeanour and betraying a comparable inflexibility of will. Ruciński 
captures Germont’s growing awareness of Violetta’s moral probity wonderfully 
well, while Romanovsky becomes increasingly embittered, his emotional violence 
all the more disturbing for its icy control.

 Few sopranos, meanwhile, have conveyed Violetta’s misery with such immediacy 
as El-Khoury, and it’s difficult to get through both the second act party scene 
and the final act without tears.Daniele Rustioni 
<http://www.danielerustioni.com/>’s conducting is wonderfully vital, with 
rhythmic patterns beautifully attuned to the psychological shifts throughout.

• At the Royal Opera <https://www.theguardian.com/music/opera> House, London, 
until 1 February. Box office: 020-7304 4000.


 