
A private meeting of Labour MPs has voted overwhelmingly to oppose an SNP 
motion to investigateTony Blair <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair>
 for allegedly misleading parliament, with MPs calling for the leadership to 
impose a three-line whip against the motion on Wednesday.

SNP MPs led by Alex Salmond <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alexsalmond> 
will put down a motion at their opposition day debate, backed by MPs from six 
other parties, calling for a parliamentary committee to investigate the 
difference between Blair’s public assurances to theChilcot inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/iraq-war-inquiry> into the Iraq war and private 
comments he made to then US president George W Bush.

Labour, Conservative and Plaid Cymru MPs and Green MP Caroline Lucas have said 
they will support the motion,Salmond told the Observer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/26/new-attempt-to-bring-tony-blair-to-book-over-iraq>
. The committee could eventually recommend sanctions against the former prime 
minister, Salmond said, including stripping him of his privy council membership.

His motion calls on MPs to recognise that the inquiry “provided substantial 
evidence of misleading information presented by the then prime minister and 
others on the development of the then government’s policy towards the invasion 
ofIraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> as shown most clearly in the 
contrast between private correspondence to the United States government and 
public statements to parliament and people.”

At a meeting of the parliamentary Labour party on Monday night, there was 
considerable anger about the motion. Sources said chief whip Nick Brown asked 
for an indicative vote on where MPs stood and MP John Cryer, the left-wing 
chair of the parliamentaryLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> 
party, which opposed the Iraq war, condemned the motion to loud applause.

 “An overwhelming majority voted to oppose the SNP motion,” one Labour MP 
said. “It was a powerful speech by the avowedly anti-war Jon Cryer who said 
that he’s always believed the Iraq war was wrong but also that Tony Blair never 
lied.”

It is understood both shadow Brexit secretary Keir Starmer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/keir-starmer> and shadow international trade 
secretary Barry Gardiner both raised their hands in favour of opposing the SNP 
motion. Labour MPs will now raise the issue with the shadow cabinet, to push 
for a tougher line against the motion.

Another Labour MP said they understood the leadership had been inclined to 
impose a one-line whip, which would have allowed MPs more freedom to vote in 
favour investigating Blair.
 