
Millions of foreign migrant workers in Malaysia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia> are to receive a significant 
increase in their salaries after the government barred employers from deducting 
a foreign workers’ levy from their wages.

The levy, along with a fee for accommodation, typically costs migrant workers 
on the minimum wage more than 20% of their earnings, leaving them with the 
equivalent of just £140 a month.

The decision is part of a package of measures announced this week by the 
deputy prime minister, Ahmad Hamidi, that have been seen partly as an attempt 
by the government toprepare Malaysia for joining 
<https://ustr.gov/sites/default/files/TPP-Final-Text-Labour-US-MY-Labour-Consistency-Plan.pdf>
 (pdf) theTrans-Pacific Partnership <https://ustr.gov/tpp/> (TPP), a 12-nation 
trade agreement between countries around the Pacific rim, including the US. The 
trade deal stipulates that any levy charged for the employment of foreign 
workers must be paid by employers rather than workers.

The opium bulbs of Myanmar: drug crop or lifeline for poor farmers?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/22/opium-bulbs-poppies-myanmar-drug-crop-or-lifeline-for-poor-farmers>
However, the Malaysian Employers Federation has vehemently opposed the 
decision, citing the vow of US president-elect Donald Trump to withdraw from 
the TPP.

“The government says we will benefit from increased trade [as part of the 
TPP], but under Trump the TPP may collapse,” said Shamsuddin Bardan, the 
executive director of the Malaysian Employers Federation. “If [the current 
system was] not fair, migrant workers would not want to come to Malaysia. What 
Malaysia is offering them is much better than in their own country.”

In announcing the changes, Hamidi, quoted by the government’s official news 
agency, also cited reports that employers did not pay earnings in accordance 
with the minimum wage, restricted the movement of foreign workers, and kept 
their passports.

The decision follows recent Guardian investigations that revealed allegations 
of thesystematic exploitation of Malaysia’s vast migrant workforce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/28/workers-for-mcdonalds-malaysia-claim-labour-exploitation>
, including claims from workers that employers routinely make excessive 
deductions from salaries in the name of the levy.

The announcement has also been viewed as an attempt to shake off Malaysia’s 
reputation as a hub for human trafficking; until recently, Malaysia was the 
bottom-ranked country in the US State Department’s annualTrafficking in Persons 
(TiP) report <https://www.state.gov/j/tip/rls/tiprpt/>. In 2015, Malaysia was 
controversially upgraded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jul/27/us-human-trafficking-in-persons-report-under-fire-cuba-malaysia-upgraded>
 to the tier 2 watch list, a move rights groups claimed was a way to ease the 
country’s entry into the Trans-Pacific Partnership.

Sumitha Shaanthinni Kishna, coordinator of the Migration Working Group 
Malaysia, said the levy is one of the reasons for Malaysia’s low ranking in the 
TiP report.

“Civil society organisations [in their reports to the TiP review] … have cited 
the levy payment by workers as a burden and a bondage … where the employers 
insist in collecting the full levy and workers are not allowed to terminate the 
contract, even in the case of violations, until the levy is fully paid,” said 
Kishna. “The government is desperate to go up a tier, especially since it wants 
to sit in important international seats at the United Nations.”

The announcement has received a cautious welcome from workers’ rights groups. 
“The policy … in the past has exposed workers to exploitation,” said Angela 
Sherwood, a refugee and migrant rights researcher at Amnesty International. 
“Thus, one positive effect of removing the permission given to employers to 
extract levy fees directly from workers’ salaries may be eliminating such 
opportunities [for] unscrupulous employers.”

However, Sherwood warned that the government must commit to reducing other 
costs, including recruitment fees, that are part of the growing financial 
burden on migrant workers, in order for the policy to have a real impact on 
workers’ rights and wellbeing.

Some critics have voiced doubt that the policy will be enforced, given the 
government’s record of reversing its decisions on migrant worker policies. The 
government had previously ruled that employers should pay the levy, butthen 
decided it should be borne by workers after instituting a minimum wage 
<http://www.ilo.org/asia/whatwedo/publications/WCMS_447687/lang--en/index.htm> 
in 2013.

“We are already seeing employer groups up in arms over this,” said Kishna. 
“With elections around the corner, we may see another reversal.”

 * This story was amended on 9 January to clarify that Sumitha Shaanthinni 
Kishna gave comments in her role as coordinator of the Migration Working Group 
Malaysia
 