
Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> may get as little as 20% 
of the vote at the next general election and win fewer than 150 seats, 
according to an analysis of the challenges the party faces.

Buffeted by difficulties including plotting a course on Brexit and a continued 
lack of support in Scotland, as well as Jeremy Corbyn’s unpopularity, Labour 
has virtually no chance of winning outright in the next election,the Fabian 
Society <http://www.fabians.org.uk/> report concludes.


If you think a progressive alliance will save us, better think again | Martin 
Kettle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/30/progressive-alliance-labour-tories>
The thinktank argues Labour should seek ways to win power with the support of 
parties such as theLiberal Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liberaldemocrats> and Scottish National 
party, arguing this is the only feasible route into government for now.

Based on analysis of existing poll data and historical trends, the study 
predicts that the next election, whether held imminently or in 2020, is very 
likely to see Labour win fewer than 200 seats for the first time since 1935, 
possibly falling to about 140.

However, it cautions against the idea that Labour could be imminently replaced 
as the main opposition, saying the electoral system will act as a “firebreak” 
against a calamitous collapse in the number of seats.

The report says Labour’s general election vote over the past 40 years has 
tended to be almost eight percentage points lower than its poll rating in the 
second year of the preceding parliament. If this happens in 2020, the Labour 
vote could fall to 20% or less.

But using projections based on recent polls, it says that even if either Ukip 
or the Lib Dems could tie with Labour on 20%, the electoral system would mean 
neither would win more than 20 seats, with Labour remaining at 140 to 150.

Such a scenario would see the Conservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> win more than 400 seats, 
giving Theresa May a vast Commons majority.

The study – titled Stuck: how Labour is too weak to win and too strong to die 
– is particularly pertinent for the party as it comes from an officially 
affiliated organisation, which was one of Labour’s co-founders in 1900 but is 
now associated with the centre-right of Labour.

The report stresses that its gloomy conclusions are based less on the 
immediate issue of Corbyn’s leadership than on long-term issues such as the 
impact of Brexit, the collapse of support in Scotland and electoral mathematics.

Andrew Harrop, the Fabians’ general secretary, who wrote the report, said 
Corbyn and his team appeared to have little idea how to respond to such 
challenges or how to win back the 4 million voters who supported Labour in 2015 
but say they would not do so now.

After Corbyn triumphed against Owen Smith in a leadership challenge, his team 
had produced “no roadmap” for overcoming Labour’s plight, Harrop wrote, while 
the wider parliamentary Labour party had become “barely audible”.

“In place of the sound and fury of Jeremy Corbyn’s first 12 months, there is 
quietude, passivity and resignation,” he said. “And on Brexit, the greatest 
political question for two generations, the party’s position is muffled and 
inconsistent. This is the calm of stalemate, of insignificance, even of looming 
death.”

Len McCluskey: Corbyn should consider his position if polls don't improve
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/02/len-mccluskey-corbyn-should-consider-his-position-if-polls-dont-improve>
On Monday Len McCluskey, the leader of the Unite union and one of Corbyn’s 
staunchest supporters, suggested the Labour leader and John McDonnell, his 
shadow chancellor, would feelobliged to step down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/02/len-mccluskey-corbyn-should-consider-his-position-if-polls-dont-improve>
 if there was no change in opinion polls currently showing Labour lagging 
behind by about 12 points.

Speaking to the Mirror 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/union-chief-len-mccluskey-claims-9547935>
, McCluskey said it was necessary to consider “what happens if we get to 2019 
and opinion polls are still awful”.


“The truth is everybody would examine that situation, including Jeremy Corbyn 
and John McDonnell,” he said, adding: “These two are not egomaniacs. They are 
not desperate to cling on to power for power’s sake.” However McCluskey later 
insisted he stillsupported the Labour leader 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/02/len-mccluskey-corbyn-should-consider-his-position-if-polls-dont-improve>
.

The Fabians’ report identifies a coherent response to Brexit as one of the 
main obstacles facing Labour. Using YouGov data, it calculates that the party 
has lost a net 400,000 votes since the last election among pro-leave electors, 
and 100,000 among those who backed remain, making its backing more strongly 
pro-remain than before.

This poses a “Brexit dilemma”, the study says, pointing out that Labour needs 
to somehow appeal more to leave voters without alienating existing supporters 
who opposed Brexit.

In such a landscape, the report stresses the need for Labour to accept the 
impossibility of outright victory in the next election and prepare instead for 
an era of “quasi-federal, multi-party politics”, where it relies on the 
assistance of other parties.

To gain an absolute Commons majority, it calculates, Labour would need to beat 
the Conservatives by more than 3m votes, a higher margin than in 2001. “Even 
before Labour’s current problems, this was unlikely,” the study argues. “It is 
currently unthinkable.”

While the proposed shakeup of Commons constituency boundaries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/28/boundary-review-changes-affect-200-labour-party-seats-robert-hayward-report>
 would further disadvantage Labour, it is only likely to affect about 10 MPs, 
the report argues, making this a “sideshow”.

Overall, Harrop says this is “not a story of victory or death … but, whenever 
an election comes, the party must fight for every vote and every seat, because 
there is a huge difference between winning 150 and 250 MPs.”

A spokeswoman for Corbyn said: “Rebuilding Labour support after its 
fragmentation at the 2015 election was always going to be a challenge. But 
Labour underJeremy Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> 
will be taking its case to every part of Britain in the coming months with a 
radical policy platform, offering the only genuine alternative to a failed 
parliament political establishment and the fake anti-elitists of the hard 
right.”
 