
Lady Leshurr has just come back from the US. She has been spending a lot of 
time there this year, she says: “We’ve been to Atlanta, LA, New Orleans, Miami, 
New York.” She played a sold-out gig in the latter, the audience’s enthusiasm 
apparently undimmed by the fact that she raps with a distinct Brummie twang: “I 
didn’t think they’d be able to understand me, didn’t think my accent, of all 
accents, would have crossed over like that. But they were singing my lyrics 
back at me. It was hilarious, hearing people with American accents saying 
‘bredrin’ and ‘wasteman’, all that British urban slang.”

But mostly, she’s been working on her debut album. “Working with a producer 
called Deputy, who made Rihanna’s Bitch Better Have My Money; Bangladesh, he 
made Lil’ Wayne’s A Milli, and Diva and Video Phone for Beyoncé. I’ve got 
a session with Scott Storch, he’s coming back now as well. And you know 
Timbaland?”

It's oh so cultural: the sharpest sounds of autumn 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/31/best-music-autumn-2016-bjork-david-bowie-pink-floyd-saint-etienne-autumn-arts-preview>
Timbaland, the celebrated, groundbreaking producer of Missy Elliott, Aaliyah, 
Justin Timberlake and Beyoncé? The visionary auteur behindmore than 100 hit 
singles on both sides of the Atlantic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/may/14/timbaland-10-of-the-best>
? I’m aware of his work, yes.

“Well, I’ve been doing a few bits with Timbaland. Timbaland is amazing. He 
just rang me up on my mobile one day.” The girl born Melesha O’Garro giggles. 
“I’m just working with a few legendary producers.”

Here, should you want it, is empirical evidence of UK rap’s sudden ascent to 
prominence in the US, a country traditionally resistant to the charms of the 
British MC, and, moreover, of the fact that a lot of people think Lady Leshurr 
is about to become very famous indeed. In fact, she’s already famous – over the 
course of our interview outside of a north London wine bar, she’s interrupted 
not once, not twice, but three times by fans. Her fame is largely thanks to a 
series of five freestyles called The Queen’s Speech, which she released herself 
on iTunes and uploaded to YouTube, accompanied by low-budget videos, becoming a 
viral sensation. Last August’sQueen’s Speech 4 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FyodeHtVvkA> racked up a fairly staggering 31m 
views.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9yyZBLvLDFE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9yyZBLvLDFE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9yyZBLvLDFE&media=>
Their lyrics were both dextrous and extremely funny, a blur of highly original 
put-downs – “I’ll upload a picture of your dog and sell it on Gumtree” – and 
pop-culture references; they also frequently came equipped with the kind of 
hooklines you can imagine being chanted in playgrounds: “That’s nasty, change 
your panties”, “Brush your teeth”, “Your lips look like crispy bacon”. 
Moreover, they seem to have attracted a different audience compared with other 
UK rappers.

“I’ve seen videos of 60-year-old women and men in America saying ‘Brush your 
teeth’ and stuff, videos of a little baby watching it and laughing, do you know 
what I mean? I get parents saying to me: ‘Wow, you’re the only artist I let my 
kids listen to,’ because I don’t swear in my lyrics. I just don’t think it’s 
necessary. My mum brought me up really well, I don’t swear unless I’m really, 
really angry.

“Everyone’s too cool, everyone wants to be drinking alcohol in their videos 
and driving flash cars, wearing big chains. I don’t want to do that, because I 
don’t live that. All my music, you’ll never see me with my breasts hanging out 
or showing so much flesh that you can’t show it to your kids or things like 
that. Because, one, I respect myself as a person; two, I want to make people 
understand that you don’t have to go that route to be successful. If you’ve got 
the talent, let the talent talk. Look at what I’m wearing afterwards, if you 
have to, but listen to me first, do you know what I mean?”

In person, Lady Leshurr is charismatic and funny and smart. You can see why 
her new major record label – she’s signed to Sony’s RCA imprint – might think 
she’s a hot prospect; in the past 12 months, she has gone from a hugely 
productive one-woman cottage industry, of the kind that’s fuelled grime’s 
commercial resurgence in Britain, to an artist that Timbaland and co are 
queuing up to work with. “All these major established artists reaching out,” 
she frowns. “Ihad people like Akon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/oct/05/akon-charities-africa-lighting-energy-access>
 calling my phone. Busta Rhymes. I’ve no idea how he even got my number. Young 
Money Records tried to reach out to sign me.” She laughs again. “I’m saying it 
all like it’s so casual, but it’s just because I don’t really let things excite 
me like that. I try to be calm with it. I’m not like: ‘Oh my God, oh my God.’”

Perhaps that’s something to do with the fact that she’s been here, or at least 
somewhere like it, before.When the Observer profiled her 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/apr/20/lady-leshurr-interview-blazin-video>
, in 2013, her career appeared to be about to blast off: a major label had 
offered her a deal,her single Blazin’ 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6m7ur5jeqeY> had just deposed Justin 
Timberlake from No 1 on the MTV Base chart, she was talking about launching a 
clothing line,Friggin’ L 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hq_HHnEe1oY&list=PLxlY4t6rUn9FY_2WYVbl0qqYl9kknSO3->
, winningly named after one of her mixtapes. But then everything went wrong, of 
which more later.

Or perhaps it’s something to do with her background, which is substantially 
grimmer than the bubbly image she projects suggests. Before she became a 
rapper, she says, she started out writing poetry “because I wanted to express 
myself. I grew up in a very strict family. My father was very strict, very 
violent: he had been brought up in a violent background and it’s probably just 
a cycle. But I think that was the push to try and express myself in another 
way. I couldn’t really express myself to him or anybody else. I was very shy, 
always looked down, I’d never have any eye contact with people, so I put all 
that into poetry, writing down my frustration, what I felt and what I’d seen, 
or stuff written from my mum’s view, as if I was my mother. I started thinking, 
‘You know what? Why don’t I just rap?’ Because it’s just poetry with a beat 
behind it, really.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWLFd6xaRLN0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWLFd6xaRLN0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWLFd6xaRLN0&media=>
She learnt to “rap, produce, mix, master, everything” at a youth club across 
the road from her home in Solihull. “We would all be in one room with the mic, 
someone would be DJing, the lights would be off, it’d just be sweaty, loads of 
men. No other girls at all. At first, they were like: ‘She’s good for a girl’, 
or ‘Ah, she’s sick because there’s no other girls about’ – there was always an 
excuse. So I thought: Fine, I’m going to show you that I’m better than the next 
man, not ‘good for a female’. So it pushed me to work hard, to write the best.”

She produced her first mixtape at 14: “I had no idea how to promote, or how to 
get my things in shops, so I just used to leave CDs on the bus when I was on my 
way to school. I’d hand them out to strangers, leave them on park benches, 
anywhere I thought people might see them and pick them up.”

Amazingly, it was a strategy that worked. Someone uploaded its contents to a 
website – “I can’t even remember what it was called, but it was big for UK 
artists at the time and it got loads of hits” – but her burgeoning career was 
still hampered by her home life. “I wasn’t allowed out of my area. I wasn’t 
allowed to go anywhere my friends were allowed to go to. I was always told by 
my father: ‘No, you’re not allowed to do this; no, you’re not going to make 
it.’ There was a time when he sat all the brothers and sisters down in a room 
and he wrote down job professions and he put them in a hat and whatever we 
picked out, we had to be. So all my sisters are like nurses, carers, my 
brothers are carpenters, mechanics, but I wouldn’t do it. I knew that if I 
picked what was in that hat, I’d have to start studying for it. Me and one 
brother who’s now a footballer were the only ones stood up to him. It caused a 
whole heap of madness, and I just ran away for a couple of hours. He wasn’t 
there when I got back, and from that point, I was just trying to dodge him.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Flady-leshurr-they-wanted-to-pit-me-against-nicki-minaj-i-wasnt-feeling-that%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce849bfebea7cf6908e52516637287ae9d991680%2F0_0_7360_4912%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lady%20Leshurr%3A%20%E2%80%98They%20wanted%20to%20pit%20me%20against%20Nicki%20Minaj%20%E2%80%93%20I%20wasn%E2%80%99t%20feeling%20that%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Flady-leshurr-they-wanted-to-pit-me-against-nicki-minaj-i-wasnt-feeling-that%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lady%20Leshurr%3A%20%E2%80%98They%20wanted%20to%20pit%20me%20against%20Nicki%20Minaj%20%E2%80%93%20I%20wasn%E2%80%99t%20feeling%20that%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Flady-leshurr-they-wanted-to-pit-me-against-nicki-minaj-i-wasnt-feeling-that%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce849bfebea7cf6908e52516637287ae9d991680%2F0_0_7360_4912%2F7360.jpg>
 Photograph: Linda Nylind for the Guardian 
She left home after landing a role in a local film called One Day by rapping 
for the director. The film was withdrawn from cinemas – “It was about gangs in 
Birmingham and when they showed it in Birmingham both gangs turned up to the 
cinema and people got stabbed and stuff” – but it brought her to the attention 
of “Wiley and Kano and Ghetts, all these people I’d grown up listening to ... I 
didn’t tell my parents I was moving to London. I just packed one suitcase, I 
left and I never went back. I think I told my mum I was going on a trip with 
the college or something.”

Her real break came when she uploaded a syllable-perfect parody video of Chris 
Brown and Busta Rhymes’s Look At Me Now 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-N-2G917g-E> to YouTube: it got 100,000 views 
in half a day, and Atlantic Records in the US offered her a deal. “They flew me 
out and we had a conversation, but their idea was that they were going to pit 
me against Nicki Minaj. It was like: ‘She’s the biggest female MC and you need 
to take her down,’ and I wasn’t feeling that at all. That whole stereotype of 
female rappers and their supporters having to compete with each other – it 
seems to be a crime to be a fan of two female rappers that are successful. So I 
turned it down. The amount of money they were offering me was amazing. I’ve 
always turned to music to get my mum out of the house, out of that situation, 
so to see that type of money thrown at me ... I’m not going to lie, I cried on 
the plane home, because I thought I’d made a mistake and my mum needed the 
money. It might have been my only chance. But I know by now I would probably 
have been dropped and my career would have been ruined.”

Back in the UK, she elected to put her career on hold for a year. “I was going 
through a lot myself, personally. I was living on couches, living out of bags 
and boxes, sometimes I wouldn’t even know where I was sleeping the next day. 
And then I went through a situation where someone completely tried to destroy 
my career, someone I thought was a friend, who deleted all my social networks. 
So I had to start again, basically. So I was like: ‘You know what? I’m starting 
again as a brand new artist if you’re going to do that.’ I thought: I grew up 
on Missy, Eminem, Busta Rhymes, they had all those funny, rewatchable videos 
with crazy visuals and I think that’s what was and still is missing in the 
scene. Humour was definitely something I thought would work, I thought it would 
be different if I brought that to the scene, with the beats I’m using, which 
I co-produce. I wouldn’t quite call them grime, they’re a bit slower, people 
say they’re a bit trap. I just wanted to create something new and fresh.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-N-2G917g-E&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-N-2G917g-E>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-N-2G917g-E&media=>
It was a plan that has clearly worked beyond her wildest dreams, although she 
says she’s keen not to be seen as just “a funny person ... The album’s going to 
do the talking, because everyone’s thinking this is all I do, the funny stuff, 
and the album’s going to show that it’s not.”

The album isn’t the only thing on her mind at the moment. She’s still thinking 
about a clothing line, although, alas, the Friggin’ L name has been retired. 
She’s talking about going back into acting. She’s starting work on her own 
sketch show, starring a selection of alter-egos she created on Snapchat. 
Whatever happens, she says, she has already managed to achieve her dream: with 
the money she made from The Queen’s Speech’s iTunes sales and YouTube hits, 
she’s buying her mum a house. “I just kept setting money aside, and it’s all 
still in the process at the moment. You know how mortgages are. But I’m 
eventually going to take her there, and it’s going to have a massive bow on it, 
and I’m going to pretend it’s my house that I’ve bought in Birmingham and then 
tell her it’s hers. She has no idea.” Unless she reads this, of course.

She drains her glass of fizzy wine. “So much has happened just because of 
uploading a couple of videos, you know. I’ve had all these offers and artists 
reaching out, I’ve got to fly around the world and experiment with things I’ve 
never tried before. I’ve got half a million subscribers on my YouTube channel, 
I’ve got my own machine. So, that’s basically made me realise: I’m on the up.”
 