
1. Paparazzi <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d2smz_1L2_0>

This may come as a shock, but Lady Gaga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/lady-gaga> always wanted to be famous. Her 
songs often touch on the different facets of fame – from the early wide-eyed 
outsider perspective of her 2008 debut, The Fame, to the 
rabbit-in-the-headlights distortion of companion EP, The Fame Monster. While 
her attitude to fame became increasingly solipsistic when she became the 
biggest pop star of the last decade, her early songs were about making it a 
universal experience. “The Fame is about how anyone can feel famous,” she said. 
“But, it’s a shareable fame. I want to invite you all to the party. I want 
people to feel a part of this lifestyle.” The album’s fifth and best single, 
Paparazzi, conflated this combination of fantasy and reality into one of her 
finest pop songs. Despite its layers – the conflict between fame and love, the 
implications of wooing the paparazzi and courting the media – there’s a stylish 
effortlessness to it all. While her later work would occasionally see her tying 
herself in knots to make a point, here it’s easy to appreciate the song as 
intensely or as superficially as you want to. While the verses are underpinned 
by an undulating, industrial-tinged beat and little flourishes of ominous 
zither-like synth squiggles, the chorus is pure melodic sunshine. Always a 
visual artist, Paparazzi also marked her first real visual statement after Just 
Dance and Poker Face, its Jonas Åkerlund-directed video a gloriously OTT 
statement on the lengths people will go to for fame, and a real marker for the 
future.


Lady Gaga: Perfect Illusion review – underwhelming comeback in search of a 
melody
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/09/lady-gaga-perfect-illusion-review-underwhelming-comeback-in-search-of-a-melody>
2. Bad Romance <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qrO4YZeyl0I>

If Paparazzi cemented Gaga’s status, then the imperious Bad Romance – about 
falling in love with your best friend – built a tower on the top with a beacon 
flashing the message: “It doesn’t get better than this!” A techno-inspired, 
electropop juggernaut, Bad Romance was written on a tour bus somewhere in 
Norway with regular collaborator RedOne. Emboldened by the reaction toher more 
outré creative statements <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4H2ldxsPMuI>, Gaga 
was keen to make what she called “a pop experimental record” with a more 90s 
edge. It pulls off that rare trick of making kitchen-sink production seem crisp 
and clear, each element fulfilling its purpose and elevating the whole. In 
fact, almost all of it is a hook of some kind. Just when you think it has 
reached peak lunacy the “walk, walk, fashion baby” bridge emerges (the song was 
debuted at an Alexander McQueen runway show), before the middle eight, 
including some A-level French, flutters into view. It reaches a glorious 
cacophony around the four-minute mark, before Gaga wails “WANT YOUR BAD 
ROMANCE!” and pop is recalibrated all over again.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqrO4YZeyl0I&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqrO4YZeyl0I>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqrO4YZeyl0I&media=>
3. Telephone feat Beyoncé <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EVBsypHzF3U>

Just over a year after The Fame came the eight-track EP The Fame Monster, a 
concise and fat-free concept album offering the seedy underbelly of celebrity 
as a contrast of The Fame’s wide-eyed hope. Originally written for Britney 
Spears (she recorded a demo of it, which leaked in May 2010), the Rodney 
Jerkins-produced Telephone seems to be about escapism and the suggestion that 
perhaps a club isn’t the best place for a chinwag. This being Gaga, however, 
there’s slightly more to it than that.She told MTV 
<http://www.mtv.com/news/1627050/lady-gaga-explains-inspiration-behind-beyonce-collabo-telephone/>
 the song was actually about suffocation and the fear of not being able to 
enjoy yourself. It’s possible that explanation was crowbarred in afterwards, 
because a pop star in their imperial phase can say and do what they like and 
get away with it – and this was definitely Gaga’s imperial phase. Telephone 
starts with two verses, rather than the typical verse, pre-chorus, chorus. Its 
dynamics and tempo are so perfectly balanced, however, that it only takes 45 
seconds to get to that chorus, its arrival shoving a proverbial rocket up the 
song’s backside. Even without its guest star, the song would exist towards the 
upper reaches of very good, but Beyoncé – deliriously half-rapping her way 
through the third verse like a woman possessed – creates the perfect time 
capsule of pop in the late 00s.


4. Alejandro  <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=niqrrmev4mA>

Alejandro is one of Gaga’s oddest singles, and one of her slowest, its 99 bpm 
tempo placing it in the space between banger and ballad. Perhaps that’s why her 
label was reluctant to push it as a single. In the end, Gaga got her way and 
the song became her seventh successive US top 10 hit. The song – deliciously 
OTT – is about Gaga saying goodbye to her ex-lovers, including the titular 
Alejandro, poor old Fernando and the forever unloved Roberto. Its string-led 
opening is juxtaposed brilliantly with the slight tinge of 90s holiday camp 
teen disco that follows, all click-track beats and soap opera relationship 
drama. But, as was typical of those early years, all the disparate elements are 
wonderfully sewn together by Gaga and RedOne, the pair allowing the song enough 
space to breathe and for that glorious chorus to take centre stage.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dniqrrmev4mA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dniqrrmev4mA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dniqrrmev4mA&media=>
5. Dance in the Dark <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-SBmJvwiDns>

Dance in the Dark is a song about self-loathing that doesn’t offer a solution: 
it marks the point for Gaga where the private and the public conflate; where 
the Fame Monster starts to win. The chorus of “Baby loves to dance in the dark/ 
’cause when he’s looking she falls apart”, however, is still anchored in the 
relatable, dealing with issues of sex and self confidence. “She doesn’t want 
her man to see her naked. She will be free, and she will let her inner animal 
out, but only when the lights are out,” she explained to the Los Angeles Times 
<http://latimesblogs.latimes.com/music_blog/2009/12/gaga-.html>. The song was 
given a new dimension whenshe performed it at the 2010 Brit awards 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d_m0ab3952E>, shortly after the death of her 
friend Alexander McQueen, anchoring the song’s message that fame is a mask that 
can’t rescue everyone. Musically, the song is a glorious juxtaposition of 
textures: the harsh, stuttering vocal meshing with that glacial riff, while the 
processed vocals of the verses burst into the sunshine of the chorus. Even the 
robotic spoken-word part towards the end is eventually washed away by a warm 
synthetic breeze. Dance in the Dark is also the first song that seems to be for 
and about her fans. “I hope and pray that I can inspire some sort of change in 
people subliminally through the show,”she told MTV 
<http://www.mtv.com/news/1628355/lady-gaga-explains-real-meaning-of-dance-in-the-dark/>
. They’re singing Dance in the Dark, but they’re dancing and they’re free. 
They’re letting it out.”


6. Judas  <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wagn8Wrmzuc>

Imperial phases only last so long of course. Born This Way 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wV1FrqwZyKw> in 2012 was, for some, a step too 
far – a well-meaning but patronising gesture that felt like another superstar 
convinced they could save the world. For the first time, the message was 
clouding the song. To others it just sounded too much like Madonna’s Express 
Yourself. The album campaign also showed signs of slipping, with previously 
immaculate artwork and videos replaced by rushed jobs. Stripped of that 
extraneous stuff – which is easier said than done when it comes to Gaga – and 
you’re left with the music, and much of the sprawling Born This Way album holds 
up. One of the few RedOne productions was Judas, a brutal jackhammer of a song 
that ramps up the juggernaut feel of Bad Romance but sweetens the pill with a 
glorious chorus that feels almost comically upbeat. Judas also brilliantly 
showcases Gaga’s varying vocal styles, with the thudding verses delivered in a 
blank, half-rap style, before the sweet pop chorus briefly lights the way. Then 
there’s the peculiar spoken middle eight (“fame hooker prostitute wench vomits 
her mind”), mixed with an unhinged cry about “ear condoms”. Judas is a reminder 
of how ludicrous pop can be.

A dangerously hostile force – China goes Gaga after Lady meets Lama
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2016/jun/30/china-lady-gaga-dalai-lama>
7. The Edge of Glory <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QeWBS0JBNzQ>

Born This Way contains several supercharged power ballads, the default genre 
for anyone looking to indulge their musical fantasies. The best of the bunch is 
The Edge of Glory, a song that takes those stadium-sized Springsteen influences 
to their obvious conclusion by employing the services of saxophonist Clarence 
Clemons. Inspired by the death of her grandfather and his 60-year marriage to 
her grandma, the song is about “the glorious moment of your life … when you 
decide that it’s OK to go, you don’t have any more words to say, more business, 
more mountains to climb.” Perhaps it’s that personal connection that makes her 
performance more soulful than elsewhere on the album. Once again the chorus is 
immaculate, a joyous burst of energy that ramps up towards an impassioned “I’m 
on the edge with you.” By the time Clemons’s sax solo screeches to a halt, the 
song feels almost overstuffed, and yet Gaga and co-producer Fernando Garibay 
manage to eek out another minute’s worth of drama before the song deflates, 
exhausted by its own ambition.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQeWBS0JBNzQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQeWBS0JBNzQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQeWBS0JBNzQ&media=>
8. Yoü & I (Mark Taylor Remix) <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RqfDXJ3AAv0>

Every Lady Gaga album includes an ode to her days shlepping around New York 
playing smokey bars. The Fame had Brown Eyes, The Fame Monster had Speechless, 
Artpop had Dope. Born This Way’s ode to whiskey-stained rock’n’roll was 
supposed to be Yoü & I, a song she premiered in June 2010 and added to the 
Monster Ball tour shortly after. Originally just a relatively low-key piano 
ballad, the version that appears on Born This Way stamps all over its original 
subtlety and features Brian May, a sample of We Will Rock You, and production 
by Robert John “Mutt” Lange. The result was bloated and suffocating, but the 
song was later saved by Mark Taylo’s remix. With the tempo increased, the 
backing vocals pushed to the forefront and a sparkly synthetic bassline slapped 
underneath it, the song shimmies and shines. This version also pushes the 
bar-room piano front and centre, brilliantly, and then follows that with a 
brief banjo solo. Just when you think it can’t get anymore perfect the backing 
track falls away by the song’s end to leave Gaga alone at her piano again, 
likely gazing into the bottom of a whiskey glass.


9. Do What U Want feat Christina Aguilera 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wAeV90a5l-E>

Hobbled by a sense of panic around the campaign and far too many elaborate 
pre-release gimmicks, 2013’s Artpop album was a blip. Though Gaga’s innate 
earnestness overtook her talent, it still contained highlights, not least the 
album’s second single Do What U Want, a pulsating shimmer built around one of 
her best choruses. Inspired by her time spent living in Chicago, Gaga created 
her version of an R&B song. Many were furious that Gaga – who claimed to be an 
advocate for the voiceless – chose to feature R Kelly on the album version, 
giventhe detailed accusations that he had sex with minors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/dec/05/r-kelly-weak-people-haters-black-panties>
 (he has always denied the allegations and has never been convicted of criminal 
charges, though he hassettled a number of civil lawsuits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/20/r-kelly-bill-cosby-assault-accusations-just-strange>
) Just to highlight how bad her decision-making had become around this point, 
she then got Terry Richardson to shoot a video, which, thank goodness, has 
never seen the light of day. Keen to keep the song in the charts following the 
reaction to the Kelly/Richardson controversy, Gaga rereleased a single version 
featuring Christina Aguilera. Rather than sing Kelly’s overtly sexual second 
verse – which jars heavily with Gaga’s first – Aguilera sings what one assumes 
was the original, pre-Kelly version, about how “her bones hurt from all the 
shows”, which is obviously in relation to the hip injury that forced Gaga to 
cancel the remainder of her Born This Way Ball tour. It’s a credit to the song 
that despite all the tinkering, it still sounds amazing.

10. Sexxx Dreams <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P2JbVZRpNbw>

There’s a parallel universe in which Sexxx Dreams was the first single from 
Artpop and everyone was a lot happier. Artpop’s actual lead single, Applause, 
was good, but it was essentially a song by Lady Gaga about being Lady Gaga for 
fans of Lady Gaga. The throbbing squelch of Sexxx Dreams, however, is just a 
straight up pop song with some delicious disco flourishes about “really nasty” 
fantasies. That’s it. No ulterior motives. It stands out a mile on Artpop 
because it’s one of the few genuinely carefree moments. Gaga’s playful vocal 
performance brings out various different textures in the song – she’s probing 
on the back and forth of the verses, playful on the pre-chorus and then in 
full-on seductive mode in the chorus. There’s also a brilliant spoken-word 
interlude bit where she giggles “I can’t believe I’m telling you this, but I’ve 
had a couple drinks and … Oh my God!” before the chorus and those delirious, 
chunky synths wash over the song one last time.

 