
A London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> council’s fight against unfit 
rented housing has resulted in a single landlord being forced to submit 140 
applications to prove his apartments are lawful accommodation.

The extent of the continuing four-year battle between Islington council and 
Andrew Panayi, a multimillionaire landlord who owns 200 flats around Caledonian 
Road in north London, has been revealed by officials who told the Guardian that 
in one year they discovered 90 of his flats did not have adequate planning 
permission.

Islington estimates investigations and official challenges to Panayi’s 
practices have cost council tax payers at least £170,000, with some cases 
taking up to two years to resolve. For a period of time one council planning 
officer was assigned no other work apart from investigating the landlord, it 
said.

“There are literally hundreds of files [on Panayi],” said Karen Sullivan, 
Islington’s planning director. “There is no one else at this scale.”

The town hall’s investigation into Panayi’s rental empire has seen him served 
with enforcement notices on more than two dozen bedsits –described by one 
tenant as “worse than prison cells” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/sep/05/london-flats-prison-cells-condemned>
 – that were ruled unfit for use because they were too small. Since the 
beginning of 2015 he has been successfully prosecuted twice for failing to 
respond to contravention and enforcement notices on rental properties. He is 
due to appear in court in February for sentencing in a third case after he 
refused to demolish an unauthorised roof extension in which he had built two 
rental flats.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fsep%2F05%2Flondon-flats-worse-than-prison-cells-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F9%2F5%2F1409934608435%2FLondon-flats-worse-than-p-017.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=London%20flats%20'worse%20than%20prison%20cells'%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fsep%2F05%2Flondon-flats-worse-than-prison-cells-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=London%20flats%20%27worse%20than%20prison%20cells%27%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fsep%2F05%2Flondon-flats-worse-than-prison-cells-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F9%2F5%2F1409934608435%2FLondon-flats-worse-than-p-017.jpg>
London flats ‘worse than prison cells’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/video/2014/sep/05/london-flats-worse-than-prison-cells-video>
But Panayi, 69, a former insolvency practitioner, has hit back at his 
treatment by the council, telling the Guardian it amounts to “victimisation”. 
In an image that suggests he thinks Islington considers him like a vampire, he 
said the council “brings out the crucifix when they hear my name”.

In 2016, the council refused all but one of his planning applications to alter 
properties, he said.

But Panayi has also won many of his battles with the council. Ninety-six of 
the 140 planning applications he has had to submit to prove his apartments are 
lawful have been successful and he has won 13 appeals against some of those 
that were refused.

He believes he is misunderstood and claims to have pioneered low-cost housing 
in the area in the 1980s by turning large single houses into multiple flats.

“The services I have provided on the Caledonian Road have been so great that 
they should not be coming after me, they should be giving me a prize,” he said. 
“It has a lot to do with the fact that I have been so successful. They just 
can’t accept it.

“Anything I touch comes out as invalidated or refused. It is revenge in a big 
way.”

This month alone Panayi had three planning appeals rejected and the reasons 
given reveal two key reasons why officials have been objecting to his approach 
to housing on an almost industrial scale. In one case he wanted to split two 
flats into four by building an extension, but the government’s planning 
inspector ruled three of them were significantly smaller than minimum space 
standards, would be “cramped” and would fail to provide acceptable living 
conditions. In another case, it emerged that Panayi did not want to provide a 
£50,000 payment towards affordable housing, as demanded by the borough.


Since 2014 he has been convicted, and had to repay £70,000 under the Proceeds 
of Crime Act, for letting out a storage basement as self-contained 
accommodation for £975 a month after it was declared substandard. In 2014 
Islington sent in health and safety inspectors after it emerged he was trying 
to rent out a studio apartment that consisted of a small room into which had 
been crammed a double mattress, a wardrobe and some kitchen units, leaving just 
enough room to open the front door or walk round the bed, plus a separate 
toilet and shower.

Panayi’s notoriety grew when he appeared in a 2012 BBC documentary, The Secret 
History of Our Streets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2012/jun/20/tv-review-secret-life-streets>
, in which he spoke about “milking” tenants and boasted he “builds first and 
asks permission later”.

By 2014 Panayi had acquired 250 rental properties which delivered him a 
multimillion-pound annual income. Local residents, who branded themselves the 
Cally Cows in reference to his “milking” quote, were furious at his tactics and 
councillors decided to act.

“When the programme aired there was national outrage,” said Andrew Marx, 
Islington’s deputy head of planning. “People from Manchester were asking, ‘What 
are you doing down there?’ It was a huge thing for us as a council wanting to 
care about people having decent accommodation. Four years later we are still 
pursuing this, which shows we are not going to stop.”

Councillor Diarmaid Ward, Islington council’s executive member for housing and 
development, said: “More and more people in Islington are renting privately, 
and they need decent homes to live in. It’s also important that public 
confidence in the planning system is not undermined by people who flout 
planning controls. Most landlords in Islington act fairly and lawfully, but if 
landlords ignore planning rules we will take action, especially if landlords 
break the rules repeatedly.”
 