
More needs to be done to ease the difficulties facing refugees if they are to 
reach their potential in the UK, according to the first major piece of research 
into the government’s resettlement scheme.

Academics from the University of Sussex are close to completing a three-year 
study that has followed the progress of more than 280 refugees who came the UK 
before 2010 under theGateway protection programme 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/gateway-protection-programme-information-for-organisations/gateway-protection-programme>
.

Researchers compared the integration and wellbeing of refugees from Ethiopia, 
Iraq, Somalia and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, living in four areas of 
the UK. Their findings reveal how the system is failing some of the most 
vulnerable members of society throughinadequacies in the provision of 
English classes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/18/david-cameron-stigmatising-muslim-women-learn-english-language-policy>
 and a lack of suitable routes to employment and training.

Syrian refugees: world leaders aim to raise $9bn to reduce plight of millions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/03/syrian-refugees-world-leaders-to-raise-9bn-to-reduce-plight-of-millions>
The study, Optimising Refugee Resettlement in the UK 
<http://www.sussex.ac.uk/migration/research/integrationcitizenship/refugeeresettlement>
, found women, along with teenagers who had missed core education because of 
turmoil in their home country, faced the biggest barriers to integration.

The findings are timely as the first of the 20,000 Syrians that former prime 
minister David Cameron pledged in 2015 to bring from the camps bordering Syria 
by 2020 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2015/sep/07/david-cameron-20000-refugees-syria-2020-video>
 have arrived in the UK. By June this year more than 2,500 had come under the
Syrian vulnerable person resettlement scheme 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/syrian-vulnerable-person-resettlement-programme-fact-sheet>
, which is based on the Gateway programme. They are selected from a country of 
safety based on vulnerability and those eligible are given refugee status prior 
to arriving in Britain, where they are settled in groups of 60 to 100 people. 
The government is under scrutiny over their progress.

Linda Morrice, a senior lecturer in education at Sussex University who carried 
out part of the analysis with colleagues specialising in geography and 
psychology, says language was both the key and the barrier to indicators of 
wellbeing and success.

“Overwhelmingly we found people wanted to learn the language and found that 
this was absolutely vital to their integration, work and independence. More 
than anything they wanted to have a plan and a future here.”

But problems arose because the government tends to use a “one size fits all 
model” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/03/english-lessons-syrian-refugees>
, she adds. “We’ve found this is really not suitable for many people.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Flanguage-barrier-refugees-english-classes-integration-esol%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e9b0b0ef759339d6e3aca44f72c4c632ea2f063%2F706_659_2698_1619%2F2698.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Language%20barrier%20leaves%20refugees%20facing%20struggle%20to%20rebuild%20their%20lives&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Flanguage-barrier-refugees-english-classes-integration-esol%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Language%20barrier%20leaves%20refugees%20facing%20struggle%20to%20rebuild%20their%20lives&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Flanguage-barrier-refugees-english-classes-integration-esol%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e9b0b0ef759339d6e3aca44f72c4c632ea2f063%2F706_659_2698_1619%2F2698.jpg>
 Syrian refugee families arrive at their new homes on the Isle of Bute in 
December 2015. Photograph: Christopher Furlong/Getty Images 
The research focused on refugees aged from 18 to 80 who had been settled in 
Brighton and Hove, Manchester, Sheffield and Norwich. They were asked to rate 
their own English understanding, speaking, reading and writing and the 
improvement of their language proficiency since arrival on a scale of one to 
five. “To investigate the importance of learning the language we then explored 
links between people’s self-rated English and other variables,” Morrice 
explains.

The results show that people with better English skills are more satisfied 
with their job and education and have a better understanding of British 
culture. Because participants filled out the questionnaires three times, each 
time a year apart, researchers were able to conduct longitudinal analysis and 
learned that language skills are needed for meaningful contact rather than vice 
versa.

“Although the assumption is if you are living in England you will come into 
contact with British people and over time learn the language, it actually 
happens the other way around,” Morrice says. “We want to emphasise that 
refugees cannot be expected to learn English simply through contact with 
English speakers. Our results clearly show language skills are needed before 
meaningful contacts can be made and that this in turn increases refugee 
wellbeing.”

Up to 750 refugees a year have been brought to the UK under the Gateway scheme 
since its inception in 2004. The scheme does not accept asylum seekers who have 
travelled to the UK under their own steam.

Someone who has never learned to read can find themselves sitting next to a 
person with a university degree

But the University of Sussex study found there was a huge diversity within 
these groups and subsequently considerable variations in need and integration 
outcomes.

Academics recorded that this was particularly problematic when it came to 
learning English. Resettled refugees are given eight hours a week of free 
English for speakers of other languages (Esol) tuition in the first year they 
arrive, grouped with others of the same nationality. This is cut to four hours 
a week in subsequent years for those claiming jobseeker’s allowance when they 
enter mainstream provision. As a result, someone who has never held a pen or 
learned to read can find themselves sitting next to another person with a 
university degree who can already speak some English. In interviews one refugee 
said: “It’s easy to learn the language – I went to the library, I looked 
online, I watched English films.” Another was still using an interpreter after 
attending English classes for nine years. She said: “I just want to be able to 
go to the doctor on my own. I want some privacy. I want to read my own 
letters.” For many the lessons are not intensive or frequent enough, while 
others would be better suited to learning through craft or cookery classes and 
one-to-one mentoring, the study found.

Last year the government announced £45m of cuts to the free Esol tuition, 
which will affect more than 16,000 people 
<https://www.tes.com/news/further-education/breaking-news/esol-cuts-%E2%80%98without-course-you-don%E2%80%99t-know-how-live%E2%80%99>
. While £10m of funding is to be injected over five years to ensure adequate 
Esol in areas where Syrian refugees are to be settled, experts have said 
targeting such a small group is not an effective approach.

“Feedback provided by refugees suggested their English improved at a greater 
pace when they were put in mixed classes with other nationalities, otherwise 
there was a tendency to speak in their native tongue. Mixed classes also 
bridged ties between communities,” Morrice says. She adds that the classes need 
to be tailored more carefully to the needs of specific groups, especially 
women. Women were found to have lower language skills, and for them childcare 
and caring for sick relatives were major barriers to learning English.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Flanguage-barrier-refugees-english-classes-integration-esol%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F084d7cabc8484b8e10a688f6499b22fabd36758a%2F0_78_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Language%20barrier%20leaves%20refugees%20facing%20struggle%20to%20rebuild%20their%20lives&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Flanguage-barrier-refugees-english-classes-integration-esol%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Language%20barrier%20leaves%20refugees%20facing%20struggle%20to%20rebuild%20their%20lives&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Flanguage-barrier-refugees-english-classes-integration-esol%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F084d7cabc8484b8e10a688f6499b22fabd36758a%2F0_78_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Refugees being given an English lesson by the FaithAction charity in London, 
December 2015. Photograph: Graeme Robertson for the Guardian 
The study also found refugees who came to the UK with qualifications and good 
English skills faced a different set of problems. Often overseas qualifications 
are not recognised and there is a lack of faster-track learning routes, 
especially when it came to support with finding employment commensurate with 
their previous work.

Things are even tougher for those described by researchers as “the lost 
teenagers”, who arrive in their mid to late teens having missed the vital final 
years of school because, for example, they were in a refugee camp. Many of 
those interviewed said they wanted to study vocations such as construction, 
hairdressing or plumbing or were keen to go to university but did not have GCSE 
maths or English. Yet too much focus was put on finding a job rather than 
training and aspirations.

A young man, living in Manchester, wrote: “Nobody cares about my future, they 
only want me to get a job and quit the jobcentre.” Another described how he 
“performed gymnastics” to subvert the system to get the qualifications he 
needed.

James (not his real name) arrived in the UK to live in Norwich after fleeing 
war in the DRC. His studies were interrupted after his family sought refuge in 
Uganda and he missed four years of education before arriving in Britain, aged 
21.

He says when he registered at the jobcentre he got an interview for a job as a 
cleaner but was turned down because he had no cleaning experience. “All I 
wanted to do was study and go to university,” he says.

Out of the other refugees who were resettled at the same time as me nobody 
else my age has managed to go to university

He finally managed to get a job as a care worker but later quit so he could 
juggle English classes with doing an access course and completing his GCSEs. He 
was forced to lie about the amount of time he was spending studying, as no more 
than 16 hours of study a week is permittedwhile claiming jobseeker’s allowance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/dec/08/900000-claiming-job-seekers-allowance-subjected-benefit-sanctions>
. Now 30 and married with two children, James has completed his first degree at 
university and is taking a master’s.

“Out of the other refugees who were resettled at the same time as me nobody 
else my age has managed to go to university,” he says. “There should be more 
support for young people to get the qualifications they need. If I had told the 
jobcentre I was studying for 18 hours a week I wouldn’t have been able to do 
the access course to do my GCSEs.”

Lucy Bryson is Brighton and Hove council’s community safety manager and its 
lead officer on refugees. She has been coordinating the package of support for 
eight Syrian households who have been resettled in the area since December 
2015. “The best way for any refugee household to integrate and feel a sense of 
belonging in the UK is for someone in that household to be working,” she 
explains. “Refugees come to the UK with skills and experience, so it may be 
only the lack of English language which gets in the way.”

She urges the government to use the findings of the Sussex study to improve 
its policy on resettling refugees. “This research underlines how important good 
quality language provision is, tailored to the skills and aspirations of each 
individual,” she says.

The Department for Education last year part-funded Esol courses for more than 
130,000 learners. A DfE spokeswoman says: “We are fully committed to equipping 
people with the necessary English language skills to succeed in work, and play 
an active role in their communities. We aim to create a fair balance between 
the investment made by the government, the employer and the individual.”

Case studies: ‘I used to cry when I had to talk to someone’


Makida is a 40-year-old mother of three living in Brighton who fled Ethiopia 
because of political upheaval. She has attended English classes since she 
arrived in the UK 10 years ago, but found the language hard to learn and often 
missed classes to care for her sick mother.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Flanguage-barrier-refugees-english-classes-integration-esol%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbab188912520d357ef6b8f871320db7d66c82504%2F510_480_2815_1689%2F2815.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Language%20barrier%20leaves%20refugees%20facing%20struggle%20to%20rebuild%20their%20lives&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Flanguage-barrier-refugees-english-classes-integration-esol%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Language%20barrier%20leaves%20refugees%20facing%20struggle%20to%20rebuild%20their%20lives&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Flanguage-barrier-refugees-english-classes-integration-esol%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbab188912520d357ef6b8f871320db7d66c82504%2F510_480_2815_1689%2F2815.jpg>
 Makida, who runs a catering company with her husband 
She needed to use a translator for a long time and said she also struggled 
with self-confidence when trying to communicate in public. “I used to cry when 
I had to talk to someone,” she explains. “It’s the way I was brought up; it 
wasn’t really respectful [in Ethiopia] to go up and talk to somebody, because 
I’m a woman.”

Makida says it was only once she started having home tuition two years ago, in 
addition to her Esol classes, that she gained confidence and started to pick up 
English.

She now runs a catering company with her husband, making Ethiopian food for 
community events, and has made friends with her neighbours: “In the past couple 
of years I’ve got to know an Albanian woman who lives a few doors down. We 
drink coffee and speak English together every day.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Flanguage-barrier-refugees-english-classes-integration-esol%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe74d5d755911cdf9fc20a444b0b172e6c42b6380%2F788_627_2482_2482%2F2482.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Language%20barrier%20leaves%20refugees%20facing%20struggle%20to%20rebuild%20their%20lives&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Flanguage-barrier-refugees-english-classes-integration-esol%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Language%20barrier%20leaves%20refugees%20facing%20struggle%20to%20rebuild%20their%20lives&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Flanguage-barrier-refugees-english-classes-integration-esol%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe74d5d755911cdf9fc20a444b0b172e6c42b6380%2F788_627_2482_2482%2F2482.jpg>
 Yared, who was a high court judge in Ethiopia, now works as a traffic warden 
Yared, 55, was a high court judge in Ethiopia, but community tensions led him 
to flee with his family to a refugee camp in Kenya 17 years ago. They lived in 
Nairobi for seven years before being selected for resettlement to Britain on 
the Gateway programme. Arriving in the UK, he applied for 30 or 40 jobs before 
finding work as a traffic warden – a post he’s been in for seven years.

He says he is grateful to have the job, but adds: “I have so much experience 
from all my years … but instead I’m doing work that just brings confrontation. 
I get abused and beaten. You see British people at their worst. It makes me 
depressed.”

Sometimes the abuse has been racist. Earlier this year a man was taken to 
court after assaulting Yared and telling him to “go home”. However, Yared says 
most people are friendly and he has made friends in the local community.

He has supported both his daughters through university, but has struggled to 
become a human rights lawyer. He took a law conversion course at Brighton 
University and went on to do a postgraduate course, but was unable to complete 
the qualification as he could not afford the fee to have his dissertation 
marked by an external assessor. “I need £3,000 to attain my qualification … As 
a refugee I’m not allowed to take out a loan,” he says.

“My daughter is a lawyer. She says: ‘Why don’t you quit your job? I’ll help 
you, Dad.’ But I don’t want to go through the benefits cycle again and I need 
the money to support my other daughter who is a single mum. She needs extra 
help with her council tax.”

Feedback from Yared, and others like him, shows that even when refugees are 
qualified for a job, it is hard to engage employers, because of their lack of 
UK qualifications or work experience.
 