
Look at any interiors magazine, fashion shoot or cutting-edge furniture store 
and you’ll see that cacti – once the dusty inhabitants of old ladies’ 
windowsills – are having a moment. Their hipster fans should get themselves 
over to Lanzarote and the incredible Jardín de Cactus, sunken into the volcanic 
landscape in a disused quarry. It was designed byCésar Manrique 
<http://www.cesarmanrique.com/biografia_i.htm>, the island’s most influential 
artist and architect, who saw these spiky characters’ funky appeal way before 
today’s deco bloggers.

All manner of otherworldly protrusions – over 1,100 species – from towering 
saguaros and spiny over-sized globes to more unusual species that resemble 
giant white maggots, thrusting asparagus spears, prickly mounds of broccoli, or 
dark green corals and sea anemones were curated here by Manrique as a botanical 
amphitheatre, walled with bridges and paved paths carrying visitors to 
different levels, past red rocks, black volcanic soils and pools. There is also 
a stunning bar and cafe, again designed by him, including chunky mid-century 
furniture, an elegant spiral staircase and curved wooden bar.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F19%2Fjardin-de-cactus-garden-lanzarote-canary-islands%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F19%2F1439980877886%2Fadafb66e-9691-4b7e-a93e-b75fd84148a0-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lanzarote%E2%80%99s%20beautiful%20cactus%20garden&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F19%2Fjardin-de-cactus-garden-lanzarote-canary-islands%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lanzarote%E2%80%99s%20beautiful%20cactus%20garden&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F19%2Fjardin-de-cactus-garden-lanzarote-canary-islands%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F19%2F1439980877886%2Fadafb66e-9691-4b7e-a93e-b75fd84148a0-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Photograph: Frank Lukasseck/Corbis 
Ignore the tacky bits and the whole of Lanzarote can seem like a Manrique art 
project. He created so many beautiful attractions there from the 1970s to the 
90s: the Bond-lair-esqueJameos del Agua 
<http://www.turismolanzarote.com/en/centros-turisticos/jameos-del-agua/5102>, a 
huge venue with restaurants, bars, auditorium and club in underground caves, 
and his two amazing homes, now open to the public. But the cactus garden, his 
final project, which he worked on for 20 years but completed in 1990 (two years 
before he died in a car crash) is the funkiest of them all.

• Adults €5, kids €2.50, lanzaroteinformation.com 
<http://www.lanzaroteinformation.com/content/jardin-de-cactus-0> 
 