
Just before 10am on New Year’s Eve 1986, armed men arrived at the office of a 
small organisation for the resettlement of migrants, in Santiago,Chile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/chile>. They immediately began rounding up 
staff. “They tossed us in the meeting room, on the floor, face down. They cut 
computer cables and tied us up, wrist to wrist,” recalled Eliana Infante, one 
of the staff. “After they tied us up, they asked, ‘Which of you is the 
communist son of a bitch Roberto Kozak?’”

A tall, strikingly handsome and immaculately dressed man stood up. “That’s 
me,” he said, calmly.

Kozak was marched down a flight of stairs. With a machine gun to his head, he 
was forced to lie on top of a conference table while he was interrogated by the 
paramilitaries.

The gunmen were members of a rightwing death squad ultra-loyal to the Chilean 
dictator General Augusto Pinochet. They were looking for guns and money that 
they suspected were stashed in Kozak’s office: the Santiago branch of the 
Geneva-based Intergovernmental Committee for European Migration (ICEM). They 
were also looking for evidence that Kozak was implicated in an assassination 
attempt on Pinochet a few months earlier, which had left five of the dictator’s 
bodyguards dead.

In the days after that ambush, Pinochet’s security services had kidnapped 
several high-profile leftwing activists in Santiago and slit their throats. 
When the paramilitaries burst into the ICEM office, Infante and the rest of the 
staff feared that Kozak was about to be murdered – and that after killing him, 
the armed men would set fire to their office, leaving them, tied up on the 
floor, to burn to death.

Latin America’s Schindler: a forgotten hero of the 20th century – podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/audio/2016/dec/30/latin-americas-schindler-a-forgotten-hero-of-the-20th-century-podcast>
Under interrogation, Kozak insisted that the Santiago office was only involved 
in helping refugees, and that there were neither guns nor large amounts of cash 
on the premises. After an hour, Kozak was released, physically unharmed, and 
hurried upstairs to untie his staff. “He was green. It was a colour between 
yellow, white and green,” said Infante. “But poker-faced, he went downstairs, 
calmly called Geneva to inform them of the raid and then went on with his work.”

Roberto Kozak’s is one of the great untold stories of the 20th century. 
Diplomatic colleagues who know the full details of what he did during the 
Pinochet era referred to him as “Latin America’s Schindler”. Like Oskar 
Schindler, the German businessman who helped to save 1,200 Jews in Poland 
during the second world war, Kozak’s story is that of a man who courageously 
used his position to save lives. He could easily have kept his head down while 
thousands were taken prisoner, tortured or “disappeared” by Chile’s brutal 
military and secret police, but he chose not to. In the years following the 
1973 military coup, Kozak and diplomats from other countries helped an 
estimated 25,000-35,000 Chilean political prisoners escape from captivity and 
find safe haven abroad.

More than a decade before the raid on his office, Kozak had worked his way 
into the inner circles of the Pinochet regime, courting senior military 
figures, politicians, officials and members of the secret police. Deploying a 
combination of diplomatic charm, patience and crates of imported whisky, he set 
about painstakingly negotiating the release of detainees, almost all of whom 
were from the Chilean left. He even hid some of them in his own house. Kozak 
brokered his deals in batches, sometimes scores or hundreds of prisoners at a 
time, sometimes just one or two.

When he died in September 2015, the world knew next to nothing of Kozak or his 
extraordinary legacy. Aside from a handful of articles in the local media and 
an honorary award from the Chilean government in 1992, there was no wider 
recognition. Kozak was self-effacing and reserved, and did not even tell his 
children of his actions until late in his life. His son Nikolai, who is now 24, 
knew little about Kozak’s work, until they attended the opening of Chile’s 
human rights museum – the Museo de la Memoria – in Santiago in 2010. That day, 
he glimpsed for the first time what his father had done.

As the ceremony unfolded in a packed plaza, Nikolai saw Kozak staring back at 
a figure who was looking at him from across the square. It was a shared look of 
astonishment. The two men slid through the crowd and, without a word, embraced. 
Both began to cry. For Nikolai, it was startling to see his father so 
emotional. Even more surprising was what the man – whose name was Patricio 
Bustos – said: “Your father saved my life.”

“I then realised my father was not the man I thought he was,” Nikolai recalled.

Roberto Kozak was born on 14 May 1942, in a rural village in north-east 
Argentina. His father’s family had moved to Argentina from Ukraine in the 
1890s, while his mother, who also had a Ukrainian background, was from the 
capital city of Buenos Aires. One of 12 children, Kozak was still young when 
the family moved from the grind of agricultural life to a poor, working-class 
area on the outer rim of Buenos Aires. His father could only find odd jobs, so 
money was tight.

Aged nine, Kozak started working in a bookshop after school. The owner was to 
have a transformative influence on his life. He let Kozak look at the books 
when there were no customers, and the boy soon became an avid reader, 
discovering engineering and mechanics, but also international politics. He 
particularly loved an atlas full of facts and curiosities about faraway places. 
Throughout his teenage years Kozak combined work at the bookshop with classes, 
eventually enrolling to study civil engineering at the University of Buenos 
Aires.

After graduation, he worked at various technical jobs, and at 21 he married 
Elsa Beatriz, the daughter of Polish immigrants. In the late 1960s, the couple 
had a son, Sergio. When he was two, the couple split but remained in touch. 
(Kozak met his second wife Silvia in 1976, at a seminar in Buenos Aires. The 
couple had a son, Nikolai and a daughter, Nathalie, now 21.) Around the time of 
the break-up of his first marriage, Kozak changed careers. He was looking for a 
chance to see the world.

One day in 1968, Kozak spotted a newspaper advertisement for a vacancy at the 
Argentinian office of the ICEM. The ICEM was set up in 1951 to help people 
displaced by the second world war. When Kozak was hired, its scope was limited, 
but today, the International Organisation for Migration, as the body is now 
known, has 165 nation-members and operates under the umbrella of the United 
Nations.

After two years in Argentina, in 1970 Kozak began preparing for an 
international role with the ICEM, spending six months in West Germany training 
to be a diplomat and a further two in London learning English. He worked in the 
ICEM’s Geneva office for about two years on migration programmes for Latin 
America, before accepting a transfer to Chile.

Soon after his arrival in Santiago in May 1972, it became apparent to him that 
a coup against Salvador Allende’s Marxist government was coming. There were 
food shortages, strikes and increasing signs of unrest in the military. Kozak’s 
diplomatic contacts confirmed to him the widespread belief that the US was 
secretly using the CIA to undermine the government.The coup began 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/07/chile-coup-pinochet-allende> at 
7am on 11 September 1973. By that afternoon, the presidential palace had been 
stormed, Allende declared dead and Pinochet’s military junta had announced that 
it was in charge.

To many in Chile, the coup was not unexpected, but the ferocity of the 
military crackdown in its aftermath came as a shock. Pinochet and his inner 
circle saw the overthrow of Allende as not just an opportunity to impose 
stability, but a chance to remove what they been taught was a cancer at the 
core of society: Marxism.

Immediately, the military and secret police began commandeering farmhouses, 
private homes and even the national football stadium for use as detention 
centres. Among those detained were communists, socialists, students, 
journalists, priests and musicians. Any connection to the Chilean left or 
suspicion of involvement in organised opposition to the coup was taken as 
grounds for detention. Death squads made up of heavily armed combat troops 
travelled throughout northern Chile, rounding up villagers and leaving behind a 
trail of corpses. Between 1973 and 1978, about 70,000 people were detained, of 
whom an estimated 30,000 were tortured and approximately 3,500 killed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Froberto-kozak-chile-latin-america-schindler%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F87baf7eda836d4eaeb1f5cb8c2f33d158cb1c49d%2F0_41_2048_1280%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Latin%20America%E2%80%99s%20Schindler%3A%20a%20forgotten%20hero%20of%20the%2020th%20century%20%7C%20Ewen%20MacAskill&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Froberto-kozak-chile-latin-america-schindler%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Latin%20America%E2%80%99s%20Schindler%3A%20a%20forgotten%20hero%20of%20the%2020th%20century%20%7C%20Ewen%20MacAskill&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Froberto-kozak-chile-latin-america-schindler%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F87baf7eda836d4eaeb1f5cb8c2f33d158cb1c49d%2F0_41_2048_1280%2F2048.jpg>
 General Pinochet and his Junta at a ceremony in Santiago, in 1985. Photograph: 
STF/AFP/Getty Images 
From the ugly first days of the coup, Kozak was determined to do something for 
those trapped by the Pinochet regime. The work he had been doing before had 
been largely mundane, setting up small-scale migration programmes for people 
moving to South America and organising transport for new arrivals. Kozak 
realised from the outset that if he was going to be able to help, he would have 
to stretch the interpretation of his duties with the ICEM.

“He had to do something and not be passive. He thought organisations such as 
the ICEM should offer protection to people,” Kozak’s widow Silvia said. That 
meant becoming an active participant in the campaign to help those on the 
receiving end of Pinochet’s brutal crackdown. At the time, the ICEM was a 
risk-averse organisation, wary of controversy and fearful of offending member 
governments. It is likely that senior staff in Geneva were not fully aware of 
what Kozak was doing and, according to some present staff, that they would have 
been concerned had they known.

One of Kozak’s first moves was to establish tight working relationships with 
diplomats from sympathetic embassies. “Roberto undertook a great task but he 
did not do it alone,” Silvia stressed. “He was part of a network. He would have 
considered it egocentric to claim responsibility. He felt his task was 
important but he never took centre stage. He put great value on teamwork.”

One of the most courageous of the diplomats, who worked alongside Kozak in the 
immediate aftermath of the coup, was the late Swedish ambassador Harald 
Edelstam. During the second world war, Edelstam had helped Jews escape from 
Norway to Sweden. Now, in Chile, he was working to save people from Pinochet’s 
regime.

In one notable incident, Edelstam came to the rescue of hundreds of Cuban 
diplomats and Allende supporters trapped inside the Cuban embassy in Santiago, 
which was under fire from Chilean tanks and troops who were preparing to storm 
the building. Carrying only a Swedish flag, Edelstam went into the embassy and 
helped negotiate safe passage for the 147 Cuban diplomats. After having 
escorted the diplomats from the building, Edelstam then returned to sleep there 
that night, in order to protect the Chileans wanted by the regime. Before the 
end of 1973, Edelstam was declared persona non grata and expelled from Chile.

Although Italy had cut ties with Chile after the coup, it kept diplomats in 
Santiago. The Italian embassy provided sanctuary for 750 people escaping 
persecution. The US, meanwhile, had a conflicted approach to Chile: while the 
CIA backed the coup, some members of the state department were appalled by the 
events that followed.

Kozak worked with other diplomats and Catholic human rights organisations, 
such as the Vicariate of Solidarity, to share lists of people detained by the 
regime. Together, Kozak, the diplomats and the Vicariate quickly became a 
contact point for anguished relatives hunting for the missing. Kozak would 
attempt to visit specific detention centres to track down individual prisoners. 
He managed to get into some, but was always barred from those in which the 
interrogations and torture were most brutal.

To his staff, Kozak always seemed preternaturally calm. “He was always 
composed. It was remarkable,” said Infante. “He would come to the hot and 
stuffy third floor to inspect the files. We were all sweating and he’s in a 
jacket and tie, cold as a fish. He told us that the files must be carefully 
taken care of, that they were not files, they were human lives, worthy of 
respect.”

Emilio Barbarani, one of the Italian diplomats in Santiago at the time, became 
close to Kozak. According to Barbarani, who is now 76, Kozak’s main role was 
befriending senior figures in the Pinochet regime and winning them over in 
order to secure the release of detainees. Once a detainee had been released, 
Kozak then had to organise their travel to safe havens abroad by persuading 
foreign embassies to grant them a visa. The first stage in this process 
sometimes involved Kozak picking up the released prisoner from outside the 
detention centre. This had to be done to prevent them from being instantly 
recaptured or “disappeared”. Then Kozak would shelter them in his office or 
home while he tried to secure their escape from Chile.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Froberto-kozak-chile-latin-america-schindler%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c2e002c651e4a3f591b8915854db95f49814829%2F0_0_3500_2188%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Latin%20America%E2%80%99s%20Schindler%3A%20a%20forgotten%20hero%20of%20the%2020th%20century%20%7C%20Ewen%20MacAskill&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Froberto-kozak-chile-latin-america-schindler%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Latin%20America%E2%80%99s%20Schindler%3A%20a%20forgotten%20hero%20of%20the%2020th%20century%20%7C%20Ewen%20MacAskill&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Froberto-kozak-chile-latin-america-schindler%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c2e002c651e4a3f591b8915854db95f49814829%2F0_0_3500_2188%2F3500.jpg>
 Pinochet’s soldiers carry out mass arrests a few weeks after the coup in 1973. 
Photograph: Keystone-France/Gamma-Keystone via Getty Images 
Barbarani is among those who see a parallel between Kozak and Schindler. 
“Roberto was a success with girls,” he said. “He was well-dressed, well-paid. 
He did not need to take political risks. It was not his job to do this. He did 
it because he was courageous.”

Kozak also had to escort freed detainees to the airport, which was controlled 
by the Chilean secret police. As often as possible, he would walk his charge 
across the asphalt, all the way to the door of the plane. In 1979, he helped 
spirit away to France Jose Zalaquett, one of the best-known human rights 
lawyers in Chile. Zalaquett remembers Kozak taking him to the airport. As they 
parted “he slipped a couple of hundred dollars in my pocket”.

Well aware of its limitations in Pinochet’s Chile, Kozak used his diplomatic 
immunity sparingly and just hoped that the deals he had made with the junta 
would hold. While some in the regime were prepared to tolerate what Kozak was 
doing, others were resentful of his interference in Chile’s domestic politics. 
According to those who worked with Kozak, Manuel Contreras, the head of the 
secret police, took a particular dislike to him. “I often talked with him about 
the risks,” said Barbarani. The Chilean secret police, Barbarani pointed out, 
did not respect the niceties of diplomatic immunity.

Among his staff and fellow diplomats, Kozak’s work ethic became legendary. He 
would begin early in the morning – often having already been to the airport to 
see off a detainee, or having spent the night in the office safeguarding a 
released prisoner – and he would finish late. And then there were the parties.

One key to Kozak’s success in securing the release of so many prisoners were 
the late-night gatherings he hosted at his stylish home in the La Reina 
neighbourhood of Santiago. Night after night, Kozak invited senior members of 
the secret police, army generals and foreign diplomats to meet over whisky and 
cocktails. As the drinks flowed, he would get officials to sign expulsion 
orders for detainees. He would also use the parties to find out where certain 
prisoners were being held and which embassies were processing visas, which 
allowed him to begin negotiations for exit papers.

The ICEM’s drivers often arrived at the office in the morning puffy-eyed, 
after working all night as waiters at one of Kozak’s parties. “There was a 
curfew, but not for the junta,” said Infante, remembering Kozak’s lobbying 
methods. “Whisky was very important. Every decree required a separate 
negotiation session.”

Throughout the dictatorship, which lasted until 1990, Kozak led a double life. 
“While Roberto was having a party for the military officials in his house, 
there would be refugees and political prisoners hiding in the attic,” Infante 
recalled. “He was always playing with fire.”

Entertaining guests in his apartment, he was acutely aware of the refugees 
hiding in the room above, but Kozak managed to master his fears about would 
happen to him if his secrets were revealed. Asked how he pulled off the 
multiple roles, Infante said: “Years later, when I asked him what he would have 
liked to have been in life, he said an actor – in theatre.”

Pinochet directly ordered killing on US soil of Chilean diplomat, papers reveal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/08/pinochet-directly-ordered-washington-killing-diplomat-documents-orlando-letelier-declassified>
Within a few years, Kozak’s contacts in the military junta went all the way to 
the top. A declassified cable from the US embassy in Santiago in April 1978 
details a meeting between Kozak and Pinochet himself. “Kozak gave us an 
optimistic read-out on his April 14 meeting with President Pinochet and justice 
minister [Monica] Madriagada,” it said.

At his famous parties, Kozak constantly impressed upon his guests that Chile’s 
global reputation was suffering because of the regime’s widespread abuse of 
human rights. He also told them that they could help mitigate this by releasing 
prisoners. He made the same pitch to Pinochet. If the dictator was prepared to 
release dozens of political prisoners, Kozak would publish a statement to the 
press praising the move as an improvement in the country’s human rights record.

Despite his outwardly calm appearance, Kozak did suffer acute stress. 
According to Silvia, her husband was affected not only by the personal risk he 
was undertaking, but by the stories of torture he had to hear almost every day. 
His efforts on behalf of detainees did not always succeed, either, and he was 
especially troubled by the lives he did not manage to save. One of the 
incidents he regretted most was his failure to prevent the murders of José 
Hernán Carrasco Vásquez and Humberto Juan Carlos Menanteau Aceituno, leaders of 
Movimiento de Izquierda Revolucionaria (MIR), a leftwing movement largely made 
up of students and trade unionists.

The two men were arrested by the secret police in 1974. Kozak helped to 
negotiate their release in September 1975, but his attempts to secure them 
visas for France were held up by repeated bureaucratic delays. In November, the 
two men were captured by secret police once again and taken to an unknown 
location. One morning, the following month, Kozak was told that they had been 
found dead, their bodies showing signs of torture. The same morning he opened 
his mail to find authorisation for their visas.

The most notorious of the Pinochet regime’s detention centres was the Villa 
Grimaldi, a remote farmhouse on the outskirts of Santiago that had been taken 
over by the secret police – the Dirección de Inteligencia Nacional (Dina) – 
after the coup. Villa Grimaldi was usually the first stop for those arrested by 
the police or military: a place where people accused of subversion were held 
without trial, and interrogated about the names and locations of their leftwing 
allies.

Villa Grimaldi was run by Major Marcelo Moren Brito, a former military officer 
who had joined the secret police after the coup and became one of its most 
remorseless interrogators. About 4,500 people were held at Villa Grimaldi. Most 
were tortured. About 200 died, either from injuries sustained through torture 
or lack of medical treatment. Others simply “disappeared”.

Among those interrogated there was Michelle Bachelet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2004/nov/15/chile>, who is now president of 
Chile. Bachelet’s father had been a brigadier general in the Chilean air force 
and had served in the Allende government. He was detained and in March 1974 
died from a cardiac arrest, probably after repeated torture. Ten months after 
his death, in January 1975, Bachelet, who was a university student at the time, 
and her mother, Jeria, were arrested, blindfolded and taken to Villa Grimaldi.

Jeria, who is now 90, was questioned by Brito 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/1999/jun/10/jonathanfranklin>. “He took my 
shoulders and began groping me,” she recalled. “My hands were tied behind my 
back and I could not defend myself. I said: ‘Major, behave yourself,’ and he 
did.” For Jeria, the most painful part of the detention was not knowing what 
was happening to her daughter. Ten days after arriving at Villa Grimaldi they 
were briefly reunited. “I was always blindfolded but we could feel each other’s 
presence.”

Bachelet, who was also interrogated, was released before her mother. Once 
outside, she contacted both Kozak and family friends in the air force to see if 
they could help get her mother out. Kozak went to the Australian embassy to ask 
for a visa for Bachelet and her mother, and in May 1975 accompanied them to the 
airport for their flight into exile. To this day, Jeria said, she and her 
daughter have not talked to each other about what happened to them at Villa 
Grimaldi.

Rodrigo del Villar Cañas was a geography student who had joined an MIR cell 
established before the coup. On 13 January 1975, soldiers arrested Villar and 
his brother at their home. Villar, who was 21, was held at Grimaldi for 15 
days. He was interrogated by Brito and repeatedly tortured. One of the most 
feared techniques was being tied to a grille, similar to a metal bedstead. “My 
arms and legs would be tied to each corner,” Villar said. “They would then wet 
my body with water. There was a crank to generate electricity and they had a 
wire to hold against your ears, mouth, testicles, penis.”

After his spell at Villa Grimaldi, Villar was transferred to other detention 
centres, ending up at Puchuncaví in Valparaiso province. While there, Villar’s 
mother and sister got word to him that a man named Roberto Kozak had been 
helping negotiate the release of prisoners, including himself. On 1 May 1976, 
Kozak arrived to pick up Villar and two other people. “You are coming with me,” 
Kozak told him.

Villar was taken aback and at first was even resistant to leave: the outside 
world was uncertain, there was the danger of being arrested again and a sense 
of solidarity in the detention centre. Nonetheless, he got into Kozak’s car. 
“Kozak drove the 100 miles back to Santiago, with a policeman in the passenger 
seat and me and the other two prisoners in the back,” said Villar. “I had slept 
in the detention centre on a mattress half-an-inch thick. The backseat felt so 
soft. It felt like floating on cotton wool. He offered me a Dunhill cigarette. 
It felt great. The cigarettes we had in the camp were a load of shit.”

Villar believes that Kozak saved his life. “If he had not got me out? Quite 
simply, we would not be having this conversation,” he said. As a member of the 
armed resistance, Villar was ineligible for many refugee programmes overseas. 
Eventually Kozak persuaded Sweden to provide him with a visa, drove him to the 
airport and ensured that he boarded the plane safely.

Kozak can be seen in the background of many famous photographs from the 
darkest years of the Pinochet regime. One of the best known is of the British 
doctor Sheila Cassidy, photographed at Santiago airport upon her release from 
captivity. Cassidy, who was 37 at the time, had been arrested in November 1975 
for treating a leftwing activist suffering from a gunshot wound. She attributes 
her release to pressure from the British government, whose consul, Derek 
Fernyhough, had visited her in detention.

When she arrived at the airport in Santiago, she met Kozak for the first time 
and was suspicious, fearing he might be a Dina agent. His sense of indignation 
at the suggestion helped convince her that he was genuine. A photograph of them 
on the runway went around the world. Cassidy, who is now 79 and lives in 
Plymouth, says that she had looked at the picture a million times but had never 
known Kozak’s role in her release until she was contacted by the Guardian this 
year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Froberto-kozak-chile-latin-america-schindler%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12839f9e17cf70218fd09bc2628ed9a3c977c914%2F0_0_1912_1322%2F1912.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Latin%20America%E2%80%99s%20Schindler%3A%20a%20forgotten%20hero%20of%20the%2020th%20century%20%7C%20Ewen%20MacAskill&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Froberto-kozak-chile-latin-america-schindler%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Latin%20America%E2%80%99s%20Schindler%3A%20a%20forgotten%20hero%20of%20the%2020th%20century%20%7C%20Ewen%20MacAskill&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Froberto-kozak-chile-latin-america-schindler%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12839f9e17cf70218fd09bc2628ed9a3c977c914%2F0_0_1912_1322%2F1912.jpg>
 Kozak escorts British doctor Sheila Cassidy to the plane taking her out of 
Chile, in 1975. Photograph: Museo de la Memoria y los DDHH de Chile 
Cassidy remembers Kozak as being “cool and unfriendly”, but understood this 
was due to his fear that, even at the last moment, she might be taken away by 
the secret police. “He was just shit-scared,” she said.

One of the cables from the US embassy in Santiago shows the scale of Kozak’s 
humanitarian work. The communication, dated 20 April 1975, estimates that his 
office was responsible for moving between 400-600 former detainees out of Chile 
each month. Included are lists of where people were resettled. In 1975, some of 
the most generous host nations were Chile’s neighbours Argentina and Peru, as 
well as France which took in 105, West Germany 104, Romania 328. Among the most 
hospitable of all was the UK, which welcomed 429 former detainees. 

The UK has a mixed record on Chile. Edward Heath’s Conservative government, 
which was in place at the time of the coup, had been hostile to the Allende 
government, but when Labour took office in 1974, it cut off arms sales to the 
Pinochet regime and in 1977 withdrew its ambassador from Santiago. After 
Margaret Thatcher took office in 1979, diplomatic relations were restored, 
along with arms sales.

In 1998, while visiting the UK, Pinochet was placed under house arrest on an 
international warrant that accused him of human rights violations. Tony Blair’s 
Labour government was in power at the time, but Thatcher visited Pinochet in 
March 1999 at the rented mansion in Wentworth, Surrey, where he was being held. 
Many Conservative MPs voiced support for Pinochet, noting that he had been a 
friend to the UK during the 1982 Falklands war, and dismissed the attempt to 
have him extradited to Spain as a leftwing stunt.

Kozak left Chile in 1979 to return to Geneva as head of the ICEM department 
responsible for migration in Latin America. By this time, according to US 
cables, only 79 political prisoners remained captive. The junta had agreed to 
speed up releases if Kozak was willing to sign a declaration to the effect that 
there were no longer any political detainees left. Kozak signed the deal.

By 1980, much of the resistance to Pinochet’s government had been suppressed. 
Killings by the security services had become more targeted, allowing many 
exiled Chileans to assume they could safely return to their country. Kozak 
himself returned to Chile in 1984 and the following year was helping to bring 
back people who had fled Chile at the height of Pinochet’s repression. That, 
too, was a fraught process. Some in the junta argued that the return of exiles 
was good for Chile’s international reputation. Others feared that they could 
rekindle armed resistance. When, on 8 September 1986, members of a Marxist 
guerrilla group ambushed Pinochet’s motorcade in an attempt to assassinate the 
dictator, hardliners felt that their view had been vindicated.

The fact that there was a direct link between the ICEM and some individuals 
accused of involvement in the plot against Pinochet’s life was a big problem 
for Kozak. “The organisers were brought to Chile by our organisation,” said 
Infante. These former exiles had set up a bakery under a special programme run 
by the ICEM. “That bakery was financed with our money. So after the attack [the 
paramilitaries] went right to us.”

The raid on the ICEM office took a particularly tough toll on Kozak. For a 
long time after, “He would dream about it and wake with a start in the night,” 
Silvia recalled.

Kozak left Chile in 1991, the year after the fall of Pinochet’s regime, to 
establish a branch of the International Organisation for Migration (IOM) in 
Moscow. In 1994, he moved back to Geneva as the IOM’s chief of staff. Ten years 
later, when he finally retired, he settled not in his native Argentina but in 
Chile, the country that had defined his life and where he felt most at home.

In 1992, Chile awarded Kozak its highest honour, the Order of Bernardo 
O’Higgins, named after one of the leaders of the Chilean independence movement. 
Many of Kozak’s colleagues, and those he helped, felt that he deserved more, 
and were pleased when the Chilean government belatedly gave him citizenship 
last year.

Kozak had been living with cancer for at least a decade. Characteristically, 
he had not told many people, but when it became obvious that his condition was 
terminal, he flew to the Argentinian capital for specialist treatment. At the 
airport, Silvia, as usual, joined the queue for Argentine citizens. Having been 
granted Chilean citizenship only four days previously, her husband joined the 
queue for non-Argentines. “Are you crazy?” she asked him, looking at the length 
of the queue. Kozak was proud that he had become a Chilean and wanted to make 
that point, even if it meant standing in a longer queue.

Since Kozak’s death in September 2015, Silvia has kept his ashes in his study 
in their Santiago home. She intends to scatter them around Chile: in the 
foothills of the Andes, where they had a plot of land with breathtaking views 
of the mountains; by a lake where Sergio, his son from his first marriage, has 
a house and where Kozak had fond family memories; and, finally, by a tree 
planted by the farmhouse that was once a place of torture and death. The tree 
was planted in honour of Kozak by the Villa Grimaldi Foundation, an 
organisation set up to maintain the grounds as a memorial.

Chile has been slow to confront the Pinochet era, but some members of the 
regime have been tried and jailed. The formerhead of the secret police, Manuel 
Contreras, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/08/manuel-contreras-head-of-chiles-spy-agency-under-pinochet-dies-aged-86>
 was handed a 529-year sentence for his part in the killings and torture. 
Brito, the torturer of Villa Grimaldi, was sentenced to 300-years. Since 1990, 
there have been only been 188 successful prosecutions in Chile, with 1,300 
investigations remaining open, according to the Museo de la Memoria.

Michelle Bachelet studied medicine while in exile and returned to Chile in 
1979. Standing on a socialist platform, she was elected president for a 
four-year term in March 2006 and again in March 2014. Her mother lives in a 
flat in Santiago.

Villar returned to Chile from Sweden with his family in 1991 and taught 
geography at the University of Chile. He is working on turning the Puchuncaví 
detention camp, where he met Kozak, into a memorial.

The last conversation Kozak and Silvia had was in a taxi on their way to the 
cancer treatment centre in Argentina. As they listened to radio news of the 
refugee crisis in the Mediterranean, which had been building that summer, he 
told her: “If I was young, I would be there.” Fifteen minutes later, he was 
dead.

Support for this article was provided by a grant from the Pulitzer Center on 
Crisis Reporting.

• Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread 
<https://twitter.com/@gdnlongread>, or sign up to the long read weekly email 
here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/jul/20/sign-up-to-the-long-read-email>.
 