
Laurent Blanc’s position as the manager of Ligue 1 champions Paris 
Saint-Germain <https://www.theguardian.com/football/parisstgermain> looked in 
jeopardy on Friday when the club president, Nasser al-Khelaifi, described their 
season as a failure.

PSG achieved their second successive domestic treble by winning Ligue 1, the 
French Cup and the League Cup but Champions League progress stagnated as they
lost in the quarter-finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/12/manchester-city-paris-saint-germain-champions-league-match-report>
 for the fourth successive season.

“Honestly, I think we failed this season despite winning domestic trophies,” 
Khelaifi, in charge since Qatar Sports Investments took over in 2011 and spent 
vast sums of money on new players, told Le Parisien.

Farewell, Zlatan: Ibrahimovic guides PSG to French Cup against Marseille
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/21/marseille-psg-french-cup-final-match-report>
“We did not reach our goal so this is a bad season. I have been here for five 
years and it is the first time that we have this feeling of failure.”

Khelaifi pinpointed the Champions League defeat by Manchester City as his 
worst moment since he became president. PSG had been favourites but lost 3-2 on 
aggregate.

“It’s not just the fact that we lost in the quarter-finals of the Champions 
League, it’s the way it happened,” he said. “I am very disappointed. I did not 
feel there was pressure before the City games. This elimination is the worst 
moment since I have been in Paris. Two hours before the return leg I knew we 
were going to lose. I did not feel the players were ready … Whose fault is 
this?”

Khelaifi promised “big changes will come”. Asked if he still trusted Blanc, 
who took over from Carlo Ancelotti in 2013, he said: “I have supported him for 
three years. Now we have to think about what we are going to do next season to 
build a group that will be stronger at European level. I will not discuss 
individual cases. Big changes will come, a new cycle will start.”

With the team’s talisman Zlatan Ibrahimovic gone, Khelaifi hinted at a change 
in the club’s recruitment policy. “We’re going to recruit players who will 
bring more to the team. At the beginning we needed players to develop our 
image. Now we need players who are ready to die for the club and for that 
shirt.”
 