
Long after she’s left, I’ll still be thinking about Laurie Anderson’s 
pumpkin-coloured jacket. I see it through the window of the restaurant, this 
big daub of colour amid all the greys and blacks of a New York winter. Then 
that colour is inside and here, emerging from it, is Laurie Anderson – 69 years 
old, small, sparkling and wide awake. Her hair, a spiky coronet, stands on end 
as if permanently electrified by the brain beneath. When she’s smiling, which 
is most of the time, she looks even more impish. The jacket, this big fat 
orange thing, puffy to the point of spherical, should be plain absurd, but on 
her I can’t help seeing it as extension of her own being. For decades, Anderson 
has been disarming us with searching and playful work that dovetails these same 
qualities: the spiritual and the silly. In the early 80s she was hailed as one 
of the most exciting figures in experimental art and she remains our foremost 
performance artist, inspiring something so often lacking in avant-garde work – 
humour and affection. That’s certainly the tenor of her most recent work,Heart 
of a Dog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/22/heart-of-a-dog-laurie-anderson-review-haunting>
, which theNew York Times called a “dreamy, drifty and altogether lovely 
movie”. Narrated by Anderson and comprising animated drawings and old home 
video, it’s a roaming, looping consideration of various loves and losses: her 
dog, her mother, and her husband, the musician Lou Reed, who died in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/oct/28/lou-reed>. It opens with Birth 
of Lola, in which Anderson recounts, in detail, a dream about giving birth to 
her rat terrier. I imagine many women must feel that intense, bodily love for 
their pet yet it’s not exactly socially acceptable to admit to it.

“That’s why it’s good to start a film or a book that way,” she whispers. “Just 
to kind of go right on out there.”

We’re in Blossom <http://www.blossomnyc.com/chelsea/>, a vegan mainstay where 
Anderson is a regular, even if she isn’t, strictly speaking, vegetarian. “I 
have been known to eat steak,” she says, although it doesn’t happen very often, 
especially not since she read her friend Matthieu Ricard’s book,A Plea for the 
Animals. “He’s a Buddhist monk and writer,” she says. “He just demolishes every 
single argument that we have for eating meat.”

We have a quick look at our meatless menu. “I wonder what a soy bacon 
cheeseburger is!” she says, amused. “I might get that, it sounds ridiculous.” 
Then again: “Maybe there’s something that’s not pretending to be something 
else, let’s see. They make seitan really well here, actually, I might have 
that.”

Laurie Anderson: ‘My dog’s character was pure empathy. I tried to express that’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/27/laurie-anderson-interview-q-and-a-heart-dog-lolabelle-terrier-brighton-festival-lou-reed-o-superman>
And from processed wheat gluten, we somehow easily move to the topic of 
maternal love. Or lack thereof: in the film Anderson makes the calm revelation 
that she didn’t love her mother. “It’s true, you know?” she says. “Women are 
meant to be all-loving, always – no one else is, but women are. I think it’s 
even harder for people just to say, ‘My mother didn’t love me.’ Because then 
you’re questioning the whole system.”

Did her mother love her?

“She was not someone who really knew how to do that,” she says. “She taught me 
other things. She taught me how to love books, music.”

Anderson grew up in a small town in Illinois, with three sisters and four 
brothers and, after college in California, made her way to New York where she 
studied sculpture. By the 70s, she’d found her tribe among the avant-garde 
artists of downtown New York. Her contemporaries included musicians such as 
Philip Glass and she began experimenting with technology and performance. “None 
of us thought we would ever make a living doing art,” she says.

Nor did she ever think she might become a pop star. O Superman, a stark, 
eight-minute track, based on a Massenet opera,, reached No 2 on the UK singles 
chart in 1981. To Anderson’s astonishment, a seven-album deal with Warner 
Brothers followed. The soundtrack toHeart of a Dog constitutes her 12th album.

And then here comes our lunch.

“Oh wow, nicely done!” she says, her face lighting up at the two little 
faux-hollandaise suns of my tofu Benedict. Her seitan isn’t quite as pretty 
but, she assures me after a few forkfuls, it’s delicious. Food is important to 
her: “I cook … not as much as I used to. I used to make lunch all the time for 
the people at the studio. It was taking a huge chunk of the day so now I have 
someone else do it, but it’s really important for us at the studio to eat 
together.”

She often talks about how her work is about stories, “and what happens when 
they are told and retold”, and I wonder about the ‘stories’ around how a widow 
should grieve. Those stories must be compounded, I imagine, when you’re the 
widow of a public figure. As I’m saying this a look of blank confusion comes 
over her face. It’s the word “widow”.

“I know I am a widow but that’s not my identity,” she says. “But it also 
wasn’t my identity to be ‘husband and wife’ – although we were. ‘Partner’ would 
be more what I thought.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVkfpi2H8tOE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVkfpi2H8tOE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVkfpi2H8tOE&media=>
Reed’s death seems to have granted her not sadness so much as a kind of 
rapture. In an essay for Rolling Stone 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/laurie-andersons-farewell-to-lou-reed-a-rolling-stone-exclusive-20131106>
 she wrote: “I had gotten to walk with him to the end of the world. Life – so 
beautiful, painful and dazzling – does not get better than that. And death? I 
believe that the purpose of death is the release of love.”

“Those doors open maybe once in your life,” she tells me, “or if you’re lucky, 
twice, and you get to see all this stuff. And that door will open again when 
you have to face your own death, but you get a chance to think about it and see 
it and feel it. It’s overwhelming. It filled me with happiness. I wasn’t 
prepared for that – I was supposed to be grief-stricken. Instead, it was kind 
of an ecstatic experience, and it continues to be. It caused my world to open 
up, and I understood things – or began to understand things in a different way.”

Such as?

“For example, we’re supposedly here eating lunch in some way, but we’re 
actually not here, right?” and her smile grows wider in invitation. “Life is a 
constant hallucination.”

It doesn’t surprise me that she speaks about Reed in the present tense.

“Lou is the most wonderful person I’ve ever met and I think of him all the 
time and he’s completely inspiring to me. I miss him enormously, but there’s no 
point in being sad. I see him all the time, he’s always here, a continued, 
really powerful presence. I think a lot of other people feel the same way – 
because he was such a strong character – that just doesn’t dissipate that 
quickly. I just wish I could hear what he would have to say about Trump. That 
would be something. ”

For her, the biggest shock of the US election was the misogyny.

“People get swayed pretty easily to think what the so-called norm is. So when 
people are screaming ‘lock her up’ [at Hillary Clinton] it’s so hideous. Or 
‘hang her’ – I don’t think people are outraged enough about that. Almost half 
the country talking that way.”

She admits that this has been a challenge to her Buddhist practice: how do you 
find loving compassion for someone shouting sexist invective? And yet: “I feel 
guilty – what was I doing the last 20 years? Had I noticed that people had 
slipped out of the middle class? I was saying that to a friend about Trump 
supporters – they’re just hungry. And she said, ‘Yeah, but a lot of them are 
just assholes who just hate women. Don’t try to make it so sweet.’”

I don’t think, though, that Anderson can help that sweetness. It’s part of her.

“Particularly at the end of your life,” she insists, “there’s always this idea 
of goodness, you never feel like you deserve it, and the fact is, you do. One 
of the things that blew Lou’s mind is the idea that we’re here to have a good 
time. Not to suffer. No, to be here for total joy, bliss.”

And as we talk a little more about death I start to feel I’m cocooned inside a 
big orange jacket – a lifejacket, in fact.

The film and album Heart Of A Dog are out now on Nonesuch
 