
The supreme court has been urged to throw out a momentous legal challenge to 
the government’s powers to trigger Brexit, with Downing Street lawyers claiming 
parliament’s support for exiting the EU was conclusively demonstrated this week.

In closing remarks at the end of a four-day hearing, James Eadie QC, appearing 
for the government, said aHouse of Commons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/houseofcommons> vote held on Wednesday 
that backed leaving the bloc by 448 to 75 was “legally relevant” to the complex 
case.

The politically sensitive dispute, which began in the high court, is over 
whether the government or parliament has legitimate authority to trigger Brexit 
by giving formal notice to Brussels under article 50 of the Treaty onEuropean 
Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> of the UK’s intention to depart. 
The lower court backed the claimant, finding that parliament should give the 
final approval to begin the process.

Because of the urgency and significance of the constitutional issues, 11 
justices are sitting together for the first time on the supreme court bench to 
hear the government’s appeal.

If the justices uphold the high court decision, they are likely to have to 
decide whether primary legislation would be needed. The three high court judges 
last month merely said that it was for parliament to decide how to proceed.

Addressing the supreme court at the end of Thursday’s hearing, Eadie said: “No 
doubt [the Commons motion] is not legally binding but that does not mean it’s 
not legally relevant. It’s politically significant.”

Lord Pannick QC, counsel for the lead claimant, Gina Miller, has argued that a 
formal act of parliament, involving majorities in both the Commons and Lords, 
is required constitutionally to override the 1972 European Communities Act 
which paved the way for the UK to join what was then the European Economic 
Community.

Eadie agreed that if the supreme court found against the government, then 
legislation would be needed. “If you declare the exercise of [the government’s] 
prerogative powers to be unlawful, you are in effect requiring primary 
legislation.”

Closing the hearing, the president of the supreme court, Lord Neuberger, said: 
“We are not being asked to overturn the result of the EU referendum. The 
ultimate question in this case concerns the process by which that result can 
lawfully be brought into effect.

“As we have heard, that question raises important constitutional issues, and 
we will now take time to ensure that the many arguments which have been 
presented to us orally and in writing are given full and proper consideration.” 
The court is expected to deliver its judgment before the end of January.

A statement released by the attorney general, Jeremy Wright QC, said: “The 
country voted to leave the European Union, in a referendum approved by an act 
of parliament. The government has argued throughout that no further act of 
parliament is needed to begin the process of leaving the EU.

“There was a universal expectation that the referendum result would be 
honoured. Parliament will be closely involved in the process of the UK’s 
withdrawal from the EU over the coming months and years. Only yesterday, MPs 
debated a Brexit motion in the house and the prime minister has committed to 
publishing the government’s plans for leaving the EU.”

Miller said after the hearing: “People have been amazed at the incredible 
efficiency shown by the judges, the lawyers and all of the parties involved in 
this case, who have shoe-horned around two years of work into six months to 
ensure the PM can trigger article 50 before the end of March.

“The tone of this week’s proceedings from everyone involved and many parts of 
the media showed respect, civility and professionalism and I very much hope 
that this will continue throughout the process of the UK’s withdrawal from the 
EU.

“Parliament debating and voting on a motion or resolution simply won’t 
suffice. I hope that the supreme court will uphold the high court ruling that 
article 50 cannot be triggered using the royal prerogative. Our case is that 
prerogative powers end where domestic law begins. Only parliament can grant 
rights and only parliament can frustrate, nullify or displace rights.”

Earlier in the day, the supreme court heard arguments that triggering article 
50 without consulting the devolved assemblies in Cardiff, Edinburgh and Belfast 
would dissolve “the glue” that holds together the UK’s unwritten constitution.

The Sewel convention <http://www.gov.scot/About/Government/Sewel/KeyFacts> 
says that if Westminster is introducing legislation on issues that have been 
devolved, it “normally” has to seek the consent of the devolved assemblies in 
Edinburgh, Belfast and Cardiff.

Richard Gordon QC, for the Welsh government, told the court: “The force of the 
Sewel convention is not its legal enforceability but that it’s a dialogue 
between legislatures … A convention is a very important force in our society 
and it’s like the glue which can only hold an unwritten constitution together.”

Helen Mountfield QC, for the crowdfunded People’s Challenge, accused the 
government of fictional creativity and myth-making in its assertion of its 
prerogative powers. “It’s much like attempts to catch the Loch Ness monster,” 
she said. “Because no one has caught it, it is said to be assumed to still roam 
free.”

The online betting site Betfair was giving odds of more than 4-1 on for Miller 
and the other claimants to defeat the government in the final judgment.
 