
It was the early hours of the morning, one night last March, when Billy Bragg 
and the American songwriter, singer and producer Joe Henry alighted from the
Texas Eagle <http://www.texaseagle.com/>, the railroad route that travels from 
Chicago deep into the Lone Star state. Although they would be resuming their 
2,278-mile journey to Los Angeles the next day – joining the Sunset Limited 
<https://www.amtrak.com/sunset-limited-train> to the west coast – they had an 
overnight stop, and only one hotel in mind for it.

“In San Antonio,” Bragg explains, “there’s the Gunter Hotel. That’s where 
Robert Johnson had his first recording session, in room 414.”


“And he only had two sessions,” Henry chips in.


“He recorded Sweet Home Chicago <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dkftesK2dck> 
in that hotel,” Bragg continues. “So I thought we should at least go there and 
get a bit of a vibe from that. The train was really late, and we turned up 
about half past two in the morning, totally knackered. And damned if I didn’t 
get room 414. I checked under the bed and in the cupboard to see ifthe devil 
was there waiting to offer me great guitar-playing skills in return for my soul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/jun/16/robert-johnson-sells-soul-devil>
” – it turns out he wasn’t – “and the next morning, over coffee, I said to Joe, 
‘You know we’ve got to record something here.’ So we set up in the room.”

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-mJnOX6fbvo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-mJnOX6fbvo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-mJnOX6fbvo&media=>
Watch Bragg and Henry’s video for Gentle on My Mind on YouTube 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-mJnOX6fbvo> 
The song they chose was Waiting for a Train by Jimmie Rodgers, one of 13 they 
recorded during their 65-hour journey across the US – two men, their voices and 
their guitars, on trains, on platforms, in waiting rooms – for Shine a Light: 
Field Recordings from the Great American Railroad. It’san album of folk and 
blues standards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/21/billy-bragg-joe-henry-st-pancras-shine-a-light-review>
, reflecting on the invention that opened up the vast country. Deep in the 
background you can hear the life of the railroad: the sounds of passengers, 
station bustle, slamming doors, luggage being loaded, engines pulling out are 
embedded in the record.


So, what is the Gunter like now? An eerie piece of heritage, cobwebbed and 
dusty?


“It’s a Sheraton <http://www.sheratongunter.com/>,” Henry says. “But there’s 
no missing the fact it was a grand old hotel. And they completely recognise the 
significance of what happened there. The bar is called theBar 414 
<http://www.bar414.com/history-of-bar-414/>, and all they play is Robert 
Johnson.” Which, given he only recorded 29 songs, must get wearing for the 
staff, but still. A bit like the oldVirginia Woolf Burger Bar 
<http://www.spectator.co.uk/2015/08/a-n-wilsons-diary-vj-day-and-the-virginia-woolf-burger-bar/>
 at the Russell Hotel in Bloomsbury, then?


“Oh, she loved a burger, she did,” Bragg says, deadpan.


“The bar was long closed when we arrived, so I didn’t get a chance to see how 
garish it might be,” Henry says.


“Or what the names of their cocktails were.”


“I’ll have a Hellhound on My Trail, please.”


When you conjure an automobile in a song, it's just an automobile – a train 
speaks to something other

“And I’ll have a Terraplane.”


Henry pulls back to seriousness. “But the Sheraton doesn’t have the authority 
to defeat the power of his mythology.” And, it should be said,Bar 414 doesn’t 
go in for tawdry, Johnson-themed drinks <http://www.bar414.com/bar414menu/>.


Mythology is at the heart of Shine a Light, in songs such as John Henry – the 
story of the African-American steel driver 
<http://www.metrolyrics.com/john-henry-lyrics-woody-guthrie.html> who beats a 
steam-powered hammer in a race but dies at its end – and Railroad Bill, the 
outlaw who achieved Robin Hood status. It’s also there in the concept of the 
American railroad itself. “Anybody who writes a song – and even Mr Springsteen 
would attest to this, I’m sure – knows that when you conjure an automobile in a 
song, it’s just an automobile,” Henry says. “But when you conjure a train, it 
speaks to something other. It lays out a whole deck of cards of possibility in 
front of you, dreams of loss and longing.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Flaying-down-tracks-billy-bragg-joe-henry-us-railroad-trip-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26009c510e184e54b1a806cbdf0e2da385daef53%2F60_0_776_970%2F776.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Laying%20down%20tracks%3A%20Billy%20Bragg%20and%20Joe%20Henry%20take%20a%20railroad%20trip%20to%20the%20blues&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Flaying-down-tracks-billy-bragg-joe-henry-us-railroad-trip-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Laying%20down%20tracks%3A%20Billy%20Bragg%20and%20Joe%20Henry%20take%20a%20railroad%20trip%20to%20the%20blues&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Flaying-down-tracks-billy-bragg-joe-henry-us-railroad-trip-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26009c510e184e54b1a806cbdf0e2da385daef53%2F60_0_776_970%2F776.jpg>
 ‘There trains and then there’s the railroad’ … Billy Bragg and Joe Henry 
“There’s trains, and there’s the railroad,” Bragg suggests. “And ‘the 
railroad’ is one of those phrases like ‘the west’ that has an immediate and 
evocative sense of space and light, and distance and hope, and fear. The 
railroad was such a transformative technology, right up to the end of the 
second world war when the Americans built the interstates. People relied on the 
railroad not just for travel, but for bringing news, bringing goods. The 
connectivity of the internet is nothing compared to the physical change that 
was brought by the railroad.”


They talk of how the railroad unified the US, bridging its two coasts, and 
opening up the possibility of building cities in places other than on the 
coasts and the banks of the great rivers. They talk of the thousands who built 
the railways, and the thousands who must have died doing so, and howthe famous 
photo of the uniting of the railroads at Promontory Summit 
<http://railroad.lindahall.org/siteart/home-map/6_PromontorySummit.jpg>, in 
Utah, portrays only white faces, when the railways were built by black and 
Chinese workers – a whitewashing of history. They talk of the tiny towns they 
passed through on their journey, places whose entire existence is owed to the 
presence of the railroad. Alpine, Texas, for example – now advertised by Amtrak 
as your stopping-off point to visit Big Bend National Park. “It’s only there 
because it had a source of fresh water for the railroad,” Bragg notes.


What’s fascinating for a British listener is how many of these songs and 
stories are familiar. Some of them I heard growing up, from my mother, who was 
anything but deeply immersed in the African-American folk tradition. That’s 
because she would have heard them on the radio in her teens, sung byLonnie 
Donegan <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2004/jun/21/popandrock>, the great 
populariser of American folk music in the UK.


There are some times I really have to be 'Billy Bragg' … But I can’t go out 
every night and be a firebrand

“Everyone refers to the fact that Ramblin’ Jack Elliott came here in ’55, ’56, 
’57,” Bragg says. “He was impressing the hell out of people in the folk clubs – 
but Lonnie Donegan was getting into the Top 10. You don’t think of Donegan as a 
white blues singer, but that’s what he was doing.He sings the shit out of Rock 
Island Line <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g7col8uqIQQ> – he gets faster and 
faster and faster, and he loses control of the song. In America, people who 
were using the same material were so aware they were dealing with a racial 
divide that they felt they couldn’t put into the those songs the same feeling 
that black Americans did, because they’d be accused of doing blackface and 
appropriating. But Donegan – he goes at it with so much energy that when he did 
go to America he was accused of being a Jim Crow by a black American 
journalist. But he was sincere in his love of the material, and being removed 
from the source meant he could go at it like gunpowder. He’s the first guy to 
get in the charts playing a guitar, and he’s playinga Lead Belly song 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lCiJ4QQG9WQ>. A lot of the things we take for 
granted about 60s music spark out of that moment.”


Shine a Light is very much an album, not just 13 songs – something that is 
particularly important to Henry. “The album is a recognisable form, like the 
sonnet or the haiku or the three-act play. To make an album that has a concept 
framing it is a way to remind people that this is a deliberate creation, not 
just songs in a pile. I’m a record producer for a lot of other artists, and 
this is something I think about a lot. Sequence really matters, content really 
matters. If you put more than 13 songs on a record you lose the thread – it 
starts to feel like a compilation.”

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkQG3eWj6N-4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkQG3eWj6N-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkQG3eWj6N-4&media=>
Watch the video for The L&N Don’t Stop Here Any More 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kQG3eWj6N-4> 
Both men reminisce about albums they still can’t put on without playing the 
whole thing – Highway 61 Revisited, Astral Weeks, Dusty in Memphis,Randy 
Newman’s Good Old Boys 
<http://www.allmusic.com/album/good-old-boys-mw0000196672> – and then start 
eulogising the simple power of the song. “I’m nearly 60,” Bragg says, “but 
every so often, a song really gets me and won’t let me go. There’s one byIzzy 
Bizu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/21/izzy-bizu-its-ok-to-be-a-space-chicken>
 that I saw on Later … and she hadn’t released it, and I needed it so much that 
I played the video clip and put my iPhone up by the speaker. I had to have it.”


The playlist: Billy Bragg and Joe Henry’s favourite travel songs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/sep/13/the-playlist-billy-bragg-and-joe-henry-favourite-travel-songs>
It’s an image that might surprise some of his fans, but even Billy Bragg – 
siren of authenticity, one-man Clash with a heart of gold – can’t be Billy 
Bragg all the time, coming down to make tea and demanding an equitable 
distribution of milk and a proportional representation of sugar. Then again, he 
says: “There are some times that I really have to be Billy Bragg. Glastonbury, 
the night Brexit went down,I was headlining the Left Field stage 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bMGrXCLToIE>. I had a real role to play there 
as someone playing to a load of predominantly young people who’d woken up 
feeling like they didn’t belong in their own country – to let them know they 
weren’t alone. But I can’t do that every night. I can’t go out every night and 
be a firebrand.”


During those three days on the railroads, at least he could be sure no one 
needed him to beBilly Bragg <https://www.theguardian.com/music/billy-bragg>, to 
lead the calls for something, anything. (He thanks me for not spending 90 
minutes asking about Jeremy Corbyn; there’s just a brief expression of support 
and a plea for intra-party tolerance at the end.) In the US, the pair were 
almost completely ignored, whatever they sang, wherever they sang it. “I felt 
like we were beautifully and anomalously invisible,” says Henry. “It was 
strangely heartening to think that singing with a couple of guitars in a train 
station could just be part of the fabric of the day.”


 * Shine a Light: Field Recordings from the Great American Railroad 
<http://shinealight-joehenry.billybragg.co.uk/> is released on 23 September on 
Cooking Vinyl. Billy Bragg and Joe Henry tour the US from 25 September to 25 
October, and the UK from 7 to 19 November, with more dates in January. Details:
billybragg.co.uk <http://www.billybragg.co.uk/gigs/gigs.php>.
 