
1. Losing My Edge <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6xG4oFny2Pk>

“I’m losing my edge / the kids are coming up from behind,” half-mutters James 
Murphy, for the opening lyrics of the first track he released as LCD 
Soundsystem. Over the next four minutes he both predicted the shape of his own 
career and deflected many of the criticisms that might be levelled at it; that 
he’s a middle-aged hipster with an overstuffed record bag into which he’s only 
too happy to dive. He’s admitting every charge against him, but qualifying his 
admission: “Don’t I have great taste?” Losing My Edge was released in 2002 on a 
wave of rising hype for Murphy. After co-producing David Holmes’ raw-sounding 
2000 album Bow Down to the Exit Sign, he and former UNKLE member Tim 
Goldsworthy joined Jonathan Galkin in forming DFA Records, scoring an early, 
scuzzy hipster hit with the Rapture’sHouse of Jealous Lovers 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6HP04nfUi4g>. Recorded with longstanding 
collaborator Nancy Whang and Spank Rock’s Alex Epton, Losing My Edge was meant 
to be a one-off, a reaction – as he told journalist John Doran at the time – to 
the fear he felt that being “the cool rock disco guy” would come to a crashing 
end. “It became a wider thing about people who grip on to other people’s 
creations like they are their own,” he said, reflecting on his own DJ career. 
“There is a lot of pathos in that character, though, because it’s born out of 
inadequacy and love.” The lyric begins amid comedy, as Murphy haughtily 
proclaims over a skipping drum machine beat that he was at every key moment in 
the birth of western underground music, and ends in distorted euphoria as he 
bellows a litany of his key influences, from Todd Terry to Joy Division and Sun 
Ra to “the Sonics <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/mar/24/popandrock>! 
The Sonics! The Sonics! The Sonics!” It was some calling card.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6xG4oFny2Pk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6xG4oFny2Pk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6xG4oFny2Pk&media=>
2. Beat Connection <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v3ThN2IJw0s>

As if to prove Losing My Edge wasn’t just a one-off slice of winning 
introspection set to a good beat, this was on its B-side. And it’s something 
truly special, eight minutes of taut, dramatic, perfectly controlled build-up 
and breakdown, as Murphy fuses disco and punk rock in the manner for which DFA 
became famed. Dangling on the end of a layered, rhythmic intro that takes half 
the song’s running time to play out, it’s the sound of Murphy forcing club kids 
and indie wallflowers together on to the floor and making them dance. 
“Everybody here’s afraid of fun / And nobody’s getting any play / It’s the 
saddest night out in the USA,” he hollers, boiling down the itchy-footed 
insistence of(We Don’t Need This) Fascist Groove Thang 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lV5dbcOmw6I> and the haranguing presence of 
Mark E Smith, filtered through the then fashionable disco-punk sound that he 
helped originate.

3. Yeah (Crass version) <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pJseqQNQ_zA>

Murphy was a suburban kid from New Jersey who dropped out of his English major 
at New York University. He turned down the chance to write for Seinfeld and 
spent his 20s in a rota of unmemorable alternative groups, hitting an early 
peak of debatable creativity in designing the PA arrangements for dimly 
remembered Sub Pop signees Six Finger Satellite. (His rig was named Death From 
Above, which went on to give his label its title.)It’s no wonder, then, that he 
had an array of songs ready whenLCD Soundsystem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/lcd-soundsystem> started to take off. During 
the three-year wait between the first single and the debut album, the band 
released four EPs, all of which found their way on to that debut’s extra disc. 
Much like Beat Connection, Yeah (in its “Crass version”; the “Pretentious 
version” is a less frantic, more groove-laden thing) takes its own sweet time 
over its 10-minute duration, in no hurry to hit its peak of oscillating 
sequencers, feverishly hammered bongos, and Murphy and Whang’s drowsy 
repetition of the title’s key word. It’s the other track that bred LCD 
Soundsystem’s formidable reputation as a rock band for the clubs.

4. Daft Punk is Playing at My House 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Cj8JrQ9w5jY>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCj8JrQ9w5jY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCj8JrQ9w5jY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCj8JrQ9w5jY&media=>
If the person in the street knows LCD Soundsystem, the chances are this is the 
first song they think of. In January 2005, the self-titled debut record 
arrived. A month later this track was released and the band moved out of the 
clubs, becoming as close to overground acclaim as they were ever likely to. 
This was their first UK top 40 single, one of only two. Having already boasted 
of being “the first guy playing Daft Punk to the rock kids” on Losing My Edge, 
Murphy was back at the Parisian duo’s door the year beforetheir famed “pyramid” 
set at Coachella 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/watch-daft-punks-legendary-2006-coachella-set-in-documentary-clip-20151210>
 provided EDM’s breakthrough moment in the US. The song was based on a vague 
and unrealised idea he had to film a Daft Punk concert in his house as though 
it were a big-budget live movie, and it was a rare example of an LCD 
Soundsystem track that relied on a developing lyrical story at its core. It 
also featured a bassline worthy of one of Barry Adamson’s from his Magazine 
days and a brave and entirely convincing falsetto from Murphy. “They’re a great 
signifier, because they manage to be genreless rather than something really 
specific,” he told Doran about Daft Punk at the time. “They do song-style songs 
and techno songs; they do dark stuff and pop crossovers. It’s like referring to 
David Bowie, who has been everything from folk to glam rock.” It’s important to 
note that every song here, and everything Murphy has recorded with LCD 
Soundsystem, bears roots of varying depths in Bowie’s work.

5. Freak Out/Starry Eyes <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ng54rhY5EXw>

Given the task of picking 10 of the best from a concise career that never saw 
the group release a track that was less than pretty good (the debut album’s 
bleary, Beatles-liteNever as Tired as When I’m Waking Up 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GDLqJ4WKBHo> comes closest to being a 
stinker), it’s tempting to pick 45:33 from 2006 on a technicality. Commissioned 
by Nike as a soundtrack to the perfect run and inspired by Ashra guitarist 
Manuel Gottsching’s extended, high-concept suite of Germanic electronicsE2-E4 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qtMVpL3B_6Y> (1984), 45:33 was technically one 
track, which was nearly half a minute longer than the running time in the 
title. But a later CD issue revealed it was actually nine separate tracks and 
this diptych was later used as a B-side, so we’ll pick it out as the highlight. 
Mostly instrumental, with vocals used as sampled, rhythmic motifs, Freak 
Out/Starry Eyes demonstrates Murphy’s gift for selecting the most unlikely 
influential sources while infusing a track with his own gift for melody and pop 
hook creation. Built around an ambling but relentlessly hypnotic drumbeat and a 
breezily descending trumpet riff, the Freak Out section is pure Afrobeat. 
Starry Eyes, meanwhile, is a slice of synthpop owned by a sweetly strutting 
vocal from singer, actor and former Mickey Mouse Club performer Terra Deva – a 
fact that adds weight to the rumour that this was one of the tracks originally 
intended for fellow former Mouseketeer Britney Spears during Murphy’s aborted 
recording sessions with her.

6. North American Scum <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gJ2np7R-Uwg>

The first flush of club-driven buzz that broke them on the dancefloors of 
Brooklyn and Europe having subsided, this was the big statement of LCD 
Soundsystem’s overground breakthrough album Sound of Silver, a comeback single 
that was both a thumbed nose and a love letter to their home nation. Released 
in 2007, so still inhaling the last diesel fumes of George Bush’s presidency, 
its title appeared to align itself with Eurocentric weariness at relentless 
displays of foreign policy muscle in the Middle East. Yet the song told a 
different story, primed with intent and a glistening, insistently repeated 
guitar riff over which Murphy and Whang positively yelped their glee at being 
American, warts and all. “I hate the feeling when you’re looking at me that way 
/ Because we’re North Americans,” he hollers. “You see I love this place that 
I’ve grown to know / And yeah, I know you wouldn’t touch us with a 10-foot 
pole.” History proved him not unreasonable. “It was kind of amazing that people 
started treating America like it was a different country [when Obama was 
elected],” he told Clash magazine in 2010. “Like before, it was this backward, 
aggro, Bush country and now it’s this forward thinking, liberal country and 
you’re like, ‘It’s the same fucking place!’”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgJ2np7R-Uwg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgJ2np7R-Uwg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgJ2np7R-Uwg&media=>
7. All My Friends <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gw-nYD0GQwI>

“I kind of vowed not to make personal music,” Murphy told the AV Club of the 
group’s earliest years. “You’re in a rock band singing about your life, your 
feelings. It seems pretty yawny in a lot of ways.” By Sound of Silver this 
edict was out of the window, contributing to All My Friends taking its place as 
possibly their masterpiece. Sonically it’s irresistible, a single, eager, 
excitable piano riff that careers through the song, joined in quick succession 
by a growling bassline and a serrated guitar riff that might have been played 
by Peter Hook and Bernard Sumner, then a Neu!-like synth wail. But it’s the 
lyrics that really make the thing: excited for the night ahead, nostalgic for 
heady times past in the face of encroaching middle age, and resonating with the 
power of great pop music to frame a time and grant the illusion of staving off 
mortality. “And if the sun comes up / And I still don’t wanna stagger home,” 
croons Murphy urgently, inspiring a hot sweat, “then it’s the memory of our 
betters / That are keeping us on our feet.” In 2013, Stereogum made it the 
subject of a feature entitled “Deconstructing LCD Soundsystem’s All My Friends 
and Trying to Define the Best Song of the Millennium 
<http://www.stereogum.com/1469481/deconstructing-lcd-soundsystems-all-my-friends-and-trying-to-define-the-best-song-of-the-millennium/franchises/deconstructing/>
” – which was over-eager, but it wasn’t hard to see where they were coming from.

8. One Touch <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F8L1eXeIPG4>

LCD Soundsystem are best remembered for the effect they had on the dancefloor, 
and for contributing significantly to breaking down that now hopelessly 
outdated sense that analogue and electronic instruments belonged on different 
stages and at different times of the evenings. The third and final (so far) 
album, This Is Happening (2010), didn’t display quite so much urgency in this 
regard, but where it did it demonstrated how Murphy’s edge remained defiantly 
unlost since that debut single of eight years before. Clocking in at nearly 
eight minutes and composed by Murphy, Whang and Gavin Russom, One Touch is an 
itchy-footed acid house monster, churning with mechanical grace and almost 
overwhelming disdain for the fact that the group weren’t megastars by this 
point: “There’s no way that we can be pleased with this / We’ve been waiting 
such a long time.”

9. New York, I Love You But You’re Bringing Me Down (live) 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0lYYocR1l68>

LCD Soundsystem are a New York band informed by the outsider’s perspective of 
New Jersey kid Murphy, a group steeped in the legends of Paradise Garage, of 
the no-wave scene and of Body and Soul house parties. They not only add to 
these legends themselves, but expand on them, documenting the 
early-21st-century push to fight back against the Giulianification of the 
city’s dancing laws and club landscape with the creation of a thriving 
underground scene in Brooklyn. This song, a Vegas-style crooner’s ballad to 
rank alongside Sinatra’s New York, New York, closed the second album Sound of 
Silver (2007), but this live version from their 2011 farewell concerts at 
Madison Square Garden and the subsequent live album The Long Goodbye is the 
definitive one – the end of an era for the band and for the city itself. While 
someone slowly plays the Twin Peaks theme in the background, Murphy expresses 
his thanks, bids his farewells and gets on with it. “It wasn’t everything I 
wanted it to be, of course,” he told the Village Voice in 2007 of moving to his 
adopted home city, “but it’s still better than everything else.”

10. Throw <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H-WxrTULSaY>

LCD Soundsystem were skilled and thoughtful interpreters of others’ work, 
usually on B-sides, limited releases or the live stage; you don’t need to 
search hard to find a shoegazey take on Siouxsie and the Banshees’ Slowdive, a 
committed but oddly Americanised version of Joy Division’s No Love Lost, and 
recent tributes to Bowie and Prince at Coachella with “Heroes” and Controversy, 
respectively. However, the last track that the first incarnation of the group 
officially released – until the sweet but featherlight balladry ofChristmas 
Will Break Your Heart <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R3kPH2MJzlg> heralded 
their comeback in December 2015 – was this cover ofCarl Craig’s irresistible 
1994 second wave Detroit techno beat 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J7wXck03hTw>, first issued by Craig under his 
Paperclip People alias. A near-instrumental precisely 10 minutes long, it 
maintained the irresistible, train-like momentum of the original and grafted on 
a winningly ludicrous falsetto from Murphy towards the finale. Released as a 
bonus track on This Is Happening, it was awarded the ultimate kudos when Craig 
reissued it on his own Planet E label, placing LCD Soundsystem among a 
catalogue that includes such fellow North American electronic visionaries as 
Moodymann and Kevin Saunderson.
 