
Observers tend to describe the rise of South Korea as a miracle, and the 
actual story makes the word seem only a minor exaggeration. Having emerged an 
utter wreck from the Korean War in the early 1950s, by the 21st century the 
country had become a rich, infrastructurally impressive, technologically 
forward-thinking global economic and cultural force. But South Korea’s 
unprecedentedly rapid entry into the first world has taken its tolls, and no 
one event of its dizzying 20th-century period of growth forced as many of its 
people to face them as thecollapse of the Sampoong Department Store 
<http://web.archive.org/web/20070314002032/http://times.hankooki.com/lpage/opinion/200410/kt2004101418510554130.htm>
.

Those who endured the hardships of the Korean War and its aftermath had to 
welcome whatever prosperity the future could bring, despite the repression of 
the dictators who oversaw it and the grinding nature of a national life 
rigorously dedicated to nation-building. But from the 1970s through to the 
early 1990s, even the most development-minded Korean couldn’t help but suspect 
that something had gone wrong. Anapartment block falls to the ground, a hotel 
catches fire, a train station explodes, a bridge collapses 
<http://www.connectkorea.com/11-notable-south-korean-disasters/>: the built 
environment that had risen so recently and triumphantly around them had already 
begun to crumble.

From the beginning, South Korea has understood that development and 
urbanisation go hand in hand. In fact, it understands that almost too well, 
resulting in what ranks today as one of the most capital-centric countries in 
the world. The resources it has devoted to Seoul make the rest ofSouth Korea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-korea> seem almost like a mere support 
system for that 24-hour high-rise megalopolis of 25 million people, built over 
the rubble of the modest Japanese colonial city it had been before the second 
world war.

The creation of postwar Seoul involved plenty of rebuilding, but even more new 
building. The “old” city lies north of the Han River, which runs through Seoul 
much as the Thames does London. On the Han’s other side, the area known as 
Gangnam (literally, “south of the river”), made famous in recent yearsby pop 
music <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CH1XGdu-hzQ> and television dramas, has 
grown since the 1970s as a deliberately designed hub of private affluence, 
corporate investment, and skyline-defining towers – a concrete advertisement 
for just how far up South Korea has come in the world.

A former landfill in Gangnam’s especially wealthy district of Seocho made the 
perfect location for the upscale Sampoong Department Store. Construction on 
this bright pink symbol of Seoul’s advanced consumer culture began in 1987, the 
year South Korea became a democracy and the year before the modernised country 
made its debut on the world stage by hosting the Olympic Games.
 US and South Korean soldiers look for survivors in the rubble: 502 people 
died, and almost 1,000 were injured in the collapse. Photograph: Choo 
Youn-Kong/AFP/Getty Images 
But it didn’t enter construction as a department store: the original plan 
called for a large four-storey apartment complex. After work had already begun, 
ownerLee Joon 
<http://edition.cnn.com/WORLD/9512/skorea_store/sentencing/index.html>, in the 
first of many ill-considered decisions, switched the project from a residential 
one to a commercial one, a conversion which necessitated the removal of support 
columns to make room for escalators. When the contractors balked at this, Lee 
exchanged them for a more obedient in-house crew.

Using a building of this size entirely as a department store went against 
zoning regulations, which Lee circumvented by ordering the addition of a 
skating rink on an originally unplanned-for fifth floor. Again, when the first 
building company he hired advised against such a structure-compromising 
modification, he simply sacked them. The firm that did build the fifth floor 
even went along when he changed his mind once again, turning it into a gallery 
of restaurants heated by a system of under-floor hot-water pipes, increasing 
the stress on the already overburdened columns remaining.

Still, the Sampoong Department Store might stand today if not for the 
air-conditioning machinery installed on top. When tenants of neighbouring 
buildings to the east complained about the noise it made, management moved the 
three units to the west, not by lifting them with cranes, but by dragging them 
– their combined 45-tonne weight four times what the building was designed to 
handle – all the way across the roof. This opened up cracks that widened each 
and every morning the air conditioners clicked on and vibrated to life over the 
next two years.

Then came the morning of 29 June 1995. The structure’s visible cracks had 
widened alarmingly and continued to do so as the day wore on, provoking enough 
concern to force two executive decisions: first, to switch off the air 
conditioning, and second, to close the top floor. But Lee refused to evacuate 
the day’s unusually large and lucrative shopping crowd, and so in the store 
they remained at 5:52 pm, when the air-conditioning units fell through the roof 
and the support columns gave way, resulting in the deadliest building collapse 
since antiquity.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F27%2Fseoul-sampoong-department-store-disaster-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F26%2F1432658074541%2F49d5d4bc-4ade-4be9-8263-2bea2406bc50-1020x637.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Learning%20from%20Seoul's%20Sampoong%20Department%20Store%20disaster%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2044&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F27%2Fseoul-sampoong-department-store-disaster-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Learning%20from%20Seoul%27s%20Sampoong%20Department%20Store%20disaster%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2044&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F27%2Fseoul-sampoong-department-store-disaster-history-cities-50-buildings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F26%2F1432658074541%2F49d5d4bc-4ade-4be9-8263-2bea2406bc50-1020x637.jpeg>
 Inspections after the collapse revealed that just one-in-50 of Seoul’s towers 
were safe. Photograph: Kim Jae Hwan/AFP/Getty Images 
More than 500 people died in the Sampoong Department Store – not because of a 
gas explosion or a North Korean bomb (two early suspicions) – but because of
sheer negligence in construction and maintenance 
<http://blogs.wsj.com/korearealtime/2014/02/18/south-koreas-history-of-building-collapses/>
 of a building not yet six years old. As the facts emerged, Lee and his 
associates became the most reviled men in South Korea, not just for their own 
actions (most damningly, theirselective evacuation of Sampoong’s executives 
<http://www.history.com/this-day-in-history/seoul-department-store-collapses> 
from the building, hours before the collapse) but for the shameful strain they 
represented in the country’s modern history: their reckless corner-cutting, 
bribery and irresponsibility, far from isolated tendencies, had become endemic 
in a society desperate to develop as rapidly as possible, a sensibility which 
renders the law nothing more than an obstacle to prosperity.

“Endless Disaster, Disaster, Disaster,” declared one local headline in the 
wake of the Sampoong collapse. Not only had the public caught on to that 
pattern, but the investigation of the Sampoong Group and the government 
officials with which they dealt threw light on a staggering depth and breadth 
of corruption. Worse still, the thoroughgoing inspection of Seoul’s by then 
proudly characteristic towers found that one out of seven needed rebuilding, 
four out of five needed major repairs, and just one in 50 could qualify as safe.

“People should do their best at their jobs,” said Jeong Gwang-jin, a prominent 
lawyer who lost three daughters in the Sampoong Department Store. “This 
accident happened because they didn’t.” The prioritisation of size and quantity 
over safety and quality demanded by South Korea’s ideology of accelerated 
nation-building, expressed as a practice of accelerated city-building, visited 
this resoundingly third-world accident on Seoul’s newly minted upper-middle 
class.

Reliving the Rana Plaza factory collapse: a history of cities in 50 buildings, 
day 22
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/apr/23/rana-plaza-factory-collapse-history-cities-50-buildings>
And Lee, born in 1922, would have come of age in a time when Korea was a land 
that still relied to a great extent on horse carts and thatched roofs, one 
where nobody considered the prospect of opulent shopping complexes, let alone 
of the prospect of opulent shopping complexes suddenly falling down. Like most 
of South Korea’s ruling class in the 1970s and 1980s, Lee found himself in a 
position of power in a reality almost incomprehensibly different from any he’d 
known before, with a mandate only to generate wealth, and he made decisions 
that reflected his circumstances.

The story offers a lesson to all the cities currently and dramatically 
expanding in developing countries over the world, most notably China, where the 
impressive and frightening aspects of South Korea’s development now play out on 
a larger scale and shorter timeline. It also continues to offer a valuable 
lesson for South Korea. Despite the insistence that a Sampoong Department Store 
must never happen again, a similar disaster did indeed happen again: last year, 
this time at sea rather than in the city. On 16 April 2014, 304 passengers, 
many of them high school students, died in the sinking of the badly overloaded, 
procedurallyunprepared MV Sewol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-korea-ferry-disaster>, a tragedy which 
echoed not just Sampoong but the earlier MV Seohae, another ferry which claimed 
292 lives when it went under in 1993.

On the whole, South Korea has built a formidable city in Seoul, and one that 
will serve ably as a model for other countries looking to craft world-class 
urban environments of their own. If a living city is a changing city, Seoul 
counts as one of the most intensely city-like cities going today. Seoul seems 
to remain in a constant state of architectural and infrastructural 
metamorphosis – and not always because pieces have fallen off. But that 
constant revision of the built environment can also feel like an erasure of 
history. Visit the site of the Sampoong Department Store, and you’d never guess 
what happened there almost exactly 20 years ago – a luxury apartment complex 
now stands in its place.

 * Which other buildings in the world tell stories about urban history? Share 
your own pictures and descriptions with GuardianWitness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/mar/23/50-buildings-great-stories-urban-history>
, on Twitter and Instagram using #hoc50 or let us know suggestions in the 
comments below  