
Assuming that any Observer reader who is not actually completely broke 
occasionally gives money to a charity, it is interesting to find out what it is 
that makes us choose one cause rather than another. Is it one where we have 
some knowledge of the problem, or of the people who need help or, quite often, 
have no particular interest in the cause but enjoy the event that has been 
organised to raise money for it?

That could hardly be the reason why a number of us crossed London on a cold 
evening recently to get together with the friends ofFreedom from Torture 
<https://www.freedomfromtorture.org/>, and sink a small drink. But here we met 
some of those who work for it, and one way or another the least knowledgeable 
of us learned more of the sad situation of survivors of torture. Not of Nazis 
nowadays, but of survivors from Syria.

We learned of Kadr, who was not allowed to work here until he achieved 
official refugee status and learned how to make shepherdâ€™s pie; and other such 
survivors who were able to find work gardening, or join a yoga group. We also 
heard about Jolie, who was tortured in the Republic of Congo and fled with her 
baby girl 13 years ago, and had a bad time here until the Freedom fromTorture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/torture> took her on.

Plainly the world has not stopped being difficult for them, and their cause 
spoke to me. (For anyone who wants to know more about Freedom From Torture, 
their postal address is 111 Isledon Road, London N7 7JW; 020 7697 7777; 
freedomfromtorture.org). I also came away thinking that any charities that help 
people, at the same time letting us know what is going on, should surely come 
before ones just favouring woolly animals or antique buildings.

What do you think? Have your say below
 