
For hundreds of years, the common law has protected the confidentiality of 
legal advice between lawyer and client.

Safeguards were developed by judges in the late 18th and early 19th centuries, 
although the origins of what is now called legal professional privilege (LPP) 
can be traced back two centuries earlier.

As Lord Chancellor Brougham said in 1833 
<http://www.bailii.org/uk/cases/UKHL/1995/18.html>, its justification is not 
hard to discover. If lawyers were not required to keep their advice 
confidential, a potential client “would not venture to consult any skilful 
person, or would only dare to tell his counsellor half his case”. Lord Chief 
Justice Taylorconfirmed in 1995 
<http://www.bailii.org/uk/cases/UKHL/1995/18.html> that LPP was “a fundamental 
condition on which the administration of justice as a whole rests”.

LPP is all the more important when a client is taking legal action against an 
institution that may be allowed to see his or her correspondence.

Many employers reserve the right to monitor staff emails. Prisoners’ letters 
are read routinely by prison officers. But what they must not read are letters 
to and from lawyers. And if they do see any correspondence relating to legal 
action against themselves then, subject to very limited exceptions, they must 
not communicate its contents to their own lawyers. What’s required are 
information barriers between departments – so-called Chinese walls.

These principles are well known. But they were not respected by the security 
and intelligence services. Last month, MI5, MI6 and GCHQconceded that 
<http://www.ipt-uk.com/docs/Belhadj_order_26Feb15.pdf> “from January 2010, the 
regime for the interception/obtaining, analysis, use, disclosure and 
destruction of legally privileged material has not been in accordance with the 
law for the purposes of Article 8(2) of the European convention on human rights 
and was accordingly unlawful”.

Article 8 requires respect for a person’s private life and correspondence. The 
governmentsaid the concession 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/feb/18/uk-admits-unlawfully-monitoring-legally-privileged-communications>
 did not mean there had been any deliberate wrongdoing or prejudice to 
proceedings. It added that the agencies were working to ensure their policies 
would comply with the human rights convention in future.

The agencies’ concession was made in connection with a case brought against 
them by Abdel Hakim Belhaj, a Libyan opponent of the former Gaddafi regime, and 
his wife Fatima Bouchar. The couple accuse British ministers and officials of 
participating in their unlawful abduction, kidnapping and removal to Libya in 
March 2004, while Gaddafi was still in power. Last October,the court of appeal 
refused 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2014/oct/30/judges-abdel-hakim-belhaj-call-government-bluff>
 to let the UK government shelter behind what is called act of state doctrine. 
The courts have also rejected the government’s proposed defence of state 
immunity. However, ministers are appealing to the supreme court and a hearing 
has been scheduled for November.

Following disclosures to the Guardian by Edward Snowden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/jun/21/gchq-cables-secret-world-communications-nsa>
 in June 2013, Belhaj’s lawyers became concerned that privileged correspondence 
with their clients might have been seen by lawyers advising the government. 
They lodged a complaint with the Investigatory Powers Tribunal (IPT), a special 
court established in 2000 to hear cases against the intelligence services. Last 
November, the agencies disclosed their internal guidance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/06/intelligence-agencies-lawyer-client-abdel-hakim-belhaj-mi5-mi6-gchq>
. This allowed LPP material to be disclosed to those dealing with an operation 
if, for example, there was an an “overriding intelligence requirement” or staff 
were at risk from extremists. They also admitted that there had been a case in 
which “the potential for tainting was identified”. So the agencies had to fess 
up and concede that their policies did not protect privileged material.

There were two issues for the IPT when the case returned to the tribunal last 
week. First, hadGCHQ <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/gchq> unlawfully 
intercepted communications between Belhaj and his lawyers? That was examined at 
a closed hearing. Secondly, if there had been unlawful interception, what 
remedy should the IPT provide? That question was considered at an open hearing 
on Friday.

The fundamental principle common to the intelligence agencies is that 
individuals must never know whether their communications are being monitored. 
So the agencies will neither confirm nor deny a specific operation. For this 
reason, the statute that set up the IPTlimited its decisions 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2000/23/section/68> to two choices: a 
determination in favour of the applicant or a statement that no determination 
has been made in the applicant’s favour.

As the IPT explains <http://www.ipt-uk.com/section.aspx?pageid=4>, finding in 
favour of the complainant means that the authority complained about has acted 
unlawfully or unreasonably. But no determination in favour of the complainant 
could mean one of two things: “either that the activity complained about 
occurred but was properly authorised and conducted within the law or that it 
did not occur”.

Last week, counsel for GCHQ and the other agencies tried to persuade the 
tribunal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/mar/13/government-trying-keep-secret-spy-agencies-unlawful-conduct-ipt>
 to rewrite these definitions. There could be no determination in an 
individual’s favour – even if there had been unlawful interception – on the 
basis that the system as a whole had been unlawful. The government’s 
alternative suggestion would be to make a determination in the applicant’s 
favour on the basis that privileged communications “might have been 
intercepted”. Either way, the individual would be none the wiser.

At the open hearing, Eadie argued that “no determination” could cover three 
possibilities: no interception, lawful interception or interception that was 
unlawful because it breached legal professional privilege.

Told by Mr Justice Burton, the IPT president, that the tribunal would then be 
hiding the true position from the public, Eadie replied that the public would 
know that the IPT was acting in the public interest. But nobody seemed to find 
this persuasive – not even Eadie himself.

Belhaj’s counsel, Ben Jaffey, responded by quoting Lord Atkin’s famous wartime 
protest <http://www.bailii.org/uk/cases/UKHL/1941/1.html> about against the 
deliberate misreading of a statute. “I know of only one authority which might 
justify the suggested method of construction. ‘When I use a word,’ Humpty 
Dumpty said in rather a scornful tone, ‘it means just what I choose it to mean, 
neither more nor less.’”

The neither-confirm-nor-deny – NCND – principle is not regarded as absolute. 
Eadie accepted that if legally privileged communications had been intercepted 
in a way that had in fact given the government a substantial advantage in 
litigation, then there would have to be a determination in favour of the 
applicant and compensation would be payable.

But what worries the agencies is that the forthcoming IPT ruling in this case 
could allow individuals to find out whether their communications have been 
intercepted. “Whilst a determination in favour of a non-controversial case may 
cause limited damage of itself,” submitted Eadie, perhaps thinking of Belhaj, 
“the tribunal must be alive to the possibility that such an approach would 
significantly undermine national security if it was to be applied in cases 
involving a national security target.”

This is how GCHQ’s nightmare scenario plays out. At the moment, the would-be 
terrorist does not know whether their communications are being intercepted. 
Imagine that the IPT decides that Belhaj’s communications were being monitored 
– which would come as no surprise, as Jaffey said – and that among his 
intercepted communications was advice from his lawyers. Imagine, too, that 
privileged material was retained but not passed to government lawyers defending 
the agencies in his main claim for compensation. The mere fact that his 
privileged communications were intercepted entitles him to a determination in 
his favour. That causes, in Eadie’s words, “limited damage” to national 
security.

But the decision would open the door to hundreds or perhaps thousands of other 
applications to the IPT. Buried among the fantasists would be terrorists who 
had deliberately communicated with their lawyers using a variety of channels. A 
series of determinations, both positive and negative, could allow terrorist 
groups to work out which methods of communication were vulnerable to 
interception and which were beyond the reach of GCHQ.

Alarming though those consequences may be, they cannot justify a dishonest 
finding by the IPT. If the tribunal finds that Belhaj has been the victim of 
unlawful interception since 2010 it must say so – though in accordance with its 
rules it should not provide any details that would disclose GCHQ’s capabilities.

Any attempt to fudge the issue would not only be damaging to the reputation 
that the IPT is slowly building for itself. It would also jeopardise the UK’s 
only defence against interception challenges at the European court of human 
rights. Claims that the IPT does not provide a fair hearing and aneffective 
remedy were dismissed 
<http://hudoc.echr.coe.int/sites/eng/pages/search.aspx?i=001-98473> by the 
Strasbourg court in 2010. Britain would be vulnerable to further challenges if 
the IPT made no determination in a case where it had found unlawful 
interception.

How, then, are the conflicting interests of GCHQ and the IPT to be resolved? 
First, by introducing new interception codes of practice that comply with 
article 8: drafts are currentlyout for consultation 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/interception-of-communications-and-equipment-interference-draft-codes-of-practice>
. That should reduce the chances of further breaches.

And, secondly, by provisions in the new intelligence services bill recommended 
last week by parliament’s intelligence and security committee. If it really is 
vital to national security that “no determination” should be extended to 
include cases where the illegality was confined to breaches of LPP but no 
advantage was gained by the agencies in litigation, then that is what the 
legislation should say. That would avoid the nightmare scenario while ensuring 
that IPT can continue to uphold the law.

We rely on the security and intelligence services to protect us against the 
threat of terrorism. The more successful they are, the less we imagine we need 
them. We also expect them them to track down those who entice would-be jihadi 
teenagers to join Islamic State.

So the agencies must be allowed to protect their methods. But, as they would 
be the first to accept, they must also obey the law.
 