
It was a weekend when east Midlands rugby went west. Leicester followed 
Northampton’s humbling at home by Leinster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/09/northampton-leinster-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
 the previous night with their heaviest defeat in the European Cup, 
accumulating players in the sin‑bin rather than points in a display of such 
incoherence and ineptitude that it could not be put down to theAnthony Foley 
factor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/16/anthony-foley-munster-man-ireland-death>
.

On a day when Racing 92 lost at home against Glasgow, Munster took control of 
the group, albeit with three away matches to come, with their second 
bonus-point victory after wearing downLeicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> in the first half with a 
series of high kicks, mainly from their scrum‑half Conor Murray. He had the 
advantage over his Lions rival Ben Youngs of playing behind a dominant pack and 
applied the knockout blow after the interval when the Tigers lost their shape 
and then their discipline.

Dylan Hartley’s Northampton red card threatens Lions captaincy dream
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/09/northampton-leinster-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
The European Cup quarter-finalists last season were drawn from England and 
France, but Munster and Leinster have given notice that it is unlikely to be 
repeated. Leicester’s two previous worst defeats in the tournament came over 
the border in Belfast and they arrived on the back of five successive victories 
in all competitions having doubledMunster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/munster> at this stage in Europe a year ago.

Munster had won all six matches since the untimely death of Foley, one of the 
provinces’s rugby icons, in October. If they were fuelled by emotion initially, 
here they were calculating and ruthlessly efficient, playing for possession 
initially, applying pressure and forcing mistakes. The back-rowers CJ Stander 
and Peter O’Mahony set the tone, all muscle and bustle, and the Tigers lacked 
anyone as physically imposing.

Murray fully exploited his pack’s dominance of the lineout and breakdown – 
long before the end they were shoving Leicester backwards in the scrum – 
weighting his kicks, which were invariably aimed at the Leicester left wing 
where Adam Thompstone and the full-back George Worth, making his first start in 
Europe, were hounded into errors by Darren Sweetnam.

Leicester were caught between their strategy of moving the ball and the need 
to get out of their own half and when they kicked they did so ineffectively. 
While Munster’s chase was strong, Simon Zebo was rarely challenged when 
catching the ball and the full-back was able to keep the pressure on the Tigers 
who, on the sunniest of December afternoons, found themselves locked in an ever 
tighter grip with no means of escape.

Other than a Stander break which Murray supported, Munster rarely threatened 
in the opening 30 minutes, wearing down their opponents with a series of body 
blows. Leicester were regularly penalised at the breakdown for trying to slow 
down the home side’s ball, and when Ed Slater took his time rolling away after 
making a tackle in his own 22 he was sent to the sin-bin.

Munster were then 12-0 up through four Tyler Bleyendaal penalties and with a 
man advantage they went for their opponents. A series of drives got them closer 
to the line before Murray fooled the defence by looking outside and passing 
inside to Zebo, who dodged past the wrong-footed Lachlan McCaffrey.

If Munster did not have the authority of old, they were relentless and 
persistent. Leicester tweaked their approach after the break but were no more 
successful at keeping hold of the ball. Manu Tuilagi, making his first start 
since the opening day of the season, touched the ball three times and his game 
finished in the sin-bin after showing his frustration by swinging his right arm 
as he joined a breakdown. He was fortunate the replacement Jean Kleyn ducked at 
the last moment so the blow glanced off the top of his head. If he had not, it 
would have caught him full in the face.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fmunster-leicester-european-champions-cup-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18d4fc5526705ef3a719431cf34dcf3164a9f54c%2F0_73_3280_1968%2F3280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Leicester%20left%20looking%20inept%20and%20embarrassed%20by%20dominant%20Munster&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fmunster-leicester-european-champions-cup-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Leicester%20left%20looking%20inept%20and%20embarrassed%20by%20dominant%20Munster&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fmunster-leicester-european-champions-cup-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18d4fc5526705ef3a719431cf34dcf3164a9f54c%2F0_73_3280_1968%2F3280.jpg>
 Munster’s Jaco Taute scores their third try. Photograph: 
Sheridan/INPHO/Rex/Shutterstock 
When Worth hauled down the Munster centre Jaco Taute as he chased a kick over 
Leicester’s line, he became his side’s third player to be sent to the sin-bin. 
His action was also punished with a penalty try, although whether Taute, who 
was looking for his hat-trick, would have reached the ball in time was more in 
the realms of the possible than the probable.

Taute’s first try came after a 20-metre driving maul from a lineout and his 
second followed a break by Sweetnam, whose job of kick chaser had by now been 
made redundant. He took out two defenders before freeing the centre, who is in 
his last few weeks with Munster on a short-term contract before returning to 
South Africa, with an inside offload.

The story of the match was summed up in the final minutes when Leicester’s 
replacement hooker, George McGuigan, drove to the Munster line in search of a 
consolation try. In his way was Stander, who held him up and stripped him of 
the ball, galling for a club that based its considerable success in years past 
on physical supremacy.

“We had our arses smacked,” Richard Cockerill, Leicester’s director of rugby, 
said. “We put ourselves under pressure by kicking poorly and inviting Munster, 
who won every bit of the physical contest, to run at us. We only have ourselves 
to blame. The performance was not acceptable. I hope we take nothing from this 
into the return when we have to salvage pride. The players will not need to be 
told that. We are not going to roll over and concede the pool.”
 