
Leicester City have been written off enough times over the past 18 months to 
be unconcerned by critics buttheir 4-1 defeat to Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/11/liverpool-leicester-sadio-mane-roberto-firmino-anfield>
 has led to questions about whether they will be able to cope with a busier 
schedule this season. They begin their Champions League campaign in Belgium and 
will be confident of progressing from their group. The draw was kind to Claudio 
Ranieri. Porto represent a real test of his side’s European credentials but 
meetings with FC Copenhagen and, first up, Club Brugge offer cause for genuine 
encouragement.

The Belgian champions have also endured an underwhelming start to the season. 
Michel Preud’homme’s side find themselves tenth in the 16-team Jupiler Pro 
League after three defeats in their opening six matches, the most recent of 
which came against the unfancied Waasland-Beveren on Friday.

Champions League: fans from all 32 clubs share their hopes and expectations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/13/champions-league-hopes-expectations>
The reigning Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> champions sit even closer 
to the foot of their league table – hovering above the relegation zone in 16th 
– but meetings with both Arsenal and Liverpool make their tally of four points 
from four games far more palatable. Nevertheless, with just four goals scored 
and, more worryingly, seven conceded, they are some way off their form from 
last season. The seven goals they have shipped already this season is as many 
as they conceded in the 12-game unbeaten streak that took them to the title at 
the end of last season.

Jamie Vardy and Rihad Mahrez are both off and running in the scoring charts 
but the protection that N’Golo Kanté offered the defence has been sorely 
missed. The vast amount of work and ground he covered looked vital last season, 
but his contribution seems even more essential with the benefit of hindsight. 
His averages of 4.7 tackles and 4.2 interceptions per game were both league 
highs in 2015-16 and were enough to make Leicester the top ranked side in both 
categories.

After four matches this season, their interceptions-per-game figure has 
dropped from 21.6 to 15.8 (joint-seventh in the league), while their number of 
tackles per game has fallen from 22.9 to 17.8 (14th). It’s no surprise that the 
numbers have fallen without Kanté in the team, but the extent of the drop 
suggests their change in approach hasn’t started to work yet. While Leicester 
were desperate to keep Mahrez and Vardy, the one man they really couldn’t lose 
was Kanté, whoserating of 7.61 last season 
<https://www.whoscored.com/Regions/252/Tournaments/2/Seasons/5826/Stages/12496/PlayerStatistics/England-Premier-League-2015-2016>
 was enough to rank sixth in the Premier League.

Andy King, Daniel Amartey and Nampalys Mendy have all partnered Danny 
Drinkwater in midfield this season, but none of them possesses Kanté’s energy, 
positioning skill or ball-winning ability. The£10m they spent on Mendy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/03/leicester-city-nampalys-mendy-football-transfer-signing-nice>
 suggests he was earmarked as Kanté’s successor and that Ranieri was going for 
a different tactical approach. The 24-year-old was instrumental for Claude 
Puel’s Nice team as they finished fourth in Ligue 1 last season, but Mendy’s 
job was to keep play ticking over in midfield rather than disrupting the 
opposition. Team-high figures of 77.6 passes per game with a 92.1% accuracy 
ensured that Mendy completed the third most passes in Europe’s top five leagues 
last season, so it was somewhat surprising that Leicester bought him given that 
they put very little onus on keeping the ball last season.

Kanté was very much the midfield destroyer for Caen in Ligue 1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ligue1football> and then Leicester, but 
Mendy’s averages of 1.7 tackles and 2.2 interceptions last season were modest 
by comparison. His arrival suggested that Danny Drinkwater would be given a 
more defensive role this season. Drinkwater weighed in with three tackles per 
game last season, but he has made 19 tackles already – the second highest in 
the entire league and 11 more than any other Leicester player. He is the club’s 
highest rated player thus far, with a modest 7.02 rating, and the rest of the 
squad need to catch up fast.

Though the record signing of Islam Slimani will have excited fans, with the 
Algerian scoring 27 goals in Liga NOS with Sporting last season, it was a 
surprising choice for Leicester. The 27-year old will provide a physical threat 
up front – and a more capable one than Leonardo Ulloa – but the main priority 
should have been adding more protection for the back four. Their defence was 
incredibly organised last season but it is vulnerable when exposed to pace, as 
Liverpool showed at the weekend.

Ranieri has more attacking options this season but, without a like-for-like 
replacement for Kanté, his team lacks bite in front of an ageing backline. 
Relying on Drinkwater to do so much defending reduces his ability to spring the 
sort of counter-attacks that made Leicester so devastating last season. Ranieri 
has some tinkering to do, having avoided living up to his old nickname last 
season.

Despite their favourable draw in Europe, Leicester’s soft centre could leave 
in line for the odd humbling. A game against a struggling Club Bruges 
represents a good chance to bounce back but a switch back to the style of play 
from the first half of last season may now be necessary for a side whose attack 
– bolstered by the arrivals of Slimani and Ahmed Musa – already appears far 
more capable than its defence.

Premier League team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
La Liga team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Liga NOS team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Bundesliga team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Serie A team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Ligue 1 team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
• Follow WhoScored on Twitter <https://twitter.com/WhoScored> and Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/WhoScored>
• Follow Martin Laurence <https://twitter.com/martinlaurence7> on Twitter
 