
“Happy new year to you all,” wrote Richard Cockerill in what turned out to be 
his final programme notes as Leicester’s director of rugby on Sunday. Less than 
24 hours later, the club announced he had been sacked following the defeat by 
thePremiership <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership> club who have 
become as dominant this decade as the Tigers were in the 2000s, Saracens.

Cockerill became the second director of rugby of a Premiership club to lose 
his job this season following Andy Robinson’s dismissal by Bristol and five 
sides are now under different management from last season, as are the relegated 
London Irish.Leicester <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> 
could not be accused of acting in haste as they faced up to a prospect of 
missing out on a trip to Twickenham in May for a fourth consecutive season. But 
as they showed in 2004 when removing another stalwart who had spent 23 years at 
Welford Road, Dean Richards, sentiment stretches only so far.

Richard Cockerill ‘sadness’ after being sacked by Leicester Tigers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/02/leicester-tigers-part-company-richard-cockerill>
Cockerill was in typically pugnacious mood after the defeat against Saracens, 
as he had been following the reverses at Exeter and Munster in the previous 
month, answering questions honestly and backing himself to get Leicester into 
the top four and the knockout stage of the European Champions Cup. His side, 
though, had tended to become threatening only after a heavy defeat, reacting 
rather than setting the tone as in days gone by.

They had brought in Aaron Mauger as head coach in the summer of 2015 to 
provide a tactical uplift, but instead it created uncertainty. Who was in 
charge tactically? Who did players need to impress most? The helm seemed to be 
pulled one way and then the other, the ship scraping along rocks more often 
than sailing in still waters. Just as Eddie Jones brought clarity to England, 
so Leicester need a clear vision now.

Before the start of the Twickenham double-header in 2004, Leicester were by 
some distance the best supported club in England and the only one to regularly 
record a profit. At the end of the previous season, their average gate for a 
league match was 16,120; Northampton were second, 5,000 behind. Bath,Wasps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-wasps> and Saracens did not make it 
into five figures.

It was a time when Leicester could sign big names from abroad, such as Pat 
Howard, Rod Kafer, Mauger – who is in interim charge of the first team after 
Cockerill’s departure – and Daryl Gibson, supplementing them with those lesser 
known such as Marcos Ayerza and Martin Castrogiovanni. These days, the elite 
end up in the Top 14 or as a marquee signing for English clubs able to live 
beyond their means.

Just as Roman Abramovich changed Premier League football when he bought 
Chelsea in 2003 and covered debts of £80m, so the ownership model of clubs 
ahead of Leicester in the table, Exeter excluded, has recalibrated 
the Premiership.

Saracens’ debt stood at more than £45m last year after an annual loss of 
nearly £4m, a shortfall covered by the club’s parent company, Premier Team 
Holdings Limited.

Bath lost £1.8m last year, down from £3m in 2014. Wasps lost £2.4m and took 
£35m in debt when they issued a bond scheme that is due in 2022, by which time 
the club anticipate a significant rise in revenue from outside rugby through 
the Ricoh Arena. Leicester, a public limited company, have the highest turnover 
of any Premiership club and the largest number of regular supporters, but 
paying to improve facilities – the latest upgrade at Welford Road cost £8m – 
left them reaching the salary cap but not making any marquee signings until the 
arrival of the Australian centre Matt Toomua last summer, and he played just a 
couple of matches before sustaining a long-term knee injury.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fthe-breakdown-leicester-tigers-crossroads%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51cf7e6590dfb71876b8b5544406fcf4f8b4700c%2F0_14_2624_1574%2F2624.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Leicester%20board%20at%20crossroads%20as%20old%20ways%20start%20to%20look%20like%20the%20wrong%20ones%20%7C%20Paul%20Rees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fthe-breakdown-leicester-tigers-crossroads%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Leicester%20board%20at%20crossroads%20as%20old%20ways%20start%20to%20look%20like%20the%20wrong%20ones%20%7C%20Paul%20Rees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fthe-breakdown-leicester-tigers-crossroads%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51cf7e6590dfb71876b8b5544406fcf4f8b4700c%2F0_14_2624_1574%2F2624.jpg>
 Matt Toomua arrived as Leicester’s marquee signing this season but was swiftly 
on the injury list. Photograph: Crombie/Inpho/Rex/Shutterstock 
Leicester find themselves in the position of Arsenal post-Abramovich, going 
from vying for the title to battling for a top-four place while living within 
their means and reducing the debt on the Emirates Stadium.

“We are at the point where Manchester United were as a plc,” Cockerill said at 
the end of the 2014-15 season. “You get to a position with the Chelseas and Man 
Citys and ask if an owner is an option for us. We just can’t create enough 
revenue to compete with whoever. If Bristol come up, their owner has a lot of 
money. The guys at Saracens and Bath have a lot of money. As far as I’m aware, 
we’re not searching for an owner. We could come to a point where that may or 
may not happen. Or we sit where we sit and, with that amount of money, stay 
there or thereabouts.”

It is in one sense fitting that Leicester’s first match without Cockerill is 
at Wasps. A couple of years ago it would have meant a trip to Wycombe but now 
it is a Midlands derby with the former London club now based in Coventry, a 
shortish drive from Leicester and Northampton, another club run on business 
lines that are scrabbling to keep up.

Gloucester are another, but they hope that an approach for a 54% stake in the 
club by the Montpellier owner, Mohed Altrad, will be approved by the organisers 
of the European Champions Cup and Challenge Cup – they have the right of veto 
because the two clubs could meet in one of the tournaments, raising an 
integrity issue.

Altrad has promised to make a significant investment in Gloucester if he does 
take over. That would put more pressure on Leicester to look at their model 
but, with Exeter reaching the Premiership final last season and now third in 
the table after a slow start, the Tigers may feel that, like their football 
neighbours Leicester City, money is not the only currency and that team spirit, 
unity and ambition count for as much.

The board’s first task is to look at the coaching setup. Does it go for a 
director of rugby in the Martin Johnson mould, someone who would let the head 
coach run the rugby side while having responsibility for recruitment and 
contracts, or continue with the current structure? Then comes the question of 
how to compete with clubs such as Saracens, who are able to absorb large 
losses. Is the old way, on and off the pitch, becoming the wrong way for a club 
that should be the model for others?

• This is an extract taken from the Breakdown, the Guardian’s weekly rugby 
union email.To subscribe just visit this page and follow the instructions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/18/sign-up-to-the-breakdown>.
 