
Leonard Cohen was always the grownup in the room. He was young once, of 
course, but the world never saw much of the modestly successful poet and 
novelist from Montreal. He was already 33 — ancient by 60s standards — when he 
gazed out from the sepia-tinted, photo-booth snapshot on the cover of 1967’s
Songs of Leonard Cohen <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Songs_of_Leonard_Cohen> 
with his shirt, tie and smart side-parting. The face suggested that he’d been 
around the block a few times; the voice and words confirmed it. The man knew 
things about life and if, you listened closely, you might learn something.

The truth was that Cohen felt as lost as anybody. What gave his work its 
uncommon gravitas wasn’t that he knew the answers but that he never stopped 
looking. He searched for clues in bedrooms and warzones, in Jewish temples and 
Buddhist retreats, in Europe, Africa, Israel and Cuba. He tried to flush them 
out with booze and drugs and seduce them with melodies. And whenever he managed 
to painfully extract some nugget of wisdom, he would cut and polish it like a 
precious stone before resuming the search. Funny about himself but profoundly 
serious about his art, he liked to describe his songs as “investigations” into 
the hidden mechanics of love, sex, war, religion and death – the beautiful and 
terrifying truths of existence. ALeonard Cohen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/leonard-cohen> song is an anchor flung into 
a churning sea. It has the kind of weight that could save your life.


Related: Leonard Cohen's life and career – in pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/gallery/2016/nov/11/leonard-cohens-life-and-career-in-pictures>

Cohen was born in 1934, a tad older than Elvis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/elvispresley>, a bit younger than Philip Roth
 <https://www.theguardian.com/books/philiproth>. He was a favoured child: “the 
oldest son of the oldest son”. One grandfather was a rabbi and Talmudic 
scholar, the other a publisher and philanthropist; his father, who died when he 
was nine, sold clothing. Cohen loved the language of the synagogue, where 
“everything was important. The absence of the casual has always attracted me.” 
At 15, he discoveredFederico García Lorca 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/federico-garcia-lorca> and the 
consolations of poetry. “The loneliness was dissolved,” he remembered, “and you 
felt that you were this aching creature in the midst of an aching cosmos, and 
the ache was OK. Not only was it OK, but it was the way that you embraced the 
sun and the moon.”

Young Leonard wrote poems of his own, sang folk songs, and studied (poorly) at 
McGill University. In 1956 he published his first volume of poetry, Let Us 
Compare Mythologies, and dedicated it to his father. In a 50th anniversary 
edition he wrote, with typical self-deprecation: “It’s been downhill ever 
since.” Around that time he also experienced the “mental violence” of 
depression for the first time. Decades later, when the worst was behind him, he 
described it as “the background of your entire life, a background of anguish 
and anxiety, a sense that nothing goes well, that pleasure is unavailable and 
all your strategies collapse”.

 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
Leonard Cohen performs Dance Me To The End of Love 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2016/nov/11/leonard-cohen-performs-dance-me-to-the-end-of-love-video>
Curious and impatient, Cohen moved to New York, London, Israel, Cuba and 
Greece, where he bought a house on the bohemian idyll of Hydra. More poems. Two 
novels, one of which a critic called “the most revolting book ever written in 
Canada”. A few prizes. A truckload of LSD. He talked about writing songs for 
years before finally knuckling down to it as “an economic solution to the 
problem of making a living and being a writer”. It was more sociable than 
poetry, too: he sold his first songs to the folk singer Judy Collins; met Nico 
and Jim Morrison; jammed withHendrix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/jimi-hendrix>. When he wrote, he would play 
around on the guitar until he felt a catch in his throat. That was when he knew 
he was on to something. “I certainly never had any musical standard to 
tyrannise me,” he once said. “I thought that it was something to do with the 
truth, that if you told the story, that’s what the song was about.”


'I never had any musical standard to tyrannise me,' he said. 'If you told the 
story, that’s what the song was about.'

When the chief executive of Columbia Records heard that A&R man John Hammond 
wanted to sign Cohen in 1967, he reportedly said: “A 32-year-old poet? Are you 
crazy?” But Hammond, who had launchedBillie Holiday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/billie-holiday>, Bob Dylan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/bobdylan> and Aretha Franklin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/aretha-franklin>, didn’t give up. During the 
first recording session for Songs of Leonard Cohen, he shouted encouragement: 
“Watch out, Dylan!”


At the time, Bob Dylan was rock’n’roll’s pre-eminent poet. Cohen really was a 
poet but he wasn’t rock’n’roll. Steeped instead in literary discipline, French 
chanson and Jewish liturgy, his work suggested old-fashioned patience. To 
Dylan, a song was a lump of wet clay to be moulded before it sets fast; to 
Cohen it was a slab of marble to be chipped into shape with immense dedication 
and care. Cohen never stopped being a poet or lost his reverence for words. 
You’ll find some erratic musical choices in his back catalogue but not a single 
careless line; nothing disposable. Years later, he said he had only one piece 
of advice for young songwriters: “If you stick with a song long enough it will 
yield. But long enough is beyond any reasonable duration.” When you sense that 
a songwriter has spent that long finding the right words, the least you can do 
is pay attention.


The making of Songs of Leonard Cohen became a maddening slog but these songs – 
Suzanne; So Long, Marianne; Hey, That’s No Way to Say Goodbye – would make him 
the so-called “bard of the bedsit”, an intellectual adventurer who looked for 
glimmers of light in the dark places. As Bono once said: “He finds shades in 
the blackness that feel like colour.” Robert Altman loved the songs so much he 
built his 1971 movie McCabe & Mrs Miller around them.


Cohen was an uncommonly alluring figure. Right from the start, he made clear 
that sex, spirituality and violence would be intertwined and things would not 
work out as hoped, but there was a certain glamour in that. He dated a long 
line of women, includingJanis Joplin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/janis-joplin> and Joni Mitchell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/jonimitchell>. Cohen’s eventful life never 
left him short of material. “I have a very poor imagination, so I’ve always 
thought of myself as a kind of journalist just reporting from the field as 
accurately as I can,” he once said.


He couldn’t settle, through. He dabbled in Scientology (hence the line “Did 
you ever go clear?” on Famous Blue Raincoat), experimented with living the 
simple life in rural Tennessee and “participated in all those investigations 
that engaged the imagination of my generation at that time”. Obliged to 
overcome his stage fright and go on tour, he wore a safari suit and behaved 
like some drug-crazed general leading a brutal campaign. He called his band 
“The Army”; they dubbed him “Captain Mandrax”. He played gigs in psychiatric 
hospitals and invited thousands of sodden, exhausted revellers at the Isle of 
Wight festival to light matches in the rain. “Tours are like bullfighting,” he 
told Rolling Stone. “They are a test of character every night.”


Related: Leonard Cohen: 10 of the best 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/may/06/leonard-cohen-10-of-the-best>

The Nashville-recorded Songs from a Room (1969) was sparser and bleaker than 
the debut; Songs of Love and Hate (1971) was murder. His depression had grown 
evil, and infectious. “People were saying I was depressing a generation,” Cohen 
complained. They called it “music to slit your wrists by”. He was in no state 
to tour again but he did anyway, and the film-maker Tony Palmer captured it all 
in his unflinching documentary Bird on a Wire. On stage, Cohen called himself 
“a broken-down nightingale” who had sold his poetry for celebrity. He revived 
his sense of self byplaying for Israeli troops during the Yom Kippur war 
<http://www.israellycool.com/2016/11/11/when-leonard-cohen-performed-for-israeli-troops-during-the-yom-kippur-war/>
 and visiting Ethiopia just before the civil war, finding creative inspiration 
in proximity to violence. “War is wonderful,” he said while promoting New Skin 
for the Old Ceremony (1974). “It’s so economical in terms of gesture and 
motion. Every single gesture is precise, every effort is at its maximum. Nobody 
goofs off.” Having compared a tour to a military campaign, he now appeared to 
be confusing war with a Leonard Cohen tour.


It was no longer true of Cohen that men envied him and women desired him. 
Death of a Ladies’ Man (1977) is better known for its chaotic genesis (Phil 
Spector, booze, guns) than for its music. “I wasn’t in good shape at the time 
mentally and I couldn’t really hold my own in there,” he told his biographer 
Sylvie Simmons. He was much happier with Recent Songs (1979) but it sold 
poorly. His mother had died, his wife had left him, his money was running out 
and his career was becalmed. He joked that he was too old for suicide: it would 
be “unbecoming”.


Related: Laura Barton on Leonard Cohen's Hallelujah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/dec/19/leonard-cohen-hallelujah-christmas>

Cohen’s resurgence began with a cheap Casio keyboard he bought in Manhattan, 
whose plinky presets granted him a new way to write. It underpinned the 
transitional Various Positions (1984), about which Columbia’s Walter Yetnikoff 
famously said: “Leonard, we know you’re great, we just don’t know if you’re any 
good.” The album was largely ignored, althoughHallelujah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/dec/19/leonard-cohen-hallelujah-christmas>
, which took him five years to write and whittle down from more than 80 verses, 
would eventually become a modern standard, thrilling and moving countless 
people who had never heard of Leonard Cohen. This ambiguous meditation on 
spirituality, sex and song unexpectedly grew into his most timeless 
contribution to the collective songbook.


With I’m Your Man (1988), Cohen found a new voice: both literally, because his 
baritone went subterranean (“It’s not a strategy,” he said, “I think it’s 
cigarettes and whiskey”), and figuratively, because his always understated 
humour was now too obvious to ignore. “I was born like this,” he rumbled on 
Tower of Song, “I had no choice, I was born with the gift of a golden voice.” 
That line always got a laugh in concert. He needed jokes to navigate the 
album’s hair-raising terrain of fascism, Aids, the Holocaust, sexual betrayal, 
political defeat and, on Everybody Knows, pessimism elevated to an artform. 
“These are the final days, this is the darkness, this is the flood,” he told LA 
Weekly. “The catastrophe has already happened and the question we now face is: 
what is the appropriate behaviour in a catastrophe?”


I’m Your Man was his most successful album and his credibility was 
impregnable: on the I’m Your Fan album (1991) the likes of Nick Cave, REM and 
Pixies paid tribute. Still, his depression worsened and engulfed the world on 
The Future (1992). He started composing the title track’s horrorscape (“I’ve 
seen the future, brother – it is murder”) when the Berlin wall came down and 
originally called it If You Could See What’s Coming Next. Oliver Stone tapped 
its dire pessimism for the soundtrack of Natural Born Killers but the album 
also contained an image of optimism as enduring as any of his lyrics: “Ring the 
bells that still can ring / Forget your perfect offering / There is a crack in 
everything / That’s how the light gets in.” That idea had been kicking around 
Cohen’s head for many years. He called it “the closest thing I could describe 
to a credo”.


Cohen spent five years of the 90s in the austere environs of the Mount Baldy 
Zen Center, where he served Kyozan Joshu Sasaki Roshi, the Japanese monk with 
whom he had studied for over 20 years. He returned to music with Ten New Songs 
(2001) and Dear Heather (2004), writing with long-time backing vocalist Sharon 
Robinson and jazz singer Anjani Thomas. He sounded gentler and more humble, his 
voice smoky and intimate rather than thick with doom.


Gradually, the floodwaters of depression receded. When losing his savings to 
his crooked business manager forced him to hit the road again for the first 
time in 15 years, he became a crowdpleaser in his own way, finally able to 
savour an audience’s love. When he cast his benign spell over an arena or, in 
2008, a Glastonbury field, he wasn’t bullfighting anymore. On his penultimate 
two albums,Old Ideas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/jan/22/leonard-cohen-old-ideas-review> 
(2012) andPopular Problems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/sep/18/leonard-cohen-popular-problems-album-review>
 (2014), he revisited old territory with a kinder eye and a lighter touch. His 
investigations were drawing to a close. Then, just weeks ago, came his final 
album,You Want It Darker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/20/leonard-cohen-you-want-it-darker-album-review>
, prefaced with an interview with the New Yorker in which he he announced: “I 
am ready to die. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/12/leonard-cohen-i-am-ready-to-die> 
I hope it’s not too uncomfortable. That’s about it for me.” Then he recanted 
that statement – but it turned out he was telling the truth, as he so often 
did, one way or another.


For Cohen, defeat was the truth of things; the reason to make art; the crack 
where the light gets in

On Old Ideas he sang about writing “a manual for living with defeat”, that 
being the human condition as far as he was concerned. “Nobody has a life that 
worked out the way they wanted it work out,” he told journalist Mark Ellen in 
2007. The role of a good song, he continued, was to share that feeling so that 
“we feel less isolated and we feel part of the great human chain which is 
really involved with the recognition of defeat”. For Cohen, defeat was the 
truth of things; the source of all the best jokes; the reason to make art; the 
crack where the light gets in.


Cohen never talked up his own importance. He often said he was just making the 
most of the limited talents he had been given and hoping that whatever insights 
he had gleaned could be useful to the listener. Songwriting was his way of 
making sense of a bewildering world and dissolving the loneliness.


In 1987, the writer Jon Wilde asked Cohen what he had set out to achieve. “How 
did I ever get into this racket?” Cohen laughed. “I don’t know! What am I 
exactly doing in it? I don’t know. I haven’t got a clue. I think it just comes 
down to nudging the guy next to you and saying, ‘That’s the way, isn’t it?’ 
They can either agree or not agree. One is continually trying to affirm 
something with the man in the next seat.”

 