
Lesley Regan, the new president of the Royal College of Obstetricians and 
Gynaecologists <https://www.rcog.org.uk/>, is only the second woman to hold 
that office and the first in 64 years. If that seems extraordinary in a 
profession where the clients are exclusively female – as are most new doctors – 
there is no doubt that Regan will soon sweep out any lingering male bias in 
dusty college corners.

More babies face health risks due to obese parents, experts warn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/12/more-babies-face-health-risks-due-to-obese-parents-experts-warn>
Regan, 60, a professor of obstetrics and gynaecology at Imperial College 
London, is straight-talking and robust and keen to help prevent the disasters 
that can wreak havoc in women’s lives, from unwantedteenage pregnancy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/18/how-uk-halved-teenage-pregnancy-rate-public-health-strategy>
 toobesity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/12/more-babies-face-health-risks-due-to-obese-parents-experts-warn>
, which can end in problems in childbirth for both mother and baby, or before 
that, in miscarriage – her own area of research.

“If we were able to persuade the next cohort of 20-year-old girls that their 
pregnancies would be immeasurably safer and better if they lost weight by doing 
some more exercise, ate more sensibly and stopped smoking, what a contribution 
that would be,” she says.

She heads a battalion of people who could make a difference. “We shouldn’t 
underestimate how much the members and fellows of this college can do, because 
there’s 14,000 of us and we’re growing. About half of us are not in the UK, but 
across the world. That’s a lot of people looking after girls and women at 
regular times in their life course,” she says.

Her chosen field looks after more than half the population (51%) at some point 
in their lives and manages “some of the most contentious and sensitive issues 
in medicine, which can no longer be swept under the carpet,” she said in a 
barnstorming address on her accession to the presidency. “We have to persuade 
the government that the health and wealth of a nation is determined by the 
health of its girls and women.”

She is an unapologetic interventionist. Consultants in most specialities wait 
for people to come to them with health problems. But in her field, you have 
many chances to get in first. When women are pregnant, they are receptive, she 
says. They want the best for their baby. “I think we need to use 
those opportunities of meeting with them before pregnancy, during pregnancy and 
then after the pregnancy to talk about other factors which are going to help 
them live healthy lives in the future.”

We have to persuade the government that the health of a nation is determined 
by the health of its girls and women

She means not only talking about smoking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/sep/10/mothers-smoking-pregnancy-stress>
 and contraception and – very importantly –mental health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/19/pregnancy-mental-health-birth-childbirth>
, but taking the bull by the horns and warning young women that they need to 
lose some weight. It’s a conversation some doctors shy away from. Not Regan. “I 
do certainly [tell my patients]. And I sometimes get myself into trouble. 
Sometimes people who are very overweight get very, very defensive about it. But 
I do think it’s very important and I think I have a responsibility to do that.”

She had just come from explaining to one of her patients (she is also a 
consultant at St Mary’s hospital, London) that fat is not padding. “Fat is an 
organ. It produces all sorts of chemicals and it’s going to affect the quality 
of the way she ovulates, the way she implants her embryo – and if she can get 
down to a normalBMI 
<http://www.nhs.uk/Livewell/loseweight/Pages/BodyMassIndex.aspx> (body mass 
index) or certainly down to 30, then she’s going to dramatically improve her 
outcomes,” she says. And if young women can get down to a normal BMI –18.5 to 
25 is considered healthy 
<http://www.thecalculatorsite.com/health/bmicalculator.php> – before they get 
pregnant, “their deliveries are so much simpler”, she adds.

Around 15-20% of pregnant women are now very overweight or obese 
<http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/pregnancy-and-baby/pages/overweight-pregnant.aspx>
 – getting on for one in five. Hospitals have had to invest in special beds, 
she says. That, together with women having babies at an older age, means there 
are many more complicated pregnancies than in the past.

She talks of three life stages: adolescence, the reproductive era and the 
years after the menopause.Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women>
 will spend roughly 12 years in the first, 35 in the second and the longest of 
all – 40 years or more – in the post-reproductive years as we all lead longer 
lives.

It is important to get in early. She wants the government to invest in girls. 
“Unless we’re going to improve the way teenagerslearn about sex and 
relationships 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2015/mar/24/sex-education-uk-teenagers-pregnancy-sexually-transmitted-infections>
, they are going to continue to have unplanned pregnancies at a very early age. 
Then they drop out of secondary education and they rarely go back, and this 
whole cycle continues; and as we all know, the epidemiological and sociological 
statistics are frightening. The inequalities are always greatest in those who 
are poorest and most poorly educated,” she says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fpregnancy-childbirth-obesity-smoking-tell-the-truth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fefd3b6b1d7718ff0999ab1d01601d71e601e6599%2F0_127_4287_2572%2F4287.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lesley%20Regan%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20have%20a%20responsibility%20to%20tell%20pregnant%20women%20the%20truth%E2%80%99%20%7C%20Sarah%20Boseley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fpregnancy-childbirth-obesity-smoking-tell-the-truth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lesley%20Regan%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20have%20a%20responsibility%20to%20tell%20pregnant%20women%20the%20truth%E2%80%99%20%7C%20Sarah%20Boseley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fpregnancy-childbirth-obesity-smoking-tell-the-truth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fefd3b6b1d7718ff0999ab1d01601d71e601e6599%2F0_127_4287_2572%2F4287.jpg>
 ‘Teenage mothers drop out of education and rarely go back. The inequalities 
are always greatest in those who are poorest and most poorly educated.’ 
Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
She has been tremendously influenced by Sir Michael Marmot 
<http://marmot-review.blogspot.co.uk/>, who as a leading epidemiology professor 
at UCL has pioneered research on health inequalities. “Why is it we treat 
people, only to put them back into the place where they got ill?” she asks. 
Marmot said that only a third of our health outcomes are attributable to 
doctors and other medical staff. “Two thirds comes from all the social and 
epidemiological factors present where somebody is born and lives and where they 
are educated. It’s absolutely phenomenal.”

She believes David Cameron should have made sex education in schools 
statutory, so that no parent can opt their daughter out on the basis of 
religion. We cannot afford to go on as we are, she says, with high rates of 
teen pregnancies (although this is currently going down) and stillbirths – 
predominantly among the young – putting the UK at thebottom end of the European 
league 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/07/rate-of-stillbirths-in-uk-higher-than-poland-croatia-and-estonia>
.

Women should know it makes sense to plan their family, she says. “Women who 
space their pregnancies out by 24 months or more just have better outcomes – 
and those children have better outcomes. I think it’s just completely 
incontrovertible. It’s so persuasive.”

There is much more to do, also, to help women through the post-reproductive 
years of life. “I’m probably going to spend more of my life, because of the 
longevity of my generation, in the post-menopausal state rather than the 
reproductive years,” she says. “Most women like me don’t just want a long life 
– they want a life with good quality health.” That means advising women to do 
weight-bearing exercise to avoid osteoporosis and not put on the pounds, but it 
also means addressing taboos such as incontinence.

Regan is good at shattering taboos. It’s why she specialised in finding the 
causes of miscarriage when she started in medicine. And she will continue to 
tell it as it is.

Curriculum vitae

Age 60

Lives west London

Family Twin daughters, aged 24 Education Lady Eleanor Holles school, Hampton, 
Middlesex; Royal Free Hospital Medical School London

Career 1996-present: head of obstetrics and gynaecology, Imperial College at 
St Mary’s hospital and deputy head of surgery and cancer, Imperial College 
London; 1990-96: consultant and senior lecturer in obstetrics and gynaecology, 
St Mary’s hospital, London; 1986-90: director of medical studies, Girton 
College, University of Cambridge; 1986-90: senior registrar, Addenbrooke’s 
hospital, Cambridge; 1987-89: senior research associate, Medical Research 
Council; embryo and gamete research group, University of Cambridge

Public life Chair, Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists; chair, 
National Confidential Enquiry into Patient Outcome and Death; co-director of 
the UK pregnancy Baby Bio Bank; trustee, CHARM (The Charity for Research into 
Miscarriage)

Publications and broadcasts The books Miscarriage: What Every Woman Needs to 
Know and YourPregnancy <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/pregnancy> 
Week by Week; and a series of eight documentaries on health-related topics for 
BBC2 Horizon.

Interests classical music and opera, Proms season ticket holder
 