
Are we quite sure we’re against gentrification, the urban phenomenon routinely 
blamed for everything held to be destroying London’s soul, from high housing 
costs, to corporatised shopping streets, to the pricing out of artists and 
other creative folk, to the alleged “social cleansing” of the poor? Do we 
absolutely know that gentrification is to blame for such bad things? Do we 
really know what we mean by the word?

Its most popular deployment is familiar: it disparages the effects of an 
influx into neighbourhoods “with potential” of newcomers who are wealthier than 
those already there. At its most pejorative it characterises economic and 
demographic change in London – especially InnerLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> - as the colonisation by wealthy people 
of working class areas with high percentages of ethnic minority residents who 
are “pushed out” as a result.

This story has become firmly entrenched among the metropolitan left and 
beyond. Resistance has been declared. Hostility is aimed at estate agents, 
property developers and local councils deemed too friendly with them. 
Campaigners vow to defend “the community” and what they say are its wishes 
against the ravenous encroachments of “the rich”.

The value of all this is that it highlights genuine anxieties about change and 
the current rapid pace of it, many of them easy to sympathise with. But that 
value is limited. The analysis that drives it may not be quite as solid or as 
righteous as it thinks.

Gentrification in London is not new 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davehillblog/2013/mar/31/regenerating-london-gentrification-happens>
. It has been going on for decades, beginning in the 1960s when bits of the 
dirty old post-war city began to swing and adventurous young architects started 
doing up dirt cheap Georgian squares. By the early-1980s, Alexei Sayle had a 
joke about entire streets in Stoke Newington falling down because all the 
middle-class people who’d bought terraced houses there chose the same weekend 
to knock their front and back rooms into one.

Thirty years on, that same joke might be made about Leyton, Peckham, Deptford 
or Plaistow. There is comedy too in the dislike gentrification inspires. Some 
of its fiercest opponents are itsinstigators 
<http://www.economist.com/blogs/blighty/2014/04/gentrification-london>: the 
media types and liberal young professionals of every kind who settle the wild 
and “edgy” urban frontiers, not necessarily to the delight of people already 
there, and in so doing quite literally prepare the ground for the value 
“uplift” to come. The funny part is thatthis truth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/davehillblog/2015/apr/28/brixton-anti-gentrification-protest-reclaim-foxtons-estate-agent>
 escapes them.

There is, though, a broader and a deeper irony. It is that these forces of 
change accused of ruining London are products of its revitalisation. People 
forget that for four decades the city was bombed out, smogged up and in 
decline. The population of Inner London still hasn’t recovered to its levels of 
1939. Today, people bewail a “hollowing out” attributed to rich foreigners who 
allegedly “buy to leave” in large numbers. It’s worth remembering that ordinary 
people have migrated from the centre of London to the suburbs and beyond for 
many, many years, often eagerly. Skilled manual workers who headed for the New 
Towns in the 1950s were searching for the promised land.

By the start of the present century, the whole dynamic had changed. London had 
become a wellspring of economic growth, gushing money from itsturbo-charged 
Square Mile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/23/anniversary-of-big-bang-on-the-lse-tinged-with-post-brexit-anxiety?CMP=share_btn_tw>
. Where there is profit, there are opportunities. Where there are 
opportunities, there are people eager to take them – in London’s case, more and 
more people, from near and far, many of them needing somewhere to set up shop, 
all of them needing somewhere to live.


Demand for space is the seed of gentrification. Its growth stems from a 
failure to meet that demand. Squeezed by rising prices, those too affluent to 
qualify for social housing but not affluent enough to buy in newly-expensive 
areas – sometimes the very areas where they were born – look further afield. 
Opposition to gentrification sometimes sounds like the way a particular section 
of the London middle-class complains about not being able to get a mortgage.

When we look at London’s unacceptable poverty, especially its child poverty, 
should gentrification be held responsible or is doing so a distraction from the 
job of addressing the issue properly? Assertions that it is “pushing out” the 
poor in London look less persuasive in light of the very high levels of social 
housing that still exist in the classic gentrified boroughs of north London. In
Camden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/13/anti-gentrification-campaign-camden-social-cleansing-london>
, 35% of all housing is for social rent, inIslington 
<https://www.islington.gov.uk//~/media/sharepoint-lists/public-records/housing/businessplanning/policies/20142015/20140603housingstrategy20142019>
 it’s 42% and inHackney 
<http://hackney.gov.uk/Assets/Documents/Hackney-Profile.pdf>, 44%. Although 
poverty rates have fallen in those boroughs, the absolute numbers of poor 
people living in themremain high 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2015/dec/22/if-londons-poor-are-being-purged-why-are-there-more-of-them>
.

There are good arguments that gentrified areas meet poor people’s needs less 
well, asshops become posher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jan/29/new-eastenders-gentrified-must-watch>
 and more niche. But there are also good ones for saying that theybenefit 
<http://londonist.com/2016/07/why-gentrification-isn-t-always-bad-for-london> 
from middle-class pressure for better schools and public spaces. Some studies 
in the United States, focussing on the changing ethnic compositions of urban 
areas, havefound 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/politics/2015/01/the_gentrification_myth_it_s_rare_and_not_as_bad_for_the_poor_as_people.html>
 that black people actually moved out of those that had gentrified less than 
they departed those that hadn’t.

It’s time to get our gentrification story straight. Edward Clarke of the UK 
thinktank Centre for Citieswrites 
<http://www.centreforcities.org/blog/in-defence-of-gentrification/> that the 
debate should not be reduced to “a simple battle between plucky communities and 
greedy gentrifiers”, stressing that this “fails to recognise that the roles and 
functions of urban neighbourhoods have always changed over time and within a 
city” or to acknowledge that gentrifying “new work” businesses can create new 
jobs and improve wages across the board.

He adds that “the myth that creative incomers are to blame” for rising housing 
costs and commercial rents works against addressing the true root of the 
problem, which he sums up as “poor city management”. To improve this, Clarke 
argues for better skills training for local people, more planning and 
tax-raising powers to be devolved to local politicians and more land, including 
a small portion of green belt, being made available for building.

The thing we call gentrification raises large issues for London - and all the 
UK’s growing cities - and opposing it like trying to hold back the sea. Dealing 
with it requires aconstructive, practical, flexible political response 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/may/20/gentrificationnothanks> 
that helps to shape this force of urban change to best and most equitable 
effect. The politics of protest aren’t up to it.
 