
Levittown isn’t a single building but a development of more than 17,000 
detached houses. The project – started in 1947 as America’s prototypical 
postwar planned community – has outlived its heartiest supporters and harshest 
detractors to stand today as something more complicated than a monument to the 
glory of the American dream, or to the blandness and conformity to which that 
dream led.

Like so much else in 20th-century America, Levittown began as a shrewd 
business move. The homebuilding firm of Levitt and Sons had specialised in 
upper middle class dwellings on New York’s Long Island before the second world 
war, only to be curtailed by the conflict’s enormous consumption of 
construction resources.

But then the founder’s son, William Levitt, came home from the navy with an 
idea: every young veteran returning to the United States would need a home. 
Couldn’t the mass-production strategies he’d learned putting up military 
housing give it to them?

And so Levitt and Sons purchased a seven square mile tract of Long Island’s 
potato and onion fields and got to work, putting up all of Levittown’s 
residences between 1947 and 1951.

No one who owns his own house and lot can be a Communist. He has too much to do
William Levitt 
Famously building one house every 16 minutes at the construction’s peak, using 
systems well-known in American automobile manufacturing but new to 
homebuilding. A variety of non-union subcontractors and “unskilled” workers 
moved from house to house, each performing one of 26 highly specialised steps 
in the overall assembly process – all using thoroughly standardised materials, 
all purchased directly from their manufacturers.


“We are not builders,” said straight-talking Levitt, the operation’s 
mastermind. “We are manufacturers.” He even went so far as to declare his 
company “the General Motors of the housing industry”, providing families the 
domestic component of the American dream, just as GM provided them the 
vehicular one. And they did so with the same aesthetic uniformity as the auto 
industry in its early years, initially stamping out house after house on the 
same architectural plan, drawn up by brother Alfred Levitt, albeit with subtle 
variations of colour, window treatment and roofline.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Flevittown-america-prototypical-suburb-history-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F22%2F1429703561519%2Fe58b6d4d-c2e2-454f-a9e8-fc7f1b1d6393-2060x1644.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Levittown%2C%20the%20prototypical%20American%20suburb%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2025&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Flevittown-america-prototypical-suburb-history-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Levittown%2C%20the%20prototypical%20American%20suburb%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2025&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Flevittown-america-prototypical-suburb-history-cities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F22%2F1429703561519%2Fe58b6d4d-c2e2-454f-a9e8-fc7f1b1d6393-2060x1644.jpeg>
 Construction of Levittown was famously quick: a home was built every 16 
minutes. Photograph: Alamy 
Even so, William Levitt called his product – which first sold for $7,990 with 
a 5% down payment (0% for veterans) and came with a built-in television set and 
hi-fi – “the best house in the US”. But certain observers had grave 
reservations: Eric Larrabee in Harper’s magazine called “the little Levitt 
house American suburbia reduced to its logical absurdity”, and urban historian 
Lewis Mumford described the community they constituted as a “uniform 
environment from which escape is impossible”.


Some sections of American society found entrance to the scheme impossible. For 
decades, Levittown’s population was 100% white – at first because of covenants 
that restricted any minorities from buying in, and thus supposedly sending the 
surrounding home values into free-fall. “The community has an almost antiseptic 
air,” said an otherwise admiring 1950 Time magazine profile of Levitt and 
Levittown. Brown v Board of Education 
<http://www.pbs.org/wnet/supremecourt/rights/landmark_brown.html> and the 
nationwide racial integration that followed hardly touched Levittown, and even 
today its demographic profile still reads 94.15% white.

By 1950, when 80% of Levittown’s men commuted to jobs in Manhattan, the 
development had set an example for countless American bedroom communities still 
to come. They provided settings to the novelists who got their start in the 
mid-20th century, some of whom would famously inveigh against their stifling 
social atmosphere. Richard Yates, whose novelRevolutionary Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/revolutionary-road> offers a harrowing 
indictment of American life during Levittown’s heyday, wrote of that era’s 
“general lust for conformity”, a “blind, desperate clinging to safety and 
security at any price, as exemplified politically in the Eisenhower 
administration and the McCarthy witch hunts”.


Levitt, for his part, assured the McCarthyites that “no one who owns his own 
house and lot can be a Communist. He has too much to do.” Though he built 
inexpensive, fully functioning houses and built them well – the vast majority 
of them still stand today – Levitt left more or less everything else involved 
in the creation of Levittown to its new suburban homesteaders. Being American, 
after all, many of them set about customising their freshly built homes, 
whether of the standard utilitarian Cape Cod design or the newer models 
(Colonial, Rancher and Country Clubber) that followed.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Flevittown-america-prototypical-suburb-history-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F22%2F1429703665693%2Fbb7fd84c-cbf2-4df5-9fe5-005f347d3c35-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Levittown%2C%20the%20prototypical%20American%20suburb%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2025&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Flevittown-america-prototypical-suburb-history-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Levittown%2C%20the%20prototypical%20American%20suburb%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2025&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Flevittown-america-prototypical-suburb-history-cities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F22%2F1429703665693%2Fbb7fd84c-cbf2-4df5-9fe5-005f347d3c35-2060x1236.jpeg>
 By 1950, 80% percent of Levittown’s male residents commuted to jobs in 
Manhattan. Photograph: Bettmann/Corbis 
“Sure they were little boxes when we first started,” says the narrator of WD 
Wetherell’s short story The Man Who Loved Levittown. But “the minute we got our 
mitts on them we started remodelling them, adding stuff, changing them around”. 
He drifts into a rhapsodic recollection of “the 50s. The early 60s. We were all 
going the same direction … Thanks to Big Bill Levitt we all had a chance. You 
talk about dreams. Hell, we had ours. We had ours like nobody before or since 
ever had theirs. SEVEN THOUSAND BUCKS! ONE HUNDRED DOLLARS DOWN! We were 
cowboys out there. We were the pioneers.’”


But this proud Levitt owner, looking back on what seems like a 
quintessentially American exercise in individualism, also remembers that “there 
wasn’t anything we wouldn’t do for each other. Babysit, drive someone 
somewhere, maybe help out with a mortgage payment someone couldn’t meet.” Not 
only did the first generation of Levittown life have its communitarian aspects, 
it had actual regulations, such as Levitt’s insistence that no homeowner fence 
off a private yard from the shared green, that now seem at least faintly 
socialist.


Pruitt-Igoe: the troubled high-rise that came to define urban America – a 
history of cities in 50 buildings, day 21
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/apr/22/pruitt-igoe-high-rise-urban-america-history-cities>
Levittown’s very existence, in fact, owes to a rare act of American socialism: 
the 1948 Housing Bill, which loosened billions of dollars in credit and gave 
every American the chance to get one of those five-percent-down, 30-year 
mortgages in the first place. City-dwellers found that they could purchase 
their very own “modern” home just as easily as they could rent a walk-up 
apartment, and homebuilders like Levitt found themselves in a booming business 
servicing a seemingly insatiable demand.


This government-sponsored encouragement of suburban residence – which, to an 
extent, continues to this day – did its part to reduce American downtowns in 
the second half of the 20th century to little more than collections of office 
buildings. Levittown and its descendants (three of which Levitt himself built 
in Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and Puerto Rico, all of which he also named 
Levittown) lured a generation out of the cities. Their children grew up shaped 
by these secure and innovative if sometimes alienating environments – and went 
on themselves to raise the generation that has made a return, full-circle, to 
the city.


• Which other buildings in the world tell stories about urban history? Share 
your own pictures and descriptions with GuardianWitness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/mar/23/50-buildings-great-stories-urban-history>
, on Twitter and Instagram using #hoc50 or let us know suggestions in the 
comments below
 