
A married couple who were abducted and flown to Tripoli in a joint UK-Libyan 
rendition operation have spoken of their distress at a decision by crown 
prosecutors that nobody should be charged over the crime.

Fatima Boudchar and her husband, Abdel Hakim Belhaj, an opponent of Muammar 
Gaddafi, were abducted in Thailand following a tipoff from Mark Allen, then 
head of counter-terrorism at MI6, andflown to Libya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/apr/08/special-report-britain-rendition-libya>
 a few days before anofficial visit 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/3566545.stm> to the country by Tony 
Blair in 2004.

A few days after the visit, in a second UK-Libyan rendition operation, another 
Gaddafi opponent, Sami al-Saadi, was abducted in Hong Kong and flown to Tripoli
along with his wife and four young children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/oct/24/britain-family-gaddafi-legal>.

Allen later signed a fax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/interactive/2012/apr/08/libya-moussa-koussa> 
to Gaddafi’s intelligence chief,Moussa Koussa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/moussa-koussa>, in which he claimed credit 
for the tipoff that led to Belhaj’s abduction. Another fax, from the CIA to 
Koussa’s office, outlined that agency’s understanding of the UK’s role in the 
rendition of Saadi and his family.

The correspondence came to light 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2011/09/08/us/uk-documents-reveal-libya-rendition-details>
 during the 2011 revolution that toppled Gaddafi. A British police 
investigation launched the following January uncovered evidence that Allen had 
sought political authority for some of his actions.

Despite this, the Crown Prosecution Service announced on Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/09/mi6-officers-not-charges-rendition-of-libyan-families-abdel-hakim-belhaj>
 that it did not have sufficient evidence to bring criminal charges.

Boudchar expressed anger at the CPS decision. “I can’t believe it,” she said. 
“I was heavily pregnant when Britain helped kidnap and deliver me to Gaddafi. 
My baby weighed four pounds when he was born. I wonder how a British mother 
would have felt in my situation, if, while she was still carrying her baby, a 
gang of kidnappers seized her, took her to a secret cell, tortured her, taped 
her to a stretcher, and delivered her and her baby to a horrendous dictator.

“I hoped for better from British justice than today’s result, and will keep 
fighting until my husband, my family, and my son receive it.”

Belhaj added: “I am very disappointed in the decision. The evidence of the 
British role in my family’s ordeal is overwhelming. I saw many of the pages 
with my own eyes. For many years I have waited and put my faith in British 
justice, but so far I have seen from the government nothing but secrecy and 
cover-ups.

“They say the rule of law in Britain reaches everyone, even the most powerful. 
Today I wonder whether that idea was a myth.”

Boudchar spent four months in one of Gaddafi’s prisons. Saadi’s wife and 
children – the youngest a girl aged six – spent two and a half months in prison.

The two men were held for six years, and they say they were repeatedly 
tortured. Both have also alleged that they were interrogated by British 
intelligence officers.

Some Scotland Yard officers are said to be furious at the CPS decision. The 
police declined to issue a joint statement with the CPS and instead issued a 
separate statement in which they said their own response to the kidnappings had 
been a “thorough and penetrating investigation” that had lasted two and a half 
years and had been conducted “without fear or favour”.

The investigation had resulted in the CPS being presented with a file 
containing 28,000 pages, the statement added, and the decision not to prosecute 
had been taken by the CPS alone.

Belhaj and Saadi have indicated through their lawyers that they will challenge 
the CPS’s decision under thevictims’ right to review scheme 
<http://www.cps.gov.uk/victims_witnesses/victims_right_to_review/>. If that 
fails to reverse the outcome, they could subsequently initiate a judicial 
review of the process.

The CPS said it had no comment to make on the couple’s criticisms.
 