
Jennifer Atim was abducted by the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) when she was 
14. She agreed to go with them to save her parents from being murdered – though 
they were later killed by a second group of rebels – and was “given” a husband, 
a 60-year-old man who raped Atim regularly and was so paranoid she would run 
away, he made Atim go to the toilet with him.

Atim, now 33, was one of an estimated 25,000 children who were abducted by 
Joseph Kony’s LRA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/mar/08/joseph-kony-lords-resistance-army>
, which is believed to have killed 12,000 people in Uganda since 1985. The 
Ugandan government claims the LRAhas been defeated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/mar/27/dominic-ongwen-war-crimes-trial-former-child-soldier-icc-uganda>
 and the internally displaced people’s (IDP) camps, to which many of the former 
child soldiers went, have been closed for a decade. But for many of these 
former soldiers, trauma and stigma still linger.

Tragedy in Uganda: Joseph Kony massacre survivors tell their stories
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/12/joseph-kony-uganda-massacres-survivors-stories>
“People would move out the way of me and call me stupid or mad,” says Atim. 
“When I had asked someone to help fetch water for me, the neighbours would say: 
‘Why are you going to fetch for that girl? She’s a killer, she destroys 
everything.’”

When she first came out of the IDP camps, Atim, along with her reunited 
siblings, would dig plots of land for farmers, barely making enough money to 
buy basics such as soap, paraffin and sugar.

Then Atim heard about a women’s group called Warocho Kwan Wwawa, which means 
“renovate our lives” in Acholi. Set up by the UK-based charitySend a Cow 
<https://www.sendacow.org/>, best known for its initiatives to help smallholder 
farmers through training, seeds and livestock loans, the charity also employs 
members of the local community and social workers to help people in northern 
Uganda rehabilitate and reintegrate into everyday life.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Flife-after-joseph-kony-uganda-women-rebuilding-lives-child-soldiers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff78224c39a4e894739d088fb80b86faf8245fb9%2F0_0_2841_1705%2F2841.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Life%20after%20Kony%3A%20how%20Uganda's%20women%20are%20rebuilding%20their%20lives&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Flife-after-joseph-kony-uganda-women-rebuilding-lives-child-soldiers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Life%20after%20Kony%3A%20how%20Uganda%27s%20women%20are%20rebuilding%20their%20lives&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Flife-after-joseph-kony-uganda-women-rebuilding-lives-child-soldiers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff78224c39a4e894739d088fb80b86faf8245fb9%2F0_0_2841_1705%2F2841.jpg>
 A Lord’s Resistance Army fighter in 2006. An estimated 25,000 children were 
abducted by Joseph Kony’s rebel fighters. Photograph: Stephen Morrison/EPA 
“This was the only group where people would not stigmatise me as there were 
people here with the same problems,” says Atim.

One Saturday morning in Koro village, north Uganda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/uganda>, Warocho Kwan Wwawa members are 
meeting. The young are poring over swatches of fabric to turn into bags and 
light maroon and grey cloths for school shirts and dresses. Later there will be 
drums and traditional dancing as well as time to go over the account book’s 
tally of milk sales and raise any farming business, not to mention discussion 
of their next football match.

Uganda attempts to treat the malignant disease of inequality | Alon Mwesigwa
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/23/uganda-disease-inequality-universal-healthcare>
In addition to the money made from farming and supplying milk to the Gulu 
Women’s Dairy Co-operative, Warocho Kwan Wwawa has contracts to make uniforms 
for two primary schools; as a group they can make up to 700,000 Ugandan 
shillings (£158) on market day. They are buying machines to make sweaters for a 
further two schools and also have plans to acquire land on the roadside to set 
up a tailoring training centre for local women and to capitalise on passing 
South Sudanese trade.

 Loan rates from the co-op to women in the group make new initiatives easier 
to accomplish. They provide loans at a 10% interest rate compared with 25% from 
commercial banks and 36% frommicrofinance initiatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jun/10/the-microfinance-delusion-who-really-wins>
. In Uganda, and in the north in particular, charitable initiatives and 
co-operatives are nothing new but what makes Warocho Kwan Wwawa stand out is 
its forward-thinking approach. The women are not just healing from their past, 
they are looking to the future too.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Flife-after-joseph-kony-uganda-women-rebuilding-lives-child-soldiers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01e9d70176e9a8df8143e03c96b7d45834e74ea2%2F0_0_4272_2563%2F4272.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Life%20after%20Kony%3A%20how%20Uganda's%20women%20are%20rebuilding%20their%20lives&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Flife-after-joseph-kony-uganda-women-rebuilding-lives-child-soldiers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Life%20after%20Kony%3A%20how%20Uganda%27s%20women%20are%20rebuilding%20their%20lives&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Flife-after-joseph-kony-uganda-women-rebuilding-lives-child-soldiers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01e9d70176e9a8df8143e03c96b7d45834e74ea2%2F0_0_4272_2563%2F4272.jpg>
 Members of Warocho Kwan Wwawa, which means ‘renovate our lives’ in Acholi. 
Photograph: Aggrey Nshekanabo/Send a Cow 
One of their members is Aciro Grace, 32, who was abducted by the LRA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jun/07/joseph-kony-united-nations-report>
 as a child. She conceived a daughter through rape, however 13-year-old Lydia 
does not live with her mother any more. Grace’s second husband refuses to let 
the child of an LRA rebel live under his roof.

Grace lives with his family, but they barely talk to her, not only because of 
her past but because the couple have not yet managed to conceive. She fears he 
will stop supporting her financially if they cannot have a child soon.

 If Grace were to leave her husband she is secure in the knowledge that her 
friends in Warocho Kwan Wwawa would look after her, and that the money she 
makes through the group would sustain her.

 “My husband and I have been together for five years and he still supports me 
but I see no future,” she says. “We cannot have a child and it’s a problem 
because his family talk about me. I can visit my daughter but, as her mother, 
she should be my responsibility. By joining the group, even though people abuse 
me I have somewhere to go.”
 