
It takes all of about five seconds before you realise that Hungarian composer 
György Ligeti's Le Grand Macabre is an opera of the unexpected. The piece 
starts with a prelude – a conventional enough idea, except that instead of 
being played by the orchestra, it's scored for 12 car horns, performed by the 
hands and feet of three percussionists. It's a surrealcoup de musique that 
starts Le Grand Macabre on its absurdist journey, in which you meet a 
perennially pissed antihero called Piet the Pot, a sado- masochistic 
astronomer, a pair of sex- obsessed lovers, a layabout prince, and a couple of 
preening, pernicious politicians. All of them are subject to the whims of 
Nekrotzar, the despotic Grand Macabre himself, who has come to visit 
annihilation on the people of Breughelland, "the entirely run-down but 
nevertheless carefree and thriving principality" in which the opera is set. 
Nekrotzar doesn't succeed, however, as Piet gets him drunk, and instead of 
commanding the minions of hell to raze Breughelland to the ground, he misses 
his own apocalypse and falls off a rocking horse.

Ligeti wrote his mock-apocalyptic opera in the 1970s, and, three years after 
his death, the piece has its first UK production for 27 years at English 
NationalOpera <https://www.theguardian.com/music/opera> in London. Le Grand 
Macabre is Ligeti's only opera, it's the longest piece he ever wrote, and it's 
one of the few postwar operas to have earned a firm place in the repertoires of 
opera companies, with more than 30 productions since its premiere. The opera's 
wild, scatological humour, its grotesque fantasy, biting satire, and above all, 
the directness and invention of its music make it one of the most riotous 
experiences you can have in an opera house.

But the significance of Le Grand Macabre isn't just that it's the most 
successful piece of music theatre by any avant-garde composer. It's also that, 
with typically elliptical humour, Ligeti holds up a mirror to late-20th-century 
society, politics, and relationships, and the image it throws back is full of 
unpleasant truths that still resonate today: politicians from the Black and 
White parties whose policies are interchangeable, a docile and selfish 
populace, the vaunting ambition of humourless bureaucrats, the seduction of 
morbid, millennial fantasies – it's all there.

Yet if you rewind to the mid-60s, when the opera was first commissioned by 
Royal Swedish Opera, the question is why Ligeti would want to write an opera at 
all. For any self-respecting modernist composer of Ligeti's generation (he was 
born in 1923), an opera house was the last place you wanted to be seen. At that 
stage, avant-garde musicians, spearheaded by Pierre Boulez and Karlheinz 
Stockhausen, shunned opera as a form stultified by convention and crippled by 
artistic conservatism, an emblem of the old musical order they had spent their 
compositional lives trying to dismantle.

Ligeti knew both Stockhausen and Boulez. He escaped to the west from Budapest 
after the October uprising of 1956, hiding from the Soviets under postbags in a 
train carriage, and ended up working with Stockhausen in his electronic studio 
in Cologne. He met Boulez at the summer schools for new music in Darmstadt, 
where as a lecturer and writer he exposed contradictions in Boulez's 
compositions and theories, resulting in bitterness between them that took 
decades to heal. Ligeti's own music put him on a different course to these two 
masters of avant-garde music. His central problem with both was their use of 
pre-compositional systems. When I interviewed him in 2003, Ligeti described 
Stockhausen's approach as "like a Soviet five-year plan. He has to have this 
planification. Nobody in Hungary would think this way."

Ligeti the man and the musician resisted ideological doctrines in all their 
forms. He grew up as a Hungarian Jew in what was then Romanian Transylvania, 
and was the only member of his family not to be transported to the 
concentration camps. Only his mother survived. In Budapest after the war, he 
found one ideological nightmare replaced by another as the Soviets took 
control, and then, in the west, met a group of composers who were deliberately 
shackling themselves to musical and compositional dogmas. It seemed crazy to 
Ligeti.

All of this affects Le Grand Macabre, which teems with characters that 
satirise the people, politics, and systems that terrorised Ligeti's life: 
there's a chief of the secret police called the Gepopo, a part sung by a 
soprano that's full of hysterical, nonsensical violence, and Nekrotzar himself 
is a brilliantly drawn parody of the death-obsessed dictators of the 20th 
century. Ligeti's synopsis describes him as a "sinister, shady, demagogic 
figure, humourless, pretentious, and with an unshakeable sense of mission". The 
lugubrious, self-important music Ligeti writes for him sends him up just as 
ruthlessly as the moment in the story when his dreams of genocide go up in 
smoke.

The text is based on a work by the little-known Flemish writer Michel de 
Ghelderode, La Balade du Grand Macabre. Ligeti, looking for something "cruel 
and frightening based on the pictures of Breughel and Bosch", could not have 
found better source material in De Ghelderode's grotesque cavalcade of a play. 
With his co-librettist, Michael Meschke, who also directed the first 
production, Ligeti updated the drama's bawdiness and brutality, writing lines 
like "Stupid dickhead make your prick red!" They originally called the two 
lovers Spermando and Clitoria (they're now less offensively titled Amando and 
Amanda), and together they created a text that sends up such operatic 
conventions as virtuosic coloratura arias and comic ensembles.

But that's nothing to what the music does. Ligeti's score is a gleeful two 
fingers to virtually every major opera composer – the prelude for car-horns 
mimics Monteverdi, there are passages that send up Mozart, parody Rossini, 
pilfer from Offenbach and take the mickey out of Verdi – but it's also a 
gesture of defiance to the ideologues of the avant-garde. If there was any 
possibility of writing music for the opera house in the late-20th-century, the 
end-point seemed to have been reached in Mauricio Kagel's unclassifiable 
stage-work, Staatstheater. "A masterpiece of musical anti-theatre," Ligeti 
called it when he saw this piece of non-linear narrative and gesture in 1971. 
In contrast, what Ligeti was doing in Le Grand Macabre was composing an 
"anti-anti-opera", as his biographer Richard Steinitz says. And "since two 
successive 'antis' cancel each other out, an 'anti-anti-opera' must be … well, 
opera!".

And that's the point about Le Grand Macabre: it works brilliantly in the opera 
house. Its dramatic and musical grotesqueries aren't just there to create a 
clever-clever contemporary parody, they create a work that has a complete 
expressive world. The music, chaotic on the surface, is rigorously controlled 
by Ligeti, nowhere more so than in the final Passacaglia, a severe baroque form 
that is used to stage the work's moral: "Fear not to die, good people all!/ No 
one knows when his hour will fall!/ And when it comes, then let it be/ 
Farewell, till then in cheerfulness!"

Ligeti was almost as precise in his vision of what Le Grand Macabre should 
look like on stage as he was about how it should sound, but although he was 
pleased with the work's success, he saw only one production that he felt did 
the piece justice. (Richard Steinitz reports that no version of the opera has 
ever realised Ligeti's incredibly detailed stage directions.) The nadir came in 
1997, with the Salzburg premiere of the revised version of the opera, directed 
by Peter Sellars. Ligeti dissociated himself from the staging, a wilful 
updating of Le Grand Macabre to a post-nuclear future. Sellars's production was 
due to reopen the Royal Opera House a decade ago, but Covent Garden cancelled 
it at the last minute.

So will ENO fare any better this time around? The signs are good. The show 
is produced by Catalan company La Fura dels Baus, and premiered in Brussels, to 
rave reviews. A teaser on YouTube reveals some of what's in store for London 
audiences: a gigantic maquette of a reclining woman, in whose innards and out 
of whose orifices the drama is staged. It looks like a properly Boschian 
interpretation of the piece, a garden of earthly delights and disgusts that 
Ligeti himself might finally have endorsed.

Le Grand Macabre opens at English National Opera, London on 17 September. Box 
office: 0871 911 0200.
 