
It started with bigger gaps between Toblerone’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/08/toblerone-gets-more-gappy-but-its-fans-are-not-happy>
 chunky chocolate peaks, but now the Maltesers have started to disappear too.

Food manufacturing giant Mars has shrunk its sharing bags of Maltesers by 15% 
as it looks for ways to offset rising production costs. It is the latest 
example of what is being described as “shrinkflation” in the food industry, 
where packs get smaller but consumers still pay the same price.

Mars’ shift to a smaller pack size was picked up by Steve Dresser, author of 
industry blogGrocery Insight <http://www.groceryinsight.com/>, who found 103g 
packs of Maltesers on a supermarket shelf where the old shelf-edge ticket 
clearly showed the previous 121g pack size. He also pointed out that Mars had 
shrunk packs of its Galaxy Counters too.

The Brexit Toblerone sums up 2016: more troughs than peaks | Rebecca Nicholson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/08/toblerone-gap-brexit-falling-pound-2016>
A spokesman for Mars said: “Like all chocolate manufacturers, we have seen the 
cost of raw materials rise and, while we try to absorb these pressures as much 
as possible, sometimes we have to make the difficult decision to reduce the 
size of some of our products so our consumers can continue to enjoy an 
affordable treat.”

“Shrinkflation” first surfaced during the last recession and in recent years 
chocolate lovers have been increasingly shortchanged: Mars and Snickers bars 
have got smaller; a1kg Quality Street tin has slimmed down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/sep/03/quality-street-chocolates-nestle-cadbury>
 to 820g and a six-pack of Cadbury’s Creme Eggs has been whittled down to five.

This year manufacturers have faced fresh pressure with the cost of producing 
milk chocolate estimated to have risen 40% due to sharp increases in the price 
of sugar and whole milk powder.

Toblerone maker Mondelez, which also owns Cadbury, also blamed higher 
ingredient costs for cutting the weight of two bars from Toblerone’s UK range. 
It has reduced 400g bars to 360g and 170g bars to 150g to keep retail prices 
steady.
 