
Edinson Cavani scored both goals for Paris Saint-Germain as they extended 
their unbeatenLigue 1 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ligue1football> run 
to seven matches with a 2-1 win inLyon.

The Argentina international 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/23/edinson-cavani-psg-arsenal>
, who now has 18 goals for the season, put PSG in front from the penalty spot 
after half an hour but Mathieu Valbuena equalised at the start of the second 
half. That goal looked as if it might be enough for a share of the points but 
Cavani netted again nine minutes from time.

Serie A roundup: Genoa’s Giovanni Simeone stuns leaders Juventus
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/27/serie-a-roundup-genoa-giovanni-simeone-juventus>
Unai Emery’s team are now only one point behind the league leaders Nice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nice>, whom they host at the Parc des 
Princes on 11 December.

Nice missed out on the chance to restore a three-point lead at the top of 
Ligue 1 as they were held to a 1-1 draw byBastia. Despite taking the lead 
through Alassane Pléa’s early header, Nice were pegged back on the hour thanks 
to Enzo Crivelli’s fifth goal of the season.

Lucien Favre’s side twice came close to winning it late on but Malang Sarr’s 
header hit a post and Pléa, with the goal at his mercy, fired against the 
crossbar.

Ten-man Saint-Étienne came from behind to secure a 2-1 away victory over Angers
 and move up to eighth. The hosts were given a penalty on 12 minutes after 
Bryan Dabo pulled back Nicolas Pépé. Famara Diédhiou stepped up but Stéphane 
Ruffier produced a wonderful save down to his right to tip the ball round the 
post.

Angers had to wait only five minutes before Pépé put them in front after 
calmly rounding Ruffier and slotting into an unguarded net. Florentin Pogba 
headed in an equaliser with 30 minutes remaining to mount the comeback before 
Oussama Tannane sealed the win, despite Kévin Malcuit’s late red card, with a 
mazy run and finish.
 