
The absence of Brian O'Driscoll was irrelevant on a night when Warren Gatland 
himself could have stood at outside-centre, limp and all, and the outcome would 
have been no different. The British & Irish Lions destroyed the Wallabies at 
forward, mulching their scrum and overpowering them at the breakdown in what 
was a consummate team performance that emphatically delivered a first series 
victory in 16 years.

From the moment that Will Genia, the player who kept Australia in the first 
Test and turned the second, dropped Jonathan Sexton's kick-off in an act of 
gaucheness out of character with one of the game's quickest thinkers, the Lions 
were on the front foot. They won a free-kick at the subsequent scrum, ran it, 
and three phases later Alex Corbisiero, the England prop, evaded Benn 
Robinson's tackle to score near the posts At that point, the momentum in the 
series shifted firmly in favour of the tourists.

The first scrum is always a litmus test when Romain Poite referees. He 
invariably awards a free-kick or a penalty and the pack that finds itself on 
the wrong side of the former policeman's law tends to find itself cast in the 
role of sinner for the rest of the game. And so it was with the Wallabies, who 
went on to concede another free-kick and five penalties at the set piece, a 
tally that cost 19 points and the services of Ben Alexander for 10 minutes for 
collapsing. The man who the previous week had tormented Mako Vunipola was not 
to return.

Corbisiero missed the second Test because of a strained calf and he played 
like a snorting bull in this one, carrying, tackling, helping win turnovers and 
making Alexander look anything but great. He was not in the original squad, 
having been injured for most of last season, and how Australia wished it had 
stayed that way. If the Lions had been passive in Melbourne, setting out not to 
lose having gone one-up in the series, they came to conquer and so intense was 
their forward effort that Gatland for the first time emptied his bench.

He had asked every player to push themselves to the outer limit of their 
physical endurance and they did. They were physical but they were also 
resourceful. They wore down the Wallabies for the first half and moved in for 
the kill on 55 minutes.

Leigh Halfpenny, who finished the night with a Lions-record 21 points to give 
him 49 for the series, eclipsing the 41 set by his mentor Neil Jenkins in 1997, 
had made his reputation this tour with his nerveless kicking, notwithstanding 
his late miss from long range in Melbourne, but as an attacking voice he had 
been mute â€“ until the final reckoning. Australia had fought back from 19-3 down 
to 19-16 when, 12 minutes into the second-half, Kurtley Beale dinked a chip 
over the Lions' defence and picked up. He was in the Lions' 22 when Halfpenny, 
isolated in defence, tackled him to the ground and prevented the off-load. The 
move ended when Toby Faletau, who with Sean O'Brien kept smashing into the 
Wallabies' fringe defence and making the gainline his own, forced the turnover. 
Sexton's kick ahead was then caught by George North, who found O'Driscoll's 
replacement, Jonathan Davies, who was savvy from the start.

Davies was tackled into touch, but the Lions soon had the ball and when they 
switched play from right to left, Halfpenny sprinted through a gap and slipped 
a short pass to Sexton. The Lions had been billed as Wales in the buildup 
because the Six Nations champions had 10 starters, but the first two tries were 
scored by an Englishman and an Irishman, and by the end all four home unions 
were represented on the field.

With Sexton at his teasing best, it was Wales with knobs on, power and 
panache. The Lions had been criticised for being predictable and unadventurous, 
but their third try was a gem, Halfpenny swerving out of Genia's tackle and 
beating Joe Tomane for pace before freeing North. When Jamie Roberts found 
space to score his side's fourth try on 68 minutes, the prospect of a 
half-century of points saw many of the yellow-hatted figures in the stand flee 
for the exits, but the Lions had sated themselves and started counting down to 
the celebrations.

It was a remarkable finale to an oscillatory series. It was no coincidence 
that it was only with a European referee in charge that the relative 
ordinariness of Australia's forwards was exposed. George Smith's comeback 
showed, in a very different way to the case of his fellow survivor from the 
2001 series, O'Driscoll, that sentiment plays no part in professional sport. He 
survived a fearsome clash of heads with Richard Hibbard in the fifth-minute, 
which involved a trip to the concussion bin, but, with his side on the back 
foot, he was unable to influence the game.

With Israel Folau straining a hamstring 25 minutes in, Australia lost their 
main strike runner. His replacement, Jesse Mogg, made one dazzling run that 
ended when he knocked on after being tackled by Geoff Parling, but the 
Wallabies struggled to put any phases of play together. They were not just 
outgunned but outclassed, never recovering from Genia's early blemish.

Of 15 scrums set in the first-half, five resulted in a free-kick or a penalty 
for the Lions and the set piece allowed them to dictate the game. Corbisiero's 
try was followed by a Halfpenny penalty after Dan Lydiate had forced Tamone to 
hold on. In the first Test the penalty would probably have gone the other way. 
Christian Leali'ifano responded with a 25-yard penalty, but three scrums 
yielded nine points for Halfpenny in 13 minutes, the last after Alexander had 
seen yellow: when his time was up, he was replaced by Sekope Kepu.

Time was up in the first half when Australia won a five-metre scrum and James 
O'Connor broke the tackles of Sexton and Mike Phillips to score a try that 
reduced the Lions' lead to nine points. When Leali'ifano kicked two penalties 
at the start of the second-half, the Wallabies had scored 13 unanswered points 
in six minutes and the series was in the balance.

Another scrum penalty gave the Lions a six-point lead, the margin they had 
been unable to defend in Melbourne. This, though, was a team with a different 
attitude, one that had forced Australia to run four kickable penalties in the 
first-half because they knew it was a night when three-pointers would not be 
enough. Up stepped man of the series Halfpenny, who will return to Wales to 
find that his value has soared. He has a year to run on his contract with 
Cardiff Blues and at the end of it Toulon will be looking for a goal-kicker.
 