
No other sport kicks off a new season with more tangled emotions than rugby 
union. Charles Dickens would have appreciated the continuing dilemma: the best 
of times mixed in with the worst, a supposed age of wisdom shackled by 
scheduling foolishness. When the British & Irish Lions belatedly stumble from 
the treadmill next July it will have been yet another tale of too many cities.

Hence the reason why every expectant northern hemisphere preview has to come 
with a cautionary “if fit/available” asterisk. It requires little foresight to 
predict Saracens,double winners last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/29/saracens-exeter-premiership-final-rugby>
, will again be frontrunners domestically and in Europe. Their players, though, 
are not robots. Even if Maro Itoje, Owen Farrell, George Kruis and the Vunipola 
brothers make it unscathed to May there will still be a 10-match tour to 
negotiate. Leigh Halfpenny has confirmed he will be released – if selected – by 
his French club Toulon but disruption is still inevitable. For the finals of 
the Premiership and Pro12 to continue to be staged a week before the opening 
Lions tour game in New Zealand is simply an insult to the top players in both 
leagues.

How the British & Irish Lions may line up on 2017 New Zealand tour
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jun/27/how-british-irish-lions-may-line-up-new-2017-zealand-tour-england-scotland-wales-ireland>
Those responsible should once again offer a collective thank you to the 
battered infantry who keep bailing them out. Never mind the threat of injury or 
longer-term concussion risks, every player is busting to get out there. That 
inner desire needs protecting and celebrating. To be in Rio to watchFiji’s 
magnificent men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/11/great-britain-fiji-rugby-sevens-rio-2016-olympics>
 andAustralia’s wonderful women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/09/olympics-rugby-sevens-australian-women-win-gold-against-new-zealand>
 sell sevens to a new global audience in a sparsely populated temporary arena 
was to have a similar message reinforced. How blessed is rugby that its 
participants remain so grounded and so at ease in the face of adversity?

It is this mandatory depth of character that ultimately saves the sport from 
itself. It also helps to deflect the nagging fear player wellbeing still 
involves a touch of Russian roulette. The former Scotland wing Shaun Longstaff, 
now a player agent, offered some fascinating observations this week, suggesting 
to BBC Scotland the game was warping into something even he, as a former 
international, struggled to rationalise. According to Longstaff, coaches are 
openly asking agents to “find us a freak” and judging players on their G-force 
readings when smashing into rucks. Longstaff particularly frets for younger 
players, desperate to retain or gain a contract, who feel compelled to push 
their bodies and heads too far: “I don’t know the way forward. I just know I’m 
worried and have been for ages.” He is far from alone but not everyone is 
listening.

In 20 years’ time it can only be hoped the global structure has fewer kinks in 
it. There will certainly be more international sevens tournaments in these 
islands, alongside higher-profile women players. It will seem crazy that more 
people did not glimpse the potential earlier but what of the professional 
15-a-side club scene: exactly how far can it go?

For all the Premiership’s charms – and its competitiveness and clannishness 
are second to none – there remains room for improvement. Anyone who saw the All 
Blacksslice and dice Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/27/new-zealand-australia-bledisloe-cup-game-ii-match-report>
 in the past fortnight knows what top-class spatial awareness and clever 
handling looks like. Judging by some social media accounts, one or two British 
players are more bothered about chasing Pokémon around their training fields 
than following suit. Hopefully this will be the season when execution levels 
rise and a fear of failure dissolves the moment the first whistle blows in 
Gloucester and Newcastle on Friday night.

That is easier said than done with automatic relegation around – just ask 
Bristol or Worcester – but no contemporary side can hope to prosper simply by 
playing one-dimensional, one-out rugby. It might have sufficed a decade ago but 
no more. This season’sPremiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership> will be home to enough marquee 
players to form a large tented village: Kurtley Beale, Willie le Roux, Matt 
Toomua, Taulupe Faletau, Schalk Burger and Louis Picamoles have not signed up 
for a grim, safety-first experience.

The Wasps director of rugby, Dai Young, made the valid point that pre-season 
assumptions do not automatically pan out. Many of Wasps’ vaunted signings, for 
example, are unavailable to start the season while Charles Piutau and George 
Smith have departed. Worcester are also shorn of some key men; Bath’s squad 
look thin in parts. Meanwhile do Gloucester, Newcastle andHarlequins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/harlequinsru> have enough to hammer their 
way into the top six, let alone higher?

Ben Te’o: ‘Some people in union love that Sam Burgess went back’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/31/ben-teo-worcester-rugby-union-league-sam-burgess>
The first half dozen league games will be particularly telling; as London 
Irish found last season it can be ruinous to start slowly.Worcester, now under 
Carl Hogg, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/02/worcester-alafoti-faosiliva-back-row-saracens>
 have a new artificial pitch but it is hard to see them winning many away games 
unlessBen Te’o 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/31/ben-teo-worcester-rugby-union-league-sam-burgess>
 transforms their attacking potency. A flinty Sale side, in contrast, have the 
potential to make a fast start, at which point anything becomes possible.

That said this season’s tea leaves suggest a similar final four to last 
season. Saracens, Exeter and Leicester have the squads, coaches and drive to 
claim the top three places and Wasps, once their reinforcements arrive either 
side of Christmas, will fancy a late rush. Northampton, Quins and Bath should 
similarly improve as the season progresses but will be deprived of key 
internationals at inconvenient moments. This is a season made for Alex 
Lozowski, Ellis Genge, Dave Dennis, Ollie Devoto,AJ MacGinty, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/31/sale-sign-us-international-aj-macginty-connacht-rugby-union>
 Mike Williams and Matt Kvesic, supposed understudies whose stock could rise 
rapidly. Even Saracens could find life awkward next May should half a dozen 
players be subconsciously thinking about their Lions adventure. Serving three 
demanding masters is hard, particularly when the relentless Eddie Jones is 
among them.

In the Pro12 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/pro12>, following Connacht’s 
outstanding effort last season, it is a good time to be following Ulster, with 
Piutau now based in Belfast and Ruan Pienaar not yet banished by the IRFU, who 
are forcing him to leave next summer because they want more Irish-qualified 
scrum-halfs. It is a harsh way to treat a loyal player but such is modern rugby 
life; perverse, unpredictable, tough. The shiny-eyed anticipation before a new 
season is delicious but hard times await all bar a fortunate few.
 