
Barcelona put pressure on the La Liga leaders Real Madrid by picking up their 
first win in four league games as two second-half strikes from Lionel Messi and 
one from Luis Suárezsecured a 3-0 win at struggling Osasuna on Saturday. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/dec/10/osasuna-v-barcelona-la-liga-live?page=with:block-584bf88ce4b06a0d55b197f4#liveblog-navigation>

The champions missed a slew of chances in a dominant first-half display but 
their class eventually shone through when Suárez tapped Jordi Alba’s neat 
cutback into an empty net in the 52nd minute to break the deadlock.

Barcelona invite Chapecoense to take part in pre-season match at Camp Nou
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/08/barcelona-invite-chapecoense-joan-gamper-trophy>
Suárez had earlier struck the post with a low shot after swivelling away from 
his marker, Iván Márquez, inside the box. Osasuna later hit the woodwork 
themselves, when Sergio León drove towards goal after racing away from Samuel 
Umtiti before his delicate chip evaded theBarcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> goalkeeper Marc-André Ter 
Stegen but not the crossbar.

Messi sealed the points in the 72nd minute by finishing off another pass from 
Alba and in stoppage time the Argentina striker toyed with theOsasuna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/osasuna> defence to grab the third and 
move ahead of Suárez and Cristiano Ronaldo as the league’s top scorer with 11 
goals.

“We had a lot of chances and we knew that as soon as we got ahead it would 
open up. Fortunately, we were able to see out the game,” Suárez told reporters. 
“We can’t give up the fight, we’re Barça and we’re title candidates, we won’t 
give up whether we’re five, six or seven points behind.”

Barcelona remain second in the standings, but are still six points behind Real 
Madrid thanks to Real’s last-gasp 3-2 win over Deportivo La Coruña on Saturday 
evening. The result meant Real set a new club record of 35 games unbeaten in 
all competitions.
 