
The most pertinent rugby quote of 2016, inevitably, came from Eddie Jones. 
“There’s only pressure when you don’t know what you’re doing,” murmured 
England’s head coach shortly before guiding his adopted country totheir 13th 
Test victory of a perfect calendar year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/03/eddie-jones-unbeaten-england-2003-comparisons>
. As a short, sharp Twitter-friendly summation of how and why the Australian 
guru has turned English fortunes around, it was inch-perfect.

What would England’s national cricket and football teams do for a milligram of 
Jones’s self-assurance right now? Maybe the government should give him a call: 
who better to negotiate a workable Brexit deal from a standing start? It is 
easy enough, too, to imagine him discussing the art of influential leadership 
with the US president-elect. “Trumpy, mate, come over to Twickenham and I’ll 
show you how it’s done.” The tide of global history could be turned for ever.

Lucky for New Zealand they were on the beach rather than battling England | 
The Breakdown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/08/the-breakdown-new-zealand-england-eddie-jones>
In a post-truth world almost anything is feasible if enough people want to 
believe it. Rugby has long been familiar with this concept. How else can the 
charms of a murderous eight-man shove or the monarch-of-the-glen beauty of a 
ripe cauliflower ear be rationally explained? Perception is important; if no 
one cares there can be no such thing as great sport.

Which is why, heading into 2017, the future shape of professional rugby union 
badly needs clarification. On the one hand this should be a glorious 12 months, 
potentially even better than the last, with a British & Irish Lions tour of New 
Zealand twinkling at its heart. On the other the pro game, now more than two 
decades old, is mutating from gung-ho adolescence into brutal adulthood. What 
was a sport for all shapes and sizes, both physically and financially, grows 
ever less forgiving on both fronts.

Only the most unashamed oval-ball politician or one-eyed Barnum could claim 
things have never been healthier. In terms of global spread, admittedly, the 
graph is encouraging, while the 2015 World Cup generated £2.3bn in overall 
economic output, including a £1.1bn boost to the UK’s GDP figures. The Olympics 
were an inspiring advertisement for sevens; no one who sawFiji’s giant, modest 
gladiators kneel to accept their gold medals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/12/rugby-is-our-religion-fiji-erupts-in-celebration-of-olympic-sevens-gold>
 could fail to salute their humility and joy. The outpouring of passion and 
local pride arousedby the passing of Munster’s Anthony Foley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/16/anthony-foley-munster-man-ireland-death>
 also showed rugby’s soul remains intact.

Even so, there is a sense that, Jones aside, the game has never been more 
unsure of itself in more respects. Where, exactly, does rugby want to be not 
just next Christmas, but 30 years hence? Does it embrace sevens or 15s as its 
best vehicle for long-term growth? Does it want to be a game weighted more 
towards elusive backs than mastodon forwards?With the spectre of concussion not 
disappearing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/21/george-north-concussion-northampton-premiership-rugby-rfu>
, will it embark down the road of safer collisions and alienate traditional 
fans or attract the lawsuits seen in American gridiron? How many fully 
professional English clubs should there be?

In other words, should it stick or twist? If ever there was a need for rugby 
men with vision, conviction and an unswerving belief in the greater good, it is 
now.

Happily, World Rugby now has Bill Beaumont 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/14/world-rugby-bill-beaumont-rugby-union-synchronicity-england-captain>
 andAgustin Pichot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/25/gus-pichot-world-rugby-fiji-england-global-calendar-player-welfare-eligiblity>
 at the helm; between them they have the necessary human qualities and – in 
Pichot’s case – the youthful optimism. Following a meeting in San Francisco at 
the end of January, we are promised an announcement on the future shape of the 
global season. With sweeping changes looming in French rugby under the new 
chairmanship of Bernard Laporte, a more enlightened era might be on its way.

Nothing, even so, is yet guaranteed. The continuing self-interest of some 
administrators remains depressing, as is the failure to appreciate global rugby 
is only as strong as its weakest link. The revolution, to misquote Billy Bragg,
is more than just a T-shirt away <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kjLXyqD3lvI>. 
It will seem crazy to future historians that Test eligibility was allowed to 
become so skewed towards countries with wealthy leagues – fair play to Laporte 
for insisting only French passport holders will henceforth be eligible forLes 
Bleus – or that the two best sides in the world could not meet outside World 
Cups because of a squabble over gate receipts.

Gus Pichot: ‘The Fiji v England game wasn’t very good for rugby … it’s unfair’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/25/gus-pichot-world-rugby-fiji-england-global-calendar-player-welfare-eligiblity>
At least the All Blacks will face the Lions in a seismic series that, with 
luck, will restore everyone’s faith. It will be desperately tough for the 
touring team, with both their preparation time and itinerary bordering on the 
scandalous. But who would not want to see a lumpy Anglo-Irish pack, perhaps led 
by Alun Wyn Jones, get stuck into New Zealand in the Tests, challenging the 
gifted Aaron Smith, Beauden Barrett and Ben Smith to sparkle in adversity? For 
every individual to whom the Lions are an anachronism, another 100 would 
mortgage their grannies for a ticket.

Aside from Saracens’ ongoing status as the Premiership team to beat, the only 
other sure thing in 2017 is that England under Jones will remain box office. 
The antipodean alchemist was spot-on before Christmas when he insisted his side 
still had considerable room for improvement and the Six Nations,complete with 
bonus points 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/30/bonus-points-six-nations-attacking-play>
, will be fascinating. At the moment Ireland rank above them, with the final 
Dublin showdown between the two sides in March already a magnet for the 
imagination. If Joe Schmidt’s side can step it up and Scotland, France and 
Italy continue to improve, it could be a Championship for the ages.

It would also help if more coaches – and players – reminded themselves that 
sporting life is to be grasped, relished and celebrated. What is the point in 
winning the league and looking as bored by the whole thing as Leicester City 
FC’s players did on stage at the BBC’s Sports Personality of the Year awards?

Rugby union <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rugby-union>, with its relative 
lack of terrestrial telly exposure, defensive media relations and political 
in-fighting, does not currently have many globally recognisable stars. In 2017 
it needs to heed Jones’s advice, work out precisely what sort of sport it wants 
to be, and then go for it.
 