
Barcelona resumed their La Liga campaign after the winter break with a 
disappointing 1-1 draw atVillarreal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/villarreal>, leaving Luis Enrique’s 
champions five points behind the in-form leaders, Real Madrid.

Zinedine Zidane’s side equalled Barcelona’s Spanish record of 39 games 
unbeaten in all competitions byswatting aside Granada 5-0 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/real-madrid-crush-granada-to-equal-spanish-record-unbeaten-run>
 on Saturday.

Barcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> needed to respond 
at Villarreal but they required a superb, late Lionel Messi free-kick to 
salvage a draw, after a fine Nicola Sansone strike gave the home side the lead 
in the second half.

Fresh from the midweek Copa del Rey first-leg loss at Athletic Bilbao 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/05/athletic-bilbao-barcelona-copa-del-rey-last-16-first-leg-match-report>
, the draw at Villarreal leaves Barcelona third in the table, a point behind 
Sevilla and five off Real Madrid, who also have a game in hand.

“I can’t make a positive evaluation because we needed the three points today,” 
said Luis Enrique. “We aren’t on a very favourable run at the moment and 
although we kept hitting the target things just would not fall for us.

“Of course, there is still time to catch Real. We’re going to have 
opportunities to fight for the league, although that will not just depend on us 
but also on them, and they are looking very strong at the moment.”

Athletic were unable to follow up the 2-1 Copa del Rey triumph by beating 
neighbouring Alavés. The hosts enjoyed the majority of possession and shots at 
San Mamés, but the match ended in a 0-0 draw as Alavés extended their unbeaten
La Liga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball> run to a fifth 
match.

Real Betis <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realbetis> won their first 
top-flight meeting with Leganes as their fine home form under Victor Sánchez 
continued.

Ruben Castro opened the scoring six minutes after half-time and Cristiano 
Piccini wrapped up a 2-0 victory late on, meaning the Andalusians have yet to 
lose at Estadio Benito Villamarín in four matches under Sánchez.

Celta Vigo <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtavigo> won their sixth 
home match in seven as Malága were overcome 3-1. Iago Aspas’s seventh-minute 
strike put the hosts ahead before Daniel Wass and Andreu Fontas put Celta 
further in front. Wass’s late own goal cost Eduardo Berizzo’s team a clean 
sheet.
 