
Barcelona’s hopes of offering Lionel Messi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lionel-messi> an improved contract face a 
stumbling block because of the expenditure caps imposed by La Liga, according 
to the club’s chief executive, Òscar Grau.

Whereas Luis Suárez and Neymar have each signed new deals until 2021, the 
Argentinian’s contract expires on 30 June 2018, givingBarcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> 18 months until he would be 
able leave the club for free.

Messi earns a reported €22m (£19m) a year after tax from Barça, whereas 
Neymar’s and Suárez’s salaries are believed to be about €25m after their latest 
contract renewals. Grau said any new deal for Barcelona’s all-time top scorer 
would put considerable pressure on the club’s finances.

Gerard Piqué points finger as Villarreal push title out of Barcelona’s hands
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/09/barcelona-villarreal-gerard-pique-sid-lowe>
“Barcelona has to analyse this situation with a cold head and common sense,” 
Grau said on Wednesday. “Barça can’t exceed 70% of its budget on wages and 
therefore we have to make the numbers add up.”

La Liga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball> agrees budgetary 
limits with each club at the start of every season and its regulations ensure 
its clubs only spend a certain proportion of their budget on wages.

Barça’s budget for this season is €695m. They pay the highest wages in Spain 
and the second-highest in world football behind Manchester United, according to 
the latest publication of theGlobal Sports Salary Survey 
<https://www.globalsportssalaries.com/>, which reported that Barcelona players 
earned an average annual wage of $7,456,800 (£6.1m).

Grau hinted that Barcelona may need to raise funds by selling players, as well 
as strengthening the club’s commercial income. Their latest sponsorship deal 
with the Japanese retailer Rakuten, the biggest such deal in the sport, will 
earn the club €55m a year.

“One option is to increase our revenues, as our economic strategy forecasts,” 
Grau said. “We want to have the best players around, but perhaps we have to 
prioritise.

“The club wants the best player in the world to stay at Barça. I would like to 
ease the concerns of club members and supporters but we have to use common 
sense.”
 