
Lionel Messi <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lionel-messi> produced a 
vintage second-half performance to help Barcelona to a 4-1 win over their local 
rivals Espanyol on Sunday as the champions cut the gap with the La Liga 
leaders, Real Madrid, to three points.

Luis Suárez celebrated signing a new contract with Barça on Friday by firing 
the home side ahead in the 18th minute after a brilliant pass from Andrés 
Iniesta and the Uruguayan struck again in the 67th after a mazy run from Messi.

The Argentina maestro cut the Espanyol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/espanyol> defence to ribbons again to 
allow Jordi Alba to score the third a minute later before capping the victory 
with a goal of his own in the 89th, after David López had pulled one back for 
the visiting side.

Luis Suárez renews Barcelona contract with €200m buyout clause
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/15/luis-suarez-barcelona-deal-buyout-clause>
Barça are second in the table on 34 points, three behind Real Madrid who have 
played a game less due to their participation in the Club World Cup final this 
weekend, while Sevilla are third on 33.

Espanyol have not beaten Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> since 2009, although they went 
into the game on a nine-game unbeaten run in the league, having conceded only 
once in their last six.

But their positive form counted for little against a Barcelona side who have 
rediscovered their groove after a slump in form in November.

The home side made their intentions clear when Suárez burst through the middle 
and worked the ball to Neymar, only for Messi to send the final pass whistling 
past the near post.

The opener came from a lightning-quick break which began with a sliding tackle 
from Javier Mascherano on his compatriot Pablo Piatti and Iniesta produced a 
sumptuous diagonal long ball for Suárez to knock into the far corner with one 
touch.

In the second half Messi seized on a loose ball and skipped past five Espanyol 
defenders before firing at goal. His shot was spilled by the substitute 
goalkeeper Roberto and Suárez gobbled up the rebound to score again.

Messi produced another breathtaking run into the box a minute later, worming 
his way through four defenders and laying the ball off for Alba to ram past 
Roberto.

López briefly silenced a jubilant Camp Nou with a well worked counter but 
Messi got the festivities started again with a fully deserved goal of his own, 
latching on to a generous chipped pass by Suárez to tap in the fourth.
 