
A picture of a tranquil young Dutchwoman pouring her morning cup of coffee is 
returning to theNetherlands <https://www.theguardian.com/world/netherlands> 
after spending centuries in an English collection.

A Dutch Girl at Breakfast, painted by the Swiss artist Jean-Étienne Liotard in 
1756, has been acquired by the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fpainting-jean-etienne-liotard-rijksmuseum-netherlands-centuries-in-england%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa16ccf43e23224591573e2b891e35d01ee785f62%2F0_0_1693_2000%2F1693.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Liotard%20painting%20returns%20to%20Netherlands%20after%20centuries%20in%20England&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fpainting-jean-etienne-liotard-rijksmuseum-netherlands-centuries-in-england%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Liotard%20painting%20returns%20to%20Netherlands%20after%20centuries%20in%20England&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fpainting-jean-etienne-liotard-rijksmuseum-netherlands-centuries-in-england%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa16ccf43e23224591573e2b891e35d01ee785f62%2F0_0_1693_2000%2F1693.jpg>
 Liotard honours Dutch Golden Age art via the painting he depicts in the 
background of the work. Photograph: DCMS Press Office 
The British government had placed an export bar on the painting because it had 
been in England for so long. It was bought in 1774 by the artist’s friend and 
patron, the second Earl of Bessborough, and had remained in the family 
collection ever since.

However, no British museum could match the price of £4.4m paid by the 
Rijksmuseumat a Sotheby’s auction this year 
<http://www.sothebys.com/en/auctions/ecatalogue/2016/old-master-british-paintings-evening-l16033/lot.36.html>
, so this week the export licence was granted.

Liotard, whose work was showcased in an exhibition at the Royal Academy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/oct/20/jean-etienne-liotard-review-royal-academy-of-arts>
 in London last year, was a star in his day, in demand across Europe for his 
subtly flattering portraits.

A Dutch Girl at Breakfast is considered to be a rarity because, compared with 
hundreds of works in pastel, only 30 of Liotard’s oil paintings are known to 
have survived. This was believed to be the last in private hands.

Taco Dibbits, general director of the Rijksmuseum, said the work had the same 
atmosphere of peace and simplicity as Vermeer’s The Milkmaid, which the museum 
also owns.

“The painter allows us to get very close to his subject. As the girl carefully 
opens the top of the coffee pot, she won’t allow herself to be disturbed by the 
millions of visitors who will come to see her,” he said.

Jean-Etienne Liotard review – a joyous time machine back to the Enlightenment
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/oct/20/jean-etienne-liotard-review-royal-academy-of-arts>
 Liotard was particularly fond of the painting, keeping it for nearly 20 years 
before selling it to one of his most important patrons. The artist portrayed 
one of his own collection of Dutch Golden Age paintings in the background of 
the work.

The green light for the export completes a sensational year for the 
Rijksmuseum, which received 2.2 million visitors and a Michelin star for its 
restaurant.

Another of its recent acquisitions dwarfed the sum paid for the Liotard 
painting:along with the Louvre in Paris, the museum  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/sep/30/france-netherlands-rembrandts-louvre-rijksmuseum>
 bought a pair of towering portraits by Rembrandt depicting a young couple, 
Marten Soolmans and Oopjen Coppit, for €160m (£134m).
 