
If you walk around much of inner-city residential Liverpool, you soon find 
yourself asking, "What catastrophe hit this place?" On investigation, you'll 
find it wasn't merely the haemorrhage of jobs at the docks or the depopulation 
of the city, but something much more recent. In any of the six areas selected 
under New Labour for"housing market renewal" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/sep/21/housing-renewal-plans-fail-living-limbo>
 you can see tinned-up street after tinned-up street, with wastelands in 
between, and people still living among it all. Although the depredations of
Housing Market Renewal Pathfinders 
<http://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=2&cad=rja&ved=0CD0QFjAB&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.parliament.uk%2Fbriefing-papers%2FSN05953.pdf&ei=PO9SUbyLCoetPO-6gfAC&usg=AFQjCNF-rhNBo_MCGGG5VVaUFLBh63k9DQ&bvm=bv.44342787,d.ZWU>
 have been ghastly all over the north of England, there is nothing to rival 
Liverpool for the sheer scale of destruction, dereliction and waste. How did it 
come to this? And can the process be stopped?

In fact, typically for Labour councils after the collapse of the speculative 
boom, the current strategy is to hope desperately that the process can be 
restarted. Pathfinder has been officially abandoned so, to some fanfare last 
year, the mayor of Liverpool, Joe Anderson, and the then housing minister, 
Grant Shapps, agreed to save and refurbish 16 houses in the condemned"Welsh 
Streets" <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-merseyside-18441277>, in Toxteth 
– out of about 500. Yet a recently submittedplanning application 
<http://www.liverpoolecho.co.uk/liverpool-news/local-news/2013/02/21/15m-plans-for-liverpool-s-welsh-streets-unveiled-100252-32849798/>
 proposes the demolition of 439 houses and a housing association scheme that 
will replace them with only 152.

George Clarke, of Channel 4's Great British Property Scandal, was appointed 
"empty homes adviser" to work with the scheme, but he has broken ranks – 
calling it "thesocial cleansing 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2295470/Tale-Two-Kensingtons-In-London-average-house-price-19m-Liverpool-homes-sale-1.html>
 of an area not only currently occupied, but very much in demand". Given the 
pace of redevelopment that Liverpool saw during the boom, let alone now, the 
area can be expected to remain in half-demolished limbo indefinitely. The 
exceptionally dubious rationale for Pathfinder, a programme to clear frequently 
viable housing and its inhabitants for the purposes of "renewing" 
insufficiently profitable local housing markets, is still unquestioned. And the 
results – the scarred, often shocking landscapes around the centre of Liverpool 
– do not seem to have forced anyone to change course. But one of the most 
prickly issues is how this all happened in the first place without much 
resistance.

Last summer I visited Homebaked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-enterprise-partner-zone-the-co-operative/you-ll-never-bake-alone-community-devise-recipe-to-re-open-liverpool-bakery>
, a bakery in Anfield converted viaLiverpool Biennial funding 
<http://liverpoolbiennial.co.uk/support/>, cunningly diverted by the artist 
Jeanne van Heeswijk 
<http://www.liverpoolecho.co.uk/liverpool-news/in-the-mix/2012/09/18/liverpool-biennial-artist-jeanne-van-heeswijk-mixes-art-regeneration-and-bread-in-anfield-100252-31855099/>
 into the base for a community land trust, all designed to gradually reverse 
the destruction of the area. I walked there from the centre of town, and saw 
how the metropolitan civic pride of the city centre gives way quickly to a 
strange mix of insular 80s low-rise, low-density housing, vast parks created 
from wasteland in the same decade, and eccentric Arts and Crafts buildings like 
theMere Bank pub 
<http://www.liverpoolpictorial.co.uk/evertonshawstreet/heyworthst.html> or the 
Everton Library 
<http://www.liverpooldailypost.co.uk/liverpool-news/regional-news/2012/06/15/everton-library-set-to-be-restored-in-5m-project-99623-31187969/>
 – beautiful and derelict in the middle of it all. Then you come to residential 
Anfield, and a seemingly endless swath of blight around the football stadium.

The houses here are those that were omitted by the slum clearance schemes of 
the 1960s, for the obvious reason that they're large and well-constructed; the 
infrastructure is sane and viable (if obviously depleted by the area's 
clearance) – a high street and the large Stanley Park, with the recently 
renovatedGladstone Conservatory 
<http://www.colliers.com/en-gb/uk/services/destination-consulting/services/viability-planning/isla-gladstone-conservatory-success-story>
.

At one corner, the streetline of grand and rotting terraces is suddenly broken 
by the new houses – the Pathfinders themselves, and the reason for all this. 
Apart from increased parking space created by their cul-de-sac like 
arrangement, their smaller windows and the poverty of their detailing and 
design, it's hard to see the difference – nondescript redbrick terraces and 
flats, devoid of character, devoid of offence.

It's bizarre, given that the entire rationale of Pathfinder was to bring the 
middle classes into the area: surely the small middle class ofLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/liverpool>, based usually in education and 
media, would have far preferred gentrified Victorian townhouses to this 
suburban-looking newbuild. How could this possibly have been worth it? How 
could anyone have been convinced that it would be?

The event at Homebaked, sponsored by Liverpool Biennial, involved me and other 
speakers talking about the crisis in housing. A long-term resident took issue 
with a lot of what I'd said about Pathfinder, which (I thought 
uncontroversially) I'd described as social cleansing. Although she opposed the 
demolitions, she didn't see it that way. The area had been practically left for 
dead before the Pathfinder programme, she pointed out – this was the first time 
anyone in the area had been talked to or consulted in years.

While I pointed out the iniquity of dragging council tenants out of 
potentially lucrative inner-city areas, she – as an owner-occupier – pointed 
out that her friends rang her up from the suburban council houses they had been 
moved into, saying, "Guess where I am? In the garden of my nice new house." It 
was obvious that the area's residents didn't fight Pathfinder because, on one 
level, a lot of them didn't want to – Anfield had been run down so ruthlessly 
that it was in many cases a relief to leave. The iniquities of the scheme had 
since become obvious, hence the action to save the area via the community land 
trust – but this hadn't been so from the outset.

This was fair enough – but setting owner-occupiers against council tenants 
seemed like the sort of breach in solidarity that made this disaster possible 
in the first place. Although in Welsh Streets there is a very activelocal 
campaign against demolition <http://www.welshstreets.co.uk/>, resistance to 
Pathfinder has often been spearheaded bySave Britain's Heritage  
<http://www.savebritainsheritage.org/news/campaign.php?id=144> (which has 
bought condemned houses in the city) or Biennial-funded artists, rather than 
the gutted local communities – so partially achieving, ironically, Pathfinder's 
original aim of bringing the middle classes into areas of "low market demand".

If working-class areas are to defend themselves, they need confidence, both in 
themselves and in the places they live, otherwise the whole grim process will 
go on, with councils making the same mistakes and the same lives being 
destroyed, without interruption.
 