
At the end of October, after the Habitat III <http://habitat3.org/> 
conference, the UN formally adopted a new plan for cities that was two years in 
the making. TheNew Urban Agenda <http://habitat3.org/the-new-urban-agenda> will 
guide urban policy at every level for the next twenty years. So how do we start 
putting the vision into practice?

We are in a world that is moving towards mega-cities, with the numbers of 
people living in urban settings expected to nearly double by 2050, from 3.7 
billion people now to 7 billion over the next 30 years.

Nearly one billion people live in urban slums and informal settlements in 
cities around the world, with huge problems in accessing clean water, energy 
and sanitation. Fortunately for them, among the key visions s et out in the New 
Urban Agenda are the right to adequate housing, universal access to safe and 
affordable water and sanitation, access to health, education and transport and 
good air quality.

There are many questions around how to implement the new agenda. How do cities 
of the future should promote civic engagement? How can we make sure that our 
cities are spaces where girls and women can achieve their full potential? And a
s the world is rapidly ageing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/15/are-you-worried-about-our-ageing-population-share-your-thoughts>
, how do we make sure cities are built in a way that promotes mobility and 
access for older people?

While holding these many goals in mind, what will it take to make this 
development sustainable, so that the future cities do not make our world 
uninhabitable. And where can we see the key innovations already in practice 
that will build these cities of the future?

Join an expert panel on Thursday 24 November, from 2pm to 3.30pm GMT, to 
discuss these questions and more.

Panel

Grete Faremo, under-secretary-general and executive director, UNOPS 
<https://www.unops.org/english/Pages/Home.aspx>, Copenhagen, Denmark, @UNOPS 
<https://twitter.com/UNOPS>
UNOPS is an operational arm of the United Nations, providing infrastructure, 
procurement, and other management support services.

Scott Thacker, research scientist, Environmental Change Institute 
<http://www.eci.ox.ac.uk/>, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK @scott_thacker1 
<https://twitter.com/scott_thacker1>
Scott’s research focuses on modelling the function and performance of 
infrastructure systems.

Sion Jones, urbanisation policy officer, HelpAge International 
<http://www.helpage.org/>, Delhi, India, @AgeingCities 
<https://twitter.com/AgeingCities>
Sion is an expert in urbanisation and ageing populations. 

Timon McPhearson, assistant professor of urban ecology, environmental studies, 
the New School 
<http://www.newschool.edu/public-engagement/ba-bs-environmental-studies/>, New 
York City, USA,@timonmcphearson <https://twitter.com/timonmcphearson>
Timon is director of the Urban Ecology Lab <http://www.urbanecologylab.com> at 
theTishman Environment and Design Center 
<http://www.newschool.edu/tishman-center/>, where he works with designers to 
foster sustainable and resilient cities.

Anaclaudia Rossbach, regional adviser for Latin America and the Carribean, 
Cities Alliance <http://www.citiesalliance.org/>, São Paulo, Brazil, 
@CitiesAlliance <https://twitter.com/CitiesAlliance>
Anaclaudia has worked as a consultant for the World Bank and supported the 
Brazilian government on their national housing plan.


Wangari Kinoti, women’s rights policy manager, Action Aid International 
<http://www.actionaid.org/>, Nairobi, Kenya, @wangkinoti 
<https://twitter.com/wangkinoti>
Wangari is an expert in women’s rights in Kenya. 

Jaideep Gupte, Co-leader of the Cities Cluster at the Institute of Development 
Studies, University of Sussex@JaiGupte <https://twitter.com/JaiGupte>
Jaideep’s research is on urban violence, poverty and development. 

Fernando Duarte, former social director of TECHO Paraguay 
<http://www.techo.org/paises/paraguay/>, now working at TECHO International, 
leading the Department of Development of Habitat. @choferd 
<https://twitter.com/choferd> TECHO is a youth led organization seeking to 
overcome poverty in slums in Latin America & the Caribbean.




The live chat is not video or audio-enabled but will take place in the 
comments section (below). Want to recommend someone for the panel or ask a 
question in advance? Get in touch viaglobaldevpros@theguardian.com 
<mailto:%20globaldevpros@theguardian.com> or @GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter. Follow the discussion using the 
hashtag#globaldevlive <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23globaldevlive&src=typd>.
 