
Liz Truss, the justice secretary, unveiled her prisons white paper last week; 
it contained a proposal to create five new community prisons to house women 
ahead of release <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-37854358>. With around 3,900, 
mainly vulnerable, women locked up in English jails 
<http://www.prisonstudies.org/country/united-kingdom-england-wales> and 19 
deaths already recorded this year (the highest for 12 years), the reforms can’t 
come too soon, say campaigners.

Liz Truss’s £9-per-hour prison officers won’t produce safe, humane prisons | 
John Podmore
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/03/liz-truss-prison-officers-prisons-staff-prisoner>
For inspiration on how to deliver her vision, Truss need not travel far. On a 
recent visit toScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, I caught a 
glimpse of how a modern, progressive country should be treating women who break 
the law.

When Scotland’s justice minister, Michael Matheson, took office in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jun/30/michael-gove-scotland-prison-closure>
, he announced plans to build a new prison to hold just 80 women deemed too 
dangerous for freedom, andfive small regional units, where most women offenders 
would be offered help with drugs, alcohol, domestic abuse and mental health 
problems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jun/30/michael-gove-scotland-prison-closure>
.

Cornton Vale women’s prison, in Stirling, is due for demolition in 2020 under 
Matheson’s plans to make way for the new secure unit. In the meantime, it is 
pioneering a new approach to women in custody that will continue in the new 
facility.

The first thing to notice as I begin an informal tour with the prison governor,
Rhona Hotchkiss 
<http://scottishjusticematters.com/wp-content/uploads/Pages-from-SJM_3-2_June2015_Week-in-the-Life-Prison-Governor.pdf>
, is the silence. We are in Ross House, the smaller of the two existing units, 
holding around 20 prisoners – a mixture of new receptions and those, Hotchkiss 
says, with “challenging behaviour”. Reception blocks and those housing 
prisoners with behavioural issues usually teem with noise; keys jangling, doors 
banging, staff bellowing orders and women venting their frustrations. But 
silence mostly reigns, apart from the hum of chatter from the prisoners, none 
of them locked in their cells. It is not accidental; staff at Cornton Vale 
operate under a “no shouting” rule (a first, for this prison watcher). And it 
appears the prisoners reciprocate.

Then, something happens which, in most prisons, would be regarded as an 
“incident”. A prisoner approaches Hotchkiss and grabs her by the arm. Clearly 
agitated, the woman speaks rapidly. The governor listens intently, then replies 
in quiet tones. Clearly calming down, the woman releases her hold. Hotchkiss 
then places her hand on the woman’s arm before moving on. Out of earshot, I ask 
Hotchkiss if the woman taking hold of her had been an issue? “No,” she replies, 
“she’s a vulnerable young woman, we need to engage.” The woman – and every 
other prisoner we encountered – called the governor by her first name.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fwomen-prisoners-scotland-liz-truss-reform%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fccc369add9b6e4b509e1d56287d1ffcae6f52218%2F125_89_5443_3266%2F5443.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Liz%20Truss%2C%20take%20note%3A%20all%20women%E2%80%99s%20prisons%20could%20be%20like%20this%20%7C%20Eric%20Allison&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fwomen-prisoners-scotland-liz-truss-reform%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Liz%20Truss%2C%20take%20note%3A%20all%20women%E2%80%99s%20prisons%20could%20be%20like%20this%20%7C%20Eric%20Allison&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fwomen-prisoners-scotland-liz-truss-reform%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fccc369add9b6e4b509e1d56287d1ffcae6f52218%2F125_89_5443_3266%2F5443.jpg>
 Paws for Progress – a scheme that ‘works’ at Polmont prison. Photograph: Murdo 
Macleod for the Guardian 
Peebles House, the second of the two remaining units at Cornton Vale, is even 
quieter, even though the women were also unlocked, as they are from morning 
until 9pm, barring an hour at lunchtime. It has corridors, and rooms, all 
carpeted. The accent is squarely on the wellbeing of the women. Hotchkiss says 
that 70% of the women suffer mental health problems, and only 20% have received 
mental health care in the community. Self-harm is an issue, with 15 incidents 
in a month recorded recently, but all were carried out by just three women.

“Mary”, serving a long sentence for violence, tells me she feels safe in 
Cornton and the programmes she is on make her feel confident about the future. 
“The staff care,” she says. “There is no sense of them and us.” Hotchkiss says 
the various programmes are all based on trauma reduction and education. “We 
need to know what works, and why. It’s a hugely exciting time to be working in 
prisons,” she adds.

I see women making greeting cards to send to friends and relatives. It is 
popular, but poignantly Hotchkiss talks of a 19-year-old prisoner who didn’t 
want to take part. When asked why, she said she had “nobody outside to send a 
card to”. Two days a week,PAT (pets as therapy) dogs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/sep/17/how-dogs-teaching-young-offenders>
 come into the prison – it’s one of the schemes that “works” says Hotchkiss.

This summer, around 80 women were transferred from Cornton Vale to a part of 
Polmont young offenders institution (YOI) in Falkirk, some 20 miles away. Space 
was available at Polmont because Scotland’s YOI population has reduced 
significantly in recent years. Here too, the focus is on women’s health and 
education.

Just the way staff speak to you, get to know you. I feel comfortable telling 
them things – and that's a good feeling

Susan Brookes has governed Polmont for four years. The women learn in small, 
individual-based programmes. It might be citizenship, parenting or grief and 
loss. Brookes says the number of women and young offenders who have suffered 
multiple bereavements is high. Staff work in partnership with outside agencies, 
aiming for a better understanding of women’s routes into – and out of – 
offending. Staff and teachers say many women and young prisoners share 
traumatic histories. Officer Michael Wilson oversees a hi-tech media centre at 
Polmont, where prisoners operate a prison radio station which broadcasts around 
the clock. He says the women and young men often present with similar problems, 
all related to troubled backgrounds. “Every prisoner has their own problems; 
it’s a challenge, but a rewarding one,” he says.

“Amy” is several years into a life sentence. She’s in no doubt that change is 
afoot. “I see it all the time … just the way staff speak to you, get to know 
you. It was never like this before. Now I feel more comfortable telling them 
things and that’s a good feeling,” she says.

Blair House, which holds Polmont’s women, is very much a prison wing, albeit 
much brighter than most. The cells here are also unlocked all day and women 
come and go at will within its confines. There is a well equipped gym, running 
and rowing machines and weight pulleys. Brookes says the “fundamentals” of her 
job are good relationships between staff and prisoners, with staff properly 
trained and responsive. Prison governors in Scotland are lucky: there have been 
no staff cuts here, as have happened in English and Welsh prisons. In fact, 
Polmont, with 375 staff for 533 prisoners, exceeds its staffing levels. 
(Portland prison, Dorset, with an almost identical roll call, has 255 staff.)

It is too soon, however, to assess the impact of Scotland’s reforms on women’s 
reoffending rates. The latest figures, up to 2014, show around45% of women 
leaving custody in Scotland are reconvicted within a year 
<http://www.gov.scot/Publications/2015/10/7805/4> compared to 48% in England 
<http://www.prisonreformtrust.org.uk/Publications/Factfile>. (There are no 
women’s prisons in Wales.)

In 2015, women made up more than 5% of the Scottish prison population, the 
second highest female prison population in northern Europe 
<http://www.gov.scot/Publications/2015/10/7805/4>and second only to Spain. 
Matheson describes the figures as “totally unacceptable”, and says that 
“housing women in smaller community-based units, closer to their families and 
alongside support services” helps them with drug, alcohol and mental health 
issues. “It means we can stop them committing further crimes.”

Although the five new units will be run by prison staff, they will be broadly 
based on an existing residential centre, operated jointly by the charity 
Turning Point and Glasgow Addiction Services. Simply called218 
<http://www.turningpointscotland.com/what-we-do/criminal-justice/218-service/>, 
the 12-bed residential unit occupies a handsome city-centre building in Glasgow 
that is identifiable only by building number.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fwomen-prisoners-scotland-liz-truss-reform%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10dfd1db662aef2031d63a6b43ea329597bdd97e%2F89_161_5577_3346%2F5577.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Liz%20Truss%2C%20take%20note%3A%20all%20women%E2%80%99s%20prisons%20could%20be%20like%20this%20%7C%20Eric%20Allison&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fwomen-prisoners-scotland-liz-truss-reform%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Liz%20Truss%2C%20take%20note%3A%20all%20women%E2%80%99s%20prisons%20could%20be%20like%20this%20%7C%20Eric%20Allison&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fwomen-prisoners-scotland-liz-truss-reform%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10dfd1db662aef2031d63a6b43ea329597bdd97e%2F89_161_5577_3346%2F5577.jpg>
 A residents’ timetable at 218 in Glasgow Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the 
Guardian 
It mainly takes women referred by local courts and social services and 
accepted after an assessment process, looking at individual needs. The 
residential service provides supported accommodation for women from between 
four weeks and six months, and also runs day groups for non-residents. Many of 
their service users are subject to statutory supervision and have a range of 
complex needs, including substance misuse, mental and physical health problems, 
issues relating to domestic abuse, trauma, housing problems, or patterns of 
repeat offending.

It opened in 2003, with the objective of reducing the number of women from the 
Glasgow area being remanded in custody and/or receiving a custodial sentence. 
Traditionally, Glasgow has always provided a large slice of Scotland’s jail 
population, both male and female. But a two-yearevaluation study 
<http://www.turningpointscotland.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/03/218-evaluation.pdf>
, carried out between 2007 and 2009, showed the percentage of female prisoners 
hailing from Glasgow had been cut from 33% to 13%. And while the total number 
of Scotland’s female prisoners had more than doubled during that period, 
Glaswegian numbers fell by a quarter. The same study showed that reoffending 
figures for women referred to 218 between 2007-09 were reduced by 21%.

At the unit, each woman is assigned a key worker and, according to their 
needs, access to an impressive range of physical and mental health facilities. 
Alternative therapies such as acupuncture and Indian head massage sit alongside 
dental and physical health, psychological/psychiatric services and 
detoxification. There are 12 full-time staff, including managers and two 
full-time nurses. The women live in bright, single rooms, wear name tags and 
carry fob passes indistinguishable from those carried by staff. Margaret 
Nkembou, the service coordinator, says “brew and blether” sessions, where women 
relax and talk over their issues are an important part of the programmes.

“Kelly”, a former resident, is now a key worker at 218. She is one of three 
staff who have made the transition from offender to practitioner. Kelly says 
her understanding of the issues facing her charges is important. “I have been 
where they are,” she says. “It gives me a connection.” She says her work 
continues to assist her own recovery. Kelly has served 12 years in jail, over 
several sentences, but calls them “wasted years”. “There was no rehabilitation. 
Being on the 218 programme made me feel part of the process, and allowed me to 
make positive decisions about my future,” she says.

From April 2015 to March 2016, of the 173 women who signed up with 218, just 
nine failed to complete their programmes. Nkembou points out that many of the 
women have a history of not engaging with agencies, so to start and complete a 
programme is a hugely positive step. The staff keep in contact with all their 
former service users; “graduation days”, when women collect their certificates, 
are always well attended. “There are wonderful moments when a woman says she 
can’t attend because she’s working!” says Nkembou.

Prison reformers believe most of the solutions to women’s offending do not lie 
behind prison walls. “There are still too may women being sent to prison for 
minor offences, including on remand and for short sentences,” says Yvonne 
Donald, Scotland and Northern Ireland manager for thePrison Reform Trust 
<http://www.prisonreformtrust.org.uk/>.

Dear Liz Truss – please consider why prisoners are rioting | Archie Bland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/07/liz-truss-prisoners-rioting-bedford-prison-riot>
Yet a decade after the Corston report on women in the criminal justice system 
<http://www.justice.gov.uk/publications/docs/corston-report-march-2007.pdf> 
recommended a fundamental rethink about locking up women and instead providing 
support in the community, many of these reforms are finally being enacted in 
Scotland, giving the English justice secretary an example close to home that 
she would do well to follow.

As Donald says: “The Scottish government’s reforms are heading very much in 
the right direction.”

• This article was amended on 10 November 2016 to correct the distance from 
Cornton Vale to Polmont YOI.
 