
Six years on from the scandal that rocked the world of newspapers, few people 
are still thinking aboutLord Justice Leveson and his inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/nov/28/leveson-inquiry-report-essential-guide>
. But the resulting legislation could be on the verge of taking hold with 
chilling effect. And my colleagues and I at local papers in the UK are worried. 
Really worried.

Press freedom danger if MPs vote in section 40 by the back door
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/oct/27/press-freedom-danger-if-mps-vote-in-section-40-by-the-back-door>
On the face of it, the phone hacking of the royals and celebrities may seem a 
world away from the kind of fare your local paper serves up. Think of them and 
you might think of summer fetes and cats stuck up trees, but they play a very 
real role in any democracy. Holding corrupt councillors to account, challenging 
unscrupulous property developers and making sure court cases are heard in 
public.

Last week Leeds city council apologised to the Yorkshire Post 
<http://www.holdthefrontpage.co.uk/2017/news/council-says-sorry-after-u-turn-over-regional-daily-foi-battle>
 after it tried to withhold the names offour of its councillors 
<http://www.yorkshirepost.co.uk/news/leeds-names-four-councillors-summonsed-on-tax-arrears-after-u-turn-1-8303612>
 who failed to pay council tax. Without the tireless reporting of the local 
paper, that may never have come to light.

The Liverpool Echo <http://www.liverpoolecho.co.uk/> was a peerless advocate 
for the 96 victims of the Hillsborough disaster, consistently pushing for an 
inquest into the tragedy to be reopened. Throughout the inquest, despite the 
dwindling resources of local papers, reporter Eleanor Barlowwas present for all 
267 days of evidence 
<http://www.liverpoolecho.co.uk/news/liverpool-news/what-covering-hillsborough-inquests-like-11247288>
 over two years.

Local papers have a connection to their communities that simply cannot be 
reproduced by other media sources. The Argus, Brighton’s long-running local,was 
the first to notice, and report on 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/08/blank-page-newspaper-rail-crisis-the-argus-brighton-southern-franchise-ministers>
,issues with Southern Rail services 
<http://www.theargus.co.uk/search/?search=%22Southern+Railway%22&topic_id=8488>
, which have now ballooned into a scandal, as unions and rail bosses continue 
to clash over strike action.

Without a committed local newspaper, criminals would go through the court 
system without being identified, councils would be able to make decisions on 
cuts without outside scrutiny and people wouldn’t be able to keep up-to-date 
with events in their communities.

But now that may all be under threat from the spectre that is section 40 of 
the Crime and Courts Act 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2013/22/section/40>. The legislation was 
drafted following the conclusion of the Leveson inquiry in 2012, but the 
government isnow consulting on its implementation 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/consultation-on-the-leveson-inquiry-and-its-implementation>
, closing tomorrow.

Section 40 would mean that any newspaper that fails to sign up to a regulator 
backed by a royal charter could be forced to pay its opponents’ legal costs in 
libel cases, even if it wins. This could mean, for instance, that vexatious 
property developers could sue papers for printing legitimate criticism, knowing 
there is very little financial risk in doing so. Vexatious claims could have a 
crippling effect on local and regional papers, already under an unprecedented 
level of financial pressure.

Phone hacking is yesterday’s news. We should focus on far greater threats | 
Peter Preston
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/08/phone-hacking-yesterdays-news-focus-on-greater-threats>
Currently the only organisation fitting the royal charter criteria is Impress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/impress> – which has strong financial ties 
to Max Mosley, who hasevery reason to hate the press 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2008/jul/24/mosley.privacy>. Senior figures at 
Impress have also beencaught out on social media 
<http://order-order.com/2016/12/20/impress-regulators-say-hate-daily-mail-scum/>
 expressing their hatred for newspapers, chiefly the Daily Mail.

The majority of national newspapers, with the exception of the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/nov/02/why-i-have-opposed-the-guardian-being-regulated-by-ipso>
 and the Financial Times, have signed up to theIndependent Press Standards 
Organisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/10/ipso-agrees-four-year-funding-deal-to-underline-independence>
 (Ipso), which was set up after Leveson to replace thePress Complaints 
Commission <https://www.theguardian.com/media/pcc> and has the power to fine 
papers as much as £1m. Ipso has made clear that it views the royal charter as 
the first step towards state press regulation, and won’t be signing up.

There is serious concern among local newspaper journalists that the threat of 
punitive legal costs could curtail our capability to engage in public interest 
reporting of the sort the Yorkshire Post did in Leeds. The Sunday Times said 
last week that the papermay not have published 
<http://www.pressgazette.co.uk/sunday-times-says-it-never-would-have-published-lance-armstrong-investigation-under-section-40-as-media-ramps-up-campaign/>
 its Lance Armstrong doping stories under the proposed system.

It is clear that the sort of crime and wrongdoing that went on at the News of 
the World, and others, prompting theLeveson inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/leveson-inquiry>, was unacceptable and 
something needed to be done. But the fact is that the overwhelming majority of 
journalists in the UK don’t act like that and would not act like that. Please 
don’t punish us all for the crimes of the few.
 