
The recent decision by communities secretary Sajid Javid to block Southwark 
Council’s compulsory purchase 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-london-37417949> (CPO) of part of the 
huge Aylesbury estate in order to completely redevelop it addressed one of the 
keenest grievances that arise from such “regeneration” schemes .

In accepting a public inquiry inspector’s recommendation not to confirm the 
CPO, Javid gave particular weight to the interests of resident leaseholders on 
the estate. A group of them argued that they have been offeredfar too little 
financial compensation <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-london-29098960> 
for having their homes knocked down – nothing like enough to buy a comparable 
property in the same area, meaning they’d have to move far from their home 
neighbourhood to somewhere much cheaper and maybe out of London altogether if 
they want to remain homeowners.

The final implications of Javid’s actions are not yet clear. Southwark intends 
to appeal andthis legal commentary 
<http://hsfnotes.com/realestatedevelopment/2016/09/28/a-new-right-to-a-community-decision-by-the-secretary-of-state-not-to-confirm-the-cpo-for-aylesbury-estate/>
 on an unexpected decision says it falls short of establishing any absolute 
right of residents in general to remain within a community affected by a CPO. 
However, the commentary concludes that it does seem to increase “the weight 
given to residents’ expectations that they will be able to remain in their 
community”.

Whatever happens next, Javid’s actions have highlighted the specific and 
recurring issue of resident leaseholders’ treatment when estates face the 
wrecking ball and also the wider question of the impact being compulsorily 
rehoused can have on residents in general, in terms of dislocating family life, 
disrupting children’s education and disproportionately affecting valued 
cultural ties. Javid was also persuaded that the council had failed to make a 
sufficiently compelling case that the CPO was in the public interest.

This is the aspect of the case for regenerating, renewing or rebuilding - pick 
your own term, according to taste - council estates that doesn’t always get 
sufficient weight. Arguments for demolition often contend that “failed” or 
“sink” examples of past municipal house building have ended up perpetuating the 
very social ills they were supposed to help cure.

The problem there is that unemployment, illness and deprivation can end up 
being blamed on buildings when their true causes lie elsewhere. In the process, 
the importance of family and friendship networks and other local connections 
among estate residents - the very stuff of social cohesion and “resilience” - 
can easily be overlooked or underplayed when decisions about the future of 
estates are made.

This is part of the unfair and inaccurate denigration of council estates and 
other forms of social housing as blocks of self-perpetuating want. Recent
research for the Peabody housing association 
<http://www.peabody.org.uk/news-views/2016/jul/business-case-for-affordable-housing>
 by theCentre for Economics and Business Research 
<https://www.cebr.com/about-cebr/> found that over a third of Londoners living 
in social housing work in the emergency services and over 30% hold down jobs as 
carers, security staff, cleaners, kitchen assists and other occupations vital 
to the capital’s economy.

At the same time, London has a chronic housing shortage, especially of the 
types of homes Londoners on low and middle incomes can afford. It has beenargued
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2015/mar/26/andrew-adonis-and-estate-regeneration-some-pros-and-cons>
 that a grand scale expunging of estates and their replacement by new “city 
villages” on borough-owned public land would enable a transformative net 
increase in the number of London homes, with no loss of social rented stock, 
along with wider neighbourhood improvements. But such a radical approach could 
cause many more problems than it solved. And do its numbers add up in the first 
place?

Let’s take the second question first. A new report 
<http://www.centreforlondon.org/project/estate-densification/> published by the 
Centre For London thinktank focuses on the scope for increasing the amount of 
housing on London council-owned estates’ land - the extent to which they can be 
“densified”, whether by “incremental infill” of spare or adaptable space or by 
some degree of demolition and rebuilding.

Mindful that many of the larger Inner London estates have already been made 
over in some way, the researchers, who include distinguished social housing 
policy practitionerPete Redman 
<http://www.centreforlondon.org/person/pete-redman/>, analysed large estates in 
four boroughs: Lewisham, Barking and Dagenham, Hounslow and Waltham Forest.


After looking at the space available and the complex financial arithmetic 
involved, they concluded that, in theory, estate densification across the 
capital could generate between 4,000 and 8,000 new homes a year – up to 20% of 
the annual increaseLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> requires. 
With public investment, which the authors are not alone in regarding as 
insufficient at present, this figure could include an increase in sub-market 
priced housing.

That leaves the vital issue of how densification, especially if it involves a 
lot of demolition, can be undertaken with the support of estate residents. 
Better compensation for those who lose their existing homes, often against 
their wishes, is very much part of the picture. Minimum levels for leaseholders 
and tenants areset by national government 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/7719/147648.pdf>
 - something else for Sajid Javid to think about if he wants to square his 
Aylesbury decision with the government’s wish to increase housing supply.

Then there’s the broader and more complex question of resident involvement in 
boroughs’ decisions to densify estates and the way such schemes progress. 
Unsurprisingly, people can be far more receptive to them if they have a genuine 
say in the form they take and if they are confident that they and their 
families will benefit.

There is plenty of thinking about that going on. For example, Just Space, an 
informal alliance <https://justspace.org.uk/history/> of community groups and 
campaigners, has lately publishedproposals and ideas for a “community-led” 
approach <https://justspace.org.uk/history/> to planning policy, drawn up with 
Sadiq Khan’s future upgrade of theLondon Plan 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/what-we-do/planning/london-plan/current-london-plan> 
in mind. From another part of the forest,Create Streets 
<http://www.createstreets.com/about-us/4589555939> continues to make its case 
that more traditional, lower-rise forms of London housing can replace many 
post-war blocks at equal or higher densities in line with existing residents’ 
wishes and advocates a “direct planning revolution 
<http://file:///Users/davehill/Downloads/A%20Direct%20Planning%20Revolution%20for%20London%20February%202016%20Final%203%20(3).pdf>
”.

Later this autumn the mayor himself will publish his own best practice guide 
to how estate regeneration should be conducted. This is expected to stress the 
central importance of winning residents’ support to getting such projects right 
from the beginning and carried through with their consent. Khan’smanifesto 
<http://www.sadiq.london/homes_for_londoners_manifesto> signalled a fairly 
flexible approach, no doubt reflecting the wishes of Labour boroughs, but his 
deputy mayor for housing, James Murray, wasno champion of demolition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2015/aug/07/estate-regeneration-the-king-square-solution>
 when he led on housing at Islington. More on this before too long.

 