
Leading figures in classical music have expressed disappointment at the 
government’s decision to withdraw public money from proposals for a new concert 
hall inLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>.

The government announced on Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/04/government-pulls-funding-for-world-class-london-concert-hall>
 that it was removing money from the project. Theconductor Daniel Harding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/aug/08/daniel-harding-young-musician-proms>
 said it would be “devastating” if the plans to create a new centre for music 
were abandoned.

London's new concert hall project has stalled – and it's no great loss
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/07/london-new-concert-hall-project-rattle-plans-stalled-no-loss>
Harding, the music director of the Orchestre de Paris, said: “Speaking as 
musician … it would be extremely disappointing if it is not possible to have 
the kind of concert hall in London that we have here in Paris.”


Under plans costed last year at £278m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/dec/16/278m-concert-hall-musuem-of-london-site>
, the concert hall would be built on the site of the Museum of London and would 
provide a new home for the London Symphony Orchestra (LSO) under the 
forthcoming leadership of Sir Simon Rattle.

Harding said he had a soft spot for the LSO’s current Barbican home, but 
acoustically it fell short. “It is a very difficult place to make a blended and 
high-quality sound. It is really a great conference venue, not a concert hall. 
If you hear the LSO play in the Barbican one night and Amsterdam or Paris or 
Berlin the next night, it is a completely different thing.”

He said the new concert hall would be more than a world-class venue, it would 
open up opportunities for new audiences. “We find a lot of money for building 
all sorts of sports arenas, which is wonderful, but the arts are hugely 
important too,” Harding said.

Last year the then chancellor, George Osborne, committed £5.5m to fund work on 
a business case for the new concert hall. Approximately £1.25m has been spent, 
and the remainder will now return to the Treasury.

Senior figures close to the project have told the Guardian that work will 
continue and the detailed business case will be made.

But neither the Barbican or the LSO would comment beyond a statement from Mark 
Boleat, the policy chairman at the City of London Corporation, who said: “This 
is very disappointing news. We believe the government should have waited to see 
whether a business case could have been developed before making this 
announcement.”

The conductor Sir Roger Norrington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/26/sir-roger-norrington-proms-17-brahms-first-symphony>
 said neither the Barbican or the Royal Festival Hall were satisfactory venues 
for orchestras. “It is a great pity, a shame,” he said. “We can survive on what 
he have got but it is not ideal. Curiously Paris, which for years did not have 
any purpose-built halls at all, now has two new ones.”

David Butcher, the chief executive of Britten Sinfonia, an associate ensemble 
at the Barbican, raised concerns about the message the decision sent.

“Political changes often bring different priorities,” he said. “But it seems a 
great shame that the government has decided not to invest in the centre for 
music. Moreover, it doesn’t send a particularly positive message about the 
value the government puts on music and culture in general.”

The case for a new concert hall was outlined in detail in a 250-page report, 
but it was not a case universally accepted. Some have pointed out that the UK 
already has first-rate concert halls in Birmingham, Gateshead and Edinburgh.


The musician Julian Lloyd Webber was not a supporter. “I certainly don’t want 
to crow but I do think the money was being spent on the wrong thing at this 
time, a time when the government is cutting back so heavily on music 
education,” he said.

“I felt it was the wrong thing as you would end up in a situation where there 
is no audience in the lovely new hall. If we had all the money in the world 
then, yes, a new hall for London would be great, but we don’t and we know we 
don’t and it is a matter of prioritising the expenditure.

“The sad thing is that the government will not spend this money on music 
education, so none of us have won.”
 