
For three decades, with barely a blip, the UK capital has been going from 
strength to strength. Nothing has stunted its potency and growth, not the 7/7 
bombings or the 2011 riots, notBlack Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/gallery/2007/oct/17/blackmonday> or the 
2008 global crash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2008/dec/28/markets-credit-crunch-banking-2008>
, not even theoriginal Millennium Dome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/mar/17/how-we-made-the-millennium-dome-richard-rogers>
. Its economydrives and subsidises the rest of the country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/dec/28/brexit-britain-will-depend-on-foreign-london-and-its-muslim-mayor-in-2017>
, its still-new tier of regional government – the mayoralty and the Greater 
London Authority (GLA) – has been a success and it has hosted a triumphant 
Olympic Games. Its population, after shrinking through years of managed 
decline, is now at an all-time high, andmight hit 10 million by 2030 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/what-we-do/research-and-analysis/people-and-communities/population-projections>
. But London enters 2017 with a question mark after its name. Might its golden 
age be coming to an end?

After the fireworks <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-38473292>, the New Year 
begins amid unaccustomed unease. The heavy, grey cloud above is Brexit, with 
major employers in an international city whose wealth has been built on 
financial services pondering their options for the future. Meanwhile, 
austerity, albeit moderated byMiliband-ish measures from Theresa May 
<https://www.ft.com/content/c55e4df6-8953-11e6-8cb7-e7ada1d123b1>, continues to 
erode from below. It doesn’t lighten the general mood that armed police 
officers have become a routine feature of everyday London life. In all these 
circumstances optimism is essential, but staving off its opposite will require 
fortitude and skill.

The mayor, of course, has a big part to play 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/dec/28/brexit-britain-will-depend-on-foreign-london-and-its-muslim-mayor-in-2017>
 in all of this. Sadiq Khan’s 2017 will involve the Labour man in unending 
nagging of and negotiating with the Conservatives in charge of national 
government, hoping to secure the best possible post-Brexit deal for the capital 
and, by extension, the country. Hispanel of Brexit advisors 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/press-releases/mayoral/mayor-unveils-brexit-expert-advisory-panel>
, bankers, accountants, Peter Mandelson and all, doesn’t delight those who 
think he’s insufficiently left-wing. But pragmatism is an essential mayoral 
art: if you want a bunch of Tories to take you seriously, you don’t surround 
yourself with Corbynites.

Policy delivery will begin with Khan hailing a freeze on those public 
transport fares that Transport for London (TfL) sets, butnot the universal one 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/jun/09/sadiq-khan-will-pay-for-incomplete-fares-freeze-but-how-much>
 some of his election campaign statements and a line in his manifesto claimed. 
Political opponents will attack him (again) for that, and for thedemands he is 
making on TfL’s finances 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/dec/08/sadiq-khan-takes-transport-for-london-into-new-business-territory>
 as a whole as hisfirst mayoral budget 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/get-involved/have-your-say/all-consultations/consultation-mayors-budget-2017-18>
, covering all GLA functions, comes under closer public scrutiny.

Khan’s new “hopper” fare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/12/sadiq-khan-launches-hopper-fares-for-london-buses>
, which enables bus passengers to catch two buses for the price of one during a 
60 minute period, has given him - not to mention a lot of Londoners on low 
incomes - a quick early win. But this initiative, though welcome, needs to be 
seen in the context of falling bus ridership, something TfL can ill afford 
given its increasing dependence on fares revenue.

This, in turn, is a consequence of worsening road traffic congestion, which 
London’s economy could do without. Congestion also harms air quality, another 
issue the mayor has sought to make a fast start on. He is set to kick-off 
implementing hisanti-pollution policies 
<https://consultations.tfl.gov.uk/environment/air-quality-consultation-phase-2/?cid=airquality-consultation>
 by introducing an emissions surcharge (the so-called “T-charge” on toxicity) 
on high-pollution vehicles entering the congestion charge zone early in 2017, 
but will be urged bycritical friends 
<http://cleanair.london/solutions/how-and-when-will-sadiq-keep-his-pledge-if-he-doesnt-bandiesel/>
 to go further with his policies as a whole.

Holding down public transport fares is one part of a broader attempt to 
address London’s high cost of living, which leaves too many of its households, 
including around 40% of its children, struggling to make ends meet on 
unacceptably low pay and excluded from many of the city’s riches. Housing costs 
are, famously, a huge factor in this and also hugely difficult to control. The 
mayor’s housing team has assembled apurposeful strategy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/nov/29/sadiq-khan-sets-out-key-plans-for-more-genuinely-affordable-london-homes>
 for getting more homes built for sale, rent or a combination of both at prices 
ordinary Londoners can afford. Khan will hope to be able to boast of initial 
successes as he embarks on the vast task of trying to better match housing 
delivery to the city’s social and economic need. The backdrop to all this is 
the ongoing three-year monster mission of writing a new London Plan.

There are going to be tensions. Hammered by successive grant cuts and hampered 
by limits on their freedom to borrow to build, some of the capital’s boroughs, 
often Labour-run, are becoming ever more adroit at finding ways to meet at 
least some local “affordable” housing demand, but these can mean private sector 
partnerships involving publicly owned land that don’t always work as well as 
planned. The available alternatives - largely, small variations on doing 
nothing - aren’t all that attractive either.

Squeezed between the same rock and hard place we find shortages of school 
places and health and social care provision also having their impact at 
borough, and indeed neighbourhood level. Dynamic boroughs and the mayor alike 
are trying to get more more purchase on low-cost childcare and improving 
post-school skills training, as the city strives for greater autonomy in the 
running of its affairs.

A striking thing about the politics of London is the high degree of consensus 
about the benefits of devolving power over such things as welfare programmes, 
property taxes and infrastructure investment from Whitehall. Agreement crosses 
party lines and unifies business interests, social sector campaigners and more. 
There is strength in that solidarity.London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> will need every ounce of it to keep on 
prospering in 2017 and beyond.
 