
A historic church in the City of London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>
 is to be reunited with a magnificent 16th-century carving that was stolen from 
it decades ago.

St Katharine Cree church in Leadenhall Street is a survivor of both the Great 
Fire of 1666 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/aug/30/great-fire-of-london-1666-350th-anniversary-which-buildings-disappeared>
 and the second world war blitz, while the 80cm-high alabaster carving was part 
of a monument to Sir Nicholas Throckmorton, a prominent figure in the reign of 
Elizabeth I, dating from the 1570s. The diplomat was the uncle of Sir Francis 
Throckmorton, a conspirator in theThrockmorton Plot 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Throckmorton_Plot>.

Klaas Muller, an art specialist in Brussels, bought the work in good faith in 
Belgium last year. He agreed to return it unconditionally after being 
approached by Christopher A Marinello, a lawyer and director ofArt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> Recovery International, which 
specialises in the recovery of stolen, missing and disputed cultural property.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fcity-london-st-katharine-cree-church-reunited-stolen-16th-century-carving%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9398003eacb2c1252e8aad0a2aa7d9d4510abbed%2F0_33_4997_2998%2F4997.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=London%20church%20to%20be%20reunited%20with%20stolen%2016th-century%20carving&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fcity-london-st-katharine-cree-church-reunited-stolen-16th-century-carving%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=London%20church%20to%20be%20reunited%20with%20stolen%2016th-century%20carving&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fcity-london-st-katharine-cree-church-reunited-stolen-16th-century-carving%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9398003eacb2c1252e8aad0a2aa7d9d4510abbed%2F0_33_4997_2998%2F4997.jpg>
 The monument to Sir Nicholas Throckmorton. Photograph: Phil Manning 
Marinello, who acted pro bono for St Katharine Cree, said it was an honour to 
return a sculpture of such importance to the church.

He said: “As a good faith buyer under Belgian law, Muller could have easily 
defended his possession of this monument. Instead, he chose to be magnanimous 
by willingly and enthusiastically returning a work of art that clearly belongs 
to St Katharine Cree.

“Muller’s actions should teach the trade a thing or two about the possession 
of stolen and looted works of art. It is not always about protecting profits 
and it is always the season to do the right thing.”

Phil Manning, a churchwarden at St Katharine Cree, said: “This is an amazing 
time for this carving to be coming back to the church ... The building is on the
heritage at risk register 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/buildingsatrisk> and there are 
significant plans for its restoration over the next few years. The return of a 
fine piece of carving which belongs on an existing monument of a historically 
important figure is really quite something.

“It is not only a beautiful object but a gateway to the understanding and 
interpretation of our heritage.”

With medieval foundations, St Katharine Cree is an important 1630s building 
with a 16th-century tower. Its imposing Jacobean architecture, including 
perpendicular vaulting and neoclassical arches, is unique in London. Its 
original organ was played by Purcell and Handel.

Manning said that the church was consecrated in 1630 by William Laud, the 
Bishop of London, who was later accused of treason and executed in 1645.

“The way he conducted the consecration service was used in evidence at his 
trial to suggest that he was actually a Catholic,” said Manning. “The account 
of the service describes much genuflecting and bowing. On entering the church, 
he threw dust into the air and declared: ‘This is holy ground.’ His emphasis 
was on the beauty of holiness, but the zeal with which he sought to reform 
public worship made him a number of enemies, notably amongthe Puritans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2002/feb/16/artsandhumanities.highereducation>
, and this led to his downfall.”

A 1793 engraving and a 1929 photograph show the Throckmorton monument in its 
complete state. Precisely when the carving disappeared is unclear.

Muller will be out of pocket by thousands of pounds, although he had paid a 
fraction of the work’s true value. He bought it from a fellow dealer, and said 
he is hoping for a refund.

Muller was shocked when he first realised that it belonged to the church. He 
said that, “historically and ethically”, returning it was the right thing to 
do, adding: “I thought it could be a nice Christmas present.”

The recovery was made possible by Patrick Damiaens, a Belgian ornamental and 
heraldic woodcarver, who was shown the carving by Muller. Intrigued, Damiaens 
began researching it, and his detective work established its significance.

The craftsmanship is of such high quality that it may have come from a 
workshop in Southwark where many Flemish refugees settled in the 16th century.

For Marinello and Manning, history is repeating itself. In 2010, they 
recovered a 17th-century alabaster bust of Peter Turner, a botanist and 
physician, that had been stolen from another City of London church, St Olave’s, 
duringthe blitz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2015/jul/10/the-blitz-rare-colour-photographs-in-pictures>
. It too had ended up with a Belgian dealer, who agreed to return it.

 * This article was amended on 22 December 2016 to remove an ambiguity in the 
third-last paragraph. An earlier version said “Intrigued, he began researching 
... ”
 