
London’s troubled garden bridge project has been accused of benefiting from a 
significant conflict of interest after it emerged that a senior official helped 
win millions of pounds of public money for the project after accepting a job 
with the engineering company behind it.

Richard de Cani, at the time head of planning for Transport for London, played 
a key role in securing £7m in additional funding from his organisation and the 
Department forTransport <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> last 
February.

According to correspondence obtained by the Architects Journal 
<https://www.architectsjournal.co.uk/news/exclusive-tfl-hit-by-garden-bridge-conflict-of-interest-claims/10015964.article?blocktitle=news-feature&contentID=17134>
 under a freedom of information request, De Cani was serving a notice period 
with TfL, having accepted a senior job at Arup.

The global engineering firm, where De Cani is now head of planning for the UK, 
Middle East and Africa regions, is the engineer behind the planned £185m bridge 
across the Thames.

The Thomas Heatherwick-designed project, intended to run 367 metres from South 
Bank to Temple and featuring 270 trees and thousands of plants, has been 
granted £60m in public funding between TfL and the DfT, to be released in 
stages.

According to the documents, the terms of the deal with the Garden Bridge 
Trust, the charity behind the project, will see the transport department and 
TfL each hand over £3.5m to the project in February after the signing of a 
construction deal.

The correspondence shows that De Cani’s role included persuading the DfT to 
release its share after arguing the trust had all the necessary money and 
consents needed to build the structure, something which remains in doubt.

While there is no evidence any of this £7m would have gone directly to Arup, 
the engineering firm would be expected to benefit if the bridge is eventually 
built.

Tom Copley, a Labour member of the London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> assembly, said he planned to write to 
the head of TfL, Mike Brown, to ask about the perceived conflict of interest.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Flondon-garden-bridge-accusation-of-conflict-of-interest-over-public-funds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F097e445428c12fcde6fbdb012e1947e0303e7e40%2F0_0_8688_5792%2F8688.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=London%20garden%20bridge%3A%20accusation%20of%20conflict%20of%20interest%20over%20public%20funds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Flondon-garden-bridge-accusation-of-conflict-of-interest-over-public-funds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=London%20garden%20bridge%3A%20accusation%20of%20conflict%20of%20interest%20over%20public%20funds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Flondon-garden-bridge-accusation-of-conflict-of-interest-over-public-funds%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F097e445428c12fcde6fbdb012e1947e0303e7e40%2F0_0_8688_5792%2F8688.jpg>
 London mayor Sadiq Khan has said the bridge will receive no more public funds. 
Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian 
“We’re not talking small fry, we’re talking millions of pounds of taxpayers’ 
money handed over when there were still crucial concerns about the trust’s 
ability to meet the conditions of its contract,” he said.


“This project has been cloaked in a thick smoke screen from the very start. 
This is only going to reduce public confidence that their money has been put to 
proper use.”

While the bridge is touted by supporters as a tourism and transport boon for 
central London, it has faced criticism for using significant sums of public 
money on a river link in a part of the city that is already well served, which 
will be privately run andclosed at night and for occasional corporate events 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/06/garden-bridge-mobile-phone-signals-tracking-london>
.

The project has faced significant planning and logistics delays, with the 
start of construction already at least a year late and senior politicians 
debating whether it should go ahead at all.

London’s mayor, Sadiq Khan, has asked the Labour MP Dame Margaret Hodge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/22/sadiq-khan-sets-up-inquiry-into-garden-bridge-projects-use-of-public-money>
 to examine whether it provides value for the public money committed, almost 
£40m of which has already been spent. Khan has pledged that the bridge will 
receive no more public funds.


In October, a National Audit Office report into the project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/11/london-garden-bridge-report-national-audit-office-public-money>
 said that ministers repeatedly handed over more money despite official advice 
against doing so.

TfL said suggestions that De Cani had a conflict of interest were “completely 
unfounded”. A spokeswoman said: “Our funding agreement with the trust requires 
us to make grant payments once certain milestones have been reached, one of 
which was the signing of the construction contract. We have kept the Department 
for Transport informed of these payments because of their financial 
contribution to the project.”

A DfT spokesman said: “There is no conflict of interest here. The funding 
agreement between TfL and the Garden Bridge Trust, drawn up in 2015, made clear 
that once the construction contract was signed further funding would be 
released to the trust.”
 