
Last Sunday night Mr. Max Beerbohm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jul/11/the-prince-of-minor-writers-the-selected-essays-of-max-beerbohm-edited-phillip-lopate-review>
 uttered, with a characteristic grace of phrase, microphonic lamentations over 
London revisited. London he now finds a cheerful, bright, salubrious Hell. To 
me it seems curious that any city which earns the three good marks of 
happiness, radiance, and health can also merit the severe epithet of “hellish.” 
Is it possible that a town can be gloomy, dark, unhealthy – and heavenly?

The hands which are wrung in despair over the spectacle of modern urbanism are 
not as a rule of the horny or even of the clerkly or secretarial type. I listen 
as much as I can to what people are saying and thinking; in buses and trains, 
in shops, streets, and crowds I am a shameless eavesdropper, indulging my 
social curiosity.

I do not hear labourers and clerks breaking into sobs and exclaiming that they 
live in hell because thehansom-cab 
<http://www.historic-uk.com/HistoryUK/HistoryofBritain/joseph-hansom-the-hansom-cab/>
 is no longer heard in the streets and the bell of the muffin-man is silent. To 
be nostalgic about these trivialities of Edwardian or Victorian London is the 
amusement of a very small minority, and that minority is exclusively composed 
of the comfortable and the well-to-do, those who could saunter down St. James’s 
Street, on a summer morning when others were at work and take a cab from 
Foodle’s Club to Poodle’s should it chance to rain.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftheguardian%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Flondon-max-beerbohm-urbanism-archive-1936%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff22878b363969b870328e814095fb4a64651607e%2F0_148_3546_2128%2F3546.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=London%2C%20a%20cheerful%2C%20bright%2C%20salubrious%20hell%20%20%E2%80%93%20archive%2C%204%20January%201936&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftheguardian%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Flondon-max-beerbohm-urbanism-archive-1936%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=London%2C%20a%20cheerful%2C%20bright%2C%20salubrious%20hell%20%20%E2%80%93%20archive%2C%204%20January%201936&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftheguardian%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Flondon-max-beerbohm-urbanism-archive-1936%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff22878b363969b870328e814095fb4a64651607e%2F0_148_3546_2128%2F3546.jpg>
 A night scene in central London, 1936. Photograph: Lacey/Getty Images 
I too have some boyhood memories of London and they are memories of squalor 
and darkness, memories of a London in which there was no unemployment insurance 
“dole,” if you must call it so, aLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> 
paraded by huge gangs of starving beggars miserably chanting “We’ve got no work 
to do-ooo.” (There were “depressions” before 1930.) Public vehicles were slow 
and shabby. One crawled over Blackheath in a horse-bus lined with straw, as 
though intended to convey cattle, and slowly proceeded to Charing Cross in a 
dilatory and dirty steam train. Or one took three-quarters of an hour to be 
jolted in a horse-bus from Hampstead to Oxford Street, a journey which now 
takes me eleven and a half minutes in a warm, dry electric train.

Everybody burned coal fires, and the grime of a great city was vastly more 
repulsive than it is to-day. For some reason or other the hansom-cab, an absurd 
vehicle, shares with the tedious tinkling of the muffin-man the office of 
magnet for nostalgic melancholy. The taxi-cab, especially if it is this year’s 
model, is an incomparably better conveyance, just as the electric train is 
incomparably more serviceable and more sanitary than the old steam train of the 
suburban and underground lines.

Does Mr. Beerbohm really look back with regret to the old Metropolitan tunnels 
of Victorian London? The City below the surface was then a choking, sulphurous 
labyrinth of smoke and smuts. If the word “hell’’ is to be applied at all, I 
should reserve it for that inferno of London unelectrified.

Continue reading here 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/12/28/TearsOverLondon.jpeg>

 