
Sadiq Khan will allow private housebuilders to limit the amount of affordable 
housing included in new developments to 35% in a deal that opponents said casts 
doubton his election promise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/jun/08/what-will-housing-success-look-like-under-sadiq-khan>
 to “set a target for 50% of all new homes in London to be genuinely 
affordable”.

How Sadiq Khan has been tackling London's housing crisis so far
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/nov/03/how-sadiq-khan-has-been-tackling-londons-housing-crisis-so-far>
The threshold, announced on Tuesday by the London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> mayor in a new housing strategy, is 
intended to increase housebuilders’ contribution to cheaper housing, but the 
Conservative opposition accused Khan on Monday night of “ratting on what he 
said during the election”, something strongly denied by City Hall.

Andrew Boff, the Tory housing spokesman on the London assembly, said: “There 
was a clear statement that50% was what he wanted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/sep/15/sadiq-khans-planning-incentives-for-more-london-affordable-homes>
. Now this has become a long-term aspiration. The mayor has resiled on his 
housing target.”

Khan said he now planned to “move towards a long-term strategic goal” of half 
of new homes being genuinely affordable and stressed that “fixing the housing 
crisis will be a marathon not a sprint”. City Hall believes the demand for 35% 
from private builders is an important first step towards delivering 50% by the 
end of this decade.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Flondon-mayor-sadiq-khan-35-affordable-homes-target-deal-developers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40b17919f709463c5eb01fab0d717429a7e98785%2F0_230_3100_1860%2F3100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=London%20mayor%20sets%2035%25%20affordable%20homes%20target%20in%20deal%20with%20developers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Flondon-mayor-sadiq-khan-35-affordable-homes-target-deal-developers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=London%20mayor%20sets%2035%25%20affordable%20homes%20target%20in%20deal%20with%20developers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Flondon-mayor-sadiq-khan-35-affordable-homes-target-deal-developers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40b17919f709463c5eb01fab0d717429a7e98785%2F0_230_3100_1860%2F3100.jpg>
 Building more affordable homes was a central pledge in Sadiq Khan’s election 
manifesto. Photograph: John Stillwell/PA 
Khan also said he would grant £3.15bn allocated to City Hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/nov/24/london-and-the-chancellors-2016-autumn-statement>
 by the chancellor inlast week’s autumn statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/24/housing-gets-4bn-boost-to-increase-number-of-new-homes>
 to housing associations who build a minimum of 50% affordable homes “with some 
partners enabled to deliver at least 60%”.

It is estimated this will provide funding for at least 90,000 affordable homes 
over the next six-year period, an increase of nearly 50% on the previous six 
years. They will be a mix of low-cost rent, shared ownership and “London living 
rent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/apr/07/sadiq-khan-housing-mayor-london-labour-business>
” which is based on a third of average incomes in each borough.

The announcement of the new target as part of supplementary planning guidance 
comes amid a deepening crisis in the availability of cheap housing in the 
capital. Just 13% of the new homes approved in London in 2014-15 were classed 
as affordable, which includes rents as high as 80% of market rates. That is 
down from almost a third in 2007-08. Khan and his deputy mayor for housing, 
James Murray, have been in talks with developers since May about ways of 
speeding up the delivery of housing of all kinds.
Affordable housing approvals 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/nov/2016-11-28T13:33:55/embed.html>
“London is in the midst of a housing crisis, with thousands of Londoners 
priced out of a city they call home,” said Khan. “These announcements today 
demonstrate real progress on the long road towards fixing London’s housing 
crisis.”


Khan wants to speed up the planning process by exempting developers from 
revealing the profitability of their schemes to officials if they promise to 
build at least 35% affordable housing. It is understood that some developers 
wanted the figure to be set at 30%. Currently, City Hall can insist on seeing 
the financial model behind a housing scheme to ensure the developer is not 
making surplus profits when they could be providing more affordable units.

In most major applications, developers have to provide a “viability assessment”
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jun/25/london-developers-viability-planning-affordable-social-housing-regeneration-oliver-wainwright>
 that shows the costs and revenues of a development, and therefore how much 
affordable housing can be provided while maintaining a profit. It often leads 
to disputes between housebuilders and planners.

City Hall said the new approach would “offer developers a new quicker route 
through the planning process, removing the requirement for protracted viability 
negotiations if they meet the minimum 35% affordable housing”.

Boff also questioned whether Khan would be able to deliver 35% affordable 
housing from private developers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2015/jan/14/no-social-housing-luxury-london-flat-advert>
, who he predicted would argue that they could only go ahead with projects if 
they are allowed to deliver less and would therefore turn down the 35% 
fast-track approach in favour of negotiation.
 