
A year and a bit have passed since John Biggs became mayor of Tower Hamlets, 
and he’s been keeping busy. He’s been particularly busy with housing policy, as 
he was keen to demonstrate to an audience of fellow politicians, housing 
professionals and the odd stray journalist in an East End community centre on 
Monday.

It was next to the once notorious <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/1118242.stm> 
but nowaward-winning Ocean estate 
<http://www.eastlondonadvertiser.co.uk/news/east_end_s_deprived_ocean_estate_is_shortlisted_for_top_uk_design_award_1_4148023>
 in Stepney, whose total rebuilding is approaching completion after a process 
lasting close to 20 years. Biggs used to represent this area as a councillor. 
He sees the Ocean’s transformation, begun under the auspices of Tony Blair, as 
the culmination of what a huge collective effort can achieve.

Tower Hamlets needs a lot more homes 
<http://www.towerhamlets.gov.uk/Documents/Housing/LBTH_Housing_Strategy_outline.pdf>
. Its population is growing faster than anywhere else in the land, with 
newcomers and newborns bumping the numbers up by about 11,000 every year - it’s 
almost doubled in the past 30 to a good 290,000. There are around 20,000 people 
on the council’s waiting list and a lot in overcrowded conditions. But the 
issue isn’t limited to volume. “Housing isn’t about big numbers, it’s about 
people,” Biggs said.

He offered good news and bad. Delivering the good involved poking his 
predecessor Lutfur Rahman and former London MayorBoris Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> in the eye. Biggs feels both were 
too concerned with maximising output and too little with sensitivity to whether 
the new homes they gave the go-ahead to, especially on the Isle of Dogs, were 
suitable for those who needed them. Also, densities had been too great for 
infrastructure to keep up with, Biggs believed: the school places, shops, 
leisure space, job and training opportunities, transport capacity and health 
care facilities essential to successful communities.

Those past failings, Biggs said, are being addressed. For one thing, he has 
displaced Rahman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/dec/23/tower-hamlets-the-future-according-to-mayor-biggs>
. For another,Sadiq Khan has replaced Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/08/sadiq-khan-labour-london-mayor>
. Other problems remain acute. There are over 2000 homeless Tower Hamlets 
households in temporary accommodation, around half of them outside the borough. 
But Biggs was able to proudly say that 238 families who’d been living for 
longer than the legal limit of six weeks in bed and breakfast places when he 
took office have now been rehoused: “We have shown that although these problems 
are hard, it’s not impossible to fix them, if you’ve got the will,” he said.

The bad news, argued the Labour man, was Conservative national policy. An 
affordability commission 
<http://democracy.towerhamlets.gov.uk/mgCommitteeDetails.aspx?ID=755> he set up 
had confirmed that “affordable rent” homes – officially a form of social 
housing, but with often far higher rents – brought in by the coalition, did not 
work for Tower Hamlets. He called theHousing and Planning Act 
<http://www.towerhamlets.gov.uk/lgnl/housing/Housing_and_Planning_Act.aspx>, 
aspects of which even some Tories consider mad, “punitive” and bound to make 
addressing housing problems in his borough even harder.

Starter homes 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/pm-the-government-will-directly-build-affordable-homes>
, costing up to £450,000 in London, would not be recognized round his way as 
“affordable”. The “pay-to-stay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/29/social-housing-tenants-face-soaring-rents-under-pay-to-stay-policy>
” proposals for social housing tenants on lower middle incomes – a paramedic 
and a nurse bringing in £45,000 on London starter salaries, for instance – 
would be hit for hundreds of pounds a year. “Unless the government’s policy is 
to intentionally price lower and middle income families out of the East End, 
something is very wrong,” Biggs concluded.

There are glimmers of hope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/oct/05/conservative-party-conference-hope-housing-crisis>
 that new housing minister Gavin Barwell, a London MP, has recognised that 
national policy needs adjustment and that London’s circumstances require 
flexibility to be built in the new Act’s regulations, when they are at last 
produced. Khan’s forthcoming supplementary planning guidance, now expected next 
month, his London Living Rent and other policies will, Biggs hopes, be helpful 
too.

The mayor and colleagues are now drawing up a new housing strategy 
<http://www.towerhamlets.gov.uk/lgnl/council_and_democracy/consultations/Housing_strategy_consultation_second_stage.aspx>
 with a view to meeting commitments that include building over 1,000 new 
council homes at social rents and over 2,000 social and other “genuinely 
affordable” rented homes in partnership with commercial developers and housing 
associations, tackling overcrowding and securing a fairer deal for private 
renters.

Biggs spoke lyrically about the East End, something he does often and well: 
“The East End’s a conundrum of a place. You might see it as being full of 
challenge and poverty. But when you actually look at the lives of people who 
come here, you see it is a place of magical potential where they can achieve 
their dreams. And we want that to happen more often.”
 