
There are prosperous views looking west from the roof of what was once the 
London 2012 Olympics press centre and is now part of a commercial complex called
Here East <http://hereeast.com/>, whose best known tenant is BT Sport: straight 
ahead for the City and the Shard; look left for more big money towers in Canary 
Wharf; further left and much nearer, the Olympic stadium is a short walk away. 
On the other side of Here East, across the Olympic Park, lies Stratford town 
centre with its luxurious Westfield mall. But beyond that stretches the rest of 
the London borough of Newham, one of the poorest places in the UK.

Inside the Here East building, Newham’s Labour executive mayor Sir Robin Wales 
talked about jobs. He told a conference calledRising in the East 
<http://centreforlondon.org/rising-in-the-east/> that in the past six years the 
council’s job brokerage,Workplace 
<https://www.newham.gov.uk/Pages/Services/About-Newham-Workplace.aspx>, which 
began in 2007, had got well over 30,000 local people into jobs - people who had 
never worked or who had been unemployed for a long time. The secret, he said, 
has been to partner with local employers to help Newham residents to seize the 
opportunities the rapid development of this part of east London has brought - 
not just since the Olympics, but from the early years of this century with 
Westfield’s investment in Stratford City and the steady, long-term eastward 
shift of the capital’s economic centre of gravity.

Earlier that morning (Wednesday), plans for the expansion of City Airport had 
been approved by the government, following London mayor Sadiq Khan’sdropping of 
objections 
<http://www.newhamrecorder.co.uk/news/sadiq_khan_drops_gla_objection_to_london_city_airport_land_purchase_1_4529860>
 to it that had been made by his predecessor, Boris Johnson.Green AM Caroline 
Russell <https://www.london.gov.uk/people/assembly/Caroline-RUSSELL>, whose 
party would like the airport closed, is dismayed, calling the decision 
“reckless” and “terrible news”. Clyde Loakes, deputy leader and cabinet member 
for the environment of Labour-run Waltham Forest, one of Newham’s fellow 
post-Olympic “growth boroughs”, deemed it “incredibly disappointing 
<http://www.yellowad.co.uk/article.cfm?id=114706&headline=Council%20disappointed%20with%20City%20airport%20expansion%20plans&sectionIs=news&searchyear=2016>
” and a “kick in the teeth” for residents of what he says is the third most 
overflown of the city’s 32 boroughs. Sir Robin, though, made it clear he was 
delighted: more flights means more business, means more growth, means still 
more jobs.

Another participant in the Rising in the East event, organised by thinktank 
Centre for London, was John Burton, Westfield’shead of development 
<http://europe-re.com/john-burton-head-of-development-westfield/62415>. He said 
the company had not moved in expecting the Olympic bid to be successful. When 
it was, the Newham mayor got on their case: “Robin’s message to us was ‘sort 
yourselves out’. He saw the opportunity for us as investors. Every time we had 
a negotiation with us, he left us with a very simple message: ‘I want jobs, I 
want jobs and I want more jobs’.”

But, of course, there are jobs and there are jobs and there are jobs. London’s 
Poverty Profile for 2015showed 
<http://www.londonspovertyprofile.org.uk/indicators/boroughs/newham/> that 
Newham’s unemployment rate, as a proportion of the economically active, fell by 
1% to 8.6% between 2011 and 2014 and that during the same period the rate of 
workless benefit claimants dropped from 13.8% among working age people to 
10.2%. However, between 2010 and 2014, the proportion of employees in Newham 
categorised as low paid rose from 25% to 35% and the proportion of low paid 
jobs done by Newham employees went up from 17% to 29%.

Between 2010 and 2015, Newham’s position in the league table of most deprived 
local authority districts according to the government’s index of multiple 
deprivation dropped from second to 25th place, only one notch above Islington 
(seepage 15 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/465791/English_Indices_of_Deprivation_2015_-_Statistical_Release.pdf>
). The borough hasproduced a graphic 
<https://mgov.newham.gov.uk/documents/s102777/IMD_Cabinet_presentation.pdf> 
mapping out the detail of this change. But some of it may be due to demographic 
shifts, as young, middle income households looking for relatively cheap places 
to buy move into terraced houses in Plaistow or shared ownership flats around 
the Royal Docks - they are “swarming in”, Sir Robin remarked. “The growth in 
zero hours contracts, insecure and part-time jobs limits progress,” wrote the 
LSE’s otherwise upbeat Anne Power inan early legacy assessment 
<http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/politicsandpolicy/the-olympic-legacy/> three years ago.

Newham is conscious that many of the jobs of longer established residents 
don’t pay very well. It says it is striving to raise skills levels among locals 
through tie-ins with employers and points to arecent initiative 
<https://www.newham.gov.uk/Pages/News/Construction-careers-boost-for-young-people.aspx>
 with Lloyds and property developer Lendlease to boost construction industry 
careers. Newham adds that it is pressing the government, as yet without 
success, to allow it toenforce payment of the national minimum wage 
<https://www.newham.gov.uk/Pages/News/Demand-for-local-authorities-to-be-granted-the-power-to-make-businesses-pay-by-the-rules.aspx>
. The council says it knows from its housing panel survey that nearly one in 
five of the borough’s residents in work does not receive it, let alone the 
higher, voluntary London Living wage.

Sir Robin expressed disappointment that Newham and other growth boroughs 
<http://www.growthboroughs.com/> such as Hackney - whose City Hall-bound mayor 
Jules Pipe 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/press-releases/mayoral/jules-pipe-announced-as-deputy-mayor>
 he credited with getting Hear East converted and occupied - and Tower Hamlets 
have not received the Games legacy support needed from post-Labour national 
governments. He did, though, say he was proud of what Newham has fought for and 
achieved. “No Olympic Games in previous history has made a difference to a poor 
community sitting right next to it,” he said, and concluded that London is the 
only Olympic city so far to have secured “anything like” a local legacy of that 
kind. “We can keep building on that,” he said.
 