
When industry left the big manufacturing regions, it was impossible not to 
notice. Entire landscapes changed. Bolton withoutits cotton mills 
<http://www.theboltonnews.co.uk/features/11738369.Bolton_has_a_long_history_tied_to_mills_and_industry/>
, Greenock withoutits shipyards 
<http://www.inverclydeshipbuilding.co.uk/home/general-history/rm-smith-history-of-shipbuilding-in-greenock>
, Consett withoutits steelworks 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/nationonfilm/topics/steel/background.shtml>: you returned 
to them after a while away and wondered at how much less enclosed they seemed – 
how a view that once stopped at a brick wall or a factory shed now extended as 
far as the hillside or the estuary. You walked down an alley and remembered the 
railway bridge where slow trains of coal wagons had passed overhead – the 
bridge gone, though not its solid stone abutments. You said to your companion, 
“It hardly seems the same place.”

Sadiq Khan asks LSE to investigate London housing market
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/08/sadiq-khan-lse-investigate-london-housing-market>
In London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, with the great exception of 
Docklands, the deindustrialisation has been much less obvious. One day an 
old-fashioned car repair shop is open for business, as it has been for the past 
40 years. Nothing much: a pull-down garage door, a Castrol sign turning in the 
wind, a glimpse of a dark inspection pit and a man in overalls. Such an 
ordinary sight that you hardly take it in, so that a few weeks pass before you 
notice it’s shut, and a further few weeks before somebody tells you it’s a 
restaurant now. This is scarcely believable. You walk round the corner to 
check. A blackboard menu sits in the window. Later, you hear that Keira 
Knightley has been seen eating there. The street looks much as before.

London has thousands of small industrial sites like the car repair shop, 
tucked behind office blocks and reached by little lanes, or sometimes still 
sitting brazenly on the corners of residential streets. They’re the kind of 
businesses that any properly functioning metropolis needs on its doorstep: 
printers, bakeries, builders’ merchants, timber yards, plumbing companies, 
office equipment suppliers. Mark Brearley, a professor of urbanism at London 
Metropolitan University, likes to describe them as London’s “industrial 
filigree” and thinks their dwindling number represents a gathering crisis. 
Conversion to restaurants is the least of it. Houses are the thing.

According to Brearley, the capital has lost 16% of its industrial land over 
the past 15 years, with another 10% threatened bychange-of-use permissions 
<https://www.planningportal.co.uk/info/200130/common_projects/9/change_of_use> 
already in the pipeline. Office space outside central London is also in steep 
decline: in the outer boroughs, 10% has been lost to housing, and with it 
33,000 jobs. Brearley is a rare, possibly unique, combination of academic and 
manufacturer – he owns a little factory off the Old Kent Roadthat makes 
aluminium trays 
<https://www.ft.com/content/a70d9c30-29ca-11e3-9bc6-00144feab7de> – which may 
account for his strength of feeling when he says that London “continues to 
treat its industry with contempt”.

The problem, he thinks, stems from a mismanagement of the planning system, 
which prioritises housing, believes it should be kept separate from even 
small-scale industry, and by relaxing the rules on planning permission has 
encouraged housing developers to offer hard-to-refuse prices to the owners of 
factory and office space.

“I want London to wake up,” he said last week. “It doesn’t just have a housing 
supply crisis, it has an accommodation crisis in general – for industry too.” 
The consequence is that all kinds of businesses, including delivery systems, 
are being pushed further out.

The process at its most extreme can be seen on the banks of the Thames 
downstream of Tower Bridge. Fifty years ago, this was still one of the busiest 
waterways in the world, filled with launches, tugs, lighters and merchant 
ships. Nothing much of that time remains. The river now ebbs and flows in a 
kind of artificial gorge created by the high flats and offices on either side, 
with its traffic confined to river-buses, pleasure craft and the occasional 
train of barges loaded with refuse or building spoil.

Despite the lack of industrial space, the idea – and the habit – of making 
money by making things is returning to London

In such post-industrial surroundings, the sight of a working boatyard comes as 
a pleasant shock. In the stretch of the tidal river between the London bridges 
andTilbury <https://forthports.co.uk/tilbury-london/>, there must once have 
been dozens. Two now survive. The one on the north bank, theGallions Point 
Marina 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/london/marina-owner-plans-court-battle-with-sadiq-khan-over-order-to-leave-site-a3376881.html>
, is fighting an eviction order – a fight it looks unlikely to win, given that 
the site is wanted as part of the£1.7bn development plan for the Royal Albert 
Dock 
<http://www.wharf.co.uk/news/local-news/forget-brexit-chinese-still-faith-11680397>
 that Chinese investment is funding. The other, the South Dock Marina boatyard, 
occupies a riverfront plot on the south bank owned by Southwark council at the 
eastern edge of the old Surrey Docks system. It has a brighter future, though 
it too is threatened by redevelopment.

‘Boatyard” is a picturesque word. What it meant in Southwark was a patch of 
level concrete with a few pleasure boats parked on it, surrounded by a high 
fence. A crane stood at the edge of the dock to raise the boats from the water 
and lower them back in. I walked round the yard’s perimeter with Alasdair 
Flint, an enthusiastic yachtsman who owns a theatrical hire and supply 
business, and the long-establishedArthur Beale chandlery 
<http://spitalfieldslife.com/2016/02/14/at-arthur-beale/> in central London.

Flint lives close to the yard and talked about the industries that used to 
flourish here – foundries, leather-makers, paint manufacturers – and, a little 
further off, the jam, vinegar and tinned-food factories that were supplied with 
their raw materials straight from the docks. Finding premises in inner London, 
he said, had become nearly impossible – everything was going for housing. He 
noticed that his Christmas round, when he’d drive to deliver a bottle of whisky 
or wine to his trade suppliers and customers, had moved from the inner city to 
the outskirts.

As to the boatyard, Southwark council 
<file:/Volumes/Downloads/Internet%20Downloads/061_SDM_Consultation_boards_FINAL.pdf>
 wants a 28-floor tower and four six- and seven-floor blocks to be built on the 
site, providing a total of 193 homes with 29% of them classified as 
“affordable”. The plans have already been amended after objections from local 
residents, and more consultations will take place this year. Some concessions 
have already been made. The boatyard is to be retained and the flats will be 
first advertised for sale in the capital before they go on offer in east Asia.

The reaction to both points, however, is sceptical. To make way for the flats, 
the yard will stack its boats on two levels, with the new blocks pressed hard 
against what’s left of the open space where the boats are repaired. There will 
never be room for the yard’s expansion. “My feeling is that nobody paying at 
least half a million for a flat is going to put up with the noise,” Flint said.

There’s a chance, of course, that none of this will happen. According to Helen 
Jones, a local property manager, the price of the typical two-room flat in the 
area has gone down from £700,000 to £650,000 or £625,000, and flats are slow to 
sell. Thebuy-to-let market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/18/buy-to-let-lending-nationwide-tax-changes-landlords>
 has nearly vanished; the City may be about to shed thousands of highly paid 
jobs; £625,000 remains a stiff price for even a well-paid working couple. Who 
will buy them? “The Chinese, if I’m honest,” said Jones. “They’ll put their 
children in them or rent them out to students.”

A paradox. Despite the lack of industrial space, the idea – and the habit – of 
making money by making things is returning to London. It no longer seems an 
anachronism. Brearley has a list: four paint manufacturers, six gunmakers, 
three brush-makers, 100 workrooms making shirts and 18 making shoes, 10 
foundries, four lift manufacturers, any number ofmicrobreweries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/nov/08/craft-beer-indepedent-brewers-micro-ed-cumming>
, a resurgence in the rag trade. The insatiable demand for London housing, and 
its international tradability as an asset, has put a lot at stake.
 