
Rail, air and London Underground 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london-underground> services will be hit by 
strikes this week, leaving many commuters, particularly those in London and the 
south-east, facing a difficult start to the first full working week of 2017.

Tube strike: all lines hit and most central London stations closed – live 
updates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/live/2017/jan/09/tube-strike-all-lines-hit-and-most-central-london-stations-closed-live-updates>
A 24-hour walkout by London Underground staff is expected to cause havoc on 
Monday by closing tube stations in the centre of the capital.British Airways 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/britishairways> flights from Heathrow are 
expected to be disrupted by a strike among cabin crew on Tuesday, and London’s 
commuters face another round of chaos as drivers on the troubled Southern 
franchise begin three days of strikes.

The wave of industrial action could also spread beyond the south-east. The RMT 
union will ballot its members on Arriva Rail North, which runs the Northern 
franchise, on Tuesday on possible strike action over a pay deal, the Sunday 
Times reported. The introduction of new trains on the Merseyrail network and 
West Midlands franchise could also lead to showdowns with unions over the role 
of conductors, the cause of the industrial action on Southern, in the coming 
months and years.

The London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> Underground strike started 
at 6pm on Sunday, as station staff in the RMT and TSSA unions shut tube 
stations in the centre of the capital, bringing many evening services to an 
early end. A limited number of routes in outer boroughs will run on Monday.

Last-minute talks aimed at limiting the impact of the industrial action ended 
unsuccessfully on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/08/tube-strike-london-underground-severely-reduced-second-union-walks-out>
 after the TSSA rejected a deal London Underground had offered and decided to 
press ahead with strikes alongside the RMT.

All zone one stations are closed, along with all those on the Victoria, and 
Waterloo and City lines.Transport <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> 
for London has put on extra buses, but said roads and National Rail services 
would be much busier than usual, slowing journeys for all commuters.

More than 4m tube journeys are made every day. The strike is part of a 
continuing row over theimpact of ticket office closures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/03/tfl-managers-disgusting-celebrating-london-underground-tube-ticket-office-closures-rmt>
 and900 posts being cut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/03/tube-strike-london-underground-rmt-union-announces-ballot-jobs>
 as part of TfL’s “modernisation” plans,implemented early last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/01/tube-station-staff-to-strike-over-job-cuts-and-ticket-office-closures>
 under the then London mayor, Boris Johnson.

TfL has admitted that too many jobs had been cut, but the RMT accused it of 
“failing to come up with any serious plans to tackle the staffing and safety 
crisis” as talks broke down last week.

An independent review by London TravelWatch, commissioned by the capital’s 
mayor, Sadiq Khan, found that many tube passengers hadstruggled to find staff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/29/london-underground-station-staff-vote-to-strike-tssa-tube-safety>
 and support since ticket offices closed.

Khan has said the strikes were unnecessary. “I have instructed TfL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/tfl> to work around the clock throughout the 
weekend to continue negotiating to resolve this dispute,” he said. “There is no 
reason for the unions to strike. I can assure Londoners that we will continue 
to do everything we can to avert this strike.”

Commuters in London’s suburbs and the south-east are braced for serious 
disruption as train drivers, mainly in the Aslef union, along with some RMT 
members,strike on Tuesday, Wednesday and Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/04/southern-rail-drivers-split-planned-six-day-strike-in-two>
, with virtually no trains operating on the Southern network, which serves 
south London, Sussex, Surrey, Kent and Hampshire.

The company has said people should only attempt travel if it is essential, and 
encourages them to work from home or travel outside the rush hour if possible. 
It is laying on coaches from some of its key stations to neighbouring train 
networks, but said space would be limited and that the service was for 
essential travel.

The company has said a ban by Aslef on drivers working overtime will also lead 
to severe disruption on days when there are no strikes. Three further strike 
days are expected to start on 24 January.

Thousands of British Airways cabin crew will start a two-day strike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/03/british-airways-cabin-crew-to-go-on-strike-next-week-in-pay-dispute>
 on Tuesday over what their union, Unite, describes as poverty pay. The crew, 
mainly young recruits to the mixed fleet, earn basic salaries from £12,000, but 
BA says full-time staff earn at least £21,000 a year after additional payments.

The strike action, originally scheduled to begin on Christmas Day, was 
suspended last month after the airline made a revised pay offer.

Despite the action, the airline said it would ensure all customers reached 
their destinations. Some flights from Heathrow had been cancelled or “merged”, 
with passengers put on alternative departures on the same day as their booked 
flights. The airline said flights from Gatwick and City airports would not be 
affected.
 