
Campaigners, health charities and neighbourhood groups have welcomed plans by 
the London mayor,Sadiq Khan <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sadiq-khan>, 
to more than double funding to clean up the capital’s dirty air.

London is one of the most polluted of dozens of cities in the UK that breach 
EU standards on nitrogen dioxide (NO2), a toxic gas caused by diesel vehicles. 
Air pollution has beenlinked to nearly 9,500 premature deaths 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/15/nearly-9500-people-die-each-year-in-london-because-of-air-pollution-study>
 in the city each year.

Funding for air quality measures over the next five years will be more than 
doubled to £875m, under plans announced on Wednesday, up from the £425m 
committed under the former mayor Boris Johnson.

If approved at a Transport for London board meeting next week, most of the 
money – £312m – will be spent on cleaning up TfL’s 9,300-strong bus fleet. A 
further £65m will be used to compensate and encourage taxi drivers to switch 
from the oldest black cabs – those more than 10 years old – to new ones capable 
of zero emissions,meaning they will either run on batteries or hydrogen 
<https://tfl.gov.uk/info-for/media/press-releases/2015/october/mayor-and-tfl-finalise-ulez-requirements-for-taxi-and-minicab-trades>
.

Local neighbourhood schemes will receive £14m for tackling some of the worst 
pollution hotspots outside the city centre. Plans will also be published next 
year to cut the number of buses running along Oxford Street, which researchers
have said has the worst NO2 pollution in the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/jul/10/london-worst-no2-pollution-earth>
.

Khan said: “With nearly 10,000 Londoners dying early every year due to air 
pollution, tackling poor air quality is a public health emergency that requires 
bold action. I wantLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> to be a world 
leader in how we respond to the challenge of cleaning up our air, and today I’m 
announcing that TfL will be doubling spending on improving London’s air over 
the next five years.”

The new money comes days after the mayors of four major world cities – Paris, 
Madrid, Athens and Mexico City –pledged to ban diesel cars by 2025 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/02/four-of-worlds-biggest-cities-to-ban-diesel-cars-from-their-centres>
.

Khan’s plans stops short of that, though the mayor is bringing in an “ultra 
low emissions zone” a year earlier than planned andhas more than doubled its 
size 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/13/sadiq-khan-to-double-size-londons-clean-air-zone-pollution>
. Owners of older diesel cars will have to pay £12.50 on top of the existing 
congestion charge to enter the zone.

The extra funding was welcomed by campaigners, though some called on the mayor 
to go further and ban diesel vehicles.

“Good job Sadiq,” said Simon Birkett, founder and director of Clean Air in 
London, but added: “We won’t be happy though till you ban diesel in London by 
2020.”

Friends of the Earth London campaigner Sophie Neuburg said: “This cash 
injection from the mayor is great news for Londoners forced to suffer the 
impacts of the capital’s filthy air.” But she also called for Khan to follow 
the other cities and ban diesel vehicles.

Dr Samantha Walker, Asthma UK’s director of research and policy, said: “It is 
clear that action is needed and we welcome the extra investment to help clean 
up the air we breathe.”

The mayor also repeated his call on the government to do more to improve air 
quality, including introducing a scrappage scheme for the most polluting cars, 
a measure that officials have ruled out. On Tuesday, children and the British 
Lung Foundation delivered a petition signed by more than 20,000 people to 10 
Downing Street urging more action on dirty air.
 