
All-night London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> underground services 
to Heathrow airport begin this weekend with the launch of the night tube on the 
Piccadilly line.


Passengers catching early flights on Saturday and Sunday mornings will now be 
able to travel by tube to the UK’s busiest airport. Services will run through 
the night between Cockfosters and Heathrow Terminal 5, providing another 
transport option for people working at or visiting bars, restaurants and music 
venues in Kensington, Hammersmith and the West End.

Weekend 24-hour tube trains already operate on the Victoria, Central, Jubilee 
and Northern lines.

London night tube: meet the people who travelled on the first night
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/20/london-night-tube-meet-people-travelled-first-night-sadiq-khan>
The London mayor, Sadiq Khan <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sadiq-khan>
, said: “I promised that five lines would be up and running by the end of the 
year, and I’m proud that we are delivering this fifth service in time for the 
festive season.

“With 2m journeys made already, the night tube has surpassed our predictions 
and made a huge difference to the lives of so many Londoners. I look forward to 
exploring the option of rolling it out even further in the future to provide 
even greater support to our vital night-time economy.”

The Piccadilly line has suffered disruption during the past three weeks as a 
number of trains have been taken out of service because of a problem with 
wheels.London Underground <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london-underground> 
said a longer than usual period of leaf fall has damaged the wheels, and there 
is a backlog for carrying out repairs.

A rail union called for the launch of night tube services on the line to be 
postponed until the problem was resolved.

The Rail, Maritime and Transport <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> 
(RMT) union general secretary, Mick Cash, said: “It is utter madness that while 
the service on the Piccadilly line is at breaking point the company plan to run 
trains right through from 5am Friday morning until 12.30am Sunday. London 
Underground Limited should postpone night tube on the Piccadilly line until all 
these engineering problems are fixed and the trains are signed off as safe.”

By mid-October, two months after services began on the Central and Victoria 
lines, a higher than expected average of 100,000 people were using the services 
in the early hours.

The busiest station in that period was Oxford Circus, with Liverpool Street, 
Brixton, Stratford and Tottenham Court Road also among the most popular.
 