
Garlic bread? Cheese cake? Some combos just sound wrong, according to the 
famousskit from the Bolton comedian Peter Kay <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=>
. So we can assume that he would happily expose the vainglorious stupidity 
involved in combining a garden and a bridge. Still, he may not have to, for 
Mervyn Davies, chair of the Garden Bridge Trust, did a pretty good jobin the 
Times this week 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/building-a-bridge-towards-a-bright-post-brexit-britain-gl2c52tz2>
, arguing that the building of a green-topped concrete bridge over the Thames, 
from the South Bank to Temple tube, would constitute a much needed economic 
boost to “areas in need of regeneration”. Would that be the Royal Courts of 
Justice and all those poverty-stricken barristers’ chambers? Or the National 
Theatre? Waterloo station? Or the South Bank, with IBM and ITV?

As it happens, Bolton is seeking money for regeneration. Its proposed £50m 
redevelopment 
<http://www.theboltonnews.co.uk/news/14496439.REVEALED__Bolton_Civic_Trust_presents_bold_new_plan_to_redevelop_historic_Cheadle_Square_site/>
 of the town centre includes accommodation for 700 students at the university. 
Just to compare: the Garden Bridge Trust has already spent £38m on consultancy 
fees and studies, without a spade having split the earth. According to the 
Joseph Rowntree Foundation, Bolton is number three onthe list of most 
struggling cities in the UK 
<https://www.jrf.org.uk/press/10-top-12-struggling-cities-are-in-the-northern-powerhouse>
, behind Rochdale and Burnley. These are the places desperately in need of 
economic renewal. And the idea that the rhetoric of regeneration can be used to 
direct money into the centre of London is disgraceful.

“In post-Brexit Britain, [the garden bridge] will be a huge boost to London 
and the country,” writes Lord Davies. Really? The country? In Bolton 58% of 
those who voted in the EU referendum voted to leave, desperately hoping that 
someone would take notice of the social collapse of their town. Who would have 
guessed that the answer to their prayers was going to be aBoris Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> vanity project, built 200 miles 
south, in one of the richest cities on the planet?

But even for Londoners, the bridge makes precious little sense. It is a 
private development that has been offered, and already burned through, 
substantial financial support from the public purse – which meansBolton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/bolton> taxpayers, among others. The whole 
thing is expected to cost £185m, of which (so far) £60m will come from the 
taxpayer. And not including the £3.5m a year maintenance, which could well fall 
to Transport for London.

It will offer no legal right of way to the public, and will be closed at 
various times so that City banks and ad agencies can have corporate soirees to 
impress their friends. It’s all part of the stealth privatisation of public 
space. A few trees plonked on a bridge are nothing but greenwash – 
environmental camouflage for a corporate takeover of open space that currently 
belongs to us all. And they will need to cut down 30 trees on the South Bank in 
order to build it.

Sadiq Khan sets up inquiry into garden bridge project's use of public money
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/22/sadiq-khan-sets-up-inquiry-into-garden-bridge-projects-use-of-public-money>
Thank goodness, then, that the new London mayor has today announced a review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/22/sadiq-khan-sets-up-inquiry-into-garden-bridge-projects-use-of-public-money>
 into the whole dodgy project, led by the indefatigable Margaret Hodge, former 
chair of the public accounts committee. “I’m clear there hasn’t been the 
necessary standard of transparency and openness around the garden bridge,” said 
Sadiq Khan in a dig at the Boris way of doing things. As well as looking into 
the procurement process, Hodge will be asked to decide if spending £185m on a 
footbridge is value for money. I think a lot of people could give her an answer 
to that already. The garden bridge is falling down, falling down, falling down, 
my dear lady. At least, let’s hope.

It is 200 metres from the proposed garden bridge to Waterloo Bridge, which 
currently offers the best street-level views ofLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>. “As long as I gaze on Waterloo sunset 
I am in paradise,” sang the Kinks. But that view won’t survive, nor that of St 
Paul’s Cathedral. Blocked out by reinforced concrete with a bit of a green 
quiff.

“Si monumentum requiris, circumspice” is Wren’s epitaph, in the crypt of St 
Paul’s 
<https://www.stpauls.co.uk/history-collections/history/explore-the-cathedral/discover-the-crypt>
. “If you seek his monument, look around.” If this bridge is built, they should 
erect the same sign for Johnson along its route. For his legacy to London has 
been to litter it with ego-driven projects, with fancy high-rise glass towers, 
owned offshore, lights never on. They are his epitaph. Designed to impress but 
with little to offer the majority of ordinary Londoners. Just like the garden 
bridge itself.

Twitter: @giles_fraser <https://twitter.com/giles_fraser>
 