
Premier League football in London doesn’t only make money for its top flight 
clubs - currently Arsenal, Chelsea, Crystal Palace, Tottenham Hotspur and West 
Ham United - and their players, but also for the capital as a whole. Away fans 
travelling to the capital’s Premier League grounds spend over £134m a season on 
transport, accommodation and food and drink in London, according toone report 
<http://www.goeuro.co.uk/travel/tourism-income-premier-league>. Visitors from 
theWest Midlands <http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/football/36994898> and Merseyside 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/football/37001073> will be pouring into Croydon 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Selhurst_Park> and Islington 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Emirates_Stadium> for the new season’s first 
weekend.

London’s football grounds make their own impact on the capital’s economy, not 
least as drivers of major development schemes. The new season, kicking off on 
Saturday, sees West Hammoving in 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/14/west-ham-deal-century-olympic-stadium>
 to the converted 2012 Olympic stadium in Stratford and workcommencing 
<http://www.tottenhamhotspur.com/news/club/new-stadium/northumberland-development-project-update-290716/>
 on transforming Spurs’s White Hart Lane stadium into aplush 61,000-seater 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/sport/football/news/new-tottenham-stadium-work-begins-8410083>
 as part of awider regeneration project 
<http://www.haringey.gov.uk/planning-and-building-control/planning/major-projects-and-regeneration/tottenham-hotspur-football-club-stadium-development>
. Meanwhile, in the Championship, Queens Park Rangers are aiming tobuild a big 
time future 
<http://www.getwestlondon.co.uk/sport/football/football-news/qpr-celebrate-double-whammy-two-11618250>
 with abrand new ground <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-london-25355950> 
in the huge Old Oak and Park Royal site, and League One AFC Wimbledon are
seeking to return <http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/football/36904275> to their 
forebear club’s original home.

Stadium moves and upgrades excite mixed emotions, and their value to local 
areas and people is contested and unclear: a London Assemblyreport 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/sites/default/files/gla_migrate_files_destination/Regeneration%20Committee%20report%20-%20The%20Regeneration%20Game_0.pdf>
 published last year said “the enhanced regeneration effects of stadia over 
other developments are as yet unproven” and stressed the need for public bodies 
- borough councils and mayors - to see that the benefits are maximised. The 
tensions between the desire for change and success and the countervailing power 
of territorialism and nostalgia are vividly illuminated by football.

This last point provides a shameless pretext for a sometimes muddy trip down 
memory lane. The first part of London Weekend Television’s 21 Years ofLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> Football 1968-89 is 27 minutes long, so 
make sure you’re sitting comfortably.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtzH2qoI0U_M&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtzH2qoI0U_M>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtzH2qoI0U_M&media=>
 Video: LWT/TheTRStv 
And, yes, there is a Part Two. Find it here 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fDn_waB3Ki0>. Finally, coming more up to date, 
a montage of views, uploaded in 2009, from Arsenal and Spurs fans about 
visiting other London clubs. Not always polite. Maybe some things don’t change 
all that much.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7Xqh5us8HaI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7Xqh5us8HaI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7Xqh5us8HaI&media=>
 Video: Partofthegametv. 
At home in the Premier League this weekend, Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/12/crystal-palace-west-bromwich-albion-match-preview>
 host West Bromwich Albion on Saturday andArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/12/arsenal-liverpool-match-preview>
 are visited by Liverpool on Sunday, followed byChelsea playing West Ham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/match/2016/aug/15/chelsea-v-westhamunited>
 at Stamford Bridge on Monday evening in the new Premier League season’s first 
London derby. Also at home in London on Saturday are ChampionshipBrentford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/match/2016/aug/13/brentford-v-ipswichtown>
, League OneCharlton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/match/2016/aug/13/charltonathletic-v-northampton>
 andWimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/match/2016/aug/13/afc-wimbledon-v-boltonwanderers>
 and League TwoBarnet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/match/2016/aug/13/barnet-v-accringtonstanley>
 andLeyton Orient 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/match/2016/aug/13/leytonorient-v-newport-county>
.
 