
London’s traditional elite, such as lawyers, architects and academics, are 
being pushed out of their enclaves in Mayfair, Chelsea and Hampstead by an 
influx of global super rich investors, causing a chain reaction of 
gentrification across the capital, according to research by theLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> School of Economics.

An influx of extremely wealthy overseas buyers is leading the old elite to 
sell up and move from London’s most exclusive postcodes and buy in areas they 
previously considered undesirable, said Dr Luna Glucksberg, of theLSE’s 
International Inequalities Institute 
<http://www.lse.ac.uk/InternationalInequalities/Home.aspx>.

Fenced off: how London’s super-rich are destroying the soul of their community
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/dec/06/battle-rages-for-soul-of-highgate>
This displacement of old money and affluent middle class professionals is in 
turn pricing neighbourhoods in south and east London out of the reach of 
average Londoners and threatening to push those on low incomes to the margins 
of the city and beyond, she added.


“The changes happening at the top end of the market are real, and although 
they do not affect large numbers of people directly, the ripple effects they 
generate do resonate across London,” Glucksberg said.

“In terms of the impact on London as a whole, this represents a very different 
kind of ‘trickle down’ effect from what politicians across the spectrum have 
long argued would be the benefit of the ‘super rich moving into our city’,” 
said Glucksberg. “Affordability for average Londoners in the rest of the city 
is likely to become an even more difficult issue to solve.”

The trend was contributing to dramatic house price rises in areas ranging from 
Battersea and Clapham to Acton, as the old elite bought property there with the 
significant profits – usually in the millions – made from selling up to the 
global uber wealthy, the researcher found.

“The study shows that the wealthy individuals and families that live in 
London’s most exclusive areas no longer feel able to compete at the top end of 
the capital’s property market,” said the researcher. “Instead they feel like 
they are being pushed out of elite neighbourhoods. For the first time, this 
elite group are buying flats for their children in areas they never would have 
previously considered.”

Glucksberg, who previously spent seven years researching London’s most 
deprived estates, said while the displacement of wealthy residents might not 
inspire sympathy the trend illustrated the deep social impact of the global 
super rich on the city.

“If wealthy Londoners feel powerless to resist the global super rich what hope 
do the women of Focus E15 have?” she posed, referring to the young mothers from 
Newham who were threatened with eviction from their hostel and advised they 
would be resettled as far away as Birmingham or Manchester.

The researcher added that international buyers of luxury high rise apartments 
did not want social housing on site and developers did everything to shift 
social tenants elsewhere.

London is home to around 4,900 “ultra-high net worth” individuals, with assets 
of at least £23m, a rise of 39% in the past decade, according to the latest
wealth report by estate agents Knight Frank 
<http://www.knightfrank.com/wealthreport>. In central London, overseas buyers 
bought as much as 85% of “prime’” properties worth at least £5m in 2012-13 and 
nearly all those worth more than £10m, according to estate agents LPP.

One family interviewed for the research, presented on Wednesday at the Royal 
Geographical Society annual international conference 
<http://www.rgs.org/WhatsOn/ConferencesAndSeminars/Annual+International+Conference/Annual+international+conference.htm>
, said they had recently sold their home in South Kensington to an 
international banker and were moving out of London. But they had helped their 
son buy a house in Acton.

“The consequences are clearly further property price increases, gentrification 
and ultimately displacement in areas of London that are not ‘elite’ or prime at 
all,” Glucksberg said.

This process of displacement by Middle Eastern, Asian and East European buyers 
was leading to feelings of “both overt and covert racism”, she added.

The study, part of a two-year investigation of London’s elite neighbourhoods 
<http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/impactofsocialsciences/2013/01/27/life-in-the-alpha-territory-investigating-londons-super-rich-neighbourhoods/>
, also found the old elites felt driven out of their traditional enclaves by 
the impact of the global super rich on the local environment, such as the 
proliferation of mega-basements, which led to considerable distress for 
longstanding residents. Glucksberg said a university lecturer in Highgate told 
her they were unable to cope with the years of drilling and digging under 
neighbouring houses.

Karen Buck, MP for Westminster North, who has dealt with dozens of cases of 
neighbours affected by iceberg basements (where so much of the home is hidden 
underground), said: “It is profoundly damaging to the fabric of London life 
when the people who make up the city’s workforce are priced out or see their 
children priced out of London. It leads to sterile communities and 
neighbourhoods that are scarcely lived in.”

Richard Webber, managing director of data analytics firm OriginsInfo.Ltd, who 
co-authoreda report on the impact of the super rich on Highgate 
<http://research.gold.ac.uk/14533/1/PDF_Proof.PDF>, said the displacement of 
middle class professionals also contributed to the decline of high end local 
shops and services.

He said: “The old elite would have bought their curtains and food locally. Now 
the hairdresser comes to you, the food is delivered. Even going to restaurants 
– chefs come and cook [for the super rich] in their house.”
 