
In 2006, as London bathed in the afterglow of winning the bid for the 2012 
Olympics, Sebastian Coe announced: "Legacy is probably nine-tenths of what this 
process is about – not just 16 days of sport. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2006/may/04/Olympics2012.politics>"

Presented as a benevolent behemoth of fast-track regeneration, the Games were 
supposed to leave behind a shiny new world of 12,000 homes and 10,000 jobs, set 
amid the rolling hills of the largest new park in Europe. It would be the 
miracle cure for the maligned East End, cleansing a swath of the Lower Lea 
valley –a site conveniently branded as a toxic dumping ground 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/2007/sep/21/communities>, at the nexus of 
London's poorest boroughs.

On Friday, reports were published declaring the legacy to be a triumph for UK 
tourism, sports participation, volunteering and business 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2013/jul/19/lord-coe-quits-ambassador-olympic-legacy>
. But what is the physical reality on the ground? One year on,and with £11bn of 
public money spent on the Olympics 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/datablog/2012/jul/26/london-2012-olympics-money>
, the first part of the park will reopen this weekend. With national cynicism 
no longer suspended, now that the collective frisson of watching our Lycra-clad 
heroes has faded, how is the promised bounty shaping up?

Walking down Stratford High Street <http://goo.gl/maps/l2kl5>, along the 
south-east border of the Olympic park, the signs are not auspicious. At every 
junction of this roaring A-road sprouts a steroidal tower, each clad in ever 
more lurid colours, transforming the street into a gauntlet of competing 
ambitions. Looming over adjacent council estates, these brash totems are a 
monument to Olympian greed. Marketed with the blandly aspirational names of
Velocity <http://www.stockwool.net/project_items/63>, Aurora and Icona 
<http://www.stockwool.net/project_items/7>, they reach their peak at the purple 
43-storey shaft of the Stratford Halo 
<http://www.ardmoregroup.co.uk/project/150-high-street-stratford/>. Strip away 
all the festive colours, though, and you'll find that these are actually 
mean-minded silos of tightly packed one-bedroom flats, mostly sold overseas for 
buy-to-let.

Like a physical bar chart, their bloated bulk stands as a diagram of the 
vastly inflated land values whipped up by the Olympic gold rush. Developers 
swarmed in when the area was earmarked as the sacred site. Paying over the 
odds, each was determined to build what they imagined would be the ultimate 
gateway to the Games. Inevitably, they failed. The real gateway to the Olympic 
park had been determined long before – in the form of a gigantic shopping mall.
Westfield 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2011/sep/11/westfield-stratford-city-shopping-review>
 represents part of a pre-existing plan forStratford City 
<http://www.chelsfield.com/project/stratford-city/>, imagined as a glamorous 
new "metropolitan centre" built around the Stratford international rail hub 
(just two hours from Brussels). But the plan hit the rocks and was divided into 
separate hands, split into an inward-looking mall on one side of the tracks and
the eastern bloc-style flats of the athletes' village 
<http://www.oliverwainwright.co.uk/2012/05/london-2012-athletes-village.html> 
on the other.

This commercial compromise destroyed any idea of an integrated "city" right 
from the start. Nor did the financial crisis help: the housing developers had 
to be bailed out by the public purse to the tune of £1bn, and the resultshave 
since been sold on to the Qatari royal family for about half that 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2011/aug/12/olympic-village-qatari-ruling-family>
. The sole precondition is that half the flats be let for "affordable" rent 
(80% of market rate).

With its wide, tree-lined streets and its endless facades of beige concrete, 
the housing area, now christenedEast Village 
<http://www.eastvillagelondon.co.uk/>, feels peculiarly soulless. It's not just 
the rigid, coarse and repetitive courtyard blocks that rise like 10-storey 
cliff-faces – it's the gaping boulevards that sweep between them. There's 
little sense of human scale. The original plan was to roll out a similar grid 
of muscular blocks right across the park, like our own slice of Benidorm. But, 
remarkably, common sense has prevailed.

"There was a moment when people said, 'Hey, shouldn't this look a bit more 
like London?'" says Canadian architect Kathryn Firth, chief of design at the
London Legacy Development Corporation (LLDC) <http://www.londonlegacy.co.uk/>, 
the mayoral machine in charge of the future of the site and its surroundings. 
"The feedback from public consultation was that it all looked like a very alien 
place."

Former legacy chiefs had spoken with rapture of replicating places like 
Belgravia and Maida Vale in the Lea valley, analogies that did not sit 
particularly happily with the terraces of Leyton and the warehouses of Hackney 
Wick. "I think it's a bit arrogant to say we're creating a bit of South Ken 
here," says Firth. "We're in east London, so we should learn from our 
neighbours."

Consequently, the plan has been reconfigured to take in a mixture of 
traditional London typologies. Now scaled back to a total of 8,000 homes, the 
"legacy communities" will be formed from familiar things: terraces and squares, 
mansion blocks and mews houses. They will sit among a surreal landscape of 
Olympic fragments from the elegant swoop of the velodrome to the skeleton of 
the main stadium and the hulking shed of the media centre – the only one 
changing its use. Reborn asiCity <http://icitylondon.com/>, it's a place for 
start-ups, media companies and a satellite of Loughborough University.
 Flats by the basketball arena, which will be the site of the first ‘legacy 
neighbourhood’, Chobham Manor. Photograph: Getty 
There is a sensible design code for each of the new neighbourhoods, covering 
general layouts, materials and street character: stone, bricks and things that 
last will be favoured over the recent vernacular of novelty shapes decorated 
with jazzy shades of plastic. And areas will be tuned according to their 
context. Over the canal from Hackney Wick, a land of artists' studios and 
fragments of industry, there will be buildings with workshops and yards. 
Chobham Manor, closer to suburban Leyton, will have bigger, family-sized homes 
with gardens, while to the south, nearer Stratford, a world of waterside 
apartments will prevail.

Firth's colleague Eleanor Fawcett sums up the ethos: "It should be like the 
surrounding neighbourhoods spilling in," she says. "The objective is that no 
one will ever know where the fence was." Given that the site is cut off on all 
sides by canals, railway cuttings and elevated roads – a secure island that 
made it particularly attractive to Olympic planners – this will be a struggle. 
Still, Fawcett has spent the last few years co-ordinating projects that try to 
stitch the severed site back into its hinterland, both physically and socially. 
"In some places, it's as simple as moving fences to unlock stretches of 
footpaths on the river," she says. "In others, it's about funding temporary 
uses, things like skate parks and studios, that can spread into the park, to 
inform the nature of the permanent developments."

Firth and Fawcett make a convincing duo. They bring a welcome voice of sanity 
after a disastrous failure of planning intelligence about how to make a 
coherent place out of this ragbag of parts. Yet, while their words and drawings 
may be reassuring, there is still precious little evidence that their hopes 
will come to fruition.

The LLDC has the unique power to insist on quality, acting as both landowner 
in the park and planning authority for 500 or so hectares around it (a model 
similar toThatcher's London Docklands Development Corporation 
<http://www.lddc-history.org.uk/> (http://www.lddc-history.org.uk/), 
responsible for Canary Wharf). Learning from the great estates like Grosvenor 
and Cadogan in the West End, the corporation will retain ownership of the land 
and rent chunks to development partners on long-term leases, with all designs 
overseen by a panel of the country's more thoughtful housing architects, 
including Peter Barber and Alex Ely.

There is also the much-declared political will to experiment with self-build 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/2013/apr/11/self-builders-olympic-park-housing>
, co-housing andcommunity land trusts 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/davehillblog/2011/nov/01/olympic-park-may-contain-pilot-community-land-trust>
, meaning the park could become a test bed for new kinds of housing. But it 
would all require a brave leap of faith – something the LLDC's target-driven 
constitution is unlikely to allow. With the onerous obligation to make some 
sort of return, given the cost of the Games, there is constant pressure for 
commercial viability: because of the cost of improving infrastructure, the 
target for 35% affordable housing, not to mention the strict design codes, 
anything beyond the market norm will be difficult to achieve. Meanwhile, mayor 
Boris Johnson – self-appointed chair of the legacy corporation – is now pushing 
to accelerate what was a 20-year plan, hungry for visible results and political 
capital.

He would do better to slow down. Outside the park, developers continue to try 
their luck, spurred on by what others have got away with.Stock Woolstencroft 
<http://www.stockwool.co.uk/>, architects of the dismal Stratford towers, are 
attempting to continue their march of mediocrity with schemes on the other side 
of the park. In Fish Island, to the west, they have submitted an application 
for 15 buildings of up to 14 storeys (in an area allowing a maximum of six) 
clothed in a random livery of cheap cladding. It wasslammed by the review panel 
<http://www.bdonline.co.uk/news/olympic-design-review-slams-stock-woolstencroft%E2%80%99s-hackney-wick-plans/5052033.article>
, but the response to such schemes will be the test of the corporation's 
planning powers, and how far it is prepared to insist on good design.

Despite all the blunders around the edge of the site, there are reasons to be 
optimistic. The communities within could yet be successful. But an uneasy fact 
remains: that building on the site of a global event – making workable streets 
from tarmac wastes and weaving housing around velodromes – is a difficult and 
expensive way of producing a good city. When it comes to building careful, 
generous places, do we really need the Olympics as an excuse?

• This article was amended on 22 July 2013 to correct the planned time from 
Stratford International to Brussels from four hours to two. Since the station 
opened, Eurostar services have not stopped there.
 