
London Welsh will be docked 20 league points and drop to the bottom of the 
Championship when the club go into voluntary liquidation this week, but they 
can remain in the second tier, if they avoid relegation, by coming up with a 
business plan that is accepted by theRugby Football Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rugby-football-union> and paying a 
six‑figure bond.

London Welsh, who faced a court hearing on Monday over an unpaid £250,000 bill 
to Her Majesty’s Revenue & Customs, announced the club were going into 
liquidation to reform as a semi‑professional entity on the day thesupport 
coaches for the British & Irish Lions tour to New Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/07/warren-gatland-british-irish-lions-coaches>
 next year were announced.

Michael Cheika backed by Australian Rugby Union to remain coach for World Cup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/07/michael-cheika-backed-australian-rugby-union-world-cup-coach>
The Lions have won a series in New Zealand just once, in 1971 when London Welsh
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-welsh> supplied seven players, far 
more than any other club. One of the leading sides then, they have paid for two 
seasons in the Premiership this decade that left them with debts and a wage 
bill they cannot afford.

“London Welsh has reached a difficult point in its illustrious history,” said 
the club’s chairman, Gareth Hawkins, who took over two months ago.

“The current business model is totally unsustainable with the playing budget 
at £1.7m and gates numbering as low as 400. The debts left the club with no 
alternative but to seek liquidation. Having to break that news to 40 staff was 
extremely difficult. In the new year, it is the intention of the board that 
London Welsh will be able to return to playing at Old Deer Park. However, it 
will be necessary to change the club’s business model to a semi-professional 
setup and then raise £300,000 so that the club can regain a position within the 
RFU Championship.”

An RFU spokesperson said: “London Welsh intend to go into voluntary 
liquidation. When that happens, the club will receive an immediate 20-point 
deduction. They can continue to play while the process is ongoing, and the RFU 
are working with the club to find a way to fulfil their fixtures this season. 
We will update all clubs as this develops.”

Hawkins cited the example of Richmond, the club the Exiles replace at the 
bottom of the table, as proof that the semi-professional model can work in 
the second tier.

It means an end to ambitions of playing again in the Premiership but if London 
Welsh’s business model is not acceptable to the RFU, or they fail to find the 
money to pay the bond, likely to be £150,000, they will, like Richmond in 1999, 
drop all the way down the leagues to start again. Waiting for them in the 
Hertfordshire and Middlesex second division would be the Bank of England.
 