
Gentrification <https://www.theguardian.com/cities/gentrification> happens 
when the demand for living and working space outstrips its supply in cities 
that people want to live in. It is force of change that is shaded, shaped, 
speeded and slowed by various factors, such as the nature of a neighbourhood, 
flows of finance, the availability of land, the powers and priorities of 
different layers of government and by skittish stuff like personal taste.

Its effects are various, some benefitting long-term residents, others not, in 
an array of different ways. Stopping it in London is probably impossible, 
though policies for making public transport worse, schools unsuccessful, 
streets more dangerous and parks unpleasant might help. The phenomenon’s 
advance guard are adventurous creative types and young professionals (I should 
know, I used to be one). They are often those most upset when ensuing stages of 
gentrification take hold, though any breakdown of winners and losers might not 
bequite as straightforward 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/oct/24/lets-get-our-gentrification-story-straight>
 as they think.


That’s my bite-size take at any rate. Not all see it that way, but many would 
agree that in London, a booming city, gentrification is happening at sometimes 
alarming speed and presents large challenges, pretty much by definition 
(including challengesof definition). Last month, the Centre for Cities 
<http://www.centreforcities.org/about/> thinktank tackled the issue in one of 
its podcasts. In a panel discussion, Shelter’sToby Lloyd 
<http://blog.shelter.org.uk/author/toby_lloyd/> said: 

From our perspective, the most important thing is simply that cities are able 
to provide for the people that live in them. Change will happen and we can’t 
assume that that’s always bad - it can be good, it can be bad, it depends. But 
at a city-wide level, it is vital that change processes do still allow for 
enough diversity of income and diversity of different types of people. It is 
inevitable that when any kind of change happens there are some people who like 
it and some people who don’t like it, some people who benefit from it and some 
who lose out. We have to recognise that there will be competing interests. 
There will always be change, there will always be tensions, so it’s how we 
manage those changes and make sure that the losers don’t lose out too badly 
from change and that the winners don’t gain disproportionately at their expense.

The whole discussion, which also involved Edward Clarke 
<http://www.centreforcities.org/about/person/edward-clarke/> and Anna Minton 
<http://www.annaminton.com/biography>, is well worth listening to. Find it here 
<http://www.centreforcities.org/multimedia/city-talks-gentrification-bad-thing/>
. If nothing else, it might persuade you that gentrification should not be 
reduced to a bunch of easy cliches and instead needs to be approached as a 
conundrum arising from London’s economic successes. Seeing it as all good or 
all bad doesn’t help with trying to understand and deal with it. Neither does 
just blaming hipsters, as this bit of mischief hints.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D36IuGkC9iik&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D36IuGkC9iik>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D36IuGkC9iik&media=>
 Video: Swindle and Steel Business Group (allegedly). 
The film is the work of Jack McPartland <http://jackmcpartland.com/>, Paul 
Calway and Adam Morley. More by me on gentrification in Londonhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/davehillblog/2015/apr/28/brixton-anti-gentrification-protest-reclaim-foxtons-estate-agent>
,here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davehillblog/2013/mar/31/regenerating-london-gentrification-happens>
 andhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/13/anti-gentrification-campaign-camden-social-cleansing-london>
.
 