
As Sadiq Khan <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sadiq-khan> and his deputy 
for transport Val Shawcross assess applicants for the role of cycling and 
walking commissioner, it is becoming ever more apparent that much must be 
learned from the failings of the previous mayoral regime.

Shawcross herself seems fully alive to this, observing in a recent interview 
<http://road.cc/content/news/207110-londons-new-cycle-highways-will-be-better> 
that cycling policy should not only be about servicing the existing (andrather 
narrow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2015/oct/12/why-are-london-cyclists-so-white-male-and-middle-class>
) commuter and otherwise committed cyclist demographic but properly recognising 
others’ interests too. “The way some of the previous schemes have been 
consulted on and designed has led to some residents, who don’t see themselves 
as cyclists, feeling disadvantaged,” shecorrectly observed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2015/nov/07/waltham-forest-mini-holland-row-politics-protests-and-house-prices>
. “I think it’s important that everybody sees that the cycling and walking 
agenda is for all of us”.

That pointer to a broad, consensual approach, seeking to harmonise and give 
equal weight to the needs of cyclists and pedestrians and to introducing new 
infrastructure with the greatest possible consent, suggests that Khan will 
appoint a very different sort of person from Boris Johnson’s cycling 
commissioner, hislong-time media champion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/jan/17/boris-johnson-cronyism-claims-andrew-gilligan>
 Andrew Gilligan.

There had been rumours that the new mayor would retain Gilligan’s distinctive 
services 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2015/nov/28/cycling-on-vauxhall-bridge-a-liar-claim-and-a-few-damned-statistics>
, but there was never any chance of that. Shawcross’s measured and mature 
approach to re-fashioning London’s streets is being welcomed at Transport for 
London (TfL), where some very senior figures have long held that the 
implementation of Johnson’s vision for cycling was made more troublesome by a 
high-handed “Lone Ranger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2014/sep/30/boris-johnson-moves-to-meet-city-concerns-about-cycle-superhighways>
” at City Hall.

It is no secret that there were transport professionals at the agency who 
thought the superhighway programme wasrailroaded through 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2014/sep/18/boris-johnsons-cycling-vision-a-railroading-exercise>
 to detrimental effect. “I think that the generally-held opinion of the speed 
with which the last tranche of cycle superhighways was delivered is that it was 
sub-optimal,” was how TfL’s director of road space management Alan Bristow 
delicately put it to theLondon Assembly transport committee on Tuesday 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/moderngov/ieListDocuments.aspx?CId=173&MId=6153&Ver=4>
 when contributing to itsinvestigation into congestion 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/about-us/london-assembly/london-assemblys-current-investigations/londons-congested-roads>
.

One consequence of the past approach appears to have been making that problem 
worse 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/transport/cycle-superhighways-make-traffic-worse-in-the-city-report-reveals-a3361216.html>
, although the policy is meant to help reduce it. Some of this has been 
temporary, brought about by the lanes’ construction, buta report to the City of 
London Corporation’s policy and resources committee 
<http://democracy.cityoflondon.gov.uk/documents/s69273/Major%20Highway%20Works.pdf>
, which was considered last week, said that “areas of traffic congestion can 
frequently be found on those roads affected by the [superhighway] scheme” and 
their “primary alternatives”, and that there is less flexibility for re-routing 
traffic to cope with road closures for construction and utility works and so on.

The report records that some of the information being gathered by TfL as it 
monitors the impact of the superhighways is shared with City officers “on a 
daily basis” and largely supports their observations. But it also stresses that 
these are early days for “definitive conclusions”, and that is surely right. 
The impact of the schemes needs to continue to be followed carefully.

Also for the longer term is the matter of how much they are being used. TfL is 
encouraged by increased numbers of cyclists on the superhighways during peak 
hours, but outside of those it is possible to stand for several minutes next to 
CS2 at Mile End or to look down at the east-west CS from Hungerford footbridge 
by Embankment station and never have more than one two-wheeled traveller, if 
that, within view.

Will public money turn out to have been spent to best effect on Johnson’s 
“vision”? Shawcross and the future cycling and walking commissioner should give 
that question plenty of thought.
 