
Loneliness has finally become a hot topic – last month, the Office for 
National Statistics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jun/22/britain-loneliness-capital-isolation-being-alone>
 found Britain to be the loneliness capital of Europe. We're less likely to 
have strong friendships or know our neighbours than residents anywhere else in 
the EU, and a relatively high proportion of us have no one to rely on in a 
crisis. Meanwhile, earlier this year,research by Professor John Cacioppo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/feb/16/loneliness-twice-as-unhealthy-as-obesity-older-people>
 at the University of Chicago found loneliness to be twice as bad for older 
people's health as obesity and almost as great a cause of death as poverty.

But shocking as this is, such studies overlook the loneliness epidemic among 
younger adults.In 2010 the Mental Health Foundation 
<http://www.mentalhealth.org.uk/content/assets/PDF/publications/the_lonely_society_report.pdf>
 found loneliness to be a greater concern among young people than the elderly. 
The 18 to 34-year-olds surveyed were more likely to feel lonely often, to worry 
about feeling alone and to feel depressed because of loneliness than the 
over-55s.

"Loneliness is a recognised problem among the elderly – there are day centres 
and charities to help them," says Sam Challis, an information manager at the 
mental health charity Mind, "but when young people reach 21 they're too old for 
youth services." This is problematic because of the close relationship between 
loneliness and mental health – it is linked to increased stress, depression, 
paranoia, anxiety, addiction, cognitive decline and is a known factor in 
suicide.In a new essay, Paul Farmer, the chief executive of Mind 
<http://www.campaigntoendloneliness.org/blog/the-most-terrible-poverty-loneliness-and-mental-health/>
, and Jenny Edwards, the chief executive of the Mental Health Foundation, say 
it can be both a cause and effect of mental health problems.

But what can young people do to combat loneliness? Dr Grant Blank, a survey 
research fellow at the OxfordInternet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/internet> Institute, points out that 
social media and the internet can be a boon and a problem. They are beneficial 
when they enable us to communicate with distant loved ones, but not when they 
replace face-to-face contact. "People present an idealised version of 
themselves online and we expect to have social lives like those portrayed in 
the media," says Challis. Comparing friends' seemingly perfect lives with ours 
can lead us to withdraw socially.

While meditation techniques such as mindfulness and apps such as Headspace are 
trendy solutions frequently recommended for a range of mental health problems, 
they're not necessarily helpful for loneliness, as they actively encourage us 
to dwell alone on our thoughts. "You'd be better off addressing the underlying 
causes of being lonely first – what's stopping you going out and seeing 
people?" asks Challis.

Indeed, a study of social media at the University of Michigan last year found 
that while Facebook 
<http://home.isr.umich.edu/releases/facebook-use-predicts-declines-in-happiness-new-study-finds/>
 reduces life satisfaction, using technology to help you meet new people can be 
beneficial. And if for whatever reason you are unable to venture outside, the 
internet can bring solace. Mumsnet has been "an absolute godsend" forMaddy 
Matthews <http://maddysmaybiebaby.wordpress.com>, 19, a student with a 
two-month-old daughter. Since the birth, she rarely sees her university friends 
and her partner works most evenings. "In the first few days, I was up late at 
night feeding her and I was worried I was doing something wrong. Being able to 
post on Mumsnet has helped me feel less alone".

Helplines can also reduce loneliness, at least in the short term. One in four 
men who call the Samaritans 
<http://www.samaritans.org/news/one-four-men-calling-samaritans-are-experiencing-loneliness>
 mention loneliness or isolation, andGet Connected 
<http://www.getconnected.org.uk/> is a free confidential helpline for young 
people, where they can seek help with emotional and mental health issues often 
linked to loneliness. There are also support services onwebsites such as Mind's 
<http://www.mind.org.uk/information-support/tips-for-everyday-living/loneliness/#.U76LCI1dX-R>
 that can remind you you're not alone.

At work, it can be beneficial to tell your employer how you're feeling. John 
Binns, a Mind trustee and former Deloitte partner who advises businesses on 
mental health and wellbeing, was admitted to hospital for stress-related 
depression in 2007 and took two months off work. He felt as if there was no one 
to talk to and wasn't close enough with colleagues for them to notice change in 
his behaviour. Greater openness with his employer and colleagues made his 
return to work easier. "Often people find that colleagues are more supportive 
than they'd expected. Mine started to reach out, asking me to lunch and 
reassuring me that the world hadn't moved on that much since I'd left."

Office chitchat may seem like a waste of time, but it helps to cushion us from 
the emotional and psychological effects of work strain. "If you form 
connections with your team, you might be stressed, but not isolated," says Rick 
Hughes, the British Association for Counselling and Psychotherapy's (BACP) lead 
adviser for workplace.

"We treat the networks we have as incidental, but they're fundamental to our 
wellbeing," says Nicky Forsythe, apsychotherapist and the founder of Talk for 
Health <http://www.talkforhealth.co.uk/>, a social enterprise that trains 
people to give and receive peer support in groups. "The most important thing is 
to have a regular time and place to reflect on your life and to have an 
empathic listener."

For developing personal skills such as empathy, counselling can help. The BACP 
website <http://www.itsgoodtotalk.org.uk> allows you to search for counsellors 
in your area. "A problem aired is a problem shared and sometimes you need to 
talk to someone impartial and independent of your friends and family," says 
Hughes. Most universities offer students such counselling and many run group 
sessions that specifically address loneliness.

If recent research is to be believed, loneliness is killing the elderly and, 
with an ageing population, we should aim to reduce our isolation before it is 
too late. "Getting older doesn't have to mean getting lonelier," saysRuth 
Sutherland, the chief executive of Relate, in a new report 
<http://www.campaigntoendloneliness.org/wp-content/plugins/download-monitor/download.php?id=197>
. "But much of this rests on laying the foundations to good-quality 
relationships earlier in life."
 