
“This is not a feminist exhibition,” curator Judith Ryan tells me as we take 
the stairs down to the ground level at the National Gallery of Victoria, after 
seeing a preview of Who’s Afraid of Colour? It is, however, an exhibition that 
features only the work of Indigenous women, and this is a statement in itself.


 In a year in which female artists were underrepresented in the major 
exhibitions and retrospectives – andthe NGV, in particular, came under fire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/15/gender-and-the-ngv-more-white-male-artists-than-you-can-shake-a-stick-at>
 for its lack of support for female artists – it’s heartening for the gallery 
to end the year with an all-female, Indigenous Australian show.

Human rights day: installation invites public to open hearts for offshore 
detention
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/dec/07/opening-hearts-unwraps-offshore-detention-its-about-letting-yourself-feel-something>
Who’s Afraid of Colour? draws on the NGV’s own collection and features more 
than 200 contemporary artworks by 118 female artists. The NGV is calling the 
exhibition an “unprecedented survey of Indigenous Australian women’s art.”


 The gallery started collecting Indigenous art in the mid 1980s. The 
exhibition, which runs over six gallery spaces, features work never displayed 
before, much of it collected in the last three or four years, says Ryan.

 Although not all the work had been hung when Guardian Australia visited, the 
pieces displayed were exciting, diverse and bold. The artists range from women 
living in traditional communities to those in cities. Some of the work is 
textural – baskets, mats and baby carriers – while others are paintings and 
installations.

“We have a vast cross-section of work,” says Ryan, who has been working with 
Indigenous art since the 1970s. “We’re showing women who have trained in glass 
[and have work by] Maree Clarke fromMelbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne> who does photography and 
installation. There’s also a lot going on in the Torres Strait – we have three 
woven body sculptures, plus jewellery and feather headdresses from Cape York.”

 There are also two rooms displaying batiks – cloth that has been dyed using 
wax to create patterns – as well as early drawings from Fitzroy Crossing and 
works that reference ancestral events, including a giant eel trap.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Foverlooked-for-decades-indigenous-womens-art-takes-centre-stage-in-melbourne-exhibition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff07f0f9a6124197ce2e9f42cecbb093ff8679289%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Long%20overlooked%2C%20Indigenous%20women%E2%80%99s%20art%20takes%20centre%20stage%20in%20Melbourne%20exhibition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Foverlooked-for-decades-indigenous-womens-art-takes-centre-stage-in-melbourne-exhibition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Long%20overlooked%2C%20Indigenous%20women%E2%80%99s%20art%20takes%20centre%20stage%20in%20Melbourne%20exhibition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Foverlooked-for-decades-indigenous-womens-art-takes-centre-stage-in-melbourne-exhibition%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff07f0f9a6124197ce2e9f42cecbb093ff8679289%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Ritual and ceremony: Men in mourning by Maree Clarke (2012–13) Photograph: 
Maree Clarke, courtesy Vivien Anderson Gallery, Melbourne 
 Work by Indigenous women has been traditionally overlooked by the art 
establishment, says Ryan. In 1981, for example, there were no female artists 
included in the Aboriginal Australia exhibition, a massive show at NGV 
featuring 321 works from Indigenous artists.

The anthropologists who were responsible for collecting fibre objects, such as 
baskets or mats, often did not acknowledge women as the creators of the objects.

The artists were “not dignified with either a name or a voice,” says Ryan.

 Ryan dates the ascendancy of female Indigenous artists to around the year 
2000, “after women’s art practice was acknowledged internationally in 1997 when 
Emily Kam Kngwarray, Yvonne Koolmatrie and Judy Watson represented Australia at 
the Venice Biennale.”

Many people assume Indigenous art begins and ends with dot paintings, but 
there is an incredible variety of artistic styles on display in this 
exhibition. Take for example Julie Dowling’s stunning painting, Goodbye White 
Fella Religion, that uses earth pigments and blood on canvas, and depicts a man 
lying on the ground in either torment or ecstasy. Or the work of Jenny 
Crompton, whosehanging sculpture Sea Country Spirits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2016/mar/22/larger-than-life-artworks-at-the-lorne-sculpture-biennale-in-pictures>
 is so beautiful, it’s difficult to resist the temptation to touch it.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Foverlooked-for-decades-indigenous-womens-art-takes-centre-stage-in-melbourne-exhibition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b180a43352fff076c6508b7ade411cf4b47774f%2F0_0_2819_3000%2F2819.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Long%20overlooked%2C%20Indigenous%20women%E2%80%99s%20art%20takes%20centre%20stage%20in%20Melbourne%20exhibition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Foverlooked-for-decades-indigenous-womens-art-takes-centre-stage-in-melbourne-exhibition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Long%20overlooked%2C%20Indigenous%20women%E2%80%99s%20art%20takes%20centre%20stage%20in%20Melbourne%20exhibition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Foverlooked-for-decades-indigenous-womens-art-takes-centre-stage-in-melbourne-exhibition%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b180a43352fff076c6508b7ade411cf4b47774f%2F0_0_2819_3000%2F2819.jpg>
 Goodbye White Fella Religion by Julie Dowling, 1992. Photograph: Julie Dowling 
/ VISCOPY 
Crompton’s sculpture consists of 32 individual hanging works, which are made 
from recycled copper wire, shells, feathers, kangaroo bones, grass tree fronds 
and paint.

 “My art practice focuses on themes that explore the environment and 
Indigenous culture of my country, the Wadawurrung country of the Surf Coast and 
Bellarine Peninsula,” Crompton told Guardian Australia. “Part of my process is 
walking the land and respectfully gathering natural materials, which allows me 
to reconnect, listen and interpret an essence of my culture and an Aboriginal 
spirituality through the making of sculpture and paintings.”

Palace of Versailles comes to Canberra in big-ticket blockbuster that doesn't 
disappoint
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/dec/09/palace-of-versailles-comes-to-canberra-in-big-ticket-blockbuster-that-doesnt-disappoint>
Consider also Maree Clarke, who recreates ceremonial objects held in museums 
which are no longer made in Indigenous communities. Her majestic kangaroo tooth 
necklace is part of the exhibition.

“With the information that I gather, I pass this knowledge on to the next 
generation through art mentoring programs,” says Clarke. “I also like to think 
about new ways to tell our stories through new media.”

The work in the exhibition – particularly the woven, fibre objects – may not 
seem like political works of art, but “art is political, life is political,” 
says Ryan. “Some of the works are more overtly political than others, but it’s 
a political statement for an artist to still live on country, and an assertion 
that she wants to stay on country. If she keeps weaving from material found on 
land, that is a statement of continuity of culture and ways of looking at the 
world.”

• Who’s Afraid of Colour? 
<http://www.ngv.vic.gov.au/exhibition/whos-afraid-of-colour/> is showing at Ian 
Potter Centre: NGV Australia from 16 December to 17 April
 