
Eighty-two seems too soon an age to take a man like Leonard Cohen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/leonard-cohen>. In truth I’m not sure that I 
believed he would ever be taken at all, rather that he might somehow gently 
ossify, assume the contours of the landscape, and be still.

I don’t know who it was who first called Cohen “the Godfather of Gloom”, nor 
even “the High Priest of Pathos”; certainly it was easy to cast him as a 
miserablist, for the half-listener to fall for the droop of the voice and the 
forlorn flamenco grounding of his music and see only the dirge and the dark. 
But this would be to miss entirely the warmth of his words.

Leonard Cohen – he knew things about life, and if you listened you could learn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/nov/11/leonard-cohen-he-knew-things-about-life-and-if-you-listened-you-could-learn>
When I think of Cohen’s use of language it is of how alive it is – which is 
not to say sprightly or gung-ho, but rather I think of its suppleness and its 
sensuality, as if his words run at the same temperature as blood.

I’ve written before about the song Chelsea Hotel #2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2007/jun/01/myfavouritewordinsongwriti>
, of how it contains my favourite single word in all of rock’n’roll – the 
plain, half-muttered “that” of its final line. It’s a short song, famously 
detailing a brief encounter with Janis Joplin at the Chelsea Hotel in New York 
– where Cohen lived while trying to make his way first as a writer and then as 
a musician – and written, he claimed, on a napkin, sitting at the bar of a 
Polynesian restaurant in Miami Beach. The throwaway nature of their 
entanglement, even of Cohen’s anecdote about how it came to be written, all 
seems to me to be undermined by the placing of that “that”. “I remember you 
well, in the Chelsea Hotel, that’s all, I don’t even think of you that often.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXk7DOe5EGgM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXk7DOe5EGgM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXk7DOe5EGgM&media=>
This is one of the qualities I love about Cohen’s writing – the precision of 
his words. Whereas Van Morrison, for instance, shares a similarly sensuous 
approach to language, the two writers’ treatment of words is strikingly 
different – Morrison seeming to shape them mid-air, Cohen choosing to sit with 
them a while, making sure they are good and right and worthy over time.

Leonard Cohen's life and career – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/gallery/2016/nov/11/leonard-cohens-life-and-career-in-pictures>
I wrote several years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/dec/19/leonard-cohen-hallelujah-christmas>
 about the songHallelujah <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oIuCwnnDq8k> – more 
famous now in the hands of talent-show contestants, or the voice of Jeff 
Buckley, Bob Dylan or John Cale. It was Cohen who composed it – though “write” 
seems too flippant a description for the five years he laboured over its 
lyrics, filling notebooks, banging his head against the floor of his room at 
the Royalton Hotel in New York out of pure frustration. Eighty drafted verses – 
and later there would be more, because Cohen chose to change the song for live 
performance. Years later, he spoke of how “all human activity is flawed” and of 
his belief that it is “by intimacy with the flaw that we discern our real 
humanity”, and perhaps this is the quality that makes Cohen’s writing resonate 
so well – not the cold-eyed precision of lexical choice, so much as intimacy 
with his words.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNW7oNpzBSGc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNW7oNpzBSGc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNW7oNpzBSGc&media=>
A few years ago, I became quite infatuated with Cohen’s song In My Secret Life 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ym3_m_Apfas> – one of those moments, perhaps, 
when the way your life and a song orbit each other leads to a perfect point of 
eclipse. Musically, it’s not my favourite Cohen style – it’s 2001 by the time 
it appears on Ten New Songs, and his music is slicker and more synth-led. But I 
love its sentiment, his exploration of the tension that exists between our 
inner and outer lives, of how the pleasure of privacy meets the cold of 
isolation and longing for connection. It is a song, to me, about closeness. And 
I have thought of it often in the years since, in a world that seems 
increasingly preoccupied with surfaces, with appearance and aesthetic, and I 
wonder about all the secret lives beneath.

You Want It Darker was the title of Cohen’s final album, released earlier this 
year – a wry nod, perhaps, to his reputation. Strange, then, that the 
most-feted Cohen lyric – the one that has appeared over and over on social 
media since the announcement of his death, should be about light. “There is a 
crack in everything,” runs the line from Anthem. “That’s how the light gets in.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6wRYjtvIYK0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6wRYjtvIYK0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6wRYjtvIYK0&media=>
When I think of Cohen it is not as that famed Godfather of Gloom, it is as a 
man always looking for the light. There was a tremendousNew Yorker profile 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2016/10/17/leonard-cohen-makes-it-darker> in 
October that depicted the Cohen of 1960 living in London with an Olivetti 
typewriter and a blue Burberry raincoat, writing to a publisher of how his work 
would appeal to “inner-directed adolescents, lovers in all degrees of anguish, 
disappointed Platonists, pornography-peepers, hair-handed monks and popists”. A 
man in a grey city, looking inward. But it also showed a man who fled Britain 
for the sunshine of Greece, who on his new island of Hydra caught a glimpse of 
a blonde-haired Norwegian woman named Marianne and sought out the brightness of 
her.

Cohen’s work to me is about light and shade, the perpetual shifting of 
perspective from inner to outer and back again. It’s there in the crack of a 
well-placed “that” or a broken hallelujah, in the quiet blaze and shadow of a 
secret life. These are the songs of a man who, through God and love and sex and 
music, spent his life seeking illumination.
 