
Nativity scenes are the art we see at Christmas, often on cards that put a 
masterpiece on the mantelpiece. Baby it’s cold outside, so let’s warm our 
hearts with a bit ofPiero della Francesca 
<https://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/paintings/piero-della-francesca-the-nativity>
 orBruegel 
<https://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/paintings/pieter-bruegel-the-elder-the-adoration-of-the-kings>
.

Yet we close our eyes to the reality of this art. We turn Renaissance and 
baroque paintings into empty kitsch when we appropriate them as part of modern
Christmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> celebrations, 
which in truth have little in common with the much more religious world that 
created these images.

Look a bit harder and the great paintings of the nativity story that we 
sentimentalise at Christmas are full of death and decay. Some are are literally 
apocalyptic. Far from soppy, painted equivalents of a modern school nativity 
play, these paintings are premonitory visions of suffering that invite the most 
serious of meditations.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fnativity-paintings-apocalypse-christmas-leonardo-da-vinci-botticelli-caravaggio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49ece884035a38190ca69c8c8712ea1ee95beee9%2F0_0_3964_3840%2F3964.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Look%20closer%20at%20nativity%20paintings%20%E2%80%93%20and%20see%20visions%20of%20apocalypse&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fnativity-paintings-apocalypse-christmas-leonardo-da-vinci-botticelli-caravaggio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Look%20closer%20at%20nativity%20paintings%20%E2%80%93%20and%20see%20visions%20of%20apocalypse&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fnativity-paintings-apocalypse-christmas-leonardo-da-vinci-botticelli-caravaggio%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49ece884035a38190ca69c8c8712ea1ee95beee9%2F0_0_3964_3840%2F3964.jpg>
 The Adoration of the Magi (1481-2) by Leonardo da Vinci. Photograph: Leonardo 
da Vinci/Getty Images/Art Images 
The world is ending. It is in ruins. A civilisation is collapsing around us. 
That is the setting of Leonardo da Vinci’s Adoration of the Magi and many more 
depictions of the infancy of Christ. In Leonardo’s unfinishedAdoration 
<https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adoration_of_the_Magi_(Leonardo)#/media/File%3ALeonardo_da_Vinci_-_Adorazione_dei_Magi_-_Google_Art_Project.jpg>
, the enigmatic ruins of wondrous buildings stand behind Mary and her child. 
Staircases lead to nowhere. Trees grow out of the crumbling structure. These 
ruins represent the decay of the classical pagan world. With Christ’s coming, 
the pagan age is over; its achievements – which Renaissance artists revered – 
must all fall into ruin. Leonardo goes further. He also depicts a distant 
cavalry battle to suggest the violence of history from which Christ has come to 
promise deliverance.

Other paintings show the ruins of Rome in a way that is eerie and bleak, 
suggesting 
<https://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/paintings/sandro-botticelli-the-adoration-of-the-kings>
 that as well as hope, the nativity also brings a painful ending of old ways. 
As TS Eliot puts it in his poemJourney of the Magi 
<http://www.poetryarchive.org/poem/journey-magi>, “this Birth was hard and 
bitter agony for us, like Death, our death”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fnativity-paintings-apocalypse-christmas-leonardo-da-vinci-botticelli-caravaggio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc765aa9ea493629a44d609e020655b8e5c417cbd%2F0_0_3692_5606%2F3692.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Look%20closer%20at%20nativity%20paintings%20%E2%80%93%20and%20see%20visions%20of%20apocalypse&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fnativity-paintings-apocalypse-christmas-leonardo-da-vinci-botticelli-caravaggio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Look%20closer%20at%20nativity%20paintings%20%E2%80%93%20and%20see%20visions%20of%20apocalypse&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fnativity-paintings-apocalypse-christmas-leonardo-da-vinci-botticelli-caravaggio%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc765aa9ea493629a44d609e020655b8e5c417cbd%2F0_0_3692_5606%2F3692.jpg>
 Caravaggio’a Adoration of the Shepherds (1609). Photograph: Dea Picture 
Library/Getty Images/DeAgostini 
Eliot’s great, uneasy poem, about the pain as well as hope the Magi feel in 
seeing a revelation that leaves them uncomfortable in the “old dispensation”, 
is very close to the true spirit of Renaissance paintings. In Pieter Bruegel 
the Elder’sharsh portrayal of the three kings 
<https://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/paintings/pieter-bruegel-the-elder-the-adoration-of-the-kings>
, they are exhausted old men, withered stumps of time, their myopic and senile 
faces unable to truly understand what they have seen.

Their gifts are troubling. Myrrh was used for embalming – it prefigures 
Christ’s death. Even without that clue, the fact that Christ has been born to 
suffer for human sins is not hard to see. In Leonardo’s Adoration, he reaches 
out to accept a gift as if accepting his fate. Part of the reason this painting 
is so potent as an unfinished work is that the uncoloured shadows evoke mortal 
thoughts.

Yet we don’t just ignore dark hints in paintings of the nativity – at 
Christmas we glide completely over a part of the story that artists in the past 
portrayed with the same insight they brought to the stable scene. You won’t find
the Massacre of the Innocents 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Massacre_of_the_Innocents> on any Christmas 
cards, but it was painted as acutely as any nativity image byBruegel 
<https://www.royalcollection.org.uk/collection/405787/massacre-of-the-innocents>
,Rubens 
<https://www.wikiart.org/en/nicolas-poussin/the-massacre-of-the-innocents-1629> 
or Poussin.

Herod’s massacre of the firstborn does not fit our heartwarming image of 
Christmas. Unfortunately nor do nativity scenes, if we look at them with both 
eyes open. Caravaggio’sAdoration of the Shepherds 
<https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adoration_of_the_Shepherds_(Caravaggio)#/media/File%3ACaravaggio_-_Adorazione_dei_pastori.jpg>
 includes a brilliant still life of a set of carpenter’s tools in the 
foreground. Is this just a nice allusion to Joseph’s job as a carpenter? Of 
course not. It is also a forewarning that one day such tools will be used to 
build a cross for Christ to die on.

Caravaggio includes a set of carpenter’s tools. One day such tools will be 
used to build a cross for Christ to die on

The seriousness of this birth is such that some artists simply shun cuddly 
domestic detail and portray it in an utterly sombre way as a moment of 
revelation.Piero della Francesca’s Nativity 
<https://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/paintings/piero-della-francesca-the-nativity>
 portrays Mary not nursing her child but kneeling on the earth to pray to and 
for him. The shepherds keep a respectful distance in front of a stable so 
humble and broken down that it places this mystical moment outside all human 
comfort. Only a choir of angels brings a silent music of joy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fnativity-paintings-apocalypse-christmas-leonardo-da-vinci-botticelli-caravaggio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F537b4a20a29ecd6ba4bba342aedc905febb333e5%2F0_0_1689_1735%2F1689.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Look%20closer%20at%20nativity%20paintings%20%E2%80%93%20and%20see%20visions%20of%20apocalypse&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fnativity-paintings-apocalypse-christmas-leonardo-da-vinci-botticelli-caravaggio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Look%20closer%20at%20nativity%20paintings%20%E2%80%93%20and%20see%20visions%20of%20apocalypse&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fnativity-paintings-apocalypse-christmas-leonardo-da-vinci-botticelli-caravaggio%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F537b4a20a29ecd6ba4bba342aedc905febb333e5%2F0_0_1689_1735%2F1689.jpg>
 The Nativity (1470-5) by Piero della Francesca. Photograph: The National 
Gallery Photographi/National Gallery, London 
Sandro Botticelli 
<https://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/paintings/sandro-botticelli-mystic-nativity>
 goes even further. His Mystic Nativity sees the holy birth not in cute human 
terms but as the event that ultimately foretells the Last Judgment, the end of 
days and the coming of a new heaven and a new earth. Devils flee into hell as 
angels soar aloft.

Of course Renaissance and baroque artists find joy and hope in the nativity. 
Angels rejoice, dumb animals recognise the weight of this moment, and all eyes 
are on the child who will redeem the world. It doesn’t have much in common with 
the festive fun of our modern, highly secularised and commercial Christmas. 
These paintings are about death and resurrection and the shock of revelation. 
That nativity scene on a card is an opportunity for a moment of meditation amid 
the tinsel. More Silent Night than Jingle Bells.
 