
“There’s gold in them thar hills”, says Colonel Mulberry Sellers in Mark 
Twain’s 1892 novel, The American Claimant. There might have been some truth in 
it then but, these days, gold prospectors could do better by sampling termite 
mounds and leaves from acacia trees. New research in Western Australia reveals 
where remaining gold deposits might be hiding.

Across the world, most of the easy gold (outcropping at the Earth’s surface) 
has already been found and gold miners have to be a bit more cunning. One area 
that hasn’t been searched thoroughly is underneath sediments and soils. But how 
does a modern gold prospector know where to start digging?

Ravi Anand, from the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research 
Organisation (CSIRO), and his colleagues gathered hundreds of samples of 
sediments, soil and acacia leaves fromMoolart Well 
<http://www.mindat.org/loc-269120.html> gold deposit, 400km north-east of 
Kalgoorlie. After analysing the gold content of all the samples they showed 
that clusters of gold occurred in zones rich in organic carbon (carbon derived 
from living material). Their findings arepublished in Geology 
<http://geology.gsapubs.org/content/early/2016/12/08/G38591.1.abstract?sid=e83ef1e9-d2dd-469b-bbe3-dab7b73020ce>
.

Anand and his colleagues believe that much of the gold in the older sediments 
came from underlying gold-bearing rock, via chemical and biological processes 
when the climate was humid. Subsequently, gold was transferred into younger 
sediments by the action of burrowing creatures, erosion and flooding, during 
the dry climate phase of the past few million years.

The samples from termite mounds and acacia leaves reveal that gold is 
preferentially absorbed by living material, and suggests that digging deep 
under gold-rich trees and mounds could lead to veins of gold.
 