
The Los Angeles Rams <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/los-angeles-rams> have 
made Sean McVay the youngest head coach in NFL history – and have reportedly 
agreed to hire veteran Wade Phillips to be their defensive coordinator.

The Rams on Thursday hired McVay, who turns 31 on 24 January. Phillips, who 
got his firstNFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl> coaching job in 1976, 
10 years before McVay was born, will replace Gregg Williams, who left to become 
defensive coordinator of the Browns last week.

McVay spent the past three seasons as the Washington offensive coordinator. He 
has been an assistant since 2010 in Washington, where he worked with head coach 
Jay Gruden to build a prolific offense led by quarterback Kirk Cousins. McVay 
replaces Jeff Fisher, who was fired 13 games into the Rams’ homecoming season 
in Los Angeles, and interim head coach John Fassel.

“I am incredibly honored by this opportunity and I want to start by thanking 
[Rams owner] Mr [Stan] Kroenke and Kevin Demoff for their faith in me to lead 
the Los Angeles Rams as head coach,” McVay said in a statement. “Collectively, 
we are committed to building a championship caliber team, and I’m excited to 
start that process and make our fans proud.”

Phillips’ most recent role came as the coordinator of a Broncos defense that 
was the backbone of a Super Bowl-winning team in 2015. He left the Broncos 
recently after his contract expired at the end of the 2016 season.

The Rams made the eye-catching move to hire McVay on the same day that the 
Chargers announced their relocation to Los Angeles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/12/san-diego-chargers-los-angeles-move-nfl-owners>
 to share the Rams’ $2.6bn stadium.

San Diego refused to be bullied by the NFL and billionaire owners | Les 
Carpenter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/12/san-diego-chargers-los-angeles-move-nfl-owners>
McVay impressed the Rams’ top brass during two recent interviews, but he is an 
unorthodox choice for the franchise. While McVay is respected as an 
up-and-coming NFL mind, he has understandably meager experience. McVay is also 
younger than two of the Rams’ players, defensive linemen William Hayes and 
Eugene Sims.

“He’s brought a lot to this football team, as far as offensively, and done a 
good job calling plays and utilizing the people that we have,” Gruden said 
recently.

But perhaps risks are in order to snap the Rams out of their 12-year playoff 
drought. McVay takes charge of a franchise rebuilding from a 4-12 season, its 
13th consecutive non-winning campaign. Lane Kiffin was 31 years old when the 
Oakland Raiders hired him in January 2007. That hire didn’t go well, and McVay 
faces plenty of difficult work in his new job.

The Rams’ offense has finished last in the NFL for two consecutive seasons. 
Quarterback Jared Goff was the No1 overall pick in last year’s draft, but he 
struggled in his half-season as their starter, while running back Todd Gurley 
had a dismal second NFL season.

McVay could be well-equipped for the job of tutoring Goff: in Cousins’ two 
seasons under McVay as Washington’s starting quarterback, he twice broke the 
venerable franchise’s records for yards passing and completions.

Although McVay is young, he comes from a football family. His grandfather, 
John, spent 21 seasons in the San Francisco 49ers’ front office as a top 
executive.
 