
A proposed law banning lone adults from Los Angeles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/los-angeles> playgrounds has triggered an 
outcry from critics who say it would stigmatize single people as pedophiles.


Mitch O’Farrell, a city councilman, suggested the ban last month as a way to 
protect children from “creepy activity”. He cited drug dealing and other 
“disturbing behavior” in or near playgrounds.

The law would bar adults unaccompanied by children from entering the 
playgrounds which dot parks around the city. The council is due to debate the 
proposal in coming weeks.

Critics have rounded on the idea as a nanny-state affront to single people. 

“Why should the city assume that every adult without a child is a pedophile?” 
said a Los Angeles Timeseditorial 
<http://www.latimes.com/opinion/editorials/la-ed-playground-ban-20161227-story.html>
. “That makes a childless adult a criminal just for being in a particular 
public space, which is an overreach that can lead to foolish enforcement – like 
ticketing people for sitting on a bench eating donuts.”

Indignant comments flooded O’Farrell’s Facebook page 
<https://www.facebook.com/CouncilmemberMitchOFarrell/>.

“I am a single person, who has often had legitimate reasons to spend time in a 
children’s playground without a child,” wrote Krystal Rains. “I take offense at 
the implication that I am a danger to anyone, child or adult when doing so.”

“That is ludicrous, I’m a woman over 60 years old and I can’t go to a 
playground,” said another post, from Cathy Prange. “My best memories are of my 
children and how much fun we had.”

Robert Alvarez said the proposal invented a problem that did not exist. “You 
can spin it any way you want but you are stigmatizing single people who visit 
the park as pedophiles. Shame on you.”

Many pointed out that adults use playgrounds to exercise. 

“I have a bad back, and frequently use playground equipment to hang, and 
stretch out my back. Would you make me a criminal for trying to get some pain 
relief?” wrote Gary Lynch.

“Often, the only place to do [pull-ups] is on a set of ‘monkey bars’ in the 
children’s area. Not sure why I should be blocked from a public space,” said 
Izzy Zayas.

Some rightwing outlets interpreted the row as evidence of liberal overreach. 
“Unbelievable,” saidRedState.com 
<http://www.redstate.com/jenvanlaar/2016/12/28/hey-single-people-la-city-councilman-wants-ban-playgrounds/>
.

“Nanny state gone wild. Los Angeles attempts to ban single adults from parks,” 
tweeted <https://twitter.com/YALiberty/status/814210196113342469> the 
libertarian-tinged Young Americans for Liberty.

O’Farrell is a Democrat who represents the 13th district, which includes parts 
of Hollywood, Silver Lake and Echo Park. He did not immediately respond to an 
interview request on Monday.

However, the backlash prompted him to defend the proposal in a Facebook post 
<https://www.facebook.com/CouncilmemberMitchOFarrell/photos/pcb.669181513261895/669179503262096/?type=3&theater>
 last week. “I want to reassure you – this is NOT a ban on adults without 
children from using our parks. This proposal is limited and affects a small 
area of a park.”

The councilman accused media outlets of incorrectly reporting his proposal, 
which he said emulated similar laws in Santa Monica, New York and Miami Beach. 
The department of recreation and parks backs the proposal.

O’Farrell noted it had generated “robust conversation” and said he was open to 
“thoughtful concerns”.
 