
True Islam <https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam> means loyalty to the 
country in which one lives, abiding by its laws and serving its people and 
communities, the spiritual leader of the Ahmadiyya Muslim movement has said.


The majority of Muslims in the UK were well integrated into British society, 
said the caliph, Mirza Masroor Ahmad, and most “follow the commandment of the 
holy prophet, which says love of your country is part of your faith”.


Casey review raises alarm over social integration in the UK
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/04/social-integration-louise-casey-uk-report-condemns-failings>
His comments followed the publication on Monday of a government-commissioned 
report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/04/social-integration-louise-casey-uk-report-condemns-failings>
 into the integration of minority groups, which concluded that segregation was 
at “worrying levels” in some parts of the country. Its author, Louise Casey, 
recommended “an oath of integration” with British values and society.

Youth members of the Ahmadiyya community already swear an oath of allegiance 
to the country they live in, which includes the sentence: “I solemnly pledge 
that I shall always be ready to sacrifice my life, wealth, time and honour for 
the sake of my faith, country and nation.”


It was “not common practice” for British Muslims to reject integration, said 
the caliph, who claims 20 million followers globally, including about 30,000 in 
the UK.


“If I am law abiding and honour all the laws of a country, I am integrated 
into society. If I am serving the nation with all my potential and capability, 
that is integration. If I am discharging all the duties of my fellow 
countrymen, I am integrated. If I take care of my neighbours – no matter if 
they are Muslim, Hindu or Christian – I am well integrated,” he said.


Judging the Casey review: 'I'm sick of being told I don't get on with people'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/04/im-sick-of-being-told-im-not-getting-on-with-people>
“But if you say we should leave all our religious practices and rituals, that 
is not integration,” he added, citing as examples wearing the hijab and 
prohibitions on eating pork and drinking alcohol.


He said Islam required women to make the domestic sphere the primary focus of 
their lives, although this did not preclude high levels of education, paid 
professional work and even participation in political activity if there was 
“spare time”.


“Islam says there is a division of labour between men and women. The man is 
supposed to be the bread basket and the [job of a] woman is to train the 
children to become good citizens,” Masroor Ahmad said.


The Casey report highlighted “regressive practices” targeting women and girls 
in some Muslim communities, with the author saying she had spoken to women who 
were forbidden from leaving the home without their husband’s permission.


The Ahmadiyya community, whose motto is “Love for all, hatred for none”, moved 
its global headquarters from Pakistan to south London in the 1980s, after a 
constitutional amendment declared its followers to be non-Muslims and they were 
later barred from practising their faith.

Some orthodox Muslims regard the Ahmadi as heretical because they do not 
believe that Muhammad was the final prophet sent to guide mankind. The Ahmadi 
have been ostracised by other Muslims and frequently been persecuted.

In August, a Bradford taxi driver was jailed for a minimum of 27 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/09/tanveer-ahmed-jailed-for-murder-glasgow-shopkeeper-in-sectarian-attack>
 for the “barbaric, premeditated” murder of Asad Shah, a Glasgow shopkeeper and 
member of the Ahmadiyya community. Tanveer Ahmed had admitted repeatedly 
stabbing Shah outside his shop in a sectarian attack motivated by hatred of the 
shopkeeper’s religious views.
 