
Luis Suárez scored twice and Lionel Messi was also on target as Barcelona 
thrashedLas Palmas <https://www.theguardian.com/football/laspalmas> 5-0 on 
Saturday with a ruthless second-half display at the Camp Nou to provisionally 
go second and cut the gap with the leaders Real Madrid to two points.

The Uruguay international Suárez scored his 101st goal for Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> by stroking in André Gomes’ 
cutback in the 15th minute as the Portuguese midfielder recorded his first 
assist for the club since his €35m move from Valencia last summer.

West Ham 3-0 Crystal Palace, Barcelona 5-0 Las Palmas: clockwatch – as it 
happened!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2017/jan/14/west-ham-v-crystal-palace-barcelona-v-las-palmas-and-more-clockwatch-live>
The Barcelona coach, Luis Enrique, had rotated his side after Wednesday’s 3-1 
victory over Athletic Bilbao in the Copa del Rey, resting Neymar, Gerard Piqué, 
the captain Andrés Iniesta and Sergi Roberto but still watched his side 
dominate Las Palmas.

Messi found the net for the seventh consecutive competitive game but after 
scoring free-kicks in all three matches Barcelona played this year, Messi 
mopped up a loose ball on the rebound in the 52nd minute after Rafinha’s shot 
was only parried by the goalkeeper Javi Varas. It was Messi’s 13th goal in the 
last 12 matches and his first against Las Palmas, which was the onlyLa Liga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball> club he had previously 
not scored against.

Suárez curled in a pass from Rafinha to get his second and Barca’s third in 
the 57th minute and the Uruguayan spurned the chance to seal a hat-trick a 
minute later. But Arda Turan mopped up after Varas had saved to score the 
fourth, while the out-of-favour right-back Aleix Vidal netted his first goal 
for the club in the 80th minute.

Barcelona are second in the table, two points behind Real Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/12/sevilla-real-madrid-match-report>
, who have played two games fewer and face third-placed Sevilla on Sunday. 
Atlético Madrid consolidated their hold on fourth spot when they beat Real 
Betis 1-0 later on Saturday.
 