
While everyone knows Motown originated in Detroit, not everyone remembers that 
the White Stripes also hail from here. Though the duo (formerly husband and 
wife) split three years ago and Jack White now lives in Nashville, Tennessee, 
his love for Detroit lingers. In June 2013, the rockerpaid $142,000 in back 
taxes to stop a foreclosure on the nearly 100-year-old Detroit Masonic Temple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/jun/05/jack-white-detroit-masonic-temple>
 (themasonic.com <http://themasonic.com/index.php>), where his mother once 
worked as an usher and where he has played many times. For his generosity, the 
Cathedral Theater in the Temple is being renamed the Jack White Theater. Below 
are the venues where the Stripes cut their teeth, and the best places to tap 
into up-and-coming local bands such as Zoos of Berlin, described as "artful 
pop" by one local reviewer; Tyvek, for "a proto punk bed of rolling funk and 
riff"; and Osborn (otherwise, Ted Osborn) for "zonked out deep-house grooves".

The Magic Stick

Still one of Detroit's top live music venues (among others Kings of Leon, 
Sleigh Bells and The Kills have played here), this was one of the first places 
The White Stripes showcased their garage rock sound (apparently Jack stormed 
off on one occasion because the light wasn't shining the right colour on him). 
There are two stages and a rooftop patio called the Alley Deck, plus a historic 
bowling alley on the first floor below the club, if you're bored by the band's 
sound.
• 4140 Woodward Avenue, majesticdetroit.com 
<http://majesticdetroit.com/magic-stick-detroit/>

Old Miami


The White Stripes regularly played in this unassuming student bar/club 
decorated with military paraphernalia (a homage to Vietnam veterans) and 
vintage sofas and chairs. Since opening in 1979 it has been, and continues to 
be, a big part of the local music scene.
• 3930 Cass Avenue, +1 313 831 3830, Facebook page 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/The-Old-Miami/222839154411733> 

Paycheck's Lounge

A short drive from downtown Detroit is Paycheck's which, for the past three 
decades, has played host to countless Detroit bands from The Stripes to the 
Romantics. Red and yellow lights adorn the stage while year-round Christmas 
lights cover the bar area. Known as one of the best places in Detroit to hear 
alternative music, 90% of the bands that play here hail from Michigan.
• 2932 Caniff, Hamtramck, paycheckslounge.com <http://www.paycheckslounge.com/>

The Magic Bag

This former cinema, also a short drive from the city, has an intimate feel 
(300 capacity) and is popular with hipsters wanting to hear new music. When the 
White Stripes played here, they were once accidentally billed as the Light 
Strikes.

• 22920 Woodward Avenue, Ferndale, themagicbag.com 
<http://www.themagicbag.com/> 
 