
Last week, after seeing a clip of Madonna twerking on an episode of Carpool 
Karaoke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2016/dec/08/madonna-twerks-and-confesses-to-kissing-michael-jackson-with-james-corden-carpool-karaoke-video>
, Piers Morgan pretended to vomit into a bucket. “Oh she makes my skin crawl,” 
he announced, before decreeing to the viewers ofGood Morning Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/apr/16/good-morning-britain-daybreak-susanna-reid-tv>
 that “you can’t be 58 and prancing about like that”.

Granted, it is a mere drop in the ocean of drivel to have come from the mouth 
ofPiers Morgan <https://www.theguardian.com/media/piersmorgan> (who, frankly, 
makes my skin crawl) over the years. Over the last few weeks, in fact. But in 
this instance, his views are shared by all too many. Because to exist as a 
woman in music, and – more importantly – to continue to do so beyond 30, is a 
deeply offensive thing.


It’s a fact that Madonna has railed against often over the years, but never 
with quite such clarity and acerbic conviction as she did on Friday night at
Billboard’s Women in Music event 
<http://www.billboard.com/articles/events/women-in-music/7617021/madonna-billboard-women-in-music-2016-speech>
. While accepting her woman of the year award (a well-intentioned, somewhat 
cumbersome honour, but that’s a debate for another day), she announced, “I 
stand before you as a doormat. Oh, I mean, as a female entertainer.”


She continued, “Thank you for acknowledging my ability to continue my career 
for 34 years in the face of blatant sexism and misogyny and constant bullying 
and relentless abuse.” She discussed her muse, David Bowie, who “embodied male 
and female spirit” and “made me think there were no rules. But I was wrong. 
There are no rules – if you’re a boy. There are rules if you’re a girl.”


Those rules are as follows: “If you’re a girl, you have to play the game. 
You’re allowed to be pretty and cute and sexy. But don’t act too smart. Don’t 
have an opinion that’s out of line with the status quo. You are allowed to be 
objectified by men and dress like a slut, but don’t own your sluttiness. And do 
not, I repeat do not, share your own sexual fantasies with the world. Be what 
men want you to be, but more importantly, be what women feel comfortable with 
you being around other men. And finally, do not age. Because to age is a sin. 
You will be criticised and vilified and definitely not played on the radio.”


It’s impossible to condense all the instances of gender inequality in music – 
both explicit and insidious – into one speech. But as far as scraping the 
surface of injustice goes, Madonna’s speech, in all its concise clarity, 
powered by decades of lived experience, was an important and moving thing 
indeed.


The music industry has progressed in leaps and bounds when it comes to its 
treatment of women. Slowly but surely, female artists are being allowed to own 
their creativity, their sexuality and their artistic agency. Pop acts like 
Fifth Harmony andLittle Mix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/07/little-mix-the-prime-minister-should-dress-like-ru-paul>
 are no longer held up as mere empty vessels into which to pour your male 
fantasies, the likes ofChristine and the Queens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/sep/04/christine-and-the-queens-heloise-letissier-interview>
 occupy an androgynous, queer space previously only inhabited by men, and 
Beyoncé, the biggest pop star on the planet, has performed in front of a 20ft 
sign saying “FEMINIST”. This is progress in which Madonna – for all her flaws – 
has played, and continues to play, a significant part, but there’s still much 
to overcome. And her speech reminded us of that in a way that was (as is 
usually the case with the Queen of Pop) pretty hard to ignore.


Madonna’s flaws, to be clear, are not insignificant. She’s suggested gay 
rights are “way more advanced than women’s rights”, as if the two are separate, 
never-overlapping entities in competition with one another;she’s praised 
Margaret Thatcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/apr/21/madonna-thatcher-gaffe-rebelheart-instagram>
; she’s inappropriatelycompared her album leaking to rape and terrorism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/dec/21/madonna-album-hack-living-state-terror>
 – an album she’d used Photoshopped images of black civil rights leaders to 
promote. She’s tripped up, that’s for sure. But she’s also remained an 
unapologetically empowered, innovative and evocative entertainer, and continued 
to joyously exist in a space so desperate to eject her.


“I think the most controversial thing I have ever done is to stick around,” 
she told the audience at the end of her speech. It’s a tough call, coming from 
the woman who simulated an orgy atop the Last Supper table during her last tour 
– but she’s probably right.

 