
It’s a bitterly cold winter’s day in Newsham Park in Liverpool, yet a group of 
people are out in the Grade II listed Victorian park’s landscaped rose garden 
moving a young tree to a better location while others do litter picking.

Until recently, the park, sandwiched between the city’s deprived areas of 
Tuebrook, Stoneycroft and Kensington, was seen as ano-go area 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-merseyside-34882365> by local residents. 
Vandals would destroy trees, groups of homeless people and people with 
addictions would gather, andcrime rates 
<https://www.police.uk/merseyside/E2/crime/> were high, exacerbating the social 
isolation of many residents. Some of the large Victorian buildings around the 
park house drug rehabilitation centres, hostels for the homeless and other 
projects, fuelling tension with neighbours.

Related: Loneliness linked to 30% increase in heart disease and stroke risk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/apr/19/loneliness-linked-to-30-increase-in-heart-disease-and-stroke-risk>

“The disconnect between people in the community, between generations and 
groups, and the increasing anxiety about crime has resulted in us becoming a 
very fragmented community and an anxious place,” says Christina Ashworth, a 
self-employed business coach, who foundedTreehouse Liverpool 
<http://treehouseliverpool.co.uk/>, a collective of local people who work 
together to improve their park. “The people who suffer disproportionately from 
the impact [of antisocial behaviour] are the socially isolated and of those we 
have many.”

Vinnie Deary, 61, had been litter picking by himself for years. Then he was 
approached in 2013 by Treehouse Liverpool. The members invited him to join them 
in repainting the rails around the lakes, and since then he has taken part in 
most of the group’s activities. A joiner by trade, he lost his job 15 years 
ago, when he developed epilepsy, and has been unable to find suitable work 
since. As well as transforming his social life, Deary says, it has made his 
area more neighbourly. He says: “It’s amazing. People just want to get involved 
with you when you start doing something like this. It’s brought the community 
together.”

Tim Smit, executive vice-chairman and co-founder of the Eden Project, is 
calling for more projects like Treehouse. Astudy published today 
<https://www.edenprojectcommunities.com/connectedcommunities> finds that 
disconnected communities could be costing the UK economy £32bn every year. The 
research, commissioned by the Eden Project’s neighbourhood initiative,The Big 
Lunch <https://www.edenprojectcommunities.com/thebiglunch/>, which receives 
£1m-£2m a year from the Big Lottery Fund, reveals the annual cost to public 
services of social isolation and disconnected communities, including demand on 
health services and policing.

The study found that far from just being a symptom of old age, loneliness and 
social isolation affected a broad range of people: “[There are] key triggers 
that can disrupt lives and create a situation in which loneliness becomes the 
norm,” the report says. “[These] include becoming a new mum at a young age, 
facing empty nest syndrome or retirement, experiencing long-term health issues 
or mobility limitations, dealing with bereavement or going through a family 
breakdown, such as divorce or separation.”

According to the Office for National Statistics, Britain is the loneliness 
capital of Europe 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/lifestyle/wellbeing/10909524/Britain-the-loneliness-capital-of-Europe.html>
. We’re less likely to know our neighbours than residents anywhere else in the 
EU, and a high proportion of the population have no one to rely on in a crisis. 
It’s more than simply feeling lonely – research shows that isolation can have 
huge knock-on effects on bothmental 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/jul/20/loneliness-britains-silent-plague-hurts-young-people-most>
 andphysical health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/apr/19/loneliness-linked-to-30-increase-in-heart-disease-and-stroke-risk>
, which is one of the reasons why social isolation is costing the UK so much 
money.

According to the research, which was carried out by the consultancy the Centre 
for Economics and Business Research (Cebr), disconnected communities are also 
linked to a loss of productivity, with a net cost to the economy of about £12bn 
every year, based onprevious research 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2010/jul/11/happy-workers-are-more-productive>
 that found happiness could be associated with a 12% rise in productivity.

“Productivity is boosted by happiness generated through community involvement 
and the social cohesion it brings, and is also effected by the lower stress, 
higher self-esteem, health and lifestyle benefits gained through community 
involvement,” the report concludes. The solution, Smit says, is social 
connection with neighbours. Neighbourliness already delivers substantial 
economic benefits to UK society, representing an annual saving of £23.8bn in 
total, the study finds. This saving, which was calculated based on a detailed 
survey of 122,000 people from Eden Project’s Big Lunch newsletter databases and 
a review of previous research, comes from sharing between neighbours, an 
increase in social connection, and reductions in the demands on public services 
such as healthcare, social care, welfare and the environment.
 Participants of Just Ride, which runs inclusive drop-in cycling sessions in 
Southend-on-Sea. Photograph: Steve Tanner 
“We estimate that, based on our assumptions, involvement in community 
activities and initiatives is currently delivering reduction in the demands on 
the health services that can be valued at £2.7bn,” the report states. “This has 
the potential to rise to an estimated £7.9bn if there is more widespread 
involvement in community initiatives.”

Using the Home Office’s data on the economic cost of crime 
<http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20110218135832/rds.homeoffice.gov.uk/rds/pdfs/hors217.pdf>
, the researchers also estimate that £205m would be saved from policing 
budgets. It says: “The increased sense of community that arises from greater 
social cohesion can be associated with a 1% reduction in crime ... [which] can 
be translated into a reduction in the demands on policing services.” Once 
people get involved in The Big Lunch or a local project, “they are more likely 
to say hello to people in the street, and it starts to feel like a 
neighbourhood rather than your home is your fortress”, says Smit. “Meeting new 
people and realising that they don’t eat babies and that they are nice is 
really socially important, and that’s what inspires us.

“Our country is a pretty marvellous place and we need to give people the 
opportunity to remember that. A lot of beastly people shout rather loudly so 
you get a wrong impression of what the majority are about and so we’re trying 
to create a platform for people who do care about looking out for others.”

He’s not alone. Tackling the issue of social isolation has become a top 
priority for large funding bodies such as the Big Lottery Fund, which has just 
announced £2.7m funding for aCampaign to End Loneliness project 
<http://www.campaigntoendloneliness.org/> in order to drive public action to 
create 250,000 acts of kindness – such as regular phone calls and volunteer 
work in the community.

Back in Liverpool, Deary says the park is totally changed since Treehouse 
started gardening, tree planting, outdoor yoga and wild play sessions for 
children. “Once you get people involved, a lot of others pay more attention to 
it. The trees aren’t getting damaged like before ,” he says. “Instead of being 
covered in graffiti and run-down, people are looking after it.”

Further south, in Southend-on-Sea, volunteers and participants of Just Ride, 
which runs inclusive drop-in cycling sessions, have had similar experiences. 
The concept behindJust Ride <https://justridesouthend.com/>, which is funded by 
sponsorship from local cycling businesses and a £7,000 grant from the Big 
Lottery Fund – and based at a local athletics track – is to get everyone out 
cycling together, no matter what kind of bike they need to do that. Tandems, 
side-by-side tandems, tricycles and wheelchair tandems, are available for all 
to try.

While many participants have learning disabilities and come with local day 
services, others come just to ride if they are afraid of cycling on streets or 
are feeling lonely. It’s also popular with those going through rehab for 
strokes or if they have had an operation.

Gwen Cook, who helped to launch the project after attending a Big Lunch 
training session, says: “I just want people to enjoy cycling – but it really is 
a way of bringing people together, and I love that. It helps you to see people 
as people. Some participants also become volunteers. It’s a proper community.”

One participant, Zayd Rahman, takes a break from cycling laps around the 
track. He fell seriously ill in February last year and doctors were forced to 
amputate one of his legs. As football coach who played football five times a 
week, the loss of his leg has been a huge shock, not least because of the 
isolation he has felt. For the last five weeks, he and his partner, Farhana, 
have been attending Just Ride.

“I was going for counselling and was asked about my hobbies, but my hobbies 
were playing sports so I felt there was nothing I could do,” he says. “The nice 
thing about this project is it’s given me the confidence to try cycling and get 
back to my former self and not be depressed. Everyone has been so friendly and 
supportive here – and for people to show that they care has meant so much.”

Farhana, who is not currently working, says: “For us, it was important to get 
out of the house. We like seeing the regular faces here and getting to interact 
with all different people from all different backgrounds. It’s really made a 
difference.”

While the report makes no specific recommendations, the message is clear: more 
community-led projects such as Treehouse, Just Ride and the Big Lunch, should 
be encouraged, says Oliver Hogan, director of Cebr. “The next step is obviously 
to provide more funding for these kinds of initiatives. These things aren’t 
really resource intensive, they are more time intensive, with people giving up 
their time.”

Ingrid Koehler, service innovation lead at the Local Government Information 
Unit, says local authorities are waking up to the cost of social isolation, but 
some of the traditional ways that councils helped to bring people together are 
suffering due to budget cuts.According to Unison 
<https://www.unison.org.uk/content/uploads/2015/05/On-line-Catalogue23139.pdf>, 
467 libraries, 578 children’s centres, and more than 300 youth centres have 
closed across England since 2010.

“What we’re talking about is the reading group at the library, the festivals 
and events, the allotments, the play groups and the community centres where 
clubs can meet,” says Koehler. “Some of these universal services, which are 
about just providing a venue and the opportunity to meet people, are slipping 
away.

“I don’t think we have a handle on what the decline in universal services such 
as these will have on loneliness. The impact won’t have truly hit yet, but I 
think it’s on its way.”

Smit does admit the impact of the Big Lunch initiative and all the community 
projects it supports is equally hard to measure, but says the benefits are 
priceless. “It’s extremely powerful. If you feel the soul go back into a place, 
you can’t really quantify it in money.”
 