
Driving into Lagos along the Third Mainland Bridge, the city greets us with a 
sky as thick as coal-slurry and a soundtrack as soulful asFela Kuti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/fela-kuti>. Pedestrians slowly criss-cross 
the eight lanes as we drive, while could-beArea Boys 
<http://nowheremag.com/2014/05/outlaws-nigerias-area-boys/> transform the beds 
of pickup trucks into mobileazonto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/sep/03/ghana-azonto-dance-craze-world> 
dance-floors.

Halfway across we turn and spot the Makoko Floating School 
<http://www.nleworks.com/case/makoko-floating-school/> rising like a beacon out 
of the murky Lagos Lagoon. It is December 2013, and this is our first glimpse 
of the inspiring triangular timber structure – only three storeys high, yet 
commanding the attention of all who travel across the longest bridge in Africa.

We are travelling to meet Nigerian architect Kunlé Adeyemi 
<http://www.nleworks.com/team-member/kunle-adeyemi/>, the founder and principal 
ofNLÉ Works <http://www.nleworks.com/> who, in collaboration with the Makoko 
Waterfront Community 
<https://oshlookman.wordpress.com/2014/07/10/makokoiwaya-waterfront-community-from-risk-to-resilience-through-regeneration-plan/>
, conceived, designed and built the floating school. Makoko, Nigeria’s oldest 
slum, is home to a population of roughly 80,000 residents who, over the 
centuries, have banded together to create an informal but fully working 
city-on-stilts at the edge of the lagoon.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F02%2Fmakoko-floating-school-lagos-waterworld-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F29%2F1432909294587%2F6044d5e8-83d9-445d-920c-d0c5fe56bc27-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Makoko%20Floating%20School%2C%20beacon%20of%20hope%20for%20the%20Lagos%20'waterworld'%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2048&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F02%2Fmakoko-floating-school-lagos-waterworld-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Makoko%20Floating%20School%2C%20beacon%20of%20hope%20for%20the%20Lagos%20%27waterworld%27%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2048&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F02%2Fmakoko-floating-school-lagos-waterworld-history-cities-50-buildings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F29%2F1432909294587%2F6044d5e8-83d9-445d-920c-d0c5fe56bc27-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Architect Kunlé Adeyemi decided to buoy the school on floating barrels and 
locally sourced timber. Photograph: Iwan Baan 
With most of the population working in the fish-smoking or fishing industry, a 
whiff of Makoko smells of just that. The air is thick with fumes; smog seeps 
out from the hundreds of wood-burning kilns and smokehouses scattered across 
this community.

As it grew, the lagoon gradually became divided into a series of informal 
canals, through which taxi-canoes are manoeuvred by nimble young bodies. From 
the stilted architecture to the re-appropriation of found objects (such as the 
emptied parboiled-rice bags that double as roof shelters) to canoes equipped 
with stereo-systems serving as mobile music-boxes, the inhabitants of Makoko 
have adapted their lives completely to surviving on water.

Three years ago, however, the Lagos authorities announced 
<http://www.ibtimes.com/poor-mans-venice-nigeria-demolishes-makoko-lagos-evicting-thousands-723329>
 that in just 72 hours, a process of forcible eviction was to begin here. Some 
3,000 residents have since been displaced from Makoko – regarded as a 
potentially lucrative waterfront site – leaving behind a resilient yet 
sceptical community.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F02%2Fmakoko-floating-school-lagos-waterworld-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F29%2F1432910665400%2F74284174-8116-468d-b79d-e48319afda9e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Makoko%20Floating%20School%2C%20beacon%20of%20hope%20for%20the%20Lagos%20'waterworld'%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2048&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F02%2Fmakoko-floating-school-lagos-waterworld-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Makoko%20Floating%20School%2C%20beacon%20of%20hope%20for%20the%20Lagos%20%27waterworld%27%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2048&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F02%2Fmakoko-floating-school-lagos-waterworld-history-cities-50-buildings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F29%2F1432910665400%2F74284174-8116-468d-b79d-e48319afda9e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Makoko, Nigeria’s oldest slum, is home to a population of roughly 100,000 
residents completely adapted to life on water. Photograph: Iwan Baan 
Around the time the evictions began, Kunlé Adeyemi began asking questions 
about the adaptability and sustainability of Makoko, and other such African 
coastal communities. The answers he got led to an immediate architectural 
response: his Makoko Floating School, completed in March 2013, would primarily 
serve as a school and community centre, while also being scalable and adaptable 
for other purposes.

Dressed in a crisp linen shirt and breezy summer trousers, Kunlé meets us at 
the main water-taxi dock. Like the school he designed, he offers a bright 
contrast against the charcoal waterscape of Makoko. We sail through the 
labyrinth of canals as Kunlé explains the ins and outs of this unique 
waterworld.


It’s a Sunday morning in a country where 50% of the population is Christian, 
and for once this part of the city has a near sci-fi silence to it – save for 
the dip of a paddle into the water, and the sound of young children yelling 
“Yavo! Yavo!” (francophone slang for “foreigner”). We pass a beauty salon, 
photo-booth, grocery stores, a myriad of churches, DVD and barber shops before 
finally arriving at a clearing where the floating school stands tall in the 
water.

When he set about building the school, Kunlé was well aware the state 
government would show resistance to it, given the unplanned nature of the 
community. His first step was to look around the community for design 
solutions. In Makoko, there’s an “anything that floats” mentality when it comes 
to building materials, so Kunlé decided to buoy the school on floating barrels 
and locally sourced timber.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F02%2Fmakoko-floating-school-lagos-waterworld-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F29%2F1432909666391%2Fdd6e7693-5d96-4619-afb2-14592bd9d6ea-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Makoko%20Floating%20School%2C%20beacon%20of%20hope%20for%20the%20Lagos%20'waterworld'%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2048&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F02%2Fmakoko-floating-school-lagos-waterworld-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Makoko%20Floating%20School%2C%20beacon%20of%20hope%20for%20the%20Lagos%20%27waterworld%27%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2048&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F02%2Fmakoko-floating-school-lagos-waterworld-history-cities-50-buildings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F29%2F1432909666391%2Fdd6e7693-5d96-4619-afb2-14592bd9d6ea-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The aim of the school was to generate a new, sustainable building system for 
Africa’s coastal regions. Photograph: Iwan Baan 
Unskilled local workers were hired to build the structure, with the idea that 
they could then go out and build their own homes with the techniques learned 
while erecting the school. Everyone in the community understands its value, not 
least because all of the materials used are ones they live with each day.

Inexpensive and elementary to assemble, the main aim of the school was to 
generate a new, sustainable and ecological building system for the teeming 
population of Africa’s coastal regions. The floating structure adapts to the 
tidal changes and varying water levels of the lagoon, making it invulnerable to 
flooding and storm surges.

Yet a more immediate impact of the new building was the powerful sense of 
ownership that Makoko’s inhabitants derived from it – even before the doors to 
the school were opened. As the only public space in the area, it has become a 
vital meeting-point for the community where, when classes are out, market 
ladies park their boats and fishermen steal some shade to mend their nets.

Visiting Makoko as foreigners back in 2013, many people had questions about 
why we were there and what our intentions were. But when we explained our 
purpose was to document the new school, doors and hearts seemed to fly open, 
with residents eager to show us their homes and businesses, built with their 
own hands. Indeed, the pride they displayed did not seem so very different from 
what we see in professional architects when they complete a project they have 
poured their heart and soul into.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F02%2Fmakoko-floating-school-lagos-waterworld-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F29%2F1432909560711%2F7fcc4d94-ab5b-4d65-825a-822447c5ef30-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Makoko%20Floating%20School%2C%20beacon%20of%20hope%20for%20the%20Lagos%20'waterworld'%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2048&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F02%2Fmakoko-floating-school-lagos-waterworld-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Makoko%20Floating%20School%2C%20beacon%20of%20hope%20for%20the%20Lagos%20%27waterworld%27%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2048&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F02%2Fmakoko-floating-school-lagos-waterworld-history-cities-50-buildings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F29%2F1432909560711%2F7fcc4d94-ab5b-4d65-825a-822447c5ef30-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Makoko schoolchildren on their way back home after classes. Photograph: Iwan 
Baan 
A few months after the school finally opened, we made a second trip to Makoko 
to further document the community and school in full function. By then it was 
abundantly clear that, while life in Makoko is synonymous with struggle and 
resilience, the floating school had made an important statement that the people 
living there do matter.

Makoko was on the verge of demolition in early 2013. Since then, its floating 
school has earned a “pin” on Google maps, and on 20 April this year, the Lagos 
State Ministry of Physical Planning and Urban Development announced it is 
considering incorporating the school’s structure into aregeneration plan for 
the entire Makoko community 
<http://archidatum.com/news/lagos-state-considers-makoko-floating-school-into-development-plan/>
.

“This is a rare and significant moment in history,” Kunlé says now, “where 
innovation is finally matched with an equally open-minded reconsideration of 
established policies … [It] is an important signal for mobilising the local and 
global interest that is critical for addressing the challenges and 
opportunities posed by rapid urbanisation and climate change in developing 
African waterfront cities.”

 * Which other buildings in the world tell stories about urban history? Share 
your own pictures and descriptions with GuardianWitness, on Twitter and 
Instagram using #hoc50 or let us know suggestions in the comments below  