
When it comes to electronics, what Malaysia makes matters. According to a 2014 
study “virtually every device on the market today 
<http://www.verite.org/research/electronicsmalaysia>” – from tablets to laser 
printers to microwaves – is likely to have involved Malaysia in some way.

Once a colonial outpost, the country has radically transformed itself into a 
key player in the global manufacture and trade of advanced electronics. The 
south-east Asian nation hosts more than 5,000 international businesses from 40 
countries, thanks to500 nationwide industrial estates and “free zones” 
<http://www.mida.gov.my/home/why-malaysia/posts/> for trade.

Samsung and Panasonic accused over supply chain labour abuses in Malaysia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/21/samsung-panasonic-accused-over-supply-chain-labour-abuses-malaysia>
Malaysia has rebranded itself as a “heaven for foreign companies” 
<http://www.mida.gov.my/home/why-malaysia/posts/>, describing itself as 
“cost-competitive”, “pro-business” and “market-oriented”.

But these company-friendly policies come with a major human cost, said Phil 
Robertson, deputy director of Human Rights Watch in Asia.

“Many of those working on the factory lines are migrant workers brought to the 
country on the promise of decent work but who are facing a system of 
exploitation that has deepened and expanded over the years,” he said.

“While a lot of this might look like normal work, when you consider the 
position that many of these workers are in, where they have paid extortionate 
fees for their jobs, have had to work as long as three years to pay off that 
debt, and have no access to personal identification documents or any control 
over terms or conditions of work, then this isn’t decent work – it is akin to 
modern slavery.”

Migrant workers are the fuel driving Malaysia’s electronics boom. Campaigners 
believe that as much as 40% of Malaysia’s workforce is made up of migrant 
workers,up to a third of whom are undocumented 
<http://news.trust.org//item/20151113185956-3pv0d/>.


Many global brands operating in the country rely on subcontractors or 
third-party recruiting agents to fill factories with workers.

“Malaysia is one huge assembly plant,” said Bruno Pereira, of the Malaysian 
Trades Union Congress. “The who’s who of the electronics industry is here, yet 
the labour supply companies and subcontracting companies are a law unto 
themselves. There is no minimum wage, no overtime rate and no inspection. They 
operate under the radar.”

Malaysia workers speak of their despair: 'Samsung only knows how to take'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/21/malaysia-workers-speak-of-their-despair-samsung-only-knows-how-to-take>
A 2014 report by supply chain specialists Verité found that as many as one in 
three foreign workers in Malaysia’s electronics sector were working under 
conditions of forced labour <http://www.verite.org/research/electronicsmalaysia>
. It concluded that poor living conditions, unlawful passport retention, 
deceptive recruitment, huge debts, no freedom of movement and penalties for 
leaving a job before the contract ends are just some of the conditions many 
workers face.

Forced labour has also been well documented in other sectors in Malaysia from 
domestic work 
<https://www.hrw.org/report/2011/10/31/they-deceived-us-every-step/abuse-cambodian-domestic-workers-migrating-malaysia>
 toconstruction 
<https://drive.google.com/file/d/0B3GSXHR8ZL1HUGxiUHlWaHM2d2s/view>, agriculture
 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/palm-oil-migrant-workers-tell-of-abuses-on-malaysian-plantations-1437933321>
,manufacturing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/jun/27/nepalese-migrant-worker-malaysia-employment-rights>
 and mining (an industry that actually depends onNorth Korean slave labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/24/-sp-north-korea-malaysia-mine-labour>
).

Migrant workers are routinely harassed by Rela – an armed paramilitary 
civilian volunteer corps with nearly4 million members nationwide 
<http://www.thestar.com.my/news/nation/2016/05/13/rela-kicks-out-186000-members/>
 – who are granted“certain powers” by the government to tackle illegal 
immigration 
<http://www.moha.gov.my/index.php/en/maklumat-perkhidmatan/pasukan-sukarelawan-malaysia-rela>
.

Complicated and outdated trade union laws mean that Malaysia has still not 
adopted the basic International Labour Organisation convention 
<http://news.trust.org//item/20151113185956-3pv0d/> allowing freedom of 
association, and legal protection for migrants – should they need it – can be 
wholly inadequate.


The US State Department, which grades countries according to their efforts to 
curb trafficking, has repeatedly ranked Malaysia on thelowest level 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-malaysia-trafficking-exclusive-idUSKCN0PJ00F20150709>
 of itsTrafficking in Persons (TiP) report 
<http://www.state.gov/j/tip/rls/tiprpt/countries/2016/258814.htm>, pointing to 
frequent forced labour, child labour and sex trafficking issues. The discovery 
last year on the Thai-Malaysian border ofmass graves of suspected trafficking 
victims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/24/mass-graves-trafficking-malaysia-perlis>
 – who are believed to have been trafficked with the help of corrupt officials 
– pointed to a worrying level of collusion at the highest level in a country in 
whichcorruption among immigration and police officers is already well documented
 <http://www.state.gov/j/tip/rls/tiprpt/countries/2016/258814.htm>.

In last year’s TiP report the State Department upgraded the country to the 
“tier 2 watch list”, a move campaigners believe allowedMalaysia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia> to become signatory to the 
Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), a 12-country trade-liberalisation pact with 
the US and Canada, among others.

While TPP theoretically prohibits the use of child and forced labour, and 
promises tocombat the trade in goods made by forced labour both inside and 
outside of TPP <https://ustr.gov/tpp/#standing-up-for-human-rights>, how 
Malaysian employment law will adapt to these changes – particularly when it 
comes to foreign workers – is unclear.

In a keynote speech to British investors this year in London, Malaysia’s prime 
minister, Najib Razak, made no mention of any employment changes, nor did he 
discuss his country’s commitment to human rights.

Instead, he thanked notable UK companies such as Tesco, HSBC, Rolls Royce and 
BT for investing in the country, and pleaded with those at theMalaysia-UK 
Investor Showcase 
<https://www.najibrazak.com/en/blog/the-malaysia-uk-investor-showcase/> to 
follow their lead.

“Malaysia has built a resilient, sustainable and inclusive economy,” Najib 
said. “You can count on us as your ideal partner for doing business in the 
region.”
 