
Malaysian prime minister Najib Razak 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/najib-razak> led a protest rally on Sunday 
against what he called a “genocide” of Myanmar’s Muslim Rohingya minority, as 
he urged Asian neighbours and the world to step up the pressure to stop the 
violence.

Najib said the rally at a stadium in Kuala Lumpur would send a strong message 
to Aung San Suu Kyi’s government that “enough is enough”.

“UN please do something. The world cannot sit by and watch genocide taking 
place,” Najib said to loud cheers from thousands of Muslims, includingRohingya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/rohingya> refugees. “The world cannot say it 
is not our problem. It is our problem,” he said.

Aung San Suu Kyi accuses international community of stoking unrest in Myanmar
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/03/aung-san-suu-kyi-accuses-international-community-of-stoking-unrest-in-myanmar>
The plight of Rohingya in predominantly Buddhist Myanmar has galvanised 
Muslims in south-east Asia and beyond. Denied citizenship although they have 
lived inMyanmar <https://www.theguardian.com/world/myanmar> for generations, 
Rohingya have faced persecution that exploded in intercommunal violence in 
Rakhine state in 2012. Hundreds were killed and more than 100,000 were forced 
into squalid camps.

The violence has again flared up as Myanmar’s military launched attacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/14/myanmar-rohingya-violence-dozens-killed-army-clashes>
 on Rohingya villages following deadly strikes by unknown assailants on police 
posts along the border with Bangladesh in October.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fmalaysia-pm-urges-world-to-act-against-genocide-of-myanmars-rohingya%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb2d44b2d3a12f28e98771b8d34cbdae38540b882%2F11_80_3583_2151%2F3583.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Malaysia%20PM%20urges%20world%20to%20act%20against%20'genocide'%20of%20Myanmar%E2%80%99s%20Rohingya&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fmalaysia-pm-urges-world-to-act-against-genocide-of-myanmars-rohingya%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Malaysia%20PM%20urges%20world%20to%20act%20against%20%27genocide%27%20of%20Myanmar%E2%80%99s%20Rohingya&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fmalaysia-pm-urges-world-to-act-against-genocide-of-myanmars-rohingya%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb2d44b2d3a12f28e98771b8d34cbdae38540b882%2F11_80_3583_2151%2F3583.jpg>
 Malaysian prime minister Najib Razak addresses Rohingya Muslim refugees in 
Kuala Lumpur. Photograph: Manan Vatsyayana/AFP/Getty Images 
The top US diplomat for east Asia, Daniel Russel, said the escalation of 
violence risked inciting jihadi extremism in Myanmar and Bangladesh and called 
on neighbouring countries, includingMalaysia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia> and Indonesia, to resist the urge 
to stage protests that could further stir religious passions.

Najib said the persecution of the Rohingya was an insult on Islam. He said he 
had asked Indonesian president Joko Widodo to stage a similar rally in Jakarta 
to put pressure on Myanmar, because he said the charter of the 10-member 
Association of South-east Asian Nations (Asean), to which all three countries 
belong, ensured the protection of human rights.

The Malaysian government-led protest marks a departure from the long-standing 
policy of non-interference by Asean members in each other’s affairs.

“I will not close my eyes and shut my mouth. We must defend them [Rohingya] 
not just because they are of the same faith but they are humans, their lives 
have values,” Najib said.

Some critics accuse Najib, who is grappling with a financial scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/1mdb>, of using the rally to win the support 
of his country’s Muslim Malays before general elections which are due in 2018 
but may be called earlier.

In a strongly worded statement on Saturday, Malaysia’s foreign ministry said 
there were 56,000 Rohingya refugees in Malaysia. It said it had an obligation 
to halt the “ethnic cleansing” of the Rohingya and ensure security and 
stability in the region.

Malaysia has also summoned the Myanmar ambassador over the issue, and withdrew 
from two scheduled friendly football matches against Myanmar this month. 
Hundreds also protested outside the Myanmar embassy last week.
 