
A large piece of debris discovered on the island of Pemba, off the coast of 
Tanzania, in June was from the missingMalaysia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia> Airlines jet MH370.

 A search of more than two years has turned up few traces of the Boeing 777 
aircraft that disappeared in March 2014, with 239 passengers and crew on board, 
soon after taking off from Kuala Lumpur, the Malaysian capital, bound for 
Beijing.

MH370 pilot's flight simulator plotted course over southern Indian Ocean
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/28/mh370-pilot-flight-simulator-plot-course-southern-indian-ocean>
 The debris, an outboard flap, will be examined further to see if it can yield 
any insight into the circumstances around the missing plane, the Malaysian 
transport minister, Liow Tiong Lai, said.

The Australian Transport Safety Bureau (ATSB) report on the new wing flap 
<http://www.atsb.gov.au/publications/investigation_reports/2014/aair/ae-2014-054/>
 said it “was confirmed as originating from the aircraft registered 9M-MRO and 
operating as MH370.”

It identified the component as “the inboard section of a Boeing 777 right, 
outboard flap.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fmalaysia-confirms-debris-near-tanzania-missing-mh370-plane%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd26b0275e7cfa2267df3b06eae7b72b4991c48e2%2F0_61_2800_1680%2F2800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Malaysia%20confirms%20debris%20found%20near%20Tanzania%20is%20from%20missing%20MH370%20jet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fmalaysia-confirms-debris-near-tanzania-missing-mh370-plane%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Malaysia%20confirms%20debris%20found%20near%20Tanzania%20is%20from%20missing%20MH370%20jet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fmalaysia-confirms-debris-near-tanzania-missing-mh370-plane%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd26b0275e7cfa2267df3b06eae7b72b4991c48e2%2F0_61_2800_1680%2F2800.jpg>
 The part number information on the large piece of debris, which helped to 
confirm it belonged to MH370. Photograph: AFP/Getty Images 
Investigators have previously confirmed a piece of plane debris found on the 
French island of Réunion in July 2015 as being part of the missing MH370. They 
are examining several other pieces of debris found in Mozambique, SouthAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> and Rodrigues Island, a territory of 
Mauritius.

The Australian Transport Safety Bureau’s analysis of several pieces of debris 
led them toconclude that four of them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/12/mh370-two-new-aircraft-fragments-almost-certainly-from-missing-plane>
 were “almost certainly” from the missing plane.

Search officials expect more wreckage to wash up in the months ahead. But so 
far, none of the debris has helped narrow down the precise location of the main 
underwater wreckage.

Scorched debris could suggest missing MH370 plane suffered fire
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/14/scorched-debris-missing-mh370-plane-fire>
The Australian Transport Safety Bureau anticipates search crews will complete 
their sweep of the 120,000-square kilometer (46,000-square mile) search zone in 
the Indian Ocean off Australia’s west coast by December.

Oceanographers have been analysing the wing flaps from Réunion and Tanzania in 
the hope of identifying a possible new search area through drift modelling. But 
a new search would require a new funding commitment. Malaysia, Australia and 
Chinaagreed in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/22/missing-flight-mh370-hunt-for-debris-will-not-be-extended>
 that the A$160m hunt would be suspended once the current stretch of ocean was 
exhausted, unless new evidence emerged that would pinpoint a specific location 
of the aircraft.

Earlier this week, relatives of some of the passengers on board the plane met 
officials from the transport bureau and asked that more potential debris found 
around the Indian Ocean be examined. The families believe those items may help 
provide clues to the plane’s location.
 