
Winston Churchill once famously paraphrased: “Democracy is the worst form of 
government except for all the others.” Recent anti-progressive electoral upsets 
in the US and UK, combined with potential successes looming for similar 
sentiment in upcoming European polls, are conspiring to give democracy a bad 
name in some circles.

Yet despite the challenges, we must be globally resolute in our commitment to 
accountable representative governments, with reinforcing systems of 
transparency and accountability.

The Observer view on corruption, repression and violence threatening fragile 
democracies | Observer editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/27/observer-view-on-corruption-south-east-asia>
In the Muslim world in particular, real democracy is essential to confront the 
threats to life, peace, security, freedom and human dignity that have become 
virtually epidemic from Africa to east Asia. Failure to address political 
grievances allows extremists the opportunity to pounce on the disenchanted and 
marginalised with their brand of deviant Islam.

Earlier this year my long-time friend, Rached Ghannouchi of Tunisia, 
challenged his Islamist peers byboldly pronouncing 
<http://edition.cnn.com/videos/tv/2016/05/23/intv-amanpour-rached-ghannouchi-tunisia-ennahda-islam.cnn>
 at the Ennahda party convention, “We are leaving political Islam … We are 
Muslim democrats.”

While this ideal may be still nascent in the Middle East, in south-east Asia, 
the success of Indonesia and the relative progress ofMalaysia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia> can make them beacons for 
Muslim-majority countries globally. But as my own political imprisonment 
exemplifies, we still need unyielding international encouragement and pressure, 
if our nations are to fully realise their democratic destinies.

Two decades ago Malaysia was arguably the bright spot of progress in the 
Muslim world. We believed then that our combination of economic growth and 
improving democratic engagement would be an example for other Muslim-majority 
countries. The past 20 years, however, have seen our country go from bad to 
worse politically and economically, driven by compromised democratic 
institutions and years of systematic abuse by the ruling elite to maintain 
their grip on power.

Our people have chosen the path of reform and democratic accountability as the 
way forward. This was evident when they showedtremendous courage 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Malaysian_general_election,_2013> in the 2013 
general election and delivered a 52% majority for the opposition coalition I 
was honoured to lead.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fthousands-march-malaysia-demanding-prime-minister-resigns-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Thousands%20march%20in%20Malaysia%20demanding%20prime%20minister%20resigns%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fthousands-march-malaysia-demanding-prime-minister-resigns-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Thousands%20march%20in%20Malaysia%20demanding%20prime%20minister%20resigns%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fthousands-march-malaysia-demanding-prime-minister-resigns-video&media=>
Thousands march in Malaysia demanding prime minister resigns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/nov/19/thousands-march-malaysia-demanding-prime-minister-resigns-video>
This sentiment has also been evident in our famous yellow-shirted “Bersih 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bersih>” rallies calling for “clean” government. 
Sadly, however, the UMNO 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_Malays_National_Organisation>-led 
government has increased harassment, arrest, and detention of nearly all key 
pro-democracy activists and opposition leaders.

Despite its uninterrupted rule since Malaysia’s independence, its ownership of 
over 95% of the nation’s media assets, and its control of the judiciary and 
federal police forces, the government dreads a democratic wave sweeping them 
from power. The historic scale of its kleptocracy has been highlighted 
internationally by the multibillion-dollar1MDB scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/28/1mdb-inside-story-worlds-biggest-financial-scandal-malaysia>
, now the subject of the largest corruption investigation in US department of 
justice history.

I remain optimistic for our nation and about the victory of our citizens, 
because the current opposition coalition now even includes former prime minister
Mahathir Mohamad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/23/former-malaysian-premier-mahathir-sues-pm-najib-over-abuse-of-power>
, and an increasing number of his allies defecting from UMNO. To stem a mass 
revolt, the ruling elite has resorted to desperate and repressive measures 
which have forced the country further into despotism. This includes the 
criminalising of public debate and a cynical exacerbation of racial and 
religious tensions. The latter factor has increased religious extremism to the 
point that per capita, Malaysia is sending six times the number of foreign 
fighters to join Islamic State as our neighbour Indonesia.

Seventeen years ago my colleagues and I took a defiant stance against 
autocracy: our “Reformasi” (reform) movement started with a dream of 
multi-ethnic politics grounded on the principles of reform, inclusivity and 
justice. Fast forward to today, and the movement has evolved into a formidable 
and vibrant opposition.

Malaysian cartoonist arrested for criticism of prime minister Najib Razak
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/27/malaysian-cartoonist-arrested-for-criticism-of-prime-minister-najib-razak>
This has put Malaysia at a crossroads: it can either return to its rightful 
place as a shining political and financial star in a developing world desperate 
for such successes; or it can descend to the role of yet another 
Muslim-majority country with a failing democracy and economy. Internationally, 
support for fundamental political reforms in Malaysia can help create a 
south-east Asian bloc of Muslim governments that will be a model for the rest 
of the world.

What may be the final judicial review of my case will be held this week, and I 
hope my wrongful conviction will now be overturned. I pray my political 
imprisonment will soon end – as theUnited Nations 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-11-02/un-determines-detention-of-malaysias-anwar-ibrahim-arbitrary/6905994>
,Amnesty International 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/documents/asa28/3414/2016/en/> and Human Rights 
Watch 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2016/02/08/malaysia-end-anwar-ibrahim-incarceration> 
have all implored – and that I may be free again to witness a new chapter in 
world history. I believe the factors are well-aligned to see Malaysia return to 
its position of regional leadership. if its true friends can work to ensure it 
does not slide down a path from which it will be difficult to quickly recover.

As the original convener of the World Forum for Muslim Democrats 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=itVLjvl_J1A> in 2014, I am certain that 
freedom, transparency, accountability are the right answers for Malaysia and 
for the entire Muslim world. Democracy may not be the perfect solution to every 
problem we have, but simply put, it is better than every other option.
 