
Malcolm Turnbull <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> 
has said Australia supports the “continuation of harmony” in east Asia before 
talks with the Japanese prime minister, Shinzo Abe, ahead of the regional 
summit in Laos.


Asked whether he was concerned that rising tensions in the South China Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-china-sea> could see Japan and China 
clash militarily, the prime minister said the relative harmony of the past 40 
years in East Asia must be maintained.

“It is vitally important that all parties work together openly in accordance 
with the rule of law and avoid in any context provocative actions which are 
likely to add to, or create, tensions,” Turnbull told reporters travelling with 
him in Vientiane, the capital of Laos.

Malcolm in the middle: Turnbull woos China and the US
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/17/malcolm-in-the-middle-turnbull-woos-china-and-the-us>
The Asean summit will bring together leaders from the US, China, Japan and the 
nations of south-east Asia against a backdrop of prolonged tensions overChinese 
aggression in the South China Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/03/g20-obama-warns-beijing-against-south-china-sea-aggression>
.

Turnbull said Australia was committed to working with both China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> and the US to ease potential 
flashpoints.

The prime minister again rejected the idea that Australia would have to choose 
between its major economic partner, China, and its strategic partner in the US. 

“I know it’s fashionable to say that you’ve got to choose between China and 
the United States but the reality is that these are both enormously important 
powers in every respect,” he said.

“And all of the countries in this region, I know, dealing with their leaders – 
all of us are committed to dealing with both because our commitment is to 
maintaining peace and harmony in this part of the world.”

Before the talks, which will also canvas regional security more broadly, the 
prime minister said the region faced a “very real challenge in terms of 
terrorism”.

Turnbull referenced a new Islamic State publication 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/07/australians-should-not-be-fearful-of-islamic-state-attack-propaganda-police-say>
 urging lone wolf attacks at a number of well-known Australian locations. He 
flagged a desire to see more regional cooperation and intelligence sharing as a 
practical consequence of the summit.

“We have to take these threats seriously,” Turnbull told reporters on 
Wednesday. “As I said last week in my national security statement to the 
parliament, as Isil or Daesh [Islamic State] is rolled back in the Middle East, 
they will seek to maintain relevance by seeking to inspire attacks elsewhere in 
the world.

“Now, many of the nations that are here assembled – Indonesia, Malaysia, the 
Philippines just to name a few – have been victims of significant terrorist 
attacks in very recent times.

“They, too, face the challenge of returning foreign fighters, adding to 
already radicalised elements in their community.

“So our collaboration in terms of counter-terrorism is critically important.”
 