
Malcolm Turnbull <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> 
says there is now “cautious optimism” that a code of conduct can be reached in 
the hotly disputed region of the South China Sea, despite the dangerous 
flashpoint overshadowing a regional meeting of Asian leaders in Laos.

The prime minister told reporters before a meeting with the Chinese premier, 
Li Keqiang, on Thursday that progress was slow to resolve the disputes between 
regional players “but there is cautious optimism that agreement can be reached 
on a code of conduct”.

The prime minister’s office also said in Laos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/laos> it had been agreed that Indonesia’s 
president, Joko Widodo, would visit Australia soon, possibly this year, but no 
date had been decided.

Turnbull said the South China Sea decision in The Hague in July – where an 
international tribunalupheld a complaint by the Philippines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/12/philippines-wins-south-china-sea-case-against-china>
 over China’s aggressive actions in the region – was “a fact, it is a reality”.

China has refused to accept the decision. But, according to news reports 
<http://www.philstar.com/headlines/2016/09/07/1621480/philippines-china-push-framework-code-conduct-south-china-sea>
 from the Philippines, China has agreed to work towards a code of conduct to 
settle territorial disputes peacefully.

Beijing warns US to stay out of South China Sea dispute
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/08/beijing-warns-us-to-stay-out-of-south-china-sea-dispute>
According to those reports, the president of the Philippines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/philippines>, Rodrigo Duterte, has signalled 
he is prepared to hold talks with China to settle the dispute and he has asked 
the former president Fidel Ramos to hold “backchannel talks” with Chinese 
officials.

Turnbull called again for cool heads on Thursday, saying the Australian 
government “strongly encouraged agreement on the code of conduct”.

The prime minister told reporters he’d had one private conversation with 
Duterte – who caused a diplomatic storm by branding the US president, Barack 
Obama, the“son of a whore” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/05/philippines-president-rodrigo-duterte-barack-obama-son-whore>
 before their planned bilateral meeting in Laos – and hoped to have another 
conversation with him late on Thursday.

Turnbull said it was critically important that claimants in the South China Sea
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-china-sea> resolved their disputation 
between themselves.

The Australian prime minister’s remarks before his meeting with the Chinese 
premier followed talks earlier in the day with Widodo, whichcentred on a trade 
deal the government wants to pursue with Jakarta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/01/steve-ciobo-australians-alienated-globalisation-nick-xenophon-pauline-hanson>
 and enhanced security cooperation in the region.

Turnbull said the Indonesian president had given a strong signal he wanted to 
move the trade deal along and he said, when it came to dealing with the threat 
of terrorism, the two leaders had agreed “tolerance is one of the major weapons 
against violent extremism”.

The prime minister told reporters leaders had also responded positively to an 
offer he made at a dinner on Wednesday night to host an Asean summit in 
Australia in 2018.
 