
Malcolm Turnbull has publicly endorsed the proposed US military buildup in the 
Asia-Pacific region which has beenflagged by the incoming Trump administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/10/australian-pm-turnbull-says-trump-will-project-enhanced-military-power-in-asia-pacific>
, while launching a swingeing political attack on the federal opposition, 
alleging Labor is hopelessly split on the alliance.


Asked on Wednesday whether he was at all concerned about talk in the US about 
the deployment of a giant US military force to counterChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> in the region, the Australian prime 
minister was unequivocal. He told reporters “a stronger United States means a 
safer world”.

The Guardian reported last week two senior Trump advisers had flagged the 
incoming administration’s desire to expand the US navy 
<http://foreignpolicy.com/2016/11/07/donald-trumps-peace-through-strength-vision-for-the-asia-pacific/>
 from 274 ships to 350 and to deploy more extensively in the region to counter 
China’s growing assertiveness.

Unpopularity in Australia may hinder security cooperation with Trump – analysts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/unpopularity-in-australia-may-hinder-security-cooperation-with-trump-analysts>
This talk has only gathered pace post-election, with public commentary over 
the past 24 hours fromRudy Giuliani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/rudygiuliani>, who is considered the 
frontrunner to be the new US secretary of state, about the proposed buildup.

Giuliani reportedly told a business conference 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/defence/donald-trump-set-to-supersize-military-says-rudy-giuliani/news-story/412e20f7a91cfad0482579d14abe0e2f>
 China would not be able to match the US in the Pacific if the navy increased 
to 350 vessels. “If you face them with a military that is modern, gigantic, 
overwhelming and unbelievably good at conventional and asymmetric warfare, 
[China] may challenge it, but I doubt it,” Giuliani is reported to have said.

Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> also flagged 
his intentions during a 15-minute conversation with Turnbull immediately after 
his election.

A more assertive US military posture in the region will likely inflame 
underlying tensions between Washington and Beijing, which have flared in the 
flashpoint of theSouth China Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-china-sea>.

On Wednesday Turnbull appeared sanguine about the development, telling 
reporters in Canberra Trump had “campaigned on a promise to increase investment 
in the US military and we support and welcome a strong United States”.

“A stronger United States means a safer world,” he said.

Turnbull also doubled down on domestic politics, declaring Labor was split on 
the US alliance after the shadow foreign minister, Penny Wong,said on Tuesday 
that Australia was at a “change point” in the bilateral relationship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/15/australia-must-develop-independent-foreign-policy-in-wake-of-trump-win-labor-wong>
 after the election of Trump.

The prime minister declared that Wong wanted to cut ties with Washington, and 
“to move away from our most trusted, most enduring ally, move away, put our 
country at risk”.

In a column published Tuesday, Wong did not argue that Australia should 
abandon the postwar alliance, but she said post-Trump: “We are at a change 
point, and face the possibility of a very different world and a very different 
America.”

“Our collective task now is to carefully and dispassionately consider 
Australia’s foreign policy and global interests over coming months, and how 
best to effect these within the alliance framework.”

Wong also argued Australia needed a better roadmap in Asia.

Turnbull told reporters the Labor left had always been uncomfortable with the 
US alliance, and he contended commentary from Labor about the alliance was a 
distraction from internal divisions on national security and border protection.

He pointed to separate commentary from the shadow defence minister, Richard 
Marles, who argued during a Sky News interview that it was important to have 
increased US presence in the region.

Turnbull suggested the right faction, of which Marles is a member, was 
attempting to “crab walk” away from the Wong position.

In Mackay the Labor leader, Bill Shorten, who has been critical of Trump’s 
policy positions, said he was optimistic about the future of the alliance.

“We have shared values with the United States but we’re not exactly the same 
as the United States, so when people talk about the future of the American 
alliance, I’m optimistic about it, but that doesn’t mean that we shouldn’t also 
be engaging in Asia,” Shorten said.

“Labor’s always had three pillars to our foreign policy and nothing’s changed: 
One is the American alliance, two is deeper engagement in our region, and three 
is respect for multilateral institutions such as the United Nations and 
international forums which deal with a whole range of important issues which 
effect the globe.”

As well as giving succour to Trump’s plans for the military buildup, the prime 
minister also on Wednesday gave a tacit endorsement to a criticism Trump made 
repeatedly during the presidential campaign about allies failing to contribute 
to the costs of their own defence.

Five ways in which a Trump presidency could affect Australia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/09/five-ways-in-which-a-trump-presidency-could-affect-australia>
During the campaign, Trump suggested that key players in the Asia-Pacific 
region, like Japan and South Korea, needed to fund their own defence.

On Wednesday Turnbull said: “I think the United States is entitled to expect 
its allies to make a commitment, a significant commitment, to their own defence 
and to that partnership, and Australia does.”

“No one can suggest that my government is not absolutely committed to ensuring 
that the men and women of the ADF have the capabilities, have the resources, to 
keep our nation safe.”

Earlier in the day the defence industry minister, Christopher Pyne, noted that 
Australia pulled its weight in the alliance in terms of military spending.

“Fortunately we are not strategic bludgers because we are at 2% of gross 
domestic product,” Pyne said at a submarine event.

“Given the spend of the Turnbull government into the next 10 years, I would 
imagine that will be surpassed at some stage in the future. So we are one of 
the countries that is pulling our weight.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ffirst-actions-trump-president-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20will%20be%20the%20first%20actions%20Trump%20takes%20as%20president%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ffirst-actions-trump-president-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20will%20be%20the%20first%20actions%20Trump%20takes%20as%20president%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ffirst-actions-trump-president-video&media=>
What will be the first actions Trump takes as president? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/10/first-actions-trump-president-video> 