
After months of shuttle diplomacy, the Coordination of Movements for Azawad 
(CMA), the main rebel coalition in northern Mali,officially signed a peace 
agreement 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/2015/06/21/uk-mali-rebels-deal-idUKKBN0P00NW20150621>
 in Bamako on 20 June. The Mali government and the Algiers Platform, a 
coalition of pro-government armed groups, hadalready signed the deal 
<http://www.english.rfi.fr/africa/20150514-france-s-hollande-welcomes-tuareg-rebels-initial-mali-peace-deal>
 in May. All the protagonists involved in peace talks in Algiers have 
officially endorsed it.

This is a welcome development for Mali <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mali>
 and a great relief for the Algerian-led international mediation. However, 
after previous agreements failed to restore peace in 1992 and 2006, there are 
reasons to remain cautious. Three stand out.

Mali conflict: south is south, north is north, never the twain shall meet? | 
Katarina Höije
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/19/mali-conflict-south-north-divide-algiers-peace-talks>
First, the CMA – an alliance of Tuareg and Arab-led rebels – signed the 
agreement under huge international pressure. Algeria, France and theUN Mission 
in Mali <http://www.un.org/en/peacekeeping/missions/minusma/> (Minusma) pushed 
hard to persuade the CMA’s leadership not to miss this unique opportunity to 
join the peace train. The CMA, not wanting to be seen as an enemy of peace, 
like the al-Qaida-linked fighters who overpowered the Tuareg rebels in northern 
Mali during 2012, eventually decided to sign up.

This form of authoritarian diplomacy succeeded in forging the Bamako 
agreement. But it came at a price.

After negotiations stalled in March, tensions between armed groups in the 
north escalated. This May was the most violent month since 2013. About 30,000 
peoplefled their homes  <http://www.unhcr.org/556868896.html>around Timbuktu 
because of fighting. Renewed attacks on civilians included summary executions 
near Gao.

Despite the peace agreement breakthrough, distrust between its signatories – 
the government, the Platform and the CMA – is running high. This will 
complicate the implementation of any lasting deal.

The day after it was signed, a few disgruntled CMA members announced that they 
had rejected the peace framework 
<http://www.english.rfi.fr/africa/20150622-cautious-optimism-meets-long-awaired-peace-deal>
 and called for an extraordinary meeting of militants and combatants in favour 
of Azawad, the territory in northern Mali that rebelsbriefly declared 
independent <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/oct/24/mali-africa>in 2012.

A second problem is that the agreement focuses on short-term security through 
disarmament, demobilisation and reintegration. These are important steps, but 
more is needed. The agreement does not do enough to build solid foundations for 
a sustainable peace.

The deal puts its faith in extended decentralisation – meaning that central 
authorities will devolve more power and resources to regional assemblies – to 
stabilise northern Mali. But that can only be part of the solution if it 
addresses the specific challenges that affect the north. Demilitarisation, for 
instance, will need to mean more than simply disarming rebels.

Political institutions that would allow peaceful resolution of local conflicts 
must be built as well. Regional assemblies, if adequately organised, supported 
and funded, could, for example, help address local disputes over territory and 
power.

The lack of more ambitious provisions to strengthen governance leaves Mali in 
a vulnerable position. This is all the more regrettable as instability has 
recently spread to areas outside the north.

The future for Mali – podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/audio/2014/aug/28/future-mali-podcast>
Since January, military barracks have been attacked and so-called 
“collaborators” murdered in central Mali. Significantly, no leader from the 
central region attended the peace talks in Algiers. Their absence at the 
signing ceremonies casts another shadow on the prospect of lasting peace.

Third, implementation remains a huge challenge despite some positive signals. 
The agreement’s monitoring committee, in which Algeria and Minusma play a 
leading role, met for the first time the day after the CMA signed.

The monitoring committee will play a pivotal role in clarifying contentious 
provisions in the deal. For example, it remains unclear how many combatants 
from the Platform and the CMA will be integrated into Mali’s security forces. 
This could quickly become a major problem.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Fjul%2F01%2Fmali-peace-deal-a-welcome-development-but-will-it-work-this-time%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F30%2F1435665985697%2Ff7a0625c-f29c-466b-bc0e-34125288be37-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mali's%20peace%20deal%20represents%20a%20welcome%20development%2C%20but%20will%20it%20work%20this%20time%3F%20%7C%20Jean-Herv%C3%A9%20Jezequel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Fjul%2F01%2Fmali-peace-deal-a-welcome-development-but-will-it-work-this-time%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mali%27s%20peace%20deal%20represents%20a%20welcome%20development%2C%20but%20will%20it%20work%20this%20time%3F%20%7C%20Jean-Herv%C3%A9%20Jezequel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Fjul%2F01%2Fmali-peace-deal-a-welcome-development-but-will-it-work-this-time%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F30%2F1435665985697%2Ff7a0625c-f29c-466b-bc0e-34125288be37-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Mahamadou Djeri Maiga, right, vice-president of the Transitional Council of 
the State of Azawad, with Mali’s president, Ibrahim Boubacar Keita, left, after 
signing the peace agreement. Photograph: Habibou Kouyate/AFP/Getty Images 
Past experience shows that integration will not be sufficient to break the 
cycle of “armed nomadism” in the region whereby individuals become rebels, 
soldiers or bandits depending on the volatile context in which they find 
themselves.

At best, the deal will buy a few months or years of relative stability, 
interrupted by short but “acceptable” episodes of violence. But it is unlikely 
to end the longstanding crisis in northern Mali.

The efforts of the mediation team in facilitating a peace process that keeps 
the CMA on board should be commended. Yet by imposing peace, Mali’s partners 
have taken a risky approach.

There should be no misunderstanding: the 20 June agreement did not end the 
Malian crisis, it opened a new phase in which peace will have to be won. If 
mediators and signatories do not invest the time needed to tackle some of the 
deal’s weaknesses or ensure implementation and follow-up, even the deal’s 
short-term security commitments will not hold.

The danger is that Mali could become a house of cards that seems stable on the 
outside but risks collapse as international interests shift to other hotspots.

Jean-Hervé Jezequel is senior analyst for the Sahel region at the 
International Crisis Group, <http://www.crisisgroup.org/>whose most recent 
report isMali: An Imposed Peace? 
<http://www.crisisgroup.org/en/regions/africa/west-africa/mali/226-mali-an-imposed-peace.aspx>
.




 