
The man killed by police on the M62 motorway died from gunshot wounds to the 
chest, the police watchdog has said, as it appealed for witnesses to come 
forward.


The Independent Police Complaints Commission revealed the results of the 
postmortem examination carried out on Yassar Yaqub on Thursday. It said there 
was no CCTV footage of the shooting and that the officers involved were not 
wearing body cameras.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fman-killed-by-police-m62-shot-chest-postmortem%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33d28ab0d6be9848141b343251fbc3ea4d1ebd94%2F0_198_1200_1498%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Man%20killed%20by%20police%20on%20M62%20was%20shot%20in%20chest%2C%20postmortem%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fman-killed-by-police-m62-shot-chest-postmortem%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Man%20killed%20by%20police%20on%20M62%20was%20shot%20in%20chest%2C%20postmortem%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fman-killed-by-police-m62-shot-chest-postmortem%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33d28ab0d6be9848141b343251fbc3ea4d1ebd94%2F0_198_1200_1498%2F1200.jpg>
 Yassar Yaqub. Photograph: Facebook 
Yaqub, 28, was shot through his windscreen after unmarked police cars boxed in 
his white Audi on a slip road off the M62 in Huddersfield on Monday night.

West Yorkshire police said the operation was planned and followed a tip-off 
about a suspected illegal firearm. Investigators found a gun in Yaqub’s car 
after the incident.

Derrick Campbell, the IPCC commissioner investigating the shooting, 
acknowledged there were “many unanswered questions”. On Wednesday, Yaqub’s 
father, Mohammed,said he wanted to know 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/04/i-want-answers-says-father-of-man-shot-dead-by-police-m62-yassar-yaqub>
 whether armed officers had planned to “assassinate” his son.

Campbell said: “I would like to reassure the local and wider community that 
this will be a thorough and detailed independent investigation. We will be 
carefully examining all the circumstances leading up to Mr Yaqub’s death, 
including the planning of the police operation and the actions of the officers 
involved that evening.

“I am, of course, aware there are many unanswered questions but I would urge 
patience at this time and that people allow our investigation to run its 
course. If anyone witnessed events who has not yet come forward, we would be 
grateful to hear from them. We are making steady, positive progress, and are 
continuing to build a picture of what exactly happened. We are in contact with 
Mr Yaqub’s family and will be keeping them updated.”

IPCC investigators have conducted house-to-house inquiries and are carrying 
out ballistics and forensics testing on the gun found in Yaqub’s car.


Yaqub’s Audi and a white VW Golf that was stopped by police in the same 
operation are undergoing forensics tests, as is an unmarked police vehicle.

On Thursday night, West Yorkshire police said a 30-year-old Dewsbury man had 
been charged with firearms offences in relation to the incident. Moshin Amin 
will appear at Leeds magistrates court on Friday charged with possession of a 
firearm – a semi-automatic handgun – with intent to cause fear of violence, 
possession of a sound moderator and possession of ammunition.

Two other men, aged 37 and 26, who were arrested in connection with the 
incident have been released on police bail pending inquiries.

On Wednesday night a roadside vigil was held for Yaqub at the spot where he 
was shot in Ainley Top, north of Huddersfield.

Yaqub was acquitted of attempted murder in 2010 when the case against him fell 
apart in court. Two years ago he was treated for shotgun wounds after a gunman 
targeted him outside his family home. Neighbours and former associates said he 
was involved with drugs, and after his death his friends described him as “no 
angel”.

In an interview with the Guardian, his father said he had “run out of tears” 
since the shooting. “I want answers from the police, from all the relevant 
bodies that can give me answers … the truth will be revealed.”

He took exception to West Yorkshire police’s description of the operation as 
“pre-planned” and demanded to know: “How can it be pre-planned? Pre-planned 
means that they have intentions of doing that. Pre-planned means that you’ve 
got intentions to assassinate someone and murder someone. That’s what you mean 
by pre-planned. Was that the case in this case? If it was pre-planned, 
pre-planned for what?”

West Yorkshire police have declined to comment and referred inquiries to the 
IPCC.

 