
A mechanic originally from the Irish Republic has been jailed for 11 years by a
Northern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> court for 
running a bomb factory that contained enough explosives to build what could 
have been one of the biggest bombs ever used by terror groups in the region.

Barry Petticrew was caught on a rural farm in County Fermanagh that had been 
transformed into a workshop building bombs.

Antrim crown court was told that Petticrew had been under surveillance by the 
Police Service of NorthernIreland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> 
(PSNI) at the farm near Kinawley, close to the border with the Irish Republic.

The surveillance operation was part of a security drive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/oct/10/explosives-found-psni-country-fermanagh-republican>
 on October 2014 against dissident Irish republican activity in the county, the 
court heard.

Petticrew was said to have tried to run across fields in the direction of the 
border when armed police raided the farm.When captured, he told PSNI officers: 
“I’m not involved in terrorism. This house belongs to a friend of mine.”

The PSNI found high-grade explosives, pipes, timer units and ammunition at the 
property.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fman-barry-petticrew-ran-bomb-factory-northern-ireland-jailed-11-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d98ef21c98b95642f0a9f2c594b752d6e93644d%2F92_65_1817_1090%2F1817.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Man%20who%20ran%20bomb%20factory%20in%20Northern%20Ireland%20jailed%20for%2011%20years&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fman-barry-petticrew-ran-bomb-factory-northern-ireland-jailed-11-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Man%20who%20ran%20bomb%20factory%20in%20Northern%20Ireland%20jailed%20for%2011%20years&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fman-barry-petticrew-ran-bomb-factory-northern-ireland-jailed-11-years%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d98ef21c98b95642f0a9f2c594b752d6e93644d%2F92_65_1817_1090%2F1817.jpg>
 A timer power unit found on the farm. Photograph: PSNI/PA 
The court heard there were enough explosives to build the largest bomb ever 
seen in Northern Ireland before or after the Troubles.

In sentencing the 45-year-old, from Swanlinbar in County Cavan, on Tuesday, 
Judge Gordon Kerr QC pointed out that Petticrew had allowed himself to be 
associated with dissident republicans five years after he had been convicted of 
a terrorism-related offence at the Republic’s non-jury special criminal court 
in Dublin.

DI Davy Lowans from PSNI said: “This haul contained many of the components 
used by a terrorist group, everything from time power units and fertiliser to a 
coffee grinder, ammunition and forensic suits.

“We believe this was for use by dissident terrorists in Fermanagh and other 
parts of Northern Ireland. The quantities and range of items recovered would 
have enabled a number of explosive devices to be constructed. The seizure will 
have an impact on the terrorists’ capabilities and undoubtedly has saved lives.”
 