
When the floods came last December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/02/southern-india-hit-by-floods-after-heaviest-rainfall-in-more-than-a-century>
, the city of Chennai and its surrounding districts in the southern Indian 
state of Tamil Nadu were caught cold. Amid dramatic scenes of flooded streets 
and devastated homes, 347 people died across the state and damage valued at 
more than 20,000 crore rupees ($3bn) was sustained – with Chennai the largest 
city affected.

The highest level of rainfall for 100 years, together with clogged and 
shrunken river mouths, encroachments on river banks, blocked natural drainage 
pathways and a lack of early flood-warning systems all contributed to the 
drowning of this coastal city.

Originally an area comprising wetlands and numerous lakes, Chennai is now a 
concrete jungle – the product of a rapid and chaotic development (powered in 
part by India’s booming automotive industry) that has shrunk its three rivers 
and built over most lakes and swamps surrounding the city.

Since the floodwaters receded, the city has had to clean up tonnes of garbage 
– but it did successfully prevent any epidemic from breaking out. Life is 
almost back to normal as roads are slowly resurfaced and damaged vehicles, 
goods and machinery are replaced.


Chennai is about water bodies and we need to work with water to reinvent the 
city
Jayshree Vencatesan 
In the aftermath of the disaster, the city’s authorities were quick to seek 
advice from other cities whose experience of flooding – and pioneering plans to 
alleviate flood risk – could ensure Chennai is less badly affected the next 
time the rains hit with such force.


“The challenge is not resources – the challenge is how will Chennai use its 
resources?” says Vikram Singh from100 Resilient Cities 
<http://www.100resilientcities.org/#/-_/> (100RC), the global initiative funded 
by theRockefeller Foundation <https://www.rockefellerfoundation.org/>. “Cities, 
at moments like this, need to learn and adapt – but also grow better and 
stronger.”

“Chennai’s agenda needs to be blue,” says Jayshree Vencatesan from Care Earth, 
a nonprofit working in the field of conservation. “Chennai is about water 
bodies and we need to work with water to reinvent the city. It is illogical 
that residents of the city pay to buy water for their daily needs while we are 
witnessing floods.”


Last month the city’s municipal body, the Greater Chennai Corporation, 
organiseda seminar with 100RC 
<http://www2.giz.de/urbanet/news/detail.asp?number=4516> in which international 
experts on flood management put their heads together with local experts to come 
up with a comprehensive plan to build a stronger, more flood-resistant Chennai. 
These are some of the cities and projects that Chennai attempted to learn from.

Georgetown, Guyana

Chennai and the Caribbean city of Georgetown may be 15,000 km apart, but the 
problems they face are the same. Rapid unplanned urbanisation in Georgetown, as 
in Chennai, has resulted in what was once a well-connected network of canals 
and drains being built over. Floods now frequently inundate Guyana’s capital, 
and it has brought in experts from Arcadis, a global design and engineering 
firm, to come up with a plan on how to handle the problem.
 The manatee: an unusual flood defence. Photograph: Arcadis 
Analysis of water flow in Georgetown’s 200-year-old drains network revealed 
one immediate problem: “Maintenance of water discharge channels is key, so we 
decided to recommend small floating dredging equipment which would keep the 
canals free of obstructions,” says Rob Steijn from Arcadis. Most strikingly, 
the team asked the Georgetown authorities to import amanatee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/12/manatees-green-sea-turtles-endangered-species-status>
 – that fully aquatic, mainly herbivorous mammal – into the canals, to eat the 
vegetation clogging them and enable a freer flow of water.

“Chennai’s rivers need to be cleaned up first, and obstacles and debris 
removed from them,” Steijn says. “Government needs to ensure that there is 
space for pumping stations in future plans; don’t build hotels before these. 
There needs to be a sustained awareness campaign first – people have to 
understand the dos and don’ts of living near water.”

Lent, Netherlands

As the pioneers of flood mitigation systems, the Dutch have battled floods for 
centuries as they protect a country that liespartly below sea level 
<http://www1.american.edu/ted/ice/dutch-sea.htm>. The Dutch government, in 
2006, began implementing a €2.3bn (£1.8bn)project called “Room for the River” 
<https://www.ruimtevoorderivier.nl/english/>. The idea was simple: make more 
room for the river to overflow, rather than building right on its banks.

The Dutch government has worked on creating more room for the rivers IJssel, 
Lek, Maas and Waal. At the neck of the river Waal in Nijmegen, flooding 
regularly occurs as the river bends in the form of a bottleneck between Lent 
and Nijmegen. The Dutch decided to make more space for the river to flow, in a 
bid to curb the strength of the floodwaters and protect the residents of Lent.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F02%2F100-resilient-cities-ideas-to-solve-chennai-flooding-problem-manatees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f3237b06e7c8b9b00dd53b185f91b5f18a0ac66%2F0_23_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manatees%20to%20the%20rescue%3F%20Cities%20offer%20ideas%20to%20solve%20Chennai's%20flooding%20problem&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F02%2F100-resilient-cities-ideas-to-solve-chennai-flooding-problem-manatees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Manatees%20to%20the%20rescue%3F%20Cities%20offer%20ideas%20to%20solve%20Chennai%27s%20flooding%20problem&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F02%2F100-resilient-cities-ideas-to-solve-chennai-flooding-problem-manatees%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f3237b06e7c8b9b00dd53b185f91b5f18a0ac66%2F0_23_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Lent after the Room for the River project began. Photograph: Kingdom of the 
Netherlands 
A dike in Lent was moved inland by 350 metres and an ancillary channel, 150 
metres wide and 3km long, was dug in the flood plains. This move resulted in a 
small island being formed, and a bridge was built to connect it with Lent. The 
idea, according to the Room for the River project, was that the river would no 
longer flow along the city, butthrough it instead.

Never think about solving a water problem​. Learn to embrace it and live with 
it
​Henk Ovink 
A new waterfront at Lent has been developed, with a paved sloping surface that 
disappears into the water. The quay itself has been designed to be another 
urban open space where cyclists and walkers can enjoy the sights of boats and 
the river. The new “green dike” is accessible to cyclists, strollers and 
emergency vehicles.

Flood plains and river beds across the Netherlands were deepened, and 
construction along rivers was systematically removed to create open public 
spaces that, in the event of floods, would be inundated,avoiding damage to 
property and loss of life 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=slmkG93SH3Q&feature=youtu.be>. “It took us 10 
years to do all this,” says Henk Ovink, the Netherlands’ special envoy for 
water affairs. “We gave up urban and farm land for the river. But we have 
increased development potential because of this.”

Ovink feels that Chennai has great scope for implementing projects similar to 
Room for the River along all three of its rivers – the Adyar, the 
Kosasthalaiyar and the Cooum. “Never think about solving a water problem,” he 
says. “Learn to embrace it and live with it.”

Jakarta, Indonesia

In 2007, global attention turned to the Indonesian capital Jakarta as floods 
ravaged this bustling megacity,displacing at least 340,000 people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/feb/05/weather.indonesia> from their 
homes. Once again, Jakarta and Chennai share many similarities: both are 
coastal cities with rivers running through them, and both cities are sinking – 
a phenomenon known as subsidence – due to extreme extraction of ground water 
and unplanned construction.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F02%2F100-resilient-cities-ideas-to-solve-chennai-flooding-problem-manatees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F02910f4cc075095adf022a5be2ef8702c546904d%2F0_191_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manatees%20to%20the%20rescue%3F%20Cities%20offer%20ideas%20to%20solve%20Chennai's%20flooding%20problem&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F02%2F100-resilient-cities-ideas-to-solve-chennai-flooding-problem-manatees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Manatees%20to%20the%20rescue%3F%20Cities%20offer%20ideas%20to%20solve%20Chennai%27s%20flooding%20problem&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F02%2F100-resilient-cities-ideas-to-solve-chennai-flooding-problem-manatees%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F02910f4cc075095adf022a5be2ef8702c546904d%2F0_191_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Flood response in Jakarta. Photograph: Ed Wray/Getty Images 
After the 2007 floods, the Indonesian government roped in Dutch water research 
institute Deltares to find lasting solutions to the problem of flooding. The 
team decided to open up a new channel that would take floodwater out into the 
sea rather than letting it run through the city.

“A new flood channel is a possibility that Chennai could look into,” says Kees 
Bons of Deltares. “Another option is to create what the Dutch call a ‘polder 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polder>’ – an enclosed area of reclaimed land 
which is very low-lying, so that water cannot flow due to gravity. These 
polders hold the water in and they can then be pumped out using powerful 
machinery.” According to Bons, the use of polders means it would not be 
necessary to raise the areas surrounding the river. “Don’t work against the 
forces of nature,” he advises. “Study the systems and use the energy of nature.”

New Orleans, United States

In 2005 Hurricane Katrina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jul/27/new-orleans-hurricane-katrina-10-years-lessons>
 devastated the city of New Orleans, leaving almost 1,500 people in the city 
and surrounding areas dead. After much soul searching, in 2010 the Greater 
Orleans Urban Water Plan was finally implemented: an attempt to create what its 
architects called a“Living Water System” <http://livingwithwater.com/>, where 
canals were widened and their surroundings turned into green public spaces. New 
Orleans has since also put in place pervious pavements, which allows rainwater 
to pass through them into underground storage basins.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F02%2F100-resilient-cities-ideas-to-solve-chennai-flooding-problem-manatees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5a7f330f8760b77b3c87fa95b982f4c2e447e419%2F0_168_5568_3341%2F5568.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manatees%20to%20the%20rescue%3F%20Cities%20offer%20ideas%20to%20solve%20Chennai's%20flooding%20problem&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F02%2F100-resilient-cities-ideas-to-solve-chennai-flooding-problem-manatees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Manatees%20to%20the%20rescue%3F%20Cities%20offer%20ideas%20to%20solve%20Chennai%27s%20flooding%20problem&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F02%2F100-resilient-cities-ideas-to-solve-chennai-flooding-problem-manatees%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5a7f330f8760b77b3c87fa95b982f4c2e447e419%2F0_168_5568_3341%2F5568.jpg>
 Artist’s impression of the Lakeview and Bucktown areas with more wet spaces 
and parks to help control floods. Photograph: Waggonner & Ball 
“Chennai and New Orleans share the problem of subsidence, and people need to 
be aware that sucking out the groundwater will cause the city to sink further,” 
says David Waggonner, president of Waggonner and Ball architects who designed 
and led the New Orleans water plan. “Chennai can definitely implement whatNew 
Orleans <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-orleans> did – make a blue 
city instead of a grey city full of concrete.”

Waggonner also cautions the city authorities against opting for purely 
engineering solutions. “We have huge engineering systems to pump out water in 
New Orleans which failed,” he says. “Engineering systems will fail. Chennai 
needs to take the ‘least effort approach’ – let nature work for me.”

Surat, India

Chennai could well learn lessons from closer home, too. Surat, a city in the 
western Indian state of Gujarat, has put in place early flood warning systems 
to ensure that loss of life is minimised among its teeming population. It has 
also managed to restore a clogged and polluted lake, and has turned the 
surrounding area into a public space replete with entertainment and games for 
children and adults.

The next Tokyo? Plan for 'flood-defence city' boasts first mile-high skyscraper
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/feb/08/next-tokyo-2045-japan-plans-mile-high-skyscraper-flood-defence>
“Chennai’s residents will benefit if similar flood warning systems are put in 
place since this will give them some respite time to move away from the area,” 
says Kamlesh Yagnik, Surat’schief resilience officer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/nov/09/what-chief-resilience-officer-summit-100rc-mexico-city>
, who worked with municipal authorities to enable these projects. “Water bodies 
can also be cleaned and restored using the public-private partnership model, as 
we did in Surat.”

As the floods have become politically sensitive in the city, and with state 
elections looming, Chennai’s residents are at a unique juncture to demand a 
sustainable plan for a more resilient, “blue” city.

“After big disasters there are windows of opportunity,” says Michael 
Berkowitz, the 100RC president. “People are shaken out of their comfort zones 
and come out of their silos. We need to use that momentum to create a strong 
city. The next disaster will not necessarily be a flood – it could also be a 
tsunami, or a typhoon, or terrorism. Chennai needs to be prepared to face any 
disaster.”

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 