
One of the refugees beaten with an iron bar on Manus Island 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/manus-island> has spoken about how 
he thought he was going to die until he was rescued by another Manussian who, 
he says, saved his life.


Kamran (the Guardian has given the man a pseudonym because of concerns for the 
safety of his family in Afghanistan) has described howhe and two fellow 
refugees were attacked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/14/manus-island-photos-show-aftermath-of-violent-attack-afghan-refugees>
 as they walked back from the beach at Lorengau on Wednesday afternoon.


He and two refugee friends were heading for the bus that would take them back 
to the Australian-run detention centre, a 45-minute drive away inside the 
Lombrum military base.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fmanus-refugee-says-he-thought-he-would-die-after-being-attacked-by-locals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80ede57dd372dfb3cbb1dd8e414efe2c3cd84f38%2F0_0_3823_5352%2F3823.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manus%20refugee%20says%20he%20thought%20he%20would%20die%20after%20being%20attacked%20by%20locals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fmanus-refugee-says-he-thought-he-would-die-after-being-attacked-by-locals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Manus%20refugee%20says%20he%20thought%20he%20would%20die%20after%20being%20attacked%20by%20locals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fmanus-refugee-says-he-thought-he-would-die-after-being-attacked-by-locals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80ede57dd372dfb3cbb1dd8e414efe2c3cd84f38%2F0_0_3823_5352%2F3823.jpg>
 Kamran (not his real name), a refugee on Manus Island who was attacked by a 
group of men in Lorengau in August 2016. Photograph: Matthew Abbott/GetUp 
“A group of seven local men approached us,” Kamran said through an 
interpreter. “They were very drunk. One had a huge iron bar about two metres 
long.”

“One of my friends managed to quickly hide in the bushes, but the men 
surrounded me and my other friend. They were abusing us, saying things like 
‘this is our country’ and ‘you do not belong here’ and ‘go back to your 
country’.

“They demanded cigarettes and our clothes and the shoes that we were wearing. 
Then the man with the iron bar started hitting us with it. I fell to the ground 
and tried to protect my head. The man kept hitting me with the bar and the 
others were punching me. I passed out for a few seconds. I thought my life was 
over.”

Manus island: photos show aftermath of violent attack on Afghan refugees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/14/manus-island-photos-show-aftermath-of-violent-attack-afghan-refugees>
The assault only ended when another Manussian man stepped in to stop it. He 
pulled the men to their feet and walked them, bloodied and confused, to the 
police station.

“One local man came and helped us. He stopped the beating.”

Even after the attack had finished, Kamran thought he had sustained 
life-threatening injuries. He collapsed at the police station and was carried 
to a police 4WD and taken to hospital.

“I was so scared. I thought I would die. There was so much blood. I collapsed 
and the next thing I know I woke up in the hospital. It was in and out of 
consciousness until the next morning.”

Kamran, a member of Afghanistan’s Hazara ethnic and religious minority who 
fled the Taliban in his homeland, says other refugee friends have been 
assaulted on Manus too.

“We are all very scared. After three years of this I am exhausted. I fled my 
country looking for safety. I still haven’t found it.”

But Kamran said he was grateful to the man – unknown to him – who stepped in. 
“I want to thank the PNG man who helped me. I also want to thank my refugee 
friends who helped me and looked after me in the hospital and back at the 
detention centre. They are very kind people.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fmanus-refugee-says-he-thought-he-would-die-after-being-attacked-by-locals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F55998e662bfec3528826632b42d37c26230e1bb0%2F0_0_2334_3500%2F2334.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manus%20refugee%20says%20he%20thought%20he%20would%20die%20after%20being%20attacked%20by%20locals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fmanus-refugee-says-he-thought-he-would-die-after-being-attacked-by-locals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Manus%20refugee%20says%20he%20thought%20he%20would%20die%20after%20being%20attacked%20by%20locals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fmanus-refugee-says-he-thought-he-would-die-after-being-attacked-by-locals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F55998e662bfec3528826632b42d37c26230e1bb0%2F0_0_2334_3500%2F2334.jpg>
 Kamran and two refugee friends were heading for the bus that would take them 
back to the Australian-run detention centre, a 45-minute drive away inside the 
Lombrum military base. Photograph: Matthew Abbott/Reuters 
Calls by the Guardian to PNG police on Sunday night and on Monday morning have 
not been answered. The Guardian understands no arrests have been made. Kamran 
remains in the medical unit of the detention centre.

Daniel Webb, the director of legal advocacy with the Human Rights Law Centre, 
was on Manus Island and witnessed the aftermath of the attack on Kamran and his 
friends.

He told the Guardian that other refugees who saw Kamran and his friends 
walking bloodied through the town towards the police station had been 
frightened by the assault “but they were not surprised”.

“I spent the week interviewing the men our government has locked up on Manus 
for the last three years,” he said. “I met some truly amazing people – men of 
different ages, from different parts of the world and with different stories to 
tell. But what they all have in common is they are tired.

“After three years of all this, they’ve had enough. These offshore camps are 
dead-ends. We must look at humane policy alternatives. First and foremost, we 
must bring them here.”

Australia’s entire offshore detention regime in PNG faces an existential 
challenge next week.

Next Monday PNG’s supreme court will hear a legal challenge to the offshore 
detention centre from the lawyer Ben Lomai, who has argued the detention regime 
is a breach of the country’s constitutional guarantee to liberty. The case has 
been fast-tracked by the court and a judgment could be delivered in weeks. 
Lomai has argued the men must be returned to Australia and compensated for 
their illegal detention.

Ninety-eight per cent of the men held on Manus 
<http://www.aph.gov.au/About_Parliament/Parliamentary_Departments/Parliamentary_Library/pubs/rp/rp1516/Quick_Guides/Offshore>
 whose asylum claims have been assessed have been found to be refugees – that 
is, they have awell-founded fear of persecution 
<http://www.unhcr.org/protect/PROTECTION/3b66c2aa10.pdf> in their home country 
and are legally owed protection. Most have been held on Manus, without charge, 
for more than three years.

A similar legal challenge against the detention centre has already succeeded. 
In April thesupreme court ruled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/26/papua-new-guinea-court-rules-detention-asylum-seekers-manus-unconstitutional>
 that the offshore processing system established in PNG was“illegal and 
unconstitutional” <https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/04/26/PNG_SC_judgement.pdf>. 
Superficial changes to the detention regime have since been instituted but the 
men remain in detention.
 