
Leicester qualified for the European Champions Cup quarter-finals after 
thrashingTreviso 47-7 at Welford Road. The Tigers’ fifth successive win means 
they will top Pool Four and also be desperate to finish the pool stage in style 
next Sunday by winning atStade Français 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/stadefrancais> to boost their chances of a 
home quarter-final.

The bonus point win puts them on 23 points and the only other time they have 
started a campaign with five straight victories was in 2001-02 when they won 
the cup for a second successive season.

Leicester <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers>, with the 
England centre Manu Tuilagi making his first start for 15 months after a groin 
injury, scored seven tries in front of a crowd of 19,076 through Mike 
Fitzgerald, a penalty try, Vereniki Goneva, Adam Thompstone, Ben Youngs, 
Freddie Burns, who kicked five conversions, and Laurence Pearce.

Treviso <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/treviso>, bottom of the Guinness 
Pro12 and without a win in 16 matches, replied through Andrea Pratichetti, 
while Simone Ferrari was sent to the sin bin.

Munster saved some face from their disappointing Champions Cup campaign with a 
26-13 bonus point win overStade Français at Thomond Park. The Irish province 
avoided their worst European run of four successive defeats, with their 
try-scoring captain and Ireland hopeful CJ Stander producing a man-of-the-match 
display.

European Cup failures indicate problems on and off the field for Ireland | 
Robert Kitson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jan/15/rugby-european-cup-failure-ireland-ulster-munster-leinster>
In Pool One, Toulouse, the four-times champions, continued their miserable 
campaign with a 32-14 defeat atOyonnax. The home side sent their compatriots 
bottom with a bonus-point win – their first victory of this year’s campaign.

Meanwhile Gloucester qualified for the Challenge Cup quarter-finals with a 
20-10 win overLa Rochelle.
 