
In 2004, Maria Balshaw was one of 27 people chosen to take part in what was 
then an experiment to forge a new generation of arts leaders. “If all goes to 
plan,” as one newspaper put it at the time, the candidates on theClore 
leadership programme <http://www.cloreleadership.org/> “will be as significant 
in the cultural life of Britain in the years to come as Sir Nicholas Serota of 
the Tate is today”. Not many in that first cohort might have dared to think 
they would actually take over from Serota barely 13 years later. As the 
director of Tatesteps down after nearly 30 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/08/sir-nicholas-serota-appointed-chairman-arts-council-england-tate>
, his successor – as long as Theresa May agrees –is set to be Balshaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2017/jan/11/maria-balshaw-the-tates-new-director-elect>
.

“Who wouldn’t, in the art sector, want that kind of job?” she said in an 
interview in 2015, though she also stressed that she still had a lot of work to 
do in Manchester, where she is director of both theWhitworth Art Gallery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/feb/01/whitworth-gallery-manchester-muma-redesign>
 and Manchester Art Gallery. Balshaw is also regarded as Manchester’s “cultural 
attache”, because somehow she finds time to be the council’s strategic lead for 
culture, and has been instrumental in thecity’s cultural revival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/feb/16/guardian-view-cultural-cities-manchester-shows-way>
.

Tate welcomes Maria Balshaw – a leader of charm, guts and skill
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2017/jan/11/tate-maria-balshaw-director-nicholas-serota>
Unlike many directors of major museums, Balshaw does not have a long history 
in the arts. She was born in Birmingham, but spent some of her childhood in 
Leicester where her father was a parks officer; they lived in a house on the 
edge of the park, which must have seemed like a vast garden to Balshaw (it is 
probably no coincidence that when she oversaw the £15m redevelopment of the 
Whitworth, adjacent to Whitworth park, the iron fence separating the two came 
down and the gallery is fully integrated into the park).

She read English at Liverpool University, then went to Sussex to do an MA in 
critical theory, followed by a doctorate. She stayed in academia, first as a 
lecturer at a college in Northampton, then as a research fellow at the 
University of Birmingham.

She got her first arts job in 2002 when she became director of Creative 
Partnerships <http://www.creativitycultureeducation.org/>, the government’s 
drive to inspire creativity in schools. One of her colleagues at the time, 
Steve Moffitt, remembers her as being “very driven. She really cared about 
young people and their creativity. She had a passion, she believed in 
everything she did and she was destined to rise in terms of becoming a leader 
of some description”. She was always very stylish, he adds. Photographs of 
Balshaw usually show her wearing bright prints and bold silhouettes; at 
Christmas, shetweeted a picture 
<https://twitter.com/mbalshaw/status/812995721624518656> of her new gold shoes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fmaria-balshaw-tates-director-elect-dares-artists-different%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6863e504d9ac25497d858f3a9522b74b4b068819%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Maria%20Balshaw%3A%20Tate's%20director-elect%20dares%20artists%20to%20be%20different&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fmaria-balshaw-tates-director-elect-dares-artists-different%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Maria%20Balshaw%3A%20Tate%27s%20director-elect%20dares%20artists%20to%20be%20different&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fmaria-balshaw-tates-director-elect-dares-artists-different%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6863e504d9ac25497d858f3a9522b74b4b068819%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Works by Cornelia Parker on show at the Whitworth Art Gallery in Manchester in 
2015, following the building’s reopening. Photograph: David Levene for the 
Guardian 
In 2006, Balshaw was offered the directorship of the Whitworth. “I thought, I 
can’t possibly do that job!” she has said, though she soon set about 
transforming it, taking visitor numbers from 80,000 a year to more than 170,000 
and attracting world-renowned artists such asCornelia Parker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/feb/11/cornelia-parker-whitworth-art-gallery>
 andMarina Abramović 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2009/jul/04/marina-abramovic-presents-manchester>
.

More so than probably any other museum director, she has championed female 
artists. “I think that Maria would rightly describe herself as a feminist and 
someone who feels that the balance of whose art has been shown has often not 
been equitable,” says John McGrath, the artistic director of theManchester 
international festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/manchester-international-festival>, “and 
if there are great female artists out there who aren’t getting the profile or 
exhibition space that they should, then she will certainly fight their corner 
and make sure they are seen. At the same time, if there is a great male artist 
whose work she loves she will also be programming that.”

McGrath has known Balshaw since she arrived in Manchester, and they have 
worked closely together on projects such asThe Factory, a planned £110m 
cultural centre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/12/manchesters-factory-arts-building-gets-go-ahead>
 (for which Balshaw got the Treasury to pledge £78m). “I think she’s 
extraordinary. She’s a woman who can juggle the most amazing range of jobs, and 
manages to do each of them with great style and inventiveness which is a 
testament to a truly extraordinary person.”

How does she fit it all in? “She’s obviously got a very good capacity to 
prioritise and she builds strong teams around her, so she’s not micromanaging, 
she’s allowing people to deliver what they need to deliver.”

What drives her, he thinks, is “she’s really excited about the widest possible 
range of people getting to see and be part of the most extraordinary and 
exciting new work. She’s interested in sharing her passion for contemporary art 
with a wide range of people and [seeing] how they respond to that work. One of 
the really nice projects they’ve had at the Whitworth is a young curators’ 
programme where they invite young people into the building to curate their own 
events and exhibitions. I think that’s the sign of a confident and exceptional 
leader.”


She is, says Parker, “brilliant. She allows people to play to their strengths. 
She’s very dynamic, charismatic and persuasive, so she’s very good at getting 
support. She can juggle lots of things at once. I thinkManchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/manchester> has really benefited from her 
input. She’s very enthusiastic. She’s very inclusive. I think everybody at the 
Whitworth works really well under her command because she spots what they’re 
good at and allows them to shine at that. She’s very astute about art. And she 
encourages you as an artist to be as bold as you want to be. As an artist, you 
want somebody who is brave rather than cautious.”

Did Balshaw place any limits on what Parker could do? “No, not really. 
Whatever we could practically do. She said, ‘Look, if you need me to raise more 
money, I can do that.’ She really facilitated brilliantly.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fmaria-balshaw-tates-director-elect-dares-artists-different%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc573fc22cbad8e52b1ffe8c716321a35debbd212%2F0_251_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Maria%20Balshaw%3A%20Tate's%20director-elect%20dares%20artists%20to%20be%20different&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fmaria-balshaw-tates-director-elect-dares-artists-different%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Maria%20Balshaw%3A%20Tate%27s%20director-elect%20dares%20artists%20to%20be%20different&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fmaria-balshaw-tates-director-elect-dares-artists-different%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc573fc22cbad8e52b1ffe8c716321a35debbd212%2F0_251_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Artworks on display in the Whitworth. The gallery’s successful renovation has 
been the high point of Balshaw’s career so far. Photograph: David Levene for 
the Guardian 
It was, says Stephen Deuchar, the director of the fundraising charity Art Fund 
<https://www.artfund.org/> and former director of Tate Britain, “a really 
remarkable moment” when Balshaw was asked to also oversee Manchester Art 
Gallery. “I don’t think that joint role would have been created for anyone 
else,” he says. The Art Fund named the newly reopened Whitworthits museum of 
the year in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jul/01/manchesters-whitworth-gallery-wins-museum-of-year>
. “I think the feel that she and her team have for architecture, works of art 
and their potential, and above all else, for audiences, is remarkable. She is 
very highly respected by working artists, art dealers also think very highly of 
her and fellow museum professionals tend to admire her, and she’s loved by her 
staff.”

The artist Jeremy Deller has worked with Balshaw several times, including his 
exhibitionAll That Is Solid Melts Into Air 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/oct/13/artist-industrial-revolution-popular-culture>
 at Manchester Art Gallery in 2014. “She likes to get things done. I think 
museums can sometimes move quite slowly and often there is a natural caution, 
and so it’s very important that there are directors who can work against that 
and be more dynamic in terms of how things can happen. She’s someone who is on 
the side of the artist. She wants things to be different and surprising. She 
trusts the artists and she trusts the public as well.” As a person, he says, 
“she wears her status very lightly – she’s not a grand person, she’s very 
approachable.”

Balshaw is also, says Deuchar, “an adept political player. The northern 
powerhouse idea was developing, which she was deeply involved in. She’s one of 
these people that can see the micro and the macro in the same picture. She gets 
the bigger political context and sight of the levers to pull to make very big 
things happen, but she also gets right down to the grassroots to what is 
required to make a museum work for its community. I don’t think it’s strategic, 
I think it’s instinctive.”

People repeatedly talk about her energy. Even her time away from work seems 
full of activity. Balshaw recently qualified as a yoga instructor and practises 
most days. “I have my best ideas in the 30 minutes following my almost daily 
yoga session,” she has said. “For me, yoga creates space within the mind as 
well as realigning the body so that the solutions to whatever I’ve been 
grappling with in the previous 24 hours or 24 weeks just sort of emerge.”

When she and her husband, Nick Merriman, the director of Manchester Museum 
<http://www.museum.manchester.ac.uk/>, go to their holiday home on the Scottish 
island of Bute – filled, typically, with printed textiles and mid-century 
furniture – not only is the time spent tending the vegetable patch and 
jam-making, but the couple are part of the driving force behindthe restoration 
of the art deco Rothesay Pavilion 
<http://www.scotsman.com/lifestyle/isle-of-bute-art-deco-pavilion-set-for-3m-revamp-1-3678146>
, which is due to reopen next year as an arts centre.

The Guardian columnist Ian Jack was also on the committee and found it curious 
that the couple had bought a house on the island. “There is, so far, absolutely 
nothing fashionable about this part of the world,” he says. “It isn’t Cornwall 
and visitors from southern England are very rare.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fmaria-balshaw-tates-director-elect-dares-artists-different%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2f1c1191c7ac37bf0e7c215a6ca4aa18b5afe58%2F0_416_5690_3414%2F5690.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Maria%20Balshaw%3A%20Tate's%20director-elect%20dares%20artists%20to%20be%20different&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fmaria-balshaw-tates-director-elect-dares-artists-different%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Maria%20Balshaw%3A%20Tate%27s%20director-elect%20dares%20artists%20to%20be%20different&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fmaria-balshaw-tates-director-elect-dares-artists-different%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2f1c1191c7ac37bf0e7c215a6ca4aa18b5afe58%2F0_416_5690_3414%2F5690.jpg>
 Balshaw at the Whitworth in January 2015, a month before its reopening. 
Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
Similarly, someone else remarks that the area where Balshaw and Merriman live 
in Manchester (they have four teenage children between them) isn’t the 
expensive area where you find most of the media and cultural elite, but one of 
the city’s most deprived parts.

Balshaw has, wrote the Telegraph’s art critic this week, “street-level 
dynamism”. She is not part of the London metropolitan elite,which in the 
current climate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/15/elites-white-male-public-school-boys-brexit>
 has been seen as something in her favour.

But others have raised doubts that she does not have a curatorial background. 
Does that matter? “No, not at all,” says Parker. When the artist agreed to work 
with the Whitworth, Balshaw “chose a curator she knew would work really well 
with me. You’ve got great curators at the Tate, so in a way it might be good to 
have that separation – she can free up the curators to do what they do best. 
But she is visually very literate and has a very good eye. I’ve worked with so 
many people over the years and I should say that she’s one of the best.”

Potted profile

Born 1970, in Birmingham.

Career Between 1993 and 2002, Balshaw was a lecturer and academic. In 2002, 
she joined Creative Partnerships, and in 2004 became a Clore leadership fellow. 
In 2006, she was named director of the Whitworth Art Gallery, and in 2011 also 
became director of ManchesterArt <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> 
Gallery. In 2014 she joined the board of Arts Council England.

High point The hugely successful renovation of the Whitworth.

Low point Virtually none, although it is believed she was in the running to 
become director of the British Museum butlost out to Hartwig Fischer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/apr/01/british-museum-hartwig-fischer-new-director-brings-lessons-of-german-history>
.

What she says “The cultural impact of museums is about bringing people and 
ideas and objects and artists together in a conversation about how we 
understand ourselves.”

What they say “She is high art but she’s democratic. There’s no dumbing down, 
there’s no apologies but she is also saying this is for everybody.” – Jeanette 
Winterson, writer and professor of creative writing at the University of 
Manchester.
 