
Mario Balotelli <https://www.theguardian.com/football/mario-balotelli> was 
once again making headlines on and off the field, scoring twice on his Nice 
debut before calling his Liverpool move “the worst mistake of my life”.

The Italy international, who moved from Liverpool on deadline day after a 
desperate spell at Anfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/31/mario-balotelli-completes-move-from-liverpool-to-nice-on-free-transfer>
, struck after seven minutes with a penalty, his first league goal since 22 
September last year.

Football transfer rumours: Watford's Troy Deeney to Everton?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/12/football-transfer-rumours-watford-troy-deeney-to-everton>
Balotelli added a second, 12 minutes from time, after the visitors Marseille 
had taken the lead through Florian Thauvin and Bafetimbi Gomis before Wylan 
Cyprien snatched victory forNice <https://www.theguardian.com/football/nice> in 
the 87th minute.

The two league goals were more in 78 minutes for Nice than his entire Premier 
League total atLiverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> which 
amounted to one against Tottenham Hotspur.

However, rather than accepting criticism for his wretched spell on Merseyside, 
the 26-year-old told the French television station Canal Plus that the club 
were to blame.

Asked by a reporter what had gone wrong in his career, he said: “I joined 
Liverpool. It was the worst mistake of my life. Apart from the fans, who were 
fantastic with me, I must be honest, and the players, who I had a good rapport 
with, I didn’t like the club.

“I had two coaches, Brendan Rodgers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brendan-rodgers> and Jürgen Klopp. As 
people they didn’t make a good impression on me. I didn’t get along with them.”

According to the BBC, Balotelli claimed he can still win the Ballon d’Or in an 
interview with the former France midfielder Olivier Dacourt.

“Of course. It’s not too late,” Balotelli said. “I think I could have already 
won it by now, but by working hard in training I could still win it in the next 
two or three years.”
 