
Mario Balotelli <https://www.theguardian.com/football/mario-balotelli> was 
sent off in stoppage time as nine-manNice saw their lead at the top of Ligue 1 
trimmed to two points heading into the winter break following their goalless 
draw atBordeaux.

The former Manchester City and Liverpool striker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/08/mario-balotelli-nice-football-italy-ligue1-goals>
, recently linked with a return to the Premier League, was sent off in stoppage 
time for kicking out at Igor Lewczuk while his team-mate Younès Belhanda also 
saw red moments later.

Monaco moved to within touching distance after goals by Radamel Falcao and 
Tiemoué Bakayoko earned them a 2-1 home victory againstCaen. They took the lead 
three minutes into the second half when Falcao converted a penalty after being 
brought down in the box and Bakayoko doubled the tally 14 minutes from time 
with a 25-metre effort.

Mario Balotelli finds new lease of life on and off the pitch at Nice
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/08/mario-balotelli-nice-football-italy-ligue1-goals>
Hervé Bazile pulled one back in stoppage time for Caen, who were reduced to 10 
men when Damien Da Silva was dismissed in the 51st minute.

Paris Saint-Germain demolished visiting Lorient 5-0 to rebound in style from a 
three-game winless streak inLigue 1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ligue1football>. Thomas Meunier and 
Thiago Silva scored either side of a Zargo Touré own goal, while Edinson Cavani 
and Lucas rounded off the scoring as third-placed PSG moved on to 39 points 
from 19 games, five behind leaders Nice.

Meunier put them ahead in the 25th minute with a fine lob from just inside the 
box and the home side doubled the lead a minute before the interval when 
Cavani’s effort was deflected into his own net by Touré.

Silva put the result beyond doubt in the 51st, heading home from Lucas’s 
corner, while Cavani rubbed salt into Lorient’s wounds by converting a penalty 
shortly after the hour for his 18th league goal of the season. Lucas added a 
fifth with a lob 20 minutes from time.

Lyon, who have a game in hand, are fourth on 34 points after goals by 
Alexandre Lacazette and Nabil Fekir gave them a 2-0 home win againstAngers, 
while sixth-placedMarseille notched up their fourth straight win by beating 
Bastia 2-1 away. Ligue 1 will resume on 13 January.
 