
There was a time when a 14-point victory against Leicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> would have earned the 
Saracens’ squad a few days off but the reaction of their director of rugby, 
Mark McCall, suggested all leave would be cancelled.

Saracens, 24-3 ahead after 44 minutes on Saturday and looking for the try 
bonus point, surprisingly fell away and were hanging on at the end as the 
Tigers scented their first point here. It was McCall’s opposite number,Richard 
Cockerill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/15/leicester-tigers-richard-cockerill-rugby-interview>
, who was smiling at the end, if in relief rather than rapture.

“After the third try we did our own thing and went off-script,” McCall said. 
“We became really sloppy when the job was not done and I am not happy about 
that. We played some good attacking rugby in the first half and showed how good 
we can be but what happened after that was frustrating and it was massively 
disappointing that we did not get the bonus point.”

Saracens eye Australia’s Will Skelton to help bolster depleted second row
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/29/saracens-australia-will-skelton-second-row-rugby-union>
Saracens <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> will be without their 
England internationals for the next three league matches at Sale, at home 
against Gloucester and at Bath but their No8 Billy Vunipola is confident the 
club will still be at the top of the table when they return in December.

“We have great depth here,” he said. “We are a club that uses its squad and it 
gives everyone confidence to know that if you train well, you will get an 
opportunity. It is not all about the frontline players. It’s about the 
collective and that is how you come to reach the play-offs.”

Vunipola scored his side’s third try but when his brother Mako 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/apr/29/billy-mako-vunipola-contract-saracens-england>
 was sent to the sin-bin for a late challenge on Freddie Burns, introduced for 
Leicester from the bench for the second week in a row, the champions struggled 
to get out of their own half and the Tigers enjoyed 65% of the possession 
overall.

“It was frustrating not to get the bonus point but for us to feel that against 
a team like Leicester shows where we are as a club. We can’t get away from the 
fact we won the game having had to back up after some tough matches. To win was 
a huge plus and I leave to join up with England happy.”

Vunipola warmed up for South Africa on 12 November with his first try of the 
season and carried the ball for 100 metres, more than any other forward. One 
charge left his England colleague Ben Youngs clinging on grimly, unable to make 
an impact or get out of the way. “I have worked a lot on my consistency this 
year. I am a little bit nervous about England’s training camp in Portugal but 
also looking forward to it. I know it will be tough and we have to knuckle down 
and work hard if we want to beat South Africa.”

Manu Tuilagi will not be in Portugal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/14/leicester-manu-tuilagi-groin-injury>
 as he deals with his latest injury setback but Leicester hope he will be fit 
when their Premiership campaign resumes against Harlequins on 20 November. They 
need him back because their Australia midfielderMatt Toomua is out for at least 
six months 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/26/leicester-matt-toomua-out-six-months-knee-injury-rugby-union>
 after knee surgery.

“Manu is doing well and training in part with us,” Cockerill said. “We do not 
want any false dawns and he will come back when he is ready. He can see light 
at the end of the tunnel and that is good for him psychologically. Without 
Toomua, he will make a difference. Matt has had his operation and is going to 
bring his coffee machine to make some for the boys; the most expensive barista 
in world rugby!”

The defeat continued Leicester’s poor record here but for the first time 
Cockerill felt he had something to take from the visit. “I am pleased we stayed 
in the battle after being dominated in the first half. The bench gave us life 
and we were playing for a point at the end. We can build on that spirit and 
effort.”

Saracens Goode; Maitland, Tompkins (Bosch, 56), Barritt (capt), Wyles; Farrell 
(Lozowski, 74), Spencer (Wigglesworth, 52); M Vunipola (Barrington, 74), George 
(Brits, 50), Figallo (Du Plessis, 61), Rhodes (Brown, 61), Hamilton (Flanagan, 
78), Wray, Burger, B Vunipola.

Tries Wyles, Maitland, B Vunipola. Cons Farrell 3. Pen Farrell.

Sin-bin M Vunipola 62.

Leicester Tait; Thompstone, Betham, Roberts (Burns, 56), Pietersen (Catchpole, 
64); Williams, B Youngs (Harrison, 52); Ayerza (Genge, 19), T Youngs (capt; 
McGuigan, 59), Cole (Mulipola, 59), Slater (Evans, 64), Kitchener, Fitzgerald, 
O’Connor (Hamilton, 70), McCaffrey.

Try Catchpole. Con Williams. Pen Williams.

Referee W Barnes. Attendance 9,734.
 