
Maro Itoje will make his first start since October when Saracens play at Bath 
on Saturday, after completinghis recovery from a broken hand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/24/maro-itoje-miss-england-autumn-internationals-fracturing-hand>
.

The 22-year-old has missed England’s autumn Test series with the hand problem 
he suffered inSaracens’ 44-26 win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/22/saracens-scarlets-european-champions-cup-match-report>
 over Scarlets on 22 October. TheWorld Rugby breakthrough player of the year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/13/sarah-hunter-world-rugby-female-player-2016-maro-itoje-beauden-barrett-steve-hansen>
 is fit for his comeback, boosting Saracens before this month’s two European 
Champions Cup rounds.

Bath welcome back five internationals for the Premiership match, with Wales’s 
Taulupe Faletau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/23/taulupe-faletau-wales-south-africa-rugby>
 and the England pair Dave Attwood and Semesa Rokoduguni leading the returning 
contingent.

The Bath director of rugby, Todd Blackadder, hopes the influence of the 
returning Test players can help the fly-half Dan Bowden and the rest of the 
team combat the sizeable threat of the European andPremiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership> champions “It’s been great 
having the international guys available for the game, they give us a bit of 
extra experience in key positions,” Blackadder said.

England’s winning run ignites sense of deja vu before Australia clash | Robert 
Kitson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/02/eddie-jones-england-winning-run-australia-clive-woodward>
“Saracens are a good quality side and they are a team which performs no matter 
where they go, whether they are at hope or on the road. It is one of those 
games where there is a lot at stake for us and we want to perform.

“We’ve picked Daniel Bowden because of his experience. He has been in the hot 
seat before. He has got to come on and be the kingpin decision-maker.”

The South Africa wing JP Pietersen and the Samoa prop Logovi’i Mulipola return 
to theLeicester squad to face Northampton at Welford Road, the duo back after 
international duty. Mike Fitzgerald has shaken off a knock to start in the back 
row, while Jono Kitto slots in at scrum-half. Pietersen and the fit-again 
England centre Manu Tuilagi will offer the Tigers plenty of experience off the 
bench.

George North and the French No8 Louis Picamoles go straight back into 
Northampton’s starting XV after autumn Test duty. Ben Foden will captain the 
Saints from full-back, with JJ Hanrahan slotting in at inside-centre for his 
first start of the season.

Gloucester will field an unchanged starting XV for the third week in a row for 
the West Country derby withBristol at Kingsholm. The Scotland scrum-half Greig 
Laidlaw and the Wales flanker Ross Moriarty take seats on the bench after 
completing autumn Test duties, as Gloucester gear up for their first match 
againstBristol <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bristolrugby> in almost eight 
years.

The acting head coach, Mark Tainton, has made four changes to his Bristol 
side, with Jack Wallace and Adrian Jarvis bedding in to the backline. Jason 
Woodward switches to full-back and Jack Tovey moves to outside-centre, while 
Rob Hawkins starts at hooker and Jon Fisher will partner Mark Sorenson at lock.
 