 New pictures from space confirm that one of the world's most remarkable 
cultures - the 5,000-year old civilisation of the Marsh Arabs of southern Iraq, 
based on reeds - could soon vanish.
In a bare 25 years, the fabled wetlands near the confluence of the Tigris and 
Euphrates have dwindled by 90%. The evidence comes from images taken in 1992 
and 2000 and donated by Nasa, the US space agency, to the United Nations 
environment programme (Unep). Because of drainage for irrigation and dams to 
provide water for a growing population, what had been 20,000 sq km of fertile 
marsh and waterway is now less than 2,000 sq km.

The Marsh Arabs, celebrated by writers such as Gavin Maxwell, author of Ring 
of Bright Water, and the explorer Wilfred Thesiger, maintain a culture that 
dates back to Sumerian times. They navigate with vast canoe-shaped reed ships 
and build huge cathedral-like structures of reeds. In the last 100 years the 
Marsh Arabs have survived rule by Turkey, Britain and successive Iraqi regimes.

The marshes began to dwindle when the Tigris and Euphrates rivers became two 
of the most intensively dammed rivers in the world. This reduced the water flow 
to the marshes. After the Gulf war, the 500,000 Marsh Arabs came under pressure 
from Saddam Hussein's regime, which embarked on massive drainage schemes. Much 
of the landscape is now salt desert. All that remains is a small fringe of 
marsh on the border with Iran. A fifth of the local people are now in refugee 
camps in Iran and most of the rest are displaced inIraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq>.

The marshes are an important site for migrating birds. An estimated 40 species 
of waterfowl are at risk. Smooth-coated otters that prowled the marshes are now 
thought to be extinct. The flow from the marshes provided nutrients to support 
fish-spawning grounds in the northern Gulf.

"This major ecological disaster, comparable to the drying up of the Aral Sea 
and the deforestation of large tracts of Amazonia, has gone virtually 
unreported until now," Klaus Toepfer, director of Unep, said. UN chiefs are 
trying to persuade Iran, Iraq, Syria and Turkey to agree on a recovery plan. 
But the drying of the Iraqi marshes is only one part of a larger picture of the 
parching of central Asia, the Middle East and Saharan Africa. Altogether, Nasa 
chiefs presented 16,000 studies from space to the UN scientists.

The $20m (Â£14m) set of pictures provides a snapshot of change in a world in 
which population is growing fast, global temperatures are rising and the 
wilderness is vanishing. Researchers will study more than 100 "hot spots" of 
environmental degradation in the less studied parts of the globe - but they 
will also concentrate on the Masai Mara in Kenya, the lagoon in Venice, and the 
north-west forests of the US.

"We hope to learn much more about the true level of environmental damage 
happening on Earth, from the real extent of illegal logging in south-east Asia 
and urban sprawl in the United States, to habitat loss in sub-Saharan Africa," 
Dr Toepfer said.
 