
Ignore all the guff in Theresa May’s Brexit speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/prime-minister-vows-to-put-final-brexit-deal-before-parliament>
 about wanting to be friends with the European Union. Focus instead on the 
explicit and subliminal threats: if EU partners do not play ball – and in 
particular if the EU denies “passports” to the City of London – Britain will 
abandon the European economic or “social model”. Instead, argued the prime 
minister, backing up her chancellor, Britain would adopt more fully the 
Anglo-American model of self-regulating markets in everything but migration. We 
would become a tax haven more Luxembourgian than the Luxembourgeois, more Irish 
than the Irish.

Related: Our panel’s verdict on Theresa May’s Brexit speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/17/theresa-may-brexit-speech-prime-minister-britain>

In other words, we will use beggar-thy-neighbour tactics to lower taxes and 
lift regulation over trade and capital flows. Philip Hammond made this threat 
explicittwo days ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/15/philip-hammond-suggests-uk-outside-single-market-could-become-tax-haven>
. Britain, he implied, was ready to retaliate with a “change in our economic 
model”. Beware. The prime minister’s promise that British workers’ rights would 
be protected sounds hollow in this context. Loss of access to the single market 
will lead, for many, to the loss of an important right: the right to a job.

As for new international “free market” investment agreements, we know from 
experience that these on the whole favour investors – “the citizens of nowhere” 
that May identified in her2016 party conference speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/05/mays-conservative-party-conference-speech-key-points-analysed>
. Investor-friendly international agreements are investor-friendly. They do not 
address labour or environmental issues. As the International Labour 
Organisation argues, “They aim only to produce a liberal atmosphere conducive 
to the flows of investment. This narrow mandate leaves social issues aside … 
social clauses are mostly only declaratory.” Instead such agreements have 
deepened globalisation and led, across the world, to increasingly precarious 
work, the loss of labour rights and rising inequality.

The EU parliament is demanding a seat at the Brexit negotiating table

These are the very conditions that led British voters to support the case for 
Brexit in the first place. They are also the conditions that led to the rise of
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>. May, by 
extolling “global Britain” several times in her speech, promises us more of the 
same if the EU refuses to bend to Britain’s will and defend the City of 
London’s role in the single market.

These threats are deemed necessary because the EU is gearing up for a fight. 
The EU parliament is demanding a seat at the Brexit negotiating table. That 
would give MEPs opportunities to undermine any concessions made to Britain. The 
winner of today’s election for a new president of the parliament is likely to 
be one of Silvio Berlusconi’s allies,Antonio Tajani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/17/berlusconi-ally-poised-to-become-next-european-parliament-chief>
. He is the candidate of the centre-right EPP, dominated by Germany’s CDU. This 
means that Angela Merkel will have united all the major institutions engaged in 
Brexit negotiations – the parliament, the commission and the European council – 
behind her agenda of strengthening the union, and defending it from the threats 
posed by Britain. It promises to be a tough fight.

May rightly acknowledged that the British parliament should be given a vote, 
but only on the final agreement. But what if, as is now highly likely, and as 
Hammond fears, there is no agreement? There should be a second referendum.

While May’s speech was refreshing for its frankness, her sugar-coated threats 
may well end up contaminating the negotiating waters.
 