
Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> has a duty to 
disassociate herself from the “vitriolic abuse” heaped onto the judiciary by 
newspapers including the Daily Mail, according to a senior Conservative MP, who 
said the prime minister had fallen short over the controversy.

Dominic Grieve <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/dominicgrieve>, the 
former attorney general, said it was not good enough for May and other 
government ministers to defend the freedom of the press after three high court 
judges were labelled “enemies of the people”.

The Daily Mail accused the Lord Chief Justice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/04/enemies-of-the-people-british-newspapers-react-judges-brexit-ruling>
 and two senior colleagues of declaring “war on democracy” after theyruled 
against the government’s right 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/parliament-must-trigger-brexit-high-court-rules>
 to trigger article 50 without a vote in parliament. It produced further 
unapologetic revelations about thebackgrounds of the 11 top judges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/dec/05/profile-the-11-justices-of-the-uk-supreme-court>
 currently overseeing May’s appeal of the case in the supreme court.

“It is the duty of parliamentarians to stand up for the independence of the 
judiciary, and my complaint about the government over this matter was that it 
simply said we believe in the independence of the judiciary and we believe in 
the independence of the press,” Grieve told the Guardian’sPolitics Weekly 
podcast <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/series/politicsweekly>.

“Well I believe in the freedom of the press as well but that doesn’t mean to 
say I’m neutral to the way in which the press expresses itself. And seeing that 
the government was a party to this litigation I think it was particularly 
important that it should disassociate itself completely from the sort of 
sentiments being expressed by theDaily Mail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailymail>.”


Grieve argued that Britain was blessed to have a legal system admired the 
world over for its independence, integrity and quality, and said thesupreme 
court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/05/supreme-court-brexit-case-whose-prerogative-is-it-anyway>
 had the ability to ensure that their approach to the case was entirely from a 
legal point of view.


He admitted that judges were human beings who could get things wrong, adding: 
“It is perfectly legitimate to criticise judges if you disagree with the 
decision they’ve come to but what was to my mind outrageous about the Daily 
Mail coverage is it was mere vitriolic abuse.

“Now the Daily Mail as I understand it appears to believe in British values, 
which I would have expected to include the independence of our judiciary. And 
yet it has mounted a campaign, sustained it and repeated it and justified it, 
that it is acceptable to heap vitriolic abuse on judges for doing exactly what 
is required of them in our constitutional set up. I find that quite worrying.”

May responded to the original furore, following coverage of the high court 
loss, bytelling journalists that while she believed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/06/labour-will-not-block-article-50-jeremy-corbyn-allies-confirm>
 in the value of the independence of the judiciary she also valued the freedom 
of the press.

“I’m concerned about the freedom of the press but the freedom of the press is 
not being undermined in this country – not at the moment anyway. If the press 
freedom needs to be protected I’ll speak up for it,” said Grieve.

“What I’m concerned about is vitriolic abuse being heaped by a section of the 
press on the judiciary on no objective basis and the duty on government 
ministers, including the prime minister, to dissociate themselves completely 
from such sentiments.”


The former attorney general has become a critical voice on the backbenches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/04/theresa-may-told-to-act-to-calm-brexit-mob-anger>
 about a possible drive towards a hard Brexit in which Britain could cut off 
economic ties to a large extent. He said he sympathised with the prime 
minister’s “awkward task” of trying to negotiate a Brexit deal, which he said 
could involve nightmarish complexities.

He said he would be prepared to support his party leader, but warned against 
forgetting those Tory supporters who did not want the country to leave the EU.

“The government has a difficult task, the referendum was very divisive... and 
many of the 48% who voted to remain were in fact Conservative voters. If the 
government wants to continue governing it has to have a broad coalition of 
interests and therefore it faces the difficult task of reconciling two 
different views while respecting the ... result,” he said.

He added that the key was for May to try to understand the anxieties felt by 
many of those who voted to remain inside the EU.

“I realise my Brexiteer colleagues think this is a brave new world in which a 
cornucopia of wonderful things will come pouring down on the UK when we free 
ourselves of European shackles, but there is an alternative viewpoint that this 
is a veryhigh risk adventure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/06/twenty-reasons-brexit-trickier-than-we-thought>
 on which we may pay a heavy economic and security price.”
 