
Theresa May has given her clearest signal yet that Britain will leave the 
single market when it leaves the European Union, despite a renewed vow from
Nicola Sturgeon <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicola-sturgeon> that a 
so-called hard Brexit would force a second independence referendum.

The prime minister said in her first interview of 2017 that she was not 
interested in keeping “bits of membership of the EU” and indicated that 
regaining control of immigration policy in the Brexit negotiations – a demand 
incompatible with single market membership – would be a priority.

Related: How Sophy Ridge got her money shot from the Maybot | John Crace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/08/how-sophy-ridge-got-her-money-shot-from-the-maybot>

She was speaking only an hour after Scotland’s first minister used a separate 
interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/08/sturgeon-reiterates-hard-brexit-threat-scottish-independence-vote-referendum>
 to say that she was not bluffing about holding a second independence 
referendum in the event of Scotland being taken out of the single market, 
adding she was not prepared to see “Scotland driven off a hard Brexit cliff 
edge”.

May’s comments came as the case for a hard Brexit was strengthened by the 
publication of a report from the rightwing thinktank Civitas that argued that 
even if Britain failed to get a trade deal with the EU and had to operate under 
World Trade Organisation terms, it would not lose out.

British exporters would face having tariffs worth £5bn imposed on their goods, 
Civitas said. But it said the government would raise £13bn from tariffs on 
imports which could fund an industrial strategy that would boost the 
manufacturing sector.

The prime minister’s renewed insistence that taking control of immigration 
policy will be non-negotiable suggests that the repeated calls fromScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, the business community and 
pro-European MPs for staying in the single market are falling on deaf ears.

Breaking with precedent to give her new year interview to Sky’s new talkshow, 
Sophy Ridge on Sunday, instead of to the BBC’s Andrew Marr Show, May rejected 
the claim fromSir Ivan Rogers – who resigned as Britain’s ambassador to the EU 
last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/03/uk-ambassador-to-eu-quits-amid-brexit-row>
 – that the government’s thinking on Brexit was muddled. “Our thinking on this 
isn’t muddled at all,” she said.

Related: European commission praises Ivan Rogers after resignation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/04/european-commission-praises-ivan-rogers-after-resignation>

“Often people talk in terms as if somehow we are leaving the EU but we still 
want to kind of keep bits of membership of the EU. We are leaving. We are 
coming out. We are not going to be a member of the EU any longer,” she said. 
“We will be able to have control of our borders, control of our laws.”

EU leaders have repeatedly said that if Britain refuses to accept the free 
movement of EU workers, it will no longer be able to enjoy membership of the 
single market and the tariff-free trade that entails. But May hinted that she 
thought EU countries might still be willing to allow the UK tariff-free access 
to the single market because it would be in their interests.

“Anybody who looks at this question of free movement and trade as a sort of 
zero sum game is approaching it in the wrong way,” she said.

“I’m ambitious for what we can get for the UK in terms of our relationship 
with the European Union because I also think that’s going to be good for the
European Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>.”


Sturgeon is so determined to keep Scotland in the single market, even if the 
rest of the UK leaves, that she published a detailed plan before Christmas 
setting out how this might be achieved. On the Andrew Marr show she said the UK 
government would be“making a very big mistake if they think I’m in any way 
bluffing” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/08/sturgeon-reiterates-hard-brexit-threat-scottish-independence-vote-referendum>
 about holding a second independence vote just as the UK quit the EU.

“I’m not going to sit back while Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> is driven off a hard Brexit cliff 
edge with all the implications for jobs and the type of country we are that 
that would have,” she added.
 Nicola Sturgeon told the Andrew Marr show she was ‘not bluffing’ about 
holding a second vote on Scottish independence. Photograph: BBC 
She said her plan would allow May to honour her promise to English voters to 
quit the EU while allowing Scotland to keep the closer ties it voted for in the 
June referendum. It would mirror the deal being discussed to ensureopen borders 
between the UK and Ireland post-Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/series/ireland-beyond-brexit>, she added.


Sturgeon also hinted that she envisaged staging a snap independence vote 
within the two year deadline set by the EU once the UK triggers article 50 in 
March. But she refused to set out a clear timetable or deadline on a decision 
to stage a new vote.


With Scotland’s economy now far weaker than before the 2014 independence 
referendum, Sturgeon’s opponents believeshe is using the threat of a second vote
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/06/nicola-sturgeon-offers-shelve-independence-vote-for-soft-brexit-eu>
 to press for far greater powers for the Scottish parliament as well as to 
placate her supporters.


Sturgeon indicated on the Andrew Marr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/andrewmarr> show that the SNP’s core message 
during a referendum would be the divisive prospect of Scotland’s fate being 
determined by rightwing Tories ruling from London for the next 20 years.


“If we’re in a position where we’ve a UK prime minister saying no compromise, 
Scotland just has to shut up and like it or lump it, then the question for 
Scotland – and it’s a much more fundamental question than just the EU or Brexit 
– is are we happy with that?

“Are we happy to have no voice in the UK, do we simply have to accept the 
direction of travel that an increasingly rightwing UK government wants to 
impose upon us?”
 