
On Sunday evening, in a scene that has become all too familiar, Dallas Cowboys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/dallas-cowboys> owner Jerry Jones stood in 
his team’s locker room and lamented another January gone awry.

“There’s no moral victory here,” he said.

For once, he could scan the room of disappointed, discouraged players and know 
this was not his fault. He had done everything right in building the Cowboys 
for a new dynasty. No impulsive free agent buys, no yanking of rookie 
quarterback Dak Prescott for his beloved Tony Romo, no senseless coaching 
changes. He even listened to good advice, a few years back and resisted the 
temptation to draft Johnny Manziel, taking instead a boring offensive lineman 
who would make the Pro Bowl while Johnny Football was flaming out.

Oh, how it killed Jerry to pass up Johnny Football. 
<http://www.si.com/nfl/2017/01/12/dallas-cowboys-stephen-jerry-jones>

But he did it in the name of being smart and not impetuous; of building a 
champion in a way that was anathema to him. Instead of chasing shiny trinkets, 
he made a team that football men could respect. A good, solid, responsible team 
that could block and tackle and not make the silly mistakes that his glamor 
teams always did.

Green Bay Packers beat Dallas Cowboys on final play in NFL playoff thriller
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/15/green-bay-packers-dallas-cowboys-nfl-game-report>
Then Sunday they went out and played a hell of a playoff football game, 
against the hottest quarterback in football. They didn’t wiltlike the Terrell 
Owens No1 seed team did against the Giants in January 2008 
<http://www.pro-football-reference.com/boxscores/200801130dal.htm>. Prescott 
didn’t fumble away victory like Romo that night in Seattleback in January 2007 
<http://www.si.com/nfl/2014/10/08/tony-romo-dallas-cowboys-seattle-seahawks-bill-parcells-mike-holmgren>
. The offense didn’t stall as it did against the Packers in 2015 when Dallas 
got just two first downs in the whole fourth quarter.

This time the Cowboys stars made big plays. This time Prescott took them to 
two touchdowns and a field goal in the final quarter. This time, the Cowboys 
matched the Packers and looked ready to go to an overtime they were surely 
destined to win. Then camethe catch by Green Bay’s Jared Cook 
<https://twitter.com/NFL/status/820799734969311232?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw> that 
still seems too ridiculous to believe. Then came the two, 51-yard field goals 
from the Packers’ Mason Crosby – the first wiped by a time out and the second 
made right after. This after a 56-yard Crosby kick just 1:33 before.
NFL (@NFL) 
FACT: It doesn't get any better than this Jared Cook sideline grab.

C-L-U-T-C-H. #GoPackGo <https://twitter.com/hashtag/GoPackGo?src=hash> #GBvsDAL
 <https://twitter.com/hashtag/GBvsDAL?src=hash> #NFLPlayoffs 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/NFLPlayoffs?src=hash> https://t.co/N66Ir6sctr 
<https://t.co/N66Ir6sctr>
 <https://twitter.com/NFL/status/820799734969311232> January 16, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/NFL/status/820799734969311232> 
So, that’s how it would end this time for Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/15/green-bay-packers-dallas-cowboys-nfl-game-report>
: with Romo on the sideline, no magic in his $1.5bn stadium and a kicker from 
Lubbock hitting 158 yards of field goals in less than two minutes.

It’s easy to hate on Jones. And yet at some point on Sunday you had to pity 
the old man. He had done everything against his nature to construct a champion. 
The ‘Boys were the ‘Boys again and they were going to march to Houston with he, 
Jerry Jones, leading the parade.

Then after Aaron Rodgers, Cook and Crosby took it away he was left where he 
has often been left on these January nights: huddled in an overcoat, surrounded 
by cameras, trying like hell to keep his head from looking at the floor.

 “There might have been a moral victory if we had continued to play the way it 
was looking earlier,” he said. “But for this bunch to come back, get it 
together [and] to see those guys come back and compete like that, then I know 
if we won this game we’re capable of doing a good job against – in this case – 
Atlanta and probably a good job in the Super Bowl.”

Only there will be no Atlanta, no Super Bowl for Jones. That last 
championship, celebrated in a raucous, all night bashat a Tempe, Arizona hotel, 
 
<http://www.si.com/vault/1996/02/05/209835/specialdelivery-the-steelers-handed-the-cowboys-two-ugly-interceptions-and-a-27-17-victory-that-kept-the-nfcs-super-bowl-streak-alive>
is now 21 years in the past. The three Super Bowl victories in four years are a 
distant memory. Their trophiestwinkle in the lobby of his new team headquarters 
called simply The Star <http://thestarinfrisco.com/tours>, but the dynasty that 
delivered them is covered in dust.

This January was supposed to change all that.

“I don’t want to say in any way it’s any consolation but I know this: They are 
capable of playing at this level,” he said Sunday. “The kind of level we would 
have expected.”

Unlike other Cowboys teams over the last two decades this one looks built to 
last. Prescott appears ready to be the next great Dallas quarterback. Running 
back Ezekiel Elliott might be the proper successor to Emmitt Smith. The Cowboys 
are young and sturdy and should have a window for more winning. They may yet go 
to three Super Bowls in four years like the teams in the 1990s.

Still, it was hard not to feel a little sorry for Jerry Jones standing there 
in the Cowboys locker room on Sunday night. He wanted another Super Bowl so 
much he was willing to stop being himself in order to get it. Then, one again, 
it was snatched away.

Fantasy player of the week 

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fdallas-cowboys-green-bay-packers-jerry-jones-playoffs-nfl%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd6a2bad1c7a282fb2797cf1b51d65d2b1165161%2F0_156_5568_3341%2F5568.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Maybe%20just%20this%20once%20it's%20OK%20to%20feel%20sorry%20for%20the%20Cowboys'%20Jerry%20Jones&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fdallas-cowboys-green-bay-packers-jerry-jones-playoffs-nfl%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Maybe%20just%20this%20once%20it%27s%20OK%20to%20feel%20sorry%20for%20the%20Cowboys%27%20Jerry%20Jones&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fdallas-cowboys-green-bay-packers-jerry-jones-playoffs-nfl%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd6a2bad1c7a282fb2797cf1b51d65d2b1165161%2F0_156_5568_3341%2F5568.jpg>
 Richard Sherman congratulates Matt Ryan after the Falcons’ victory over the 
Seahawks. Photograph: John David Mercer/USA Today Sports 
“MVP. MVP. MVP”

What will be the next-to-last Falcons crowd at the Georgia Dome serenaded 
quarterback Matt Ryan with this chant throughout much ofAtlanta’s 36-20 
trampling of Seattle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/14/atlanta-falcons-nfc-championship-game-seahawks-nfl>
. It may be the most accurate thing a fanbase has shouted in weeks. Somehow 
lost in all the euphoria of Rodgers’ surge and Elliot’s huge rookie season is 
the year Ryan had in Atlanta.

During the regular season he completed nearly 70% of his passes for 4,944 yards
 <http://www.nfl.com/player/mattryan/310/profile>, with 38 touchdowns against 
only seven interceptions. His team won the NFC South and established themselves 
as the most dangerous offense in the NFL and yet because he’s Matt Ryan and 
unflashy, most of football ignores him. The Falcons rarely move the needle 
themselves, even when they are very, very good. Perhaps Saturday’s victory will 
change those impressions. All Ryan did against what was supposed to be one of 
the league’s better defenses is throw for 338 yards and three touchdowns.

MVP indeed. 

Quote of the week

“Don’t tell me I didn’t do my job, motherfucker. Get the fuck out of my face. 
Like I said, get out of my face. Don’t play with me. Don’t play with me. I just 
put my heart on the fucking field … Try me again, see what happens.”

It’s been a hard year for the Seattle Seahawks despite the fact they won the 
NFC West again. Key injuries on the defense, a hobbled quarterback Russell 
Wilson and a struggling offensive line made the Seahawks run to the division 
round especially hard. The team that once seemed like the happiest in football 
has grown a bit more sullen as expectations of another Super Bowl loom. Late in 
the season, Richard Sherman snapped at a Seattle radio show host and on 
Saturday night, the generally affable Michael Bennettunloaded on a Seattle 
television reporter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/14/atlanta-falcons-nfc-championship-game-seahawks-nfl>
 who asked why the Seahawks hadn’t been able to pressure Ryan in their loss to 
Atlanta.

Michael Bennett goes on expletive-laced rant after Seahawks lose to Falcons
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/14/atlanta-falcons-nfc-championship-game-seahawks-nfl>
Perhaps the game and the disappointment of a season-ending loss remained 
fresh. It wouldn’t be the first time an athlete has blown up after a tough 
defeat, especially in the playoffs. The bigger issue for the Seahawks is the 
struggle they had to win as many games as they did while trying to keep open a 
championship window that might be starting to close. No team with expectations 
will have a bigger offseason than Seattle. 

Gif of the week
Jason McIntyre (@jasonrmcintyre) 
Time the F Out, shouts hoodie Belichickpic.twitter.com/3OTCWPcr7Y 
<https://t.co/3OTCWPcr7Y>
 <https://twitter.com/jasonrmcintyre/status/820490262728146944> January 15, 
2017 <https://twitter.com/jasonrmcintyre/status/820490262728146944> 



Nothing is more fun than Gifs of Cleveland Browns’ futility but these are the 
playoffs, which means no more Browns mascots in elf costumesslipping on ice 
<https://twitter.com/ChrisCalo1/status/808017373341085696> or ugly 
interceptions in the snow. 
<http://www.sbnation.com/lookit/2016/12/11/13913674/browns-flea-flicker-interception-bengals>
 The next best thing is everybody’s former failed Browns coach who has found 
fame elsewhere. Bill Belichick. Here is the Patriots coach going crazy during 
New England’s 34-16 victory over Houston on Saturday night.

Really, there is little in the NFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl> as 
amusing than Belichick when he comes unhinged. If you are adept at reading lips 
this blowup is especially amusing. But the best part is the fact it came not 
early in the night when the score was close but late in the fourth quarter with 
New England already up by 15 points and on the verge of kicking the field goal 
that would extend the lead to three scores. Belichick was angry it was taking 
too long to set up the field goal attempt, something that would annoy any 
coach. And yet his rage was burning late in a game his team had all but won.

In case you wonder just how hard it is to play for Belichick, enjoy this clip 
ofWes Welker learning of his demise in New England 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YFeZsWj9WFs> even before he knew it. 

Stat of the week

Six. The number of field goals kicked by Pittsburgh’s Chris Boswell on Sunday 
night, an NFL record. The Steelers did nothing spectacularin their 18-16 
victory over Kansas City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/15/kansas-city-chiefs-pittsburgh-steelers-nfl-playoffs-game-report>
. They were plodding and methodical, chewing up yardage on a wet, frosty night. 
They never did get a touchdown. But, again and again they sent their 
25-year-old kicker onto the field to boot the ball through the cold. He made 
all of his attempts, none longer than 45 yards. It could not be easy on a night 
like Sunday’s, played on Arrowhead Stadium’s soggy turf and yet he made six 
field goals look simple, like something anyone can do.

 They would be the difference on a night when the Chiefs scored one last, 
desperate touchdown and came up empty on the two-point conversion. Just one 
miss from Boswell – who surpassed the old record of five, held by seven other 
players - and Kansas City would have been going to New England next weekend.
 