
It has become as much a part of the British summer as Wimbledon, grey skies 
and the queues for the toilets at Glastonbury: the annual complaints about 
misbehaviour by drunken British tourists.

Yesterday the mayor of the Latvian capital, Riga, became the latest European 
to hit out at Brits' conduct abroad, saying their boozy antics were putting off 
other visitors. Stag parties urinating against the country's most revered 
national monument, were particularly offensive, he said. "The only problem is 
that we have a large share of those British tourists," Nils Usakovs told a 
local magazine. "If we also had other tourists, then British visitors who piss 
about all the time would not be as noticeable. Let's not be politically correct 
â€“ unfortunately, this is their speciality."

Last month the Foreign Office launched a campaign in Mediterranean countries 
aimed at encouraging Britons to "know your limits" overseas, amid indications 
that British tourists continue to be among the worst behaved inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. Last year the Foreign Office 
noted that arrests in 15 holiday destinations had soared because of "excessive 
drinking".

It has also funded English lessons for policemen in Greece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece>, where 70% of consular cases involve 
tourists who have got into difficulty. In May, 17 British men spent a night in 
a Cretan jail after attending a stag party dressed as nuns and allegedly 
flashing at other holidaymakers. According to Foreign Office research, one in 
seven British men have had sex in a public place on holiday.

Last year the then interior minister of Latvia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/latvia>, Mareks Seglins, hit out at the 
"English pigs" who visited the city, after one Briton was sentenced to five 
days in prison for urinating against the country's Monument of Freedom. Two men 
from Derby were extradited last month to face charges of assaulting a police 
officer while on a stag party to Riga.

One Riga-based tourist information provider said his company now refused to 
deal with Britons. "I don't believe that these young men from Britain have any 
interest in Latvian culture at all," said Mike Johnson, an American who runs 
the Patricia tourist office. "They are drunk by the time they get off the plane 
and they don't sober up again until they go back home three days later."

The vogue for urinating against the Monument of Freedom, which commemorates 
those killed in the Latvian war of independence and became a symbol of 
resistance during the Soviet era, was "deeply offensive" to locals, he said. 
"After one or two people were arrested, it became the thing to do: go to Riga, 
pee against the monument, take a photo and put it on the internet. It's a very, 
very important monument in Latvian culture. It's sacred to Latvians, even the 
Soviets didn't dare touch it."

But Paul Luke, eastern Europe sales co-ordinator at the specialist stag party 
tour operator lastnightoffreedom.co.uk, said the reputation of Britons in Riga 
dated from a few notorious incidents some years ago, and blamed unscrupulous 
bar owners who had provoked trouble by attempting to rip off tour groups.

His company, which organises 150-175 stag parties a year in the Latvian 
capital, always tried to provide "a little bit of something through the days to 
keep them out of the bars", he said.

A spokeswoman for the Latvian embassy in London said: "Of course British 
tourists are welcome like any other tourists, even though it is true that they 
are better known because of loud behaviour and alcohol." The hope was that 
tourists would look beyond Riga's bars, she added.
 