
McDonald’s has been accused of exploiting homeless people in Rome as part of a 
public relations strategy to gain favour with locals following thecontroversial 
opening 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/14/cardinals-see-red-over-vatican-mcdonalds>
 of a restaurant within steps of the Vatican.

A community group called Safeguard the Borgo said a recent initiative by 
McDonald’s to pledge 1,000 meals to the homeless was nothing but a “commercial 
transaction which cynically uses the homeless and offends many years and daily 
work [done by others] to help alleviate extreme poverty”.

The US fast-food chain revealed the initiative after a handful of cardinals, 
as well as the Borgo group, complained last year that opening a McDonald’s so 
close to St Peter’s Square would further degrade and commercialise the 
Unesco-protected neighbourhood.

The restaurant opened on 30 December and Monday marked the first day of dozens 
of McDonald’s meals beingreportedly donated 
<http://news.trust.org/item/20170116143030-518v6/> to a charity that 
distributed them at a local walk-in clinic.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fmcdonalds-accused-of-exploiting-homeless-people-in-rome-vatican%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F623ca702598e991eecbdee23cd1578092fdf3792%2F0_209_4950_2970%2F4950.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=McDonald's%20accused%20of%20exploiting%20homeless%20people%20in%20Rome&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fmcdonalds-accused-of-exploiting-homeless-people-in-rome-vatican%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=McDonald%27s%20accused%20of%20exploiting%20homeless%20people%20in%20Rome&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fmcdonalds-accused-of-exploiting-homeless-people-in-rome-vatican%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F623ca702598e991eecbdee23cd1578092fdf3792%2F0_209_4950_2970%2F4950.jpg>
 Homeless people eat hamburgers outside a Medicina Solidale centre in Rome on 
Monday. Photograph: Gregorio Borgia/AP 
The meal consisted of a double cheeseburger, an apple and water, according to 
Reuters.

Pierfrancesco Spiga, 46, an unemployed and homeless Rome native, told the news 
agency that other companies should follow the example of McDonald’s.

“It would be good if these multinational companies gave food at the end of the 
day to poor people who don’t have any, instead of throwing it away,” Spiga said.

But the Borgo group said it was more important to recognise the work of groups 
such as the Catholic charity Caritas and other residents of the neighbourhood 
that were working systematically to help homeless people survive.

“For how long will the show of the ‘free drink’ go on, in what ways will it be 
given, and how long will the homeless be allowed to use the location and 
bathrooms of the fast-food restaurant [before they are treated] like the 
plague,” the community organisation said in a statement.

Holy Big Mac: Vatican's first McDonald's opens
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/03/holy-big-mac-vaticans-first-mcdonalds-opens>
It added: “Why doesn’t McDonald’s distribute its food waste to the homeless 
every day?”

According to Reuters, the move to give meals away was initiated after the 
director of a charity, Medicina Solidale, wrote to McDonald’s in the wake of 
the criticism over the restaurant opening. The initiative involves 1,000 meals 
being given away over the next six months, which the Medicina Solidale said 
would not resolve hunger, but could help.

McDonald’s declined to comment directly. But in an email the company sent the 
Guardian a comment from the director of Medicina Solidale in which the charity 
said it was satisfied with its close partnership with the fast-food group.

“The offer of meals let us make a step forward, giving to the women and men 
living on the street in the neighbourhood the chance of a balanced meal, with 
an adequate supply of proteins and vitamins,” said Lucia Ercoli, director of 
Medicina Solidale.

Reuters said 50 lunches were served on Monday.

Pope Francis has been a strong advocate for the homeless in Rome. On his 80th 
birthday last month, he sat down to breakfast with eight homeless people before 
celebrating mass. He has also spoken at a recent mass of the need to end the 
exclusion of people in need, a fact he underlined by giving the homeless the 
seats in St Peter’s Basilica usually reserved for VIPs.
 