
“We get pushed around and treated like garbage because there is no one to 
speak for us,” says Chandni, the 18-year-old editor of India’s only tabloid 
paper produced by street-children journalists, Balaknama (Hindi for “voice of 
children”).

Like all editors, Chandni’s biggest challenge is to decide which stories will 
make it to the front page, and managing the egos of those whose stories don’t. 
“As editor, I want to play up stories that are most impactful,” says Chandni. 
“But many reporters get upset when their stories don’t make the mark. So, yes, 
I do have to tread carefully.”

Can India’s military veterans join the fight for women’s rights?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/apr/11/india-military-veterans-help-fight-womens-rights>
The monthly newspaper has a team of 60 reporters between 12 and 20 years old 
and is based in Delhi and neighbouring states of Haryana, Madhya Pradesh and 
Uttar Pradesh. Most of the street-children reporters were recruited from 
learning centres run by NGOs the Federation for Street and Working Children (
Badhte Kadam <http://www.bkindia.org/en/home-2/>) and the NGO Childhood 
Enhancement through Training and Action (Chetna 
<http://streetchildren.org/members/chetna/>), which started Balaknama in 2003.

A lot of time is spent on writing the stories. “Many of our reporters started 
school after joining the paper so writing is a struggle for them,” says 
Chandni. The copy is written in Hindi and later translated into English.

Each paper is priced at a token 2 rupees and over 8,000 copies, most of them 
in Hindi, are published every month. Many of them are distributed free to 
police stations and NGOs working in the field of child rights. The paper makes 
no profit and is entirely NGO-funded.

Regardless, the sense of pride and accomplishment is evident.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Fstreet-children-journalist-balaknama-newspaper-delhi-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc08a6a9741dad80526f26b560c8c73e6faea87a7%2F414_330_2210_1473%2F2210.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meet%20the%20street%20children%20making%20their%20own%20newspaper%20in%20India&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Fstreet-children-journalist-balaknama-newspaper-delhi-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meet%20the%20street%20children%20making%20their%20own%20newspaper%20in%20India&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Fstreet-children-journalist-balaknama-newspaper-delhi-india%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc08a6a9741dad80526f26b560c8c73e6faea87a7%2F414_330_2210_1473%2F2210.jpg>
 Chandni, Balaknama’s editor, has manage the reporters’ egos. Photograph: Vijay 
Kumar/Balaknama 
“We filed a report on how the police was forcing children living in railway 
stations to retrieve the bodies of people who were killed on the tracks,” says 
Shambhu, 20, a senior reporter. “Imagine forcing a child to go down those 
dangerous tracks and retrieve bloody, mangled limbs!”


Mainstream news outlets picked up Balaknama’s report and it led to a huge 
outrage. Eventually, the National Committee for Protection of Child Rights 
stepped in and action was taken against the police.

Pedal power: how bicycles are changing what it means to be a girl in India
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/apr/06/pedal-power-how-bicycles-are-changing-what-it-means-to-be-a-girl-in-india>
An estimated 51,000 children live on Delhi’s streets 
<https://www.savethechildren.in/news/surviving-the-streets>, some as young as 
five-years-old. They make a living by begging or rag picking and aresubject to 
verbal, physical and sexual abuse 
<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/Indias-invisible-children-Swallowed-by-the-streets/articleshow/10626388.cms>
. Many are abandoned by their families or have run away from home.

Twelve-year-old Rustam is one of the lucky ones. He lives with his 
construction-worker parents but, like his three brothers and sister, missed out 
on school because he had to supplement the family income.

He started feeding Balaknama reporters stories last year and got a front-page 
splash when he alerted a senior reporter about a child marriage in June 2015. 
He was taken aback by what followed. “Local activists held protests and the 
police were forced to step in and stop the marriage from taking place. I became 
known in my neighbourhood and my parents felt so proud,” he glows.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Fstreet-children-journalist-balaknama-newspaper-delhi-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fceb8f2091693716fe475e1583662d2ec2cbd7c6a%2F518_0_3754_2848%2F3754.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meet%20the%20street%20children%20making%20their%20own%20newspaper%20in%20India&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Fstreet-children-journalist-balaknama-newspaper-delhi-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meet%20the%20street%20children%20making%20their%20own%20newspaper%20in%20India&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Fstreet-children-journalist-balaknama-newspaper-delhi-india%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fceb8f2091693716fe475e1583662d2ec2cbd7c6a%2F518_0_3754_2848%2F3754.jpg>
 Rustam speaks at an editorial planning meeting. Photograph: Vijay 
Kumar/Balaknama 
For nearly a year now, Rustam has stopped begging and studies at a learning 
centre. He is paid a small fee for every story lead that he gives.

This feeling of empowerment is what Balaknama wants to foster among street 
kids. It does this by highlighting, not just the difficulties they face, but 
also stories of hope.

Positive reports about street kids who return lost items or help get back 
stolen goods get prioritised. “Street children feel worthless and hated by the 
world and we are trying to change that,” says Sanno, 20, a former Balaknama 
editor, who now advises the team.

The women who refuse to do India's dirtiest job
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/mar/01/the-women-who-refuse-to-do-indias-dirtiest-job>
Balaknama also looks at larger policy-level issues. The paper campaigned to 
get street kids in Delhinational identity cards called Aadhar 
<http://www.telegraphindia.com/1140203/jsp/nation/story_17893784.jsp#.VwZnRWSrTAx>
, which give proof of residence and when available, date of birth.

The paper has recently been focusing on the implications of the changes to the 
Juvenile Justice Act 
<http://indianexpress.com/article/india/india-news-india/amended-jj-act-complicated-needs-discussion-sc-judge-m-b-lokur/>
 that allows children between the ages of 16-18 years to be tried as adults for 
crimes like rape and murder. The amended act has beencriticised by child rights 
activists 
<http://indianexpress.com/article/india/india-news-india/changes-in-juvenile-law-crime-against-kids-say-experts-rajya-sabha-debate-today/>
 who say it could be misused to implicate innocent minors and that it would 
undermine the aim of reforming juvenile criminals. Balaknama has taken a strong 
position on the issue.

“Many street kids don’t have families,” says Chandni. “They don’t even know 
their date of birth and they have become vulnerable now. A 15-year-old can be 
turned into a 19-year-old.” She believes it’s a sign of how much farther they 
have to go to make India’s estimated 400,000 street children visible to those 
who matter.

“When authorities talk about children’s rights, they are looking at 
school-going children, with homes and families. No one is looking at the child 
living on the streets, or labouring inside homes and hotels. They still don’t 
exist.” Balaknama is determined to change this attitude by enabling street 
children to tell their own stories, in their own words.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter. Join the conversation with the 
hashtag#SheMatters <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23SheMatters&src=typd>.
 