
Megan Rapinoe knelt during the national anthem before USA’s friendly against 
Thailand on Thursday night.

Rapinoe first knelt during the anthem on 4 September  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/04/megan-rapinoe-anthem-protest-colin-kaepernick>
before a game with her National Women’s Soccer League team, the Seattle Reign. 
She said she wanted to express solidarity with San Francisco 49ers quarterback 
Colin Kaepernick, who is not standing during the anthemto bring attention to 
racial inequality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/27/colin-kaepernick-national-anthem-protest>
.

Rapinoe did not start the game against Thailand at Mapfre stadium. She knelt 
from a spot near the bench while the fellow substitutes around her stood.

Rapinoe’s actions appear to have caused friction with US Soccer, who issued a 
statement to ESPN after the game, which the US won 9-0.

“Our national anthem has particular significance for US Soccer. In front of 
national and often global audiences, the playing of our national anthem is an 
opportunity for our men’s and women’s national team players and coaches to 
reflect upon the liberties and freedom we all appreciate in this country,” it 
read. “As part of the privilege to represent your country, we have an 
expectation that our players and coaches will stand and honor our flag while 
the national anthem is played.”

The 31-year-old, who helped the US win the World Cup last year and played in 
the Rio Olympics, came into the game at the start of the second half. At a game 
on Sunday night in Seattle, the anniversary of the 9/11 terrorist attacks, she 
stood and linked arms with her Reign team-mates.

Washington Spirit move anthem to avoid Megan Rapinoe 'hijacking'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/07/megan-rapinoe-anthem-protest-washtington-spirit-colin-kaepernick>
Last week before a Reign match at Washington, the anthem was played before the 
teams took the field 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/07/megan-rapinoe-anthem-protest-washtington-spirit-colin-kaepernick>
rather than “subject our fans and friends to the disrespect we feel such an act 
would represent,” said a Spirit statement that cited the personal beliefs of 
the team owner.

There was speculation that Rapinoe might refrain from kneeling before Thursday 
night’s game at Mapfre Stadium because she was playing for the United States 
and not her club team. It was also the final game for midfielder Heather 
O’Reilly, who is retiring after 15 years with the national team.

Kaepernick’s refusal to stand for the anthem first came to public notice when 
he remained seated on the bench before an NFL preseason game against Green Bay. 
Since then numerous players have joined the protest, taking a knee or raising a 
fist.

“Being a gay American, I know what it means to look at the flag and not have 
it protect all of your liberties. It was something small that I could do and 
something that I plan to keep doing in the future and hopefully spark some 
meaningful conversation around it”, she told American Soccer Now.

Since coming out in 2012, Rapinoe has been devoted advocate for LGBT rights 
and has worked with the Gay, Lesbian & Straight Education Network (GLSEN) and 
other organizations. Rapinoe also has been vocal about pay equality, and was 
among five national team players who lent their names to a complaint filed with 
the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission alleging wage discrimination. The 
players claim that members of the team make in some cases up to four times less 
than their male national team counterparts.
 