
JULY 31, 1975

Booker T 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/sep/12/booker-t-jones-sound-alarm-interview>
 & the MGs drummer andStax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jan/20/respect-yourself-stax-records-robert-gordon>
 session musician Al Jackson, Jr is shot in the chest with a .22-caliber pistol 
during a fracas with his wife, Barbara Jackson, in their Memphis home at 2885 
Central Avenue.


Mrs Jackson, who admits to firing two shots with the pistol (only the second 
bullet hit Jackson), claims that she used the pistol in self-defence, firing 
the gun only after extreme provocation. As Jackson himself later testified, he 
followed his wife out of the house at about 8pm, asking Barbara where she was 
going. When she cursed him, he hit her, knocking her onto the hood of his car, 
which was parked in the driveway. Jackson then struck his wife several times, 
grabbed her by the hair and threw her into a flowerbed. He followed her back 
into the house, where she approached him with the .22 pistol, firing one 
warning shot before shooting him in the chest. After Barbara shot him, Jackson 
hit her again and took the gun away, then went to his bedroom, got a 
.38-caliber pistol, and fired it once into the floor. Around 8.30pm, Mrs 
Jackson asked a neighbour to call the police. Arriving officers found Jackson 
sprawled in the entrance hall to the den and brought him to Baptist Hospital, 
taking Mrs. Jackson in for questioning at 10.15pm.




Booker T &amp; the MGs: 'It was just a lucky marriage of us four' – a classic 
interview from the vaults
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/may/15/booker-t-mgs-donald-duck-dunn> 
AUGUST 28, 1975 

Memphis City court judge Joseph McCartie dismisses 
assault-with-intent-to-murder charges against Barbara Jackson, stating that 
Jackson’s actions prior to the shooting would “tend to lead Mrs Jackson to feel 
that she was in danger”. Jackson says under testimony that he fired the .38 
into the floor to relieve his frustrations. He said that he wanted to kill his 
wife after she shot him, but he could not do it. Following this incident, both 
Al and Barbara Jackson continue to reside in the Central Avenue home, living in 
separate bedrooms. Although they reconciled their differences after filing 
divorce petitions the previous November, separation now seems imminent. Jackson 
rents an apartment in the Lynwood Woods complex at 1407 Walnut Hall Court in 
east Memphis, planning to move in the first week of October. Prompted by 
concern for Jackson after the shooting, plans to reunite Booker T & the MGs are 
solidified, with recording dates booked for the first week of 1976.

SEPTEMBER 30, 1975

Although he is supposed to fly to Chicago for a business meeting, Al Jackson 
attends a telecast of the Ali-Frazier fight at Memphis’s Mid South Coliseum. He 
is accompanied by a girlfriend. Airline reservations for the Chicago trip are 
rescheduled for 10am 1 October. Jackson never makes the flight.

OCTOBER 1, 1975 

12.15am – Police Sgt JS Massey, passing the Jackson home on his way from work, 
finds Barbara Jackson on the sidewalk, screaming and crying, her hands tied 
behind her back. Massey rushes into the house and finds Jackson lying on the 
den floor, apparently shot several times. The 39-year-old musical pulse of the 
“Memphis Sound” is dead.

Barbara Jackson, accused of wounding Al just a few months previously, 
testifies that she witnessed the slaying. According to Mrs Jackson: Arriving 
home from a beauty parlour at 11pm, she was ambushed by a young black man just 
inside her front door. The intruder pointed a pistol at her and demanded money. 
After she told him that there was no cash in the house, he tied her to a chair 
with an ironing cord, then ransacked the house searching for valuables.

When the front doorbell rang, the intruder untied Mrs Jackson and instructed 
her to answer while he trained the gun on her. Barbara went to the door, where 
she met her estranged husband, who was then accosted by the robber. Mrs Jackson 
said that Jackson told the robber, “There’s no money in the house except for 
what I have on me.” Mrs Jackson was then again bound to the chair and placed 
with her back to her husband in the den. The robber threatened Al once more and 
forced him to lie face down on the floor. Several pistol shots rang out.

After the intruder fled, Mrs Jackson managed to knock over the chair and free 
herself. Unable to use the telephone because her hands were still tied, Barbara 
ran out into the street, screaming “My husband is in the house. He’s been 
shot!” Police notes state that Mrs Jackson heard the robber address her husband 
by his first name, indicating that they perhaps knew each other. Barbara also 
said that Al pleaded with the killer, saying that “you can have anything in the 
house if you just won’t hurt us”.

Jackson was found lying face down, shot in the back five times. As the police 
later told the press, “Whoever killed him really wanted him dead.” The robber, 
never apprehended, made off with some jewellery as well as the contents of 
Jackson’s pockets. He was described as a tall black man, 25-30 years old, with 
an Afro haircut and a moustache, wearing dark clothing at the time of the 
murder.

Despite the Memphis Police Department’s pledge to Stax Records and the black 
community to catch Al Jackson’s killer, the case remains unsolved nearly 25 
years later. The murderer of the man whomOtis Redding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/oct/21/otis-redding-interview-rocks-back-pages-mr-cool-and-the-clique-from-memphis>
 referred to as “the greatest drummer in the world” is quite possibly still 
free.

As the police later told the press, 'Whoever killed Jackson really wanted him 
dead'

Al Jackson and Stax Records were murdered the same year, which lends an 
unending amount of speculation to the motive behind Jackson’s death. Stax, the 
birthplace of the Memphis Sound that changed the world by giving it such 
artists as Otis Redding, Rufus Thomas, Eddie Floyd, andIsaac Hayes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/isaachayes>, soared in the late 60s, but 
began showing signs of trouble by the early 70s. Founded in Memphis by Jim 
Stewart and his sister Estelle Axton, Stax had moved to the now infamous (and 
unfortunately, now razed) old Capitol theatre on McLemore Avenue, in the heart 
of the black community, in 1961.

Jackson’s first date at Stax was in 1962, playing with Booker T Jones, Steve 
Cropper, and Lewis Steinberg on a Billy Lee Riley session which, during down 
time, produced the instrumental Behave Yourself and what they thought would be 
a good B-side, Green Onions. The latter, of course, became one of the label’s 
biggest sellers – in the millions – propelling “Booker T & the MGs” to 
worldwide fame. Following that session, Al went on to provide the beat for 99% 
of the material recorded at Stax through the 60s. Also recording a few blocks 
away with Willie Mitchell and Al Green for Hi Records, Jackson quickly 
established himself as a premier purveyor of the “Memphis Sound”.

But in 1972, after a distribution deal with Atlantic ended, Stax heads Jim 
Stewart and Al Bell signed a contract with CBS, Inc granting CBS exclusive 
distribution rights in exchange for a $6 million loan. For unclear reasons, CBS 
(then run by Clive Davis) did not hold up their part of the bargain, crippling 
Stax by withholding national distribution. Then, fearing Stax would break the 
agreement, CBS sued Stax in 1974 as a preventative measure. Although Stax 
counter-sued for $67m, the suits were tied up in court for several months, 
financially destroying the “Sound of Money”, as Stax once called itself. Minor 
creditors forced Stax into bankruptcy in late 1975, and in January 1976 Union 
Planters Bank shut Stax down in a foreclosure for default on a $10.5m loan.

Following the paper trail documenting Stax’s fall and Jackson’s death is no 
easy task. Here in Memphis, most people who remember the time choose not to 
talk about it. The few who speak up, do so hesitantly. Followers of the case 
are divided into two camps: those who believe Al Jackson was silenced in part 
of a conspiracy to “kill” Stax Records, and those who think he was merely in 
the wrong place at the wrong time.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DL3MWu6LhWQ8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DL3MWu6LhWQ8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DL3MWu6LhWQ8&media=>
 Watch Booker T & the MGs’ Green Onions 
During Stax’s court battles with CBS, many Memphis musicians resorted to suing 
the label in an attempt to get unpaid salaries and royalties. Isaac Hayes sued 
Stax twice, in 1974 for $5m in unpaid royalties, then again in 1976 for $3 
million he was still owed from the earlier settlement. Word got out after 
Jackson’s death that he too was planning to sue Stax. Yet another local legend 
places Jackson at a hearing into the dissolution of Stax, providing vital 
testimony that needed silencing. Memphis producer Jim Dickinson, who believes 
that the same foul players who took out Stax, also murdered its most integral 
part – the backbeat – puts it most cryptically: “There were two of everything 
else, but only one drummer – only one Al Jackson.”

The remaining members of the “Memphis Group” – Jones, Cropper and Donald 
“Duck” Dunn (who replaced Steinberg in the early 60s) publicly scoff at this 
theory. They were all just as involved as Jackson had been, and although Jones 
and Cropper resided in California in 1975, Dunn lived in Memphis and kept close 
ties to Jackson. None of the MGs knew of any damning testimony Jackson could 
provide, and besides, Jackson had hardly fallen on hard times before his death. 
Enabled by – or possibly in spite of – his success in the music industry, 
Jackson owned a South Memphis gas station and had invested in several oil 
wells. As Jones recalled, “He never let go of the service station, because he 
never trusted the record business. We’d be out on the road, he’d call the 
station! That was good business, you know.” In fact, Jackson’s personal 
property at the time of his death was valued at over $214,000, plus $144,000 
annual revenue from the oil wells and approximately $1,600 a year from 
music-based royalties.

Because there is no statute of limitations on murder in the state of 
Tennessee, the police consider this case open and refuse access to department 
files. A rumour about town insists that now-retired MPD Sgt Jim Hester, 
coordinator of the case at the time of the slaying, knows the real story. 
Indeed, Memphis’s Commercial Appeal newspaper reported that on 21 April, 1976, 
Hester advised that “We are very close to seeking indictments against those 
responsible for his [Jackson’s] death. We expect to move soon,” with Capt Tommy 
Smith adding that “four suspects are under investigation”. Unfortunately the 
indictments never came, and in early 2000 it seems that both Hester and Smith 
have disappeared.

Memphis newspaper articles reporting the MPD’s progress on the Jackson case 
remain the only main source available to the public. Even established 
journalists such as Rob Bowman, author of Soulsville USA: The Story of Stax 
Records, cannot gain access to the homicide file on Jackson at MPD 
headquarters. Although they insist the case is still open, the police refuse to 
make comment – not even to state whether they’ve received any leads in the last 
ten years, or if any detectives are still assigned to the case. For a police 
force portrayed so determined to resolve the case and put Jackson’s killer 
behind bars, they are strangely reticent. However, when rereading mid-70s 
editions of Memphis’s three newspapers – the Press Scimitar and Commercial 
Appeal dailies plus the black-owned weekly Tri-State Defender – an alternate 
conspiracy and possible cover-up become apparent.

On April 21, 1976, Sgt Hester told the Commercial Appeal that the MPD were 
investigating four unnamed suspects, and expected to indict those suspects 
within the month. While Barbara Jackson was initially linked to the murder 
because she had shot and wounded Jackson, Memphis police believed that Mrs 
Jackson was the potential victim of a plot intending to frame her as lead 
suspect. Yet by early 1976, the MPD were keeping a close eye on Barbara Jackson.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Fal-jackson-jr-memphis-sunset-the-mysterious-death-of-stax-heartbeat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb04588abc72d6026435ae4361735e196ead95ad2%2F0_0_3057_3057%2F3057.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Memphis%20sunset%3A%20The%20Mysterious%20death%20of%20Stax%20heartbeat%20Al%20Jackson%2C%20Jr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Fal-jackson-jr-memphis-sunset-the-mysterious-death-of-stax-heartbeat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Memphis%20sunset%3A%20The%20Mysterious%20death%20of%20Stax%20heartbeat%20Al%20Jackson%2C%20Jr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Fal-jackson-jr-memphis-sunset-the-mysterious-death-of-stax-heartbeat%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb04588abc72d6026435ae4361735e196ead95ad2%2F0_0_3057_3057%2F3057.jpg>
 Booker T & the MGs … Booker T Jones, Donald ‘Duck’ Dunn, Al Jackson Jr and 
Steve Cropper. Photograph: David Redfern 
On May 1, 1976, the Tri-State Defender reported that an anonymous source close 
to the attorney general’s office named widow Barbara Jackson and blues singer 
Denise LaSalle as two of the suspects about to be indicted. The other two 
suspects were not named by the source, although the article states that the 
triggerman in Al Jackson’s murder was the same man that LaSalle was accused of 
protecting in a previous federal litigation. Backtracking to an article in the 
Press Scimitar on 15 January, 1976, it is revealed that Ora Denise Jones 
[LaSalle] was then indicted by a federal grand jury for harbouring a fugitive 
wanted on armed robbery charges in Ohio. The alleged robber, Nathaniel Doyle, 
Jr (also known as Nate Johnson), was on the FBI’s 10 Most Wanted list. LaSalle 
co-operated with the FBI and was acquitted by the grand jury, but Doyle was 
still on the run.

Digging back even further in the Tri-State Defender files, more information is 
divulged: an unnamed black Memphis policeman, a boyfriend of Barbara Jackson, 
was also under allegation as the possible triggerman in Al’s murder. Passers-by 
placed his car in the Jacksons’ driveway, but all charges were dropped on 
November 29, 1975, when the policeman passed a polygraph test. Speculative 
rumours place Barbara Jackson, her anonymous boyfriend, Denise LaSalle, and 
Nate Doyle at Jackson’s house the night of the murder. Another source believes 
that Jackson wasn’t expected home that evening, and that he surprised the four 
at his Central Avenue house. What happened that night is still unclear. Doyle 
was killed in an unrelated police shoot-out in Seattle later in 1976, so he 
isn’t talking. Neither are Mrs Jackson, LaSalle, or Barbara’s unnamed 
boyfriend. Any possible answers remain locked up in Homicide at 201 Poplar 
Avenue in downtown Memphis.

Twenty-five years later, the only accessible remains of Al Jackson’s existence 
are his recordings. Denise LaSalle still tours the chitlin’ circuit, and 
incredibly enough, Barbara Jackson still resides at 3885 Central, in the house 
where her husband was murdered. Booker T & the MGs have regrouped with other 
drummers (usually Steve Jordan – eminently capable, but no Al Jackson) and the 
entire vault of Stax singles, the majority of which feature Jackson’s steady 
backbeat, have been re-released on CD to universal acclaim. Peter Guralnick’s
Sweet Soul Music 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/330130/> and the 
aforementioned Soulsville, USA pay written homage to what was the “Memphis 
Sound” and the drummer behind it. His bones may lie buried in south Memphis’s 
New Park cemetery, and his murder may never be solved. But no one and nothing, 
not even five bullets in the back, can silence the musical legacy left by Al 
Jackson, Jr.

© Andria Lisle, 1997
 