
How many bands are there who have made their best records after losing their 
lead singer? Whoever said “Marillion”, go and sit in the corner, and Joy 
Division/New Order aren’t allowed either because of the name change. The simple 
truth is, Mercury Rev are lords of their own sub-set.


The fact that the New York state sextet’s last two albums were made subsequent 
to the departure of porcine vocalist David Baker is actually the least 
remarkable thing about them. (Baker was, after all, one of the most annoying 
men in rock.) What marks out 1995’s See You on the Other Side and this year’s 
Deserter’s Songs as two of the most amazing albums of this or any other decade 
is, quite simply, the music. Mercury Rev have fashioned a marvelous shimmering 
landscape of bowed saws, whistling choirs and audacious orchestrations that one 
moment seem to be soaring into the farthest reaches of the stratosphere, the 
next deep into the darkest inner reaches of the listener’s cerebellum.

The difference between See You on the Other Side and Deserter’s Songs? The 
first is like a motorway, the second more like a ring road. “We decided to edit 
ourselves a bit,” explains guitar, reed and woodwind journeyman Sean 
“Grasshopper” Mackowiak. “Instead of 20 things going on at once, now there are 
only 10. A monkey could play these tunes on an acoustic guitar.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1xJbEoc5sDw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1xJbEoc5sDw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1xJbEoc5sDw&media=>
“Deserter’s Songs is more internalised,” adds vocal, guitar, strings and 
Chamberlin maestro Jonathan Donahue. “I think the lyrics are a lot deeper 
embedded emotionally. The record has to do with feeling deserted and at the 
same time deserting someone. It’s like love: sometimes you’re leaving and 
sometimes she’s leaving – it’s never easy to quite say which.”

On meeting the two Rev mainstays in a quiet west London pub, it is hard not to 
be struck by the contrast between their day-to-day demeanour and the spiritual 
aura of their music. Lasciviously holding up a tacky pinup of Natasha 
Henstridge to a toilet window is not what you expect of warriors of the new 
space-gospel vanguard. But once you have got over the small problem of their 
personalities, Donahue and Grasshopper actually talk a great deal of sense.

“We went to New Orleans at Mardi Gras and saw all these marching bands playing 
really fast,” the former enthuses. “It sounded like jungle to us.” The ability 
to make these kinds of connections is integral to Mercury Rev’s music, but the 
band’s righteous contempt for anything that looks like a boundary fence has 
sometimes caused their admirers a certain amount of confusion. “We’ve always 
found it strange that in Britain people have tended to think of us as this 
really weird rock band from America,” says Donahue, “because the music we 
listen to is 10 times weirder than the music we make. Like, the Smithsonian 
Folkways collection – what’s weirder than that?”

Donahue’s definition of rock’n’roll – “a large placard that says ‘inside these 
doors, anything goes’” – seems as close to the truth as it is possible to get. 
It includes both Miles Davis and the Chemical Brothers. “American rock’n’roll 
was originally built on African music, the European classical tradition, gospel 
and country,” Donahue continues. “If they hadn’t called it rock’n’roll, they 
would probably have had to call it ‘western bebop’.” Would it be fair to say 
that Mercury Rev’s musical mission is to reintroduce those diverse ingredients? 
“I hope so,” says Donahue modestly.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfusKcZjj7dg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfusKcZjj7dg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfusKcZjj7dg&media=>
Questions like, “Why would an unabashed art band like Mercury Rev team up with 
such non-art stalwarts as the Band’s Levon Helm and Garth Hudson?” fade into 
insignificance before such frenetic inclusivity. So were they surprised by the 
massive step forward that the last two, post-David Baker, Mercury Rev records 
seem to represent from their patchily compelling predecessors, Yerself Is Steam 
and Boces?

“To be blunt, David didn’t make a huge musical contribution, so when he left, 
we knew he was taking his personality, not the group’s musical style, and we 
were quite excited about what we might achieve.”

Old-fashioned ideas of “progression” don’t really work for the Rev. They had 
demos which “sounded just like Holes” (Deserter’s Songs’ captivating opening 
number) dating back to formative years in Buffalo in the late 80s. Mercury 
Rev’s peculiar genius favours a cyclical understanding of musical history over 
a linear one.

Deserter’s Songs: their perfect record? “We want the next one to be 10 times 
better. If this is perfect, where are you going from here, buddy?”
 