
One of the most remarkable things about Christmas is its basic reach, the 
layers of ritual and habit, the way this very special time of year manages to 
smear itself like a basting of goose fat across every one of the vital senses. 
Overwhelmed by these ruddy-cheeked riches, it can be a tricky choice. We all 
have our preferences. But in the end it’s really just a personal choice which 
part of Christmas you hate the most.

The list is endless. Motorway gridlock. Men who use the word Chrimbo. Adorable 
bright-eyed, husky-voiced, bowl-headed American children in family movies whose 
hearts are full of Santa and joy, and who will within the next five to six 
years appear in Nevada county sheriff mugshots looking glazed and insolent (– 
you won’t believe what Timmy McMuffinface looks like now!) and being sued by 
their own mad parents in supermarket gossip magazines.

Cristiano Ronaldo, Leo Messi, fresh air, a vacuum, elevator music, then the 
rest | Barney Ronay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/23/cristiano-ronaldo-lionel-messi-top-100-footballer-2016>
Welcome to the most wonderful time of the year, a world of 32-pack, breaded 
bacon-cheese cranberry bites, angry jabbing fingers in the Argos queue, 
faux-straw supermarket Stilton sets and department store TV adverts designed to 
taunt you into crying hot empty tears of existential anguish.

Plus, of course, not forgetting the special horror of the traditional family 
Christmas, with all its airless resentments, the arguments about meat, the 
tearful moments by the kitchen sink, the ghosts of Christmases that never were, 
lives that didn’t happen, setting like a congealed custard skin over every 
attempt to jazz some life into these stale and unforgiving Victorian rituals. 
Happy Christmas one and all!

In the middle of which sport always seems to loom even larger. Perhaps it is 
the element of escapism, a moment of clarity in the middle of all this. 
Whatever the reason it’s customary at this time of year to sigh a little, adopt 
an expression of sickly piety, fill the fountain pen with liquid cheese and 
write about those moments of the year, the vignettes that offer a message of 
sporting hope for humanity.

Happily, there are some things that always deliver. I’m talking, of course, 
aboutLionel Messi’s amazing dribble against Espanyol 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zqV59bVYR_o>, my own moment of the week, 
festive season and possibly year. So forget Christmas. Let’s talk Messi. It is 
funny how it still seems important to go on about him 12 years into his 
extraordinary sporting life. You’d think by now we might have become glazed by 
repetition. But not when he keeps doing things like this.

The 100 best footballers in the world 2016 – interactive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/dec/20/the-100-best-footballers-in-the-world-2016-interactive>
Barcelona played Espanyol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/18/barcelona-espanyol-la-liga-match-report>
 on Monday night, a tight, furious derby game they were winning 1-0 with 67 
minutes gone. Now and then you hear the suggestion La Liga is a soft touch. In 
which case best not tell Andrés Iniesta, who starts things off by wriggling 
past three players and having his legs whipped out violently from under him as 
he slips the ball back to Messi 45 yards from goal. At which point, we’re on.

Messi looks up. Much of the last hour has been spent hurdling tackles and 
forcingEspanyol <https://www.theguardian.com/football/espanyol> back. Ahead of 
him now are seven players arranged in a tight, angry triangle on the edge of 
their own area. Freeze-frame and Messi resembles briefly the blue and red fairy 
at the top of this densely packed defensive Christmas tree. This is the only 
remaining festive reference from here. Hopefully it conveyed a feeling of 
warmth, goodwill and childish wonder.

The first thing Messi does is nutmeg Javi Fuego. This isn’t as easy as it 
sounds. Fuego played for Spain through the age groups. He’s 32 now. From a 
distance he looks like the kind of shin‑raking defensive midfielder who stalked 
the Spanish league in the 1980s. By contrast Messi’s nutmeg is disarmingly 
gentle, a discreet little dab through the gap left by Fuego’s stride.

It’s a funny thing about Messi, this gentleness. Gerard Piqué remembers him 
turning up at the academy and not saying a word for his first month. Even now 
as he inflicts a relentless, often humiliating pain on his opponents Messi does 
so with a nuzzle, a cosseting touch. The famous dribble in the Champions League 
semi-final that leftJérôme Boateng on his back 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YxQ2Tzj2GHs> last year was like a loving 
little cosh to the back of the head.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fmessi-meets-afghan-boy-who-made-football-shirt-out-of-plastic-bag-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Messi%20meets%20Afghan%20boy%20who%20made%20football%20shirt%20out%20of%20plastic%20bag%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fmessi-meets-afghan-boy-who-made-football-shirt-out-of-plastic-bag-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Messi%20meets%20Afghan%20boy%20who%20made%20football%20shirt%20out%20of%20plastic%20bag%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fmessi-meets-afghan-boy-who-made-football-shirt-out-of-plastic-bag-video&media=>
Messi meets Afghan boy who made football shirt out of plastic bag 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/dec/13/messi-meets-afghan-boy-who-made-football-shirt-out-of-plastic-bag-video>
Next Messi skips away from Diego Reyes. Reyes has 39 caps for Mexico. He is 
6ft 3in tall and quick to the ball. Messi has had to get used to being 
outmuscled at times. Watching him glide away from Reyes you remember also how 
strong he is, how exhausting his jump-start movements must be, the need always 
to floor the throttle to find space, to be fresh right to the end. He may look 
like a friendly cartoon mouse. But Messi is also a warrior in his way.

Next up is Gerard, who has sprinted back to cover. As Messi veers close Gerard 
jams his feet together, fearing the nutmeg. Messi tacks right and brushes past, 
the simplest of shuffles. But then for a prodigious dribbler he doesn’t have a 
huge range. Messi isn’t an outrageously creative mover,like Ronaldinho 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0rWrPZpVEuY> with his inventive dance-style 
routines. Everything is a variation on the same matrix of movements, the feint 
and the sideways spring, that extraordinary ability to see the space and leap 
right into it. Twelve years on it’s still a surprise to see him do it.

By now we are four seconds into Messi’s dribble. There is still one to go. 
David López is at centre-back. López grew up inBarcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona>. He made his La Liga debut the 
same season Messi won his second Ballon d’Or. Aside from his spell at Napoli 
his career has effectively been spent in Messi’s near‑shadow. Here he watches 
as Messi jinks left three times, then steps out to nick the ball.

At which point Messi produces what seems in the moment like a startling change 
of plan. He turns right instead, at a giddy speed. López hares off the wrong 
way, a pained look already spreading across his face as he paddles thin air. By 
now the two full‑backs are also closing in, like two ends of a piece of thread 
yanked from its stitches. The whole game is jammed into that shrinking triangle 
of green. Finally Messi does what these high-end ball players tend to do, 
freezing time, finding a second to lean on his elbow, think about it and switch 
the ball to his left foot. The shot is weak, a toe poke straight at Roberto who 
parries it. Luis Suárez smashes in the rebound. The Camp Nou erupts.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Flionel-messi-christmas-barcelona-espanyol-nutmeg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c693b8af000a0f103f5e11e8035c1812d542321%2F175_282_4031_3229%2F4031.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Messi%20Christmas%2C%20the%20seasonal%20gift%20from%20Barcelona%20with%20a%20dusting%20of%20nutmeg%20%7C%20Barney%20Ronay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Flionel-messi-christmas-barcelona-espanyol-nutmeg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Messi%20Christmas%2C%20the%20seasonal%20gift%20from%20Barcelona%20with%20a%20dusting%20of%20nutmeg%20%7C%20Barney%20Ronay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Flionel-messi-christmas-barcelona-espanyol-nutmeg%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c693b8af000a0f103f5e11e8035c1812d542321%2F175_282_4031_3229%2F4031.jpg>
 Lionel Messi sends David López haring off the wrong way. Photograph: 
Aflo/REX/Shutterstock 
And that was pretty much that for Messi’s amazing dribble, although a minute 
later he did run through four defenders and tee up Jordi Alba for a third. This 
team of outsize superstars will continue to win games like these as the season 
tapers into the tiny margins of elite‑level triumph or elite-level failure. Not 
much will be changed by another Messi dribble, another round of applause, a 
reignition of the endlessly tedious argument about greatness and stature.

The best bit will remain that small, still square of green around Messi as he 
tickles out his intricate patterns, a reminder that even in the middle of the 
familiar, parping brouhaha of commerce, dubious practice and branding schmaltz, 
sport can still produce these moments of purity, its own enduring magic and 
sparkle.
 