
Mesut Özil is public enemy No1 
<http://metro.co.uk/2016/12/21/mesut-ozil-responds-to-arsenal-backlash-liking-instagram-post-ridiculing-his-haters-6336414/>
 in the Premier League this week. For most players, a run of just two abject 
performances would usually go unnoticed but, rightly or wrongly, Özil has been 
thrust into the spotlight. Since his arrival from Real Madrid, Özil has come 
under scrutiny in England for his perceived lack of defensive workrate, but is 
it fair to blame Arsenal’s woes on their record signing?

While fans and pundits are quick criticise Özil, the fact that Wenger’s side 
struggle when he isn’t at the races does show how important he is to the team. 
As his manager would attest, Özil isn’t in the team to break up play in 
defensive positions but to create opportunities in the final third. If he’s 
doing neither, as was the case against Manchester City and Everton, there is a 
problem, but that hasn’t been the norm this season.

His return of two assists in the league is extremely modest given his ability 
and record, but his connection withAlexis Sánchez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/sanchez-alexis> is still far and away 
Arsenal’s greatest weapon. In fact, their roles have been somewhat reversed 
this season, with Özil scoring five goals, four of which have been laid on by 
Sánchez. No other combination has been more fruitful in the Premier League.

The fact that Sánchez has scored 12 goals himself is making Özil seem less 
influential than he is. It’s not just from an attacking standpoint that Özil is 
in some ways the victim of his team-mate’s success. The two are very different 
players, which was abundantly clear when they were signed, but Sánchez’s 
indomitable workrate and commitment only serve to magnify Özil’s lackadaisical 
mannerisms.
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
The German is making fewer tackles in the Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> this season than he has in 
any other season before. He has made 0.7 tackles per game, the fifth lowest 
return from the 23 players who have made at least 10 starts as attacking 
midfielders. He has made half as many tackles as Philippe Coutinho, Delli Alli 
and Theo Walcott (all 1.4), while Sánchez has also averaged almost twice as 
many (1.2 per game).

Dimitri Payet has a similar style of play to Özil and, even though he has 
faced some criticism for his perceived lack of desire, Payet’s average of just 
0.4 tackles per game has come under far less scrutiny. One of the other four 
players below Özil in tackles is Eden Hazard (0.5 per game), who has faced no 
such flak for a number of reasons. For a start, Hazard is playing in a team 
that has won their last 11 games. He is also more explosive than Özil and his 
ability to breeze past defenders earns him forgiveness from fans. Hazard also 
benefits from a system at Chelsea that is more liberating than the one Özil 
finds himself in atArsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> – so 
when Özil fails to put in a defensive shift it is more of an issue.

Mesut Özil, the ghost in Arsenal’s machine, picks bad time for wan game
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/19/mesut-ozil-arsene-wenger-arsenal>
Özil does not make many tackles but, when you analyse how often he wins the 
ball in advanced areas, the German is pulling his weight. Having won possession 
in the attacking third 16 times this season, Özil is level in second in the 
league with Sánchez. Given that Sánchez has played an extra game, it’s harsh to 
suggest that Özil doesn’t contribute defensively. Interestingly, the only 
player in front of the Arsenal pair is Hazard. For players in their position, 
winning the ball high up the pitch is the vital defensive statistic.

Sadio Mané (15), Kevin De Bruyne (14), Philippe Coutinho and Raheem Sterling 
(both 11) all rank highly but are all below Özil. That Theo Walcott has made 
twice the number of tackles as his team-mate this season but won possession in 
the attacking third half as many times (eight) suggests that Wenger wants his 
wide men to track back and play deeper to allow Özil to do what he does best.

This approach was working well until a week ago, but the argument can still be 
made that in the big games against sides that will have more possession – as 
City did at the weekend (61%) – Özil can be more of a hindrance than a help. 
For that reason the manager should be taking some of the blame for not 
resolving a problem that has cropped up on numerous occasions. But if Arsenal 
were to drop their record signing and lose a big game, Wenger would face 
massive criticism from fans and pundits alike.

The statistics suggest that the reaction to Özil’s performance has been blown 
out of proportion. Yes, he rarely tracks back, but in Wenger’s system that is 
the job of the wingers and as long as Özil continues to win the ball high up 
the pitch – as he has been doing – he is doing his job. Moreover, given that he 
started every game for Germany at Euro 2016, has missed just one Premier League 
match this season and has started every game in the Champions League, his 
latest showings could be attributed to fatigue.

Will England regret missing out on Wilfried Zaha if he plays for Ivory Coast?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/who-scored-blog/2016/dec/13/wilfried-zaha-england-ivory-coast-crystal-palace>
Özil doesn’t help himself at times with his demeanour but that’s a reflection 
of his personality. Just as you’ll never get Sánchez to hold back and take a 
break, it’s unlikely you’ll ever see Özil sprinting around when the opposition 
have the ball. You have to take the rough with the smooth and, when Özil is at 
his exceptional best, there are few smoother.

Premier League team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
La Liga team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Bundesliga team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Serie A team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Ligue 1 team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
• Follow WhoScored on Twitter <https://twitter.com/WhoScored> and Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/WhoScored>
• Follow Martin Laurence <https://twitter.com/martinlaurence7> on Twitter
 