
The Metropolitan police <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/metropolitan-police> 
are to pay more than £400,000 to a woman who has been profoundly traumatised 
after discovering by chance that the father of her son was an undercover police 
officer.

It is the first time the police have made a payment to settle any of the legal 
claims brought by women who were deceived by undercover officers sent to spy on 
political and activist groups.

The woman has been receiving psychiatric treatment and has contemplated 
suicide since she read a newspaper in 2012 and found out the true identity of 
the man who had fathered her son before abandoning her and the child 24 years 
previously.

The woman, who wishes to remain anonymous and is known by the name Jacqui, 
said the out-of-court settlement in which theMet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/metropolitan-police> would pay her £425,000 
would not bring closure for her as the force had not admitted wrongdoing.

She also criticised the police for dragging out the legal action by refusing 
to concede for two years that the father, Bob Lambert, was one of their 
undercover officers, even though he himself had already publicly admitted his 
covert role.

She added there was “absolute proof” that Lambert was the father of their son 
as there was “six foot of his DNA walking around”. The police’s obstructive 
attitude had made her last two years a “hundred hundred times worse”.

She said: “It was like they were kicking me all the time. I felt like they had 
cast me out to the sea, just to leave me, and I was drowning, I was clinging 
on.” She had previously said she felt as ifshe had been “raped by the state” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/jun/24/undercover-police-spy-girlfriend-child>
.

Jules Carey, Jacqui’s lawyer, called on Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe, the Met 
commissioner, to give a commitment that undercover police would never use 
sexual relationships to gather information, a “shameful and abusive practice”.

Jacqui said she hoped to “finally get some answers” from the public inquiry 
looking into the undercover infiltration of political campaigners set up by the 
home secretary, Theresa May,following a series of revelations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/jan/20/undercover-police-children-activists>
 in the Guardian over the last three years.

Police <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> chiefs have maintained that the 
undercover operatives were not permitted, under any circumstances, to have 
sexual relationships with the people they were spying on. However, the evidence 
that has emerged shows that such sexual relationships were routine, and that 
they often lasted several years.

Police are still resisting legal claims from more than 10 other women who say 
they have suffered emotional trauma after discovering that their one-time 
boyfriends were undercover officers.

Jacqui said she was angry that so many questions about her life would remain 
unanswered because the police were refusing to give her an explanation. “I have 
had conversations with my psychiatrist about this. It is something that I have 
to come to terms with. I live in a country that protects its establishment so 
much that someone like me is nothing to them – I am just like a little ant, and 
they are like a big elephant stamping on a little ant. I would like all the 
gaps of the last 30 years of my life filled in.” She had not known anything 
about Lambert’s undercover role when they met in east London in 1984.He 
presented himself as Bob Robinson, a long-haired leftwing radical 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/feb/21/anatomy-of-betrayal-undercover-police>
 . In reality he was a member of a secret police unit,the special demonstration 
squad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/aug/15/metropolitan-police-forced-to-name-undercover-officers>
 (SDS), and was embarking on a five-year missionto infiltrate environmental and 
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/jun/21/mclibel-leaflet-police-bob-lambert-mcdonalds>
animal rights groups.

Jacqui, then 22, has described how quickly she became smitten by the “very 
charming and charismatic” Robinson, her first love. Their son was born the 
following year. She said she was a trusted activist so no one ever questioned 
him, particularly as they had had a child together.

Jacqui believed their son was his first child. What she was to discover 
decades later 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/jun/22/undercover-police-lovers> 
was that Lambert had another family, miles away on the outskirts of London, and 
already had two young children with his real wife. On the Sunday she gave 
birth, he had spent the rest of the weekend with his wife and children. “I had 
a spy who was being paid by the government to spy on me, to the extent that he 
watched me give birth, so he saw every intimate part of me. He was with me for 
14 hours giving birth. How did he report that back?”

She had wanted the child and said he had made no effort to persuade her to 
have an abortion. At first he was a devoted, hands-on father, but when their 
son was two Lambert disappeared from their lives and left her to bring him up. 
At the time he claimed that hehad to go on the run abroad to escape 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/oct/23/police-spy-tricked-lover-activist> 
from the police who wanted to arrest him over his animal rights work.

In fact, he returned to Scotland Yard and was promoted to detective inspector, 
running the operations of the SDS in the 1990s. He controlled undercover 
officers deployed in political groups. Several struck up long-term 
relationships with campaigners. In October 2011a group of activists unmasked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/oct/16/academic-bob-lambert-former-police-spy>
 Lambert, who had left the police and become an academic, compelling him to 
publish a statement admitting that he had been an undercover officer.

Jacqui did not find out until June 2012 when she read about his undercover 
work in a newspaper. Within 24 hours she had tracked him down.

She said Lambert and his son had since developed a close relationship.

The Met said it unreservedly apologised for any pain and suffering Jacqui had 
suffered, recognising “the impact that the revelation that he was an undercover 
police officer must have had both on her and her son”. It said it had dealt 
with the case with “professionalism and sensitivity” and regretted if the 
process had “added to her distress”. Lambert’s confirmation that he was an 
undercover officer did “nothing to dilute our duty to protect our staff 
currently working undercover”, the Met said, as it had to preserve the secrecy 
of covert operations.

Jacqui - in her own words

He watched me give birth. To me, he was watching his first child being born. 
He was there throughout the labour, and that is something so intimate between a 
man and a woman, to watch your wife, your girlfriend, your partner give birth 
to your child is, despite all the blood and gore and everything that’s there, 
so intimate. And I shared that with a ghost, with someone who vaporised.

As I said, I have no foundations in my life. I had a spy who was being paid by 
the government to spy on me to the extent that he watched me give birth. So he 
saw every intimate part of me. He was 14 hours with me, giving birth.

How did he report that back? Did he report every contraction back to the 
police? What use was that for information purposes? He had to spent all of a 
Sunday evening right the way through to the Monday at lunchtime[when] I 
actually gave birth. [He] held our son before I did, because I was out of it.

And after 14 and a half hours and epidural and everything, I was just resting 
and he was holding our son. Our son was in special care just for a couple of 
days because of the difficult birth. He came down to tell me how he was, that 
he had been holding him, and I had not been well enough to go and see him.

He was 36 hours old before I saw him to hold him, but Bob had been with him 
all that time. He had bonded with him for 36 hours before that. So this spy 
watched me give birth, the most intimate thing a man and woman can share. And 
he would have [taken] that secret to his grave, because in all this time he had 
not told his second wife anything about us.
 