
Terrorist truck attacks in Nice and Berlin have forced police to adjust plans 
for protecting crowds inLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> on New 
Year’s Eve, a senior officer has said.

Armed police will join about 3,000 officers on the streets of the capital on 
Saturday as hundreds of thousands of people flock to watch the official 
fireworks display.

Concerns about the threat of a mass-casualty attack targeting the occasion 
have been heightened after extremists struck busy public events in Europe.

Man wrongly arrested over Berlin attack says he fears for his life
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/29/naveed-baloch-man-wrongly-arrested-berlin-attack-fears-for-his-life>
In July, a lorry ploughed down the packed seafront promenade in Nice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/15/nice-terror-attack-bastille-day-memorial-service-france>
 during Bastille Day celebrations, killing 86 people and injuring hundreds of 
others. AChristmas market in the heart of Berlin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/20/berlin-truck-crash-terrorism-fears-darken-germanys-mini-utopias>
 was the scene of a similar atrocity in December, when 12 people died after a 
truck packed with steel was driven into crowds.

But DS Phil Langworthy of the Metropolitan police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/metropolitan-police> sought to reassure the 
public, saying there were overt and covert measures in place for protection.

He said: “We have been looking at what has happened around the world in terms 
of Berlin, Nice, etc, and have adjusted our plans and continue to adjust our 
plans.

“We police around 3,500 large events every year including on New Year’s Eve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/29/new-years-eve-world-15-drinks>
 and we meticulously plan those events … and we look at our tactics and we look 
around the world and adjust our tactics if need be.

“We have a very extensive planning period, we plan for many months, pretty 
much we start planning since the last event.”

He said there was no specific intelligence for an attack on the event. He 
added: “I would encourage people on the night if they see anything suspicious 
or have any concerns to come and speak to one of the police officers or 
stewards who will be on duty.”

Huge numbers are expected to ring in the new year on the banks of the Thames, 
with partygoers likely to head to other parts of central London, including 
major tourist spots such as Trafalgar Square.

Police <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> are urging those who do not 
have tickets for the fireworks, which has sold out, to watch it at home instead.

Road closures will be in place from 2pm on 31 December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/dec/31/happy-new-year-when-scheduled-tweets-go-wrong>
, affecting Lambeth, Westminster, Waterloo and Blackfriars bridges.
 