
Say what you like about Metallica (they’re very loud and can’t hear you), but 
there is no denying that the world’s biggest heavy metal band have never lost 
their ability to make an impact. Today they have released the first song from 
their long-awaited10th studio album, Hardwired … to Self-Destruct 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/19/metallica-hardwired-to-self-destruct-first-studio-album-for-eight-years>
, due in November. As has long been the case, the metal world is once again 
embroiled in arguments about whether or not Metallica have lost, regained or 
recklessly jettisoned the plot. Partly this inevitable eruption of opinions – 
both positive and less so – is because Metallica remain incomparably huge, with 
only Iron Maiden and Slipknot coming remotely close to their global status. But 
it’s also down to a widely held belief that James Hetfield and co haven’t made 
a genuinely great album in 25 years. As a consequence, every new music they 
make is subjected to intense scrutiny and compared to the seminal and legendary 
records the band made in the 1980s. The eight years since the release of 
Metallica’s last studio album,Death Magnetic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/sep/12/rockreview.metallica>, have only 
heightened the anticipation for new songs.

Metallica – the band who reinvented metal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/apr/19/metallica-the-band-who-reinvented-metal>
The band’s audience seems to be roughly divided between those who love 
everything they do and those who have despaired over recent nonsense such as 
Lulu –a virtually unlistenable collaboration with Lou Reed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/oct/27/lou-reed-metallica-lulu-review> 
– and the hapless concert filmMetallica: Through the Never 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/oct/03/metallica-through-the-never-review>
. The new single, Hardwired, may not delight all fans, but it does at least 
suggest that Metallica have ironed out one or two problems. Specifically, the 
song is just over three minutes long and goes like the clappers from start to 
finish. This, long-suffering fans may argue, is what the band should have done 
on their last album, rather than forgetting how to edit their own material – 
resulting in anonymous, rambling dreck like the 10-minute instrumentalSuicide & 
Redemption <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WuyZ4Bt73mg]>, instead of songs to 
rival old classics such as Whiplash and Battery. Hardwired is unlikely to 
become as loved as those early anthems, but the band do sound like a powerful 
heavy metal band at full throttle. The lyrics are a bit feeble, mirroring the 
clumsy angst and faux rebellion that has marred every Metallica album since 
Load in 1996, and too much mediocre water has travelled under this band’s 
bridge for the song’s title to be anything more than a handy slogan to imply 
edginess of some kind. But none of that really matters when the riffs are this 
sharp and brutal, the arrangement so neatly to-the-point and the band’s 
individual performances so unfussy and precise. (Which also raises the 
question: has Lars Ulrich been practising his drums for once?)

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Fmetallicas-single-hardwired-review-brutal-riffs-and-precise-playing-signal-a-return-to-form%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf232d386090027f9d28d0408ba1f522c1c91a92%2F0_124_4464_2679%2F4464.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Metallica's%20single%20Hardwired%20review%20%E2%80%93%20brutal%20riffs%20and%20precise%20playing%20signal%20a%20return%20to%20form&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Fmetallicas-single-hardwired-review-brutal-riffs-and-precise-playing-signal-a-return-to-form%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Metallica%27s%20single%20Hardwired%20review%20%E2%80%93%20brutal%20riffs%20and%20precise%20playing%20signal%20a%20return%20to%20form&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Fmetallicas-single-hardwired-review-brutal-riffs-and-precise-playing-signal-a-return-to-form%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf232d386090027f9d28d0408ba1f522c1c91a92%2F0_124_4464_2679%2F4464.jpg>
 James Hetfield of Metallica at Glastonbury in 2014. Photograph: Jonathan 
Short/AP 
In most respects, Hardwired is the best thing Metallica have released in a 
long time. Unfortunately, the forthcoming album will be a two-disc, 80-minute 
monster with only 12 tracks. This means some very long songs – something 
Metallica haven’t pulled off with any success in almost three decades. That 
news also means that Hardwired itself is something of a diversionary tactic. 
Most fans would explode with delight if the band released an album of 10 short, 
fast and furious songs, and preferably produced by someone with a faint clue 
about how metal records sound in the 21st century. Eighty minutes of 
meandering, half-hearted toss like the execrableLords of Summer 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s7SIYzXM6zA> – a stand-alone tune released in 
2014 – is not an appealing prospect, particularly if Metallica have stuck with 
theinexplicably inelegant and misguided production 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/sep/14/popandrock16> they applied to 
2003’s St Anger and Death Magnetic.

So, as ever, we cross our fingers and hope that Hardwired is no false dawn and 
that Metallica’s 10th album will be something approaching a genuine modern 
classic. Let’s face it, every metal fan on the planet will want to hear it 
anyway.

 