
Lars Ulrich, drums

When we recorded Ride the Lightning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/17/metallica-kill-em-all-ride-the-lightning-review-metal-giants-early-years-revisited>
 in 1984, our producer was Flemming Rasmussen, a Dane. He was definitely our 
kind of guy: quick on the draw, really smart. The exchange rate between the 
dollar and the krone was so much in our favour that we decided to record the 
next album in Denmark. Plus, if you’re going to transplant a bunch of 
20-year-old American kids anywhere in western Europe,Copenhagen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/copenhagen>’s not a bad place. Everyone 
speaks English, they’re very aware of American culture and there’s lots of good 
beer.

We had so much energy and belief. It’s interesting how instinctive things used 
to be, how impulsive. I don’t remember labouring over ideas or ways to do 
things. We just did it. When you’re 21, you just do shit. When you’re 51, 
everything is an ordeal.

Welcome Home (Sanitarium) came on and Iron Maiden’s manager said it was cool. 
It was as if God had spoken

All the songs had been written, except The Thing That Should Not Be 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bYJGt67Mwmo>, which we did in the studio. We 
had a tendency to look at our albums as a collection of different dynamics: 
there’s a fast song, a mid-tempo song, a ballad, an instrumental. It’s like 
food groups – you need your carbs, your protein, all of that. So we knew there 
was a spot for a slow, super-weighty song, and The Thing That Should Not Be 
came together easily.

We recorded two more songs, initially intended as B-sides: The Prince by 
Diamond Head, and The Money Will Roll Right In, by a California punk band 
called Fang. But we thought the punkish nature of the songs was being lost – 
they were becoming too polished. So we sacked them. Maybe one day they’ll see 
the light of day.

I remember mixing the record in LA. We used to hang out with Iron Maiden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/iron-maiden>’s manager, Rod Smallwood. He 
had a house two blocks from Sunset Boulevard that frequently became an 
after-hours hang. One night, our song Welcome Home (Sanitarium) came on in the 
background. Rod said: “That was really cool, can I hear it again?” It was as if 
God had spoken. I thought: “You know what? I think this is going to work out.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Draqyh8ndrSg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Draqyh8ndrSg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Draqyh8ndrSg&media=>
Metallica’s own behind-the-scenes footage of Welcome Home (Sanitarium) from 2013
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=raqyh8ndrSg> 
Flemming Rasmussen, producer


Whenever a group comes into the studio, they always want to be the biggest 
band in the world – but withMetallica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/metallica>, I felt like they could actually 
pull it off. And they did.

They were ambitious, hard working and always made good demos, so the songs 
were more or less done when they arrived in Copenhagen. The Thing That Should 
Not Be turned out great – I’m a sucker for those slow, grinding songs – and I 
have a fondness for Sanitarium because I messed around with a few things during 
the recording and it all worked out. During the intro guitars, if you listen on 
headphones, it starts out in mono then I flick a switch and everything goes 
into stereo. It’s kind of nice.

Nothing else matters: Metallica's haters never really understood the band
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/18/metallica-new-album-hardwired-to-self-destruct-haters>
We all had the same vision of how the album should sound, so we all pulled in 
the same direction. That doesn’t happen very often. I had a strong sense that 
we were making a classic record. It felt like a joyride. I don’t remember a 
single argument. That’s pretty unusual, too. Now people talk about what 
happened after theirBlack Album 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/18/metallica-new-album-hardwired-to-self-destruct-haters>
 – all the problems they had in the studio and the egos clashing – but when we 
made Master they were on the rise. Every time they made a record, it was bigger 
than the previous one. They were young and full of confidence. You can’t beat 
that.

It was Cliff Burton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/oct/02/squarepusher-10-songs-that-taught-me-how-to-play-bass>
’s last album [the bass player died in a bus crash in Sweden in 1986 during a 
subsequent world tour]. I remember how brilliant he was at arranging harmonies 
and the melodic side of everything. He had to hang around a lot while we sorted 
out the drums and rhythm guitars, and he was really, really bored. But when he 
came to record his parts he was out of this world.

I’ve always kept in touch with Metallica. We shared a special experience. And 
the albums we made still get me work today.

• Metallica: Back to the Front 
<https://metallica.com/store/books-mags/10340/metallica-back-to-the-front-hardcover-book>
 is published by Pocket Books. The albumHardwired … to Self-Destruct 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/17/metallica-hardwired-to-self-destruct-review>
 is also out now.
 