
The man in charge of the hunt for Malaysia Airlines flight MH370 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia-airlines-flight-mh370> believes it 
is “very likely” the plane will be found in the next four months, even as the 
multimillion dollar search effort enters what is likely to be its final stage.

 In the two years since the plane disappeared en route from Kuala Lumpur to 
Beijing with 227 passengers and 12 crew on board, its only confirmed trace has 
beena barnacle-encrusted flaperon wing that washed up on the French island of 
Réunion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/03/reunion-debris-flaperon-malaysia-airlines-flight-mh370-confirmed>
 last July.

MH370 search: 'rogue pilot' theory still on Australian investigators' radar
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/19/mh370-search-rogue-pilot-theory-still-on-australian-investigators-radar>
Two other pieces of flotsam, found on Réunion and Mozambique 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/mar/03/mh370-high-probability-mozambique-debris-is-from-boeing-777-video>
, are suspected to come from the plane, but are yet to be positively identified.

 Yet Martin Dolan, the head of the Australian authority tasked with scouring 
an expanse of seafloor for the wreck of the aircraft, is confident it will be 
found this year.

 Since 31 March 2014, the Australian Transport Safety Bureau has led the 
search effort for the plane, driven by what its investigators have always 
considered to be the most likely scenario – known as the “ghost flight” theory 
– that no-one was at the controls when the jet went down.

 The ATSB’s modelling shows that, after running out of fuel, the plane would 
have crashed in the southern Indian ocean, off the coast of Western Australia. 
As of this month, four ships have searched more than 85,000sq km of a long but 
narrow “seventh arc”, totalling 120,000sq km of seafloor – without success.

 To Dolan, that suggests that the plane is in the 30,000-odd sq km yet to be 
searched, and will be found when the operation concludes around July, if not 
before.

“It’s as likely on the last day [of the search] as on the first that the 
aircraft would be there. We’ve covered nearly three-quarters of the search 
area, and since we haven’t found the aircraft in those areas, that increases 
the likelihood that it’s in the areas we haven’t looked at yet.”

 At this late stage, Dolan is aware that his assurance could seem like blind 
optimism, or a bid to save face over a US $133.3m operation –paid for by 
<http://jacc.gov.au/about.aspx> Australia and Malaysia, plus $14.8m in funding 
and equipment from China – that has already been said to have failed.

The search zone – twice the size of Tasmania – shows a range of places the 
plane could be, some higher probability than others. “We now know that there’s 
a range of those places the aircraft isn’t in, but that hasn’t changed the 
overall probability that the aircraft is in the total search area,” Dolan said.

“To eliminate that from the search – assuming we don’t find the aircraft – we 
have the cover the whole area.”

The complexities surrounding the search are immense: the area is six days’ 
sail from the nearest shore and previously unmapped, with water depths of up to 
6,000m and underwater mountains, crevasses and 2,000m sheer drops. It is being 
covered at a rate of two knots – about walking pace.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fmh370-head-of-search-says-very-likely-plane-will-be-found-by%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f680de72573737112be7677d177f45ac162d061%2F0_0_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=MH370%3A%20head%20of%20search%20says%20'very%20likely'%20plane%20will%20be%20found%20by%20July&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fmh370-head-of-search-says-very-likely-plane-will-be-found-by%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=MH370%3A%20head%20of%20search%20says%20%27very%20likely%27%20plane%20will%20be%20found%20by%20July&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fmh370-head-of-search-says-very-likely-plane-will-be-found-by%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f680de72573737112be7677d177f45ac162d061%2F0_0_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 A waiter walks past a mural of flight MH370 outside Kuala Lumpur. Photograph: 
Joshua Paul/AP 
Given those uncertainties, Dolan can’t be specific about when the search will 
be completed. But he remains optimistic. “We’ve still got some serious area to 
cover, including some areas in the assessment that are highly prospective for 
finding the aircraft, and the aircraft’s very likely there.

“We’ll cover those very thoroughly and I hope our next conversation is going 
to be about how we found the aircraft.”

He draws his confidence from the robustness of investigators’ analysis of the 
plane’s last satellite communications. What looks like obscure technical 
language is expressing a “very reliable proposition”, he says, which the ATSB 
has sometimes struggled to communicate to laypeople. “And that is why there’s 
not always a good understanding of why we’re so confident in what we’re doing.”

 The model may be perfect, but it is only as accurate as its input data. And 
that’s where the ATSB’s singleminded approach falls short, says journalist Jeff 
Wise, a member of the so-called Independent Group (or IG) of professionals 
conducting their own work on the search for MH370. While the ATSB’s “ghost 
flight” theory is the most simple, most reasonable, most likely explanation of 
what happened, it is not the only one.

 “The ATSB has essentially spent $130m to rule that out,” he says. “And as the 
more reasonable hypotheses get ruled out, we have to move further down the list 
to look at ones that seem more outrageous.”

One such theory is that the plane’s systems were tampered with so that it only 
appeared to be going south. That factors into Wise’s own hypothesis, which he 
posted ina six-part blog post 
<http://jeffwise.net/the-spoof-part-1-why-a-speculative-scenario/> last 
February: that the plane was hijacked on Vladimir Putin’s instruction.

His “spoof” theory got “a respectful hearing but no converts among the IG”, he 
wrote ina 4,000-word feature for New York magazine 
<http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2015/02/jeff-wise-mh370-theory.html#>: 
“My gut still tells me I’m right, but my brain knows better than to trust my 
gut.”

With the end of the search in sight, every day that it does not throw up the 
plane casts doubt in the minds of even those who take the “ghost flight” theory 
as given. “Some of the people who believe it has to be in the search box are 
thinking they’ve probably missed it,” says Wise.


 The example he gives is of mowing a lawn: in theory, you can cut every single 
blade of grass. But it’s very easy to leave gaps, even if you are systematic 
and precise.

 Correspondence seen by Guardian Australia shows that a short section of a 
search line approximately 24km west of the seventh arc was missed when the 
vessel Fugro Discovery’s survey on 4 September was cut short by poor weather.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fmh370-head-of-search-says-very-likely-plane-will-be-found-by%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F637436bc60b51034a182393cde5cac50baa82ce8%2F0_155_3873_2325%2F3873.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=MH370%3A%20head%20of%20search%20says%20'very%20likely'%20plane%20will%20be%20found%20by%20July&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fmh370-head-of-search-says-very-likely-plane-will-be-found-by%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=MH370%3A%20head%20of%20search%20says%20%27very%20likely%27%20plane%20will%20be%20found%20by%20July&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fmh370-head-of-search-says-very-likely-plane-will-be-found-by%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F637436bc60b51034a182393cde5cac50baa82ce8%2F0_155_3873_2325%2F3873.jpg>
 Flight officer Rayan Gharazeddine on board a Royal Australian Air Force AP-3C 
Orion searches for missing Malaysia Airlines Flight MH370. Photograph: Rob 
Griffith/AP 
Independent investigators Richard Cole and Brock McEwen, who flagged the 
apparent oversight with the ATSB, were initially told that the area had been 
accounted for. But on 3 December, operational search program director Peter 
Foley emailed to correct that statement, clarifying that approximately 80km had 
been missed and was “earmarked to be rerun”.

It was later scanned, said Cole, though there was no evidence to suggest that 
this was a result of his or McEwen’s work.

 Dolan says the ATSB’s approach has been dynamic, transparent and and informed 
by regular correspondence with the Independent Group. “They provide a criticism 
and questioning that is very valuable to us. That’s one component of the 
wonders of the internet.”

 Less welcome is the correspondence – often “quite insistent”, he says – from 
those whose theories cast doubt on the operation “with no real reason”. “We 
will listen to anyone, but the more they insist on things that are inconsistent 
with the facts, the less we’re going to pay attention to them.”

The most promising development in some time may have been made by a 
58-year-old lawyer from Seattle, Washington, with no relevant professional 
expertise or accreditation.

Blaine Alan Gibson has spent much of the past year travelling in the Indian 
ocean region, attempting to solve the mystery of what happened to MH370. On 27 
February he made his most exciting discovery yet: a 1m piece of metal, washed 
up on a sand bank in Mozambique. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/03/mh370-debris-finder-says-he-thought-it-was-from-a-smaller-plane>

It will shortly arrive in Canberra for testing. Until that is complete, Dolan 
says he cannot comment other than to say he is “certainly very interested” in 
what the debris may prove to be. The location, at least, is consistent with 
drift analysis, and the Malaysian transport minister said on Twitter there was 
a “high possibility” it belonged to a Boeing 777.

 Based on the experience of the flaperon, Dolan warns to “not have too many 
expectations”: even if it is found to be from MH370, it would not necessarily 
lead to the plane.

In the absence of significant developments, the hunt for MH370 will end with 
the completion of the 120,000sq km zone, slated for around July. If the plane 
has not been found, says Dolan, “the alternative scenarios might apply”.

These include the “controlled glide” theory, in which someone was in charge of 
the plane when it went down, and would implicate an area three times as big. 
The Australian, Malaysian and Chinese governments have been fairly explicit 
that the cost of searching such a vast tranche of ocean floor is prohibitive.

Whether or not the plane is found in that last 30,000-odd sq kms of seabed, 
investigators will have to take the available evidence, however insubstantial, 
and put forward their best guess as to what happened in the final moments of 
flight MH370.

 “At some point, whatever the total of the evidence is, is going to have to be 
assessed and a conclusion reached as to the most likely solution to the 
mystery,” says Dolan.

 “That’s the way we see our job. That’s the way our Malaysian colleagues see 
their job. And that will happen. The only question really is, how extensive 
that information will be.”


 