
The families of those lost aboard a Malaysia Airlines flight that went missing 
in 2014 will themselves comb the beaches ofMadagascar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/madagascar> this week in the hope of finding 
debris from the plane.

The families, who arrived on the island in the Indian Ocean on Saturday, have 
criticised Malaysian investigators for not doing enough to find debris, which 
could reveal more clues about what happened.


​The man on a solo mission to find ​the wreckage o​f​ flight MH370
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/26/the-man-on-a-solo-mission-to-find-the-wreckage-of-flight-mh370>
Flight MH370, carrying 239 passengers and crew, disappeared on its way from 
Kuala Lumpur to Beijing on 8 March 2014, sparking a search in the southern 
Indian Ocean that is still going on.

But many families say they have been dismayed by the failure of the deep-sea 
debris search more than 1,000 miles off Australia’s western coast, and by what 
they say is an apparent lack of interest from Malaysian authorities in the 
growing amount of debris washing up on the other side of the Indian Ocean.


This week, clutching homemade fliers showing what the debris looks like and 
what to do with it if found, seven bereaved relatives from China, Malaysia and 
France will travel along Madagascar’s remote coastline to raise awareness among 
locals and conduct beachcombing searches.


Most paid for their own flight tickets and accommodation, but some of the 
Chinese contingent were funded by broadcast journalists who travelled with them.

Some of the families will travel to Ile Sainte Marie off the north-east coast 
where debris and potential personal effects are thought to have been found in 
the past week.

Ghislain Wattrelos, 53, who lost his wife and two teenage children on MH370, 
said he had quit his job as a marketing director to ensure he would one day be 
able to give his remaining 23-year-old son some answers.


“I’m involved in this quest for truth because I don’t want him to be involved. 
One day I will tell him what happened,” he said.


“I will stop searching when I have a definitive answer. I think we will get it 
one day. I do believe that many people in this world have a small part of the 
truth and I don’t think they can hide it forever.”

Grace Subathirai Nathan, a Malaysian lawyer who lost her mother, Anne Daisy, 
on MH370, said the families were alarmed by the suggestion that unless 
“credible new evidence” was found the inquiry could soon be wound down.

“I can’t understand how they can say that they lack evidence to progress the 
investigation when there’s debris washing up here all the time,” she said in 
the Malagasy capital where the families gathered on Sunday to begin a search 
for debris.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fmh370-recovered-wing-flap-yields-new-information-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Malaysian%20Airlines%20flight%20MH370%3A%20plane%20was%20out%20of%20control%20in%20last%20moments%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fmh370-recovered-wing-flap-yields-new-information-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Malaysian%20Airlines%20flight%20MH370%3A%20plane%20was%20out%20of%20control%20in%20last%20moments%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fmh370-recovered-wing-flap-yields-new-information-video&media=>
Malaysian Airlines flight MH370: plane was out of control in last moments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/nov/02/mh370-recovered-wing-flap-yields-new-information-video>
“There is still so much to learn from this mystery. They must show that lives 
matter more than money.”

Nathan said that for most families, it was impossible to accept the worst 
until they had more answers. “In the logical part of your mind you accept that 
the plane is in the ocean and they can’t have survived but emotionally it’s 
different,” she said.

“I still talk about my mother in the present tense, I can never say she is 
gone. We haven’t been able to live as if she isn’t coming back. Until I see 
concrete proof, it’s hard to bridge that gap.”

After the discovery of a flaperon on La Reunion in July investigators 
confirmed the plane was unlikely to have been downed by the pilots since the 
wings had not been prepared for landing.

Blaine Gibson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/26/the-man-on-a-solo-mission-to-find-the-wreckage-of-flight-mh370>
, a lawyer turned investigator who arrived on Madagascar six months ago, said 
he has seen debris from the plane used to fan a kitchen fire by a nine-year-old 
girl on the island.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fmh370-search-families-of-passengers-to-comb-madagascar-beaches-for-clues%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71d36eee448e072d450be1eb7ce9dd9a9bc74963%2F0_45_1386_832%2F1386.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=MH370%20search%3A%20families%20of%20passengers%20to%20comb%20Madagascar%20beaches%20for%20clues&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fmh370-search-families-of-passengers-to-comb-madagascar-beaches-for-clues%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=MH370%20search%3A%20families%20of%20passengers%20to%20comb%20Madagascar%20beaches%20for%20clues&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fmh370-search-families-of-passengers-to-comb-madagascar-beaches-for-clues%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71d36eee448e072d450be1eb7ce9dd9a9bc74963%2F0_45_1386_832%2F1386.jpg>
 Investigator Blaine Gibson shows off debris found in Madagascar that he 
believes could have come from MH370. Photograph: Blaine Gibson 
“It was light and it was solid and it was part of the plane,” said Gibson, 59. 
“When I put the word out around the village, another guy turned up with another 
piece he had been using as a washing board for clothes.”

Gibson said that when tested the debris, which includes parts of the wings, 
tail and a seat-back from inside the cabin, could determine mechanical failure 
or external attack.


“They can test for traces of explosive or any sort of shrapnel, if it was a 
high-speed forceful impact, which is what it looks like because the pieces are 
small and shredded,” he said.

“The one piece I held in my hand that made tears stream down my face was the 
seat-back with a coat hook still attached. It’s a striking piece of evidence, 
powerful and significant because they will be able to tell what type of impact 
it was in the cabin.”

Debris found by Gibson on a trip to Madagascar in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/16/mh370-debris-madagascar-malaysia-not-collected>
 had been languishing in storage there for months since, awaiting pickup by 
Malaysian authorities. Gibson said on 3 December that word of the MH370 family 
members’ trip had “finally” mobilised an investigator to collect it.

Aslam Khan, one of the Malaysian MH370 investigators who arrived in 
Antananarivo on Sunday to meet local officials and collect the debris, said it 
was incorrect to suggest the inquiry was winding down.

He said the criticism of the investigation team for its failure to collect the 
debris in the six months since it was found was “fair”, adding: “but my answer 
is that we are here now to collect the debris that is with the Madagascan 
authorities for examination”.


He said he would discuss with local officials whether it was worth funding a 
comprehensive search of the country’s 2,300-mile coast.


“As far as the investigation team of which I am a member is concerned we will 
go on until such time as we find some answers,” he said.

 