
Two pieces of debris discovered in Madagascar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/madagascar> by a man who previously found a 
part “almost certainly” from Malaysia Airlines Flight MH370 will be examined by 
investigators to see if it, too, came from the missing plane, Australian 
officials have said.

The Australian Transport Safety Bureau (ATSB) said on Friday it had been 
contacted by Blaine Gibson, an American adventurer who has been hunting for the 
aircraft over the past year. In March, Gibsonfound plane debris  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/03/mh370-debris-finder-says-he-thought-it-was-from-a-smaller-plane>
off the coast of Mozambique.

Of the items found on the Madagascan island of Nosy Boraha, one resembled an 
airplane seat part while another appeared to be a cover panel on a plane wing, 
the BBC reported.
Richard Westcott (@BBCwestcott) 
Has Blaine Gibson found more of MH370 Madagascar? It's possible. Not confirmed 
by experts yet....pic.twitter.com/yXGjk7e8Wv <https://t.co/yXGjk7e8Wv>
 <https://twitter.com/BBCwestcott/status/740945746913046528> June 9, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/BBCwestcott/status/740945746913046528> 
Three more pieces of debris possibly from MH370, says Australia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/26/three-more-pieces-of-debris-possibly-from-mh370-says-australia>
In a separate development, a piece of debris has been found on Kangaroo Island 
off the coast of southern Australia. The item, discovered among seaweed and 
driftwood, resembles part of a plane, with the words “caution no step” visible, 
according to footage on Australia’s Channel Seven.

However, the TV channel reported the item might have come from a Cessna that 
went down several kilometres off the island’s coast in 2002.

The fate of the passenger jet, which is presumed to have crashed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia-airlines-flight-mh370> at sea after 
disappearing en route from Kuala Lumpur to Beijing with 239 passengers and crew 
on board in March 2014, remains a mystery.

“The ATSB has been advised and has received photos of the item [on Kangaroo 
Island],” an ATSB spokesman told AFP. “It needs to be examined before coming to 
any conclusion.”

The bureau spokesman said images of the Madagascar debris were being studied. 
“We have seen the photos and governments are being consulted on how best to 
have that examined,” he added.
MH370 possible debris locator 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/maps/embed/jun/2016-06-10T04:33:35.html> 
Excluding the most recent finds, eight pieces of debris have been discovered 
thousands of kilometres from the current search zone far off the west 
Australian coast.

They are presumed to have drifted there with five of the parts identified as 
definitely or probably from the Boeing 777, while three others are still being 
examined.

The first concrete evidence that MH370 likely met a tragic end was when a 
two-metre-long (7ft) wing part 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/07/mh370-search-second-possible-plane-part-found-on-reunion-coast>
 known as a flaperon washed up in the French overseas territory of La Réunion 
in July 2015.

Australian authorities have since said two pieces of debris found in 
Mozambique were “almost certainly from MH370” and two fragments that came 
ashore in SouthAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> and Mauritius 
were also likely to be from the jet.

Australia is leading the painstaking search for MH370 in the remote Indian 
Ocean, but wild weather has not allowed the three ships involved to make any 
progress in recent weeks.

So far 105,000 square kilometres (40,500 square miles) of the designated 
120,000-square-kilometre seafloor search zone has been covered without success.

If nothing turns up once the area is fully scoured, the search will be 
abandoned, Australia, Malaysia and China – the countries that most of the 
passengers came from – have jointly said.

The ATSB said Malaysian authorities had procedures in place to examine any 
suspected debris, but Australia would help if asked.

Associated Press and Agence France-Presse contributed to this report.
 