
Senior aviation officials from Australia, Malaysia and China are meeting in 
Kuala Lumpur to discussthe future of the search for missing aircraft MH370 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/17/mh370-search-decreasing-possibility-plane-will-be-found-say-authorities>
 that disappeared in 2014.

Australia’s transport minister, Darren Chester, said the tripartite meeting of 
officials on Monday and Tuesday would pave the way for a final 
ministerial-level meeting after the 2 July federal election.

The three countries previously agreed that in the absence of credible new 
information, the search would be wound up once the 120,000 square kilometre 
zone in the southern Indian Ocean was scoured.

MH370: two years on, mystery still no closer to a solution
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/08/mh370-two-years-on-malaysia-airlines-mystery-still-no-closer-to-a-solution>
The search for the Boeing 777 is in its final phase, with 15,000sq km yet to 
be covered, and is being delayed by winter weather.

Earlier this month, the Australian government’s Joint Agency Coordination 
Centre said crew on one of the vessels had measured an 18-metre wave and rough 
seas were hindering their ability to work effectively.

“We now expect the search will conclude in the next eight weeks,” Mr Chester 
said.

“I remain hopeful of a successful outcome.”

Several pieces of debris that authorities say are almost certainly from the 
plane have been recovered during the past year. The first item, apiece of wing 
known as a flaperon 
<https://www.google.com.au/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=2&ved=0ahUKEwiNhqjsm7bNAhVT42MKHdAfBpsQFggiMAE&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F30%2Fmh370-search-what-is-the-debris-found-in-la-reunion&usg=AFQjCNHlomVXFzx8FXmY6vZXfBeysbr7kg&sig2=bRQjK7oaeQ623pbsGmX0fw>
,was found on Reunion island 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/03/reunion-debris-flaperon-malaysia-airlines-flight-mh370-confirmed>
 in July.

Other pieces have been discovered on the shorelines of South Africa, Rodrigues 
Island and Mozambique 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/26/three-more-pieces-of-debris-possibly-from-mh370-says-australia>
.

A piece of possible plane debris was recently found on South Australia’s 
Kangaroo Island and is being examined at Australian Transport Safety Bureau 
laboratories in Canberra.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F10%2Fmalaysia-airlines-flight-mh370-debris-australia-kangaroo-island-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Possible%20MH370%20debris%20found%20on%20Australia's%20Kangaroo%20Island%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F10%2Fmalaysia-airlines-flight-mh370-debris-australia-kangaroo-island-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Possible%20MH370%20debris%20found%20on%20Australia%27s%20Kangaroo%20Island%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F10%2Fmalaysia-airlines-flight-mh370-debris-australia-kangaroo-island-video&media=>
Possible MH370 debris found on Australia’s Kangaroo Island 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/jun/10/malaysia-airlines-flight-mh370-debris-australia-kangaroo-island-video>
An American lawyer Blaine Gibson, who previously found debris in Mozambique, 
has also reported finding more objects in Madagascar.

Malaysia’s transport minister Datuk Seri Liow Tiong Lai last month said 
searches along African coastlines should be increased in light of the 
discoveries.

MH370 search: 'rogue pilot' theory still on Australian investigators' radar
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/19/mh370-search-rogue-pilot-theory-still-on-australian-investigators-radar>
Voice370, a network of families of passengers, agrees.

“We wish to express our concern that to date, we have not heard of any 
organised plan to systematically comb these far dispersed localities,” the 
group said.

“This task is too important to be left to some chance discovery by private 
citizens such as locals/tourists.”

They say the search must go on and have urged Boeing to contribute to the 
costs.

The aircraft disappeared in March 2014 with 239 people on board.
 