
Australia is mounting a case for a new search effort for MH370 bolstered by 
“important new information” about what investigators believe to have happened 
at the end of the missingMalaysia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia> 
Airlines flight.

A new report 
<http://www.atsb.gov.au/media/5771773/ae-2014-054_debris-update_2nov2016.pdf> 
by the Australian Transport Safety Bureau (ATSB) suggests the plane was in a 
“high and increasing rate of descent” at the time of its final satellite 
communications, and that the right outboard wing flapfound on Pemba island 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/15/malaysia-confirms-debris-near-tanzania-missing-mh370-plane>
 was not deployed at the time of the crash.
What happened to MH370? 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=16ce3f4a-6672-4dc3-83fb-97c07bc10cab>
Both are consistent with an uncontrolled plane plummeting into the ocean in 
the final moments of a flight in which it was not configured for a landing or 
ditching.

The future of the hunt for MH370 hinges on whether this constitutes credible 
new evidence about the location of the wreck. A spokesman for the ATSB declined 
to say.

But the ATSB is hosting a three-day meeting with other experts from Wednesday 
to attempt to finalise a proposal to shift the search for the missing plane 
further north.

The ATSB has been leading the hunt for MH370 in a 120,000 sq km area of the 
southern Indian ocean, with the remaining 10,000 sq kmdue to be completed early 
next year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/19/hunt-for-mh370-will-go-extend-into-2017-says-search-team>
.

As that venture nears completion, the likelihood of finding the wreckage has 
dwindled, and there have been calls from experts for the search effort to be 
shifted further north – calls to which the ATSB has now given credence.

The report 
<http://www.atsb.gov.au/media/5771773/ae-2014-054_debris-update_2nov2016.pdf> 
released on Wednesday pointed to drift analysis and the times and locations at 
which debris has been found as evidence that the crash site was likely to be 
“within the current search area, or further north”.


Simulations have also shown some northernmost areas “to be less likely” to be 
the site of the plane’s wreckage than others, and ongoing analysis is expected 
to further refine those results.

There are now more than 20 items of debris of interest to investigators, 
including seven that have been examined anddetermined to have come from MH370 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/07/mh370-officials-say-piece-of-aircraft-wing-found-on-mauritius-is-from-missing-plane>
. All were found on coastlines of the western Indian Ocean, including 
Madagascar, Mauritius, Réunion and Rodrigues.

No debris has made landfall on Tasmania or Western Australia, effectively 
ruling out a crash site south of the search area.

It is not clear whether efforts to extend the search will be accepted. At a 
tripartite meeting in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/22/missing-flight-mh370-hunt-for-debris-will-not-be-extended>
, the transport ministers for Australia, Malaysia and China agreed that the 
search effort would be suspended indefinitely with the completion of the 
current area.

The MH370 first principles review summit currently under way in Canberra is 
understood to be aiming to reach a robust and fully costed proposal for the 
Australian transport minister, Darren Chester, to take to his counterparts in 
Malaysia andChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> – the destination 
of flight MH370 and home to most of its 227 passengers – to persuade them to 
agree to renew the search.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fmh370-australia-new-search-data-plane-plummeted-ocean%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb5c6ec03f2e8f48cf3152e25869c3025ca42d76%2F0_0_2800_2100%2Fmaster%2F2800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=MH370%3A%20data%20suggests%20plane%20was%20out%20of%20control%20as%20it%20plummeted%20into%20ocean&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fmh370-australia-new-search-data-plane-plummeted-ocean%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=MH370%3A%20data%20suggests%20plane%20was%20out%20of%20control%20as%20it%20plummeted%20into%20ocean&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fmh370-australia-new-search-data-plane-plummeted-ocean%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb5c6ec03f2e8f48cf3152e25869c3025ca42d76%2F0_0_2800_2100%2Fmaster%2F2800.jpg>
 Analysis of the recovered right outboard wing flap section (inverted) of MH370 
suggested it was not set for landing at the time it separated from the plane. 
Photograph: AFP/Getty Images 
Chester said in a statement on Wednesday that the fresh ATSB report contained 
“important new information on what we believe happened at the end of MH370’s 
flight”.


He said the summit would review “all the available data and analysis 
associated with the search to date … inform the remainder of the search effort, 
and develop guidance for any future search operations”.

Both Chester and Greg Hood, the chief commissioner of the ATSB, were 
unavailable to speak to Guardian Australia on Wednesday. But a spokeswoman for 
Chester said the review summit was to review the findings so far, and expanding 
the search was not on the agenda.

Even if the likely site of the plane’s wreck was determined, any new search 
effort outside of the current area would have to be agreed upon by the three 
governments involved.

The challenge would likely be persuading China and Malaysia to contribute to 
the cost of a new search,reportedly in the region of AU$30m 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-11-02/mh370-search-may-be-extended/7986064> 
(£18.7m). Almost AU$200m has been spent on the underwater operation currently 
underway, with the bulk of the expense shouldered by Malaysia and Australia.


News that the ATSB was attempting to define a new search area, despite a lack 
of any funding commitment,was first reported in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/19/search-for-mh370-may-be-extended-by-australia-if-funding-can-be-found>
. “If it is not in the area which we defined, it’s going to be somewhere else 
in the near vicinity,” Hood told Associated Press at the time.

The ATSB has not requested any new funding, the spokesman told Guardian 
Australia.

​The man on a solo mission to find ​the wreckage o​f​ flight MH370
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/26/the-man-on-a-solo-mission-to-find-the-wreckage-of-flight-mh370>
Though Australia is leading the search for the wreckage of the plane, Malaysia 
holds overall responsibility for the investigation. Representatives are 
understood to be present at the review summit in Canberra, though not the 
Malaysian transport minister.

Its authorities have been accused of a lack of urgency with potential pieces 
of plane debris left tolanguish in storage, awaiting pickup, for months 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/16/mh370-debris-madagascar-malaysia-not-collected>
.

In a surprise development on Tuesday, Malaysia Airlines granted lawyers in 
Sydney representing victims’ families access to a huge number of company 
records, including maintenance log books and medical certificates of the crew.

The documents have thus far only been released to the Malaysian police report 
into MH370, which remains secret.

John Dawson, a partner at Carneys Lawyers, told Reuters that he had been 
advised he would receive the information by the end of November. Guardian 
Australia has contacted Dawson for comment.
 