
The Dutch company leading the underwater hunt for Malaysia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia> Airlines jet MH370 has said it 
could have been looking for the plane in the wrong part of the Indian Ocean for 
the past two years.


The Boeing 777 airliner disappeared in March 2014 with 239 passengers and crew 
onboard en route to Beijing from Kuala Lumpur, prompting an exhaustive search 
of sea bed roughly the size of Greece.


But engineers from the Dutch group Fugro said on Thursday that they now 
believe the plane may have glided down rather than dived in the final moments, 
meaning they have been scouring the wrong patch of ocean for two years.

 That search, over 120,000 sq kms of the southern Indian Ocean off Western 
Australia, is expected to end in three months and could be called off following 
a meeting of officials from Malaysia, China and Australia on Friday. So far, 
nothing has been found although parts of the planehave been found washed up in 
east Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/10/mh370-search-two-more-pieces-of-plane-debris-found-in-madagascar>
.

MH370: two years on, mystery still no closer to a solution
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/08/mh370-two-years-on-malaysia-airlines-mystery-still-no-closer-to-a-solution>
 “If it’s not there, it means it’s somewhere else,” Fugro project director 
Paul Kennedy told Reuters.

 While Kennedy does not exclude extreme possibilities that could have made the 
plane impossible to spot in the search zone, he and his team argue a more 
likely option is the plane glided down – meaning it was manned at the end – and 
made it beyond the area marked out by calculations from satellite images.

 “If it was manned it could glide for a long way,” Kennedy said. “You could 
glide it for further than our search area is, so I believe the logical 
conclusion will be, well, maybe, that is the other scenario.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fmh370-hunt-team-leading-search-says-they-may-have-been-looking-in-wrong-place%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62b7e9963c2348b00b53b6fe906fd70b5444b024%2F0_115_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=MH370%20search%20team%20says%20they%20may%20have%20been%20looking%20in%20wrong%20place&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fmh370-hunt-team-leading-search-says-they-may-have-been-looking-in-wrong-place%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=MH370%20search%20team%20says%20they%20may%20have%20been%20looking%20in%20wrong%20place&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fmh370-hunt-team-leading-search-says-they-may-have-been-looking-in-wrong-place%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62b7e9963c2348b00b53b6fe906fd70b5444b024%2F0_115_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 A map showing the search area in the Indian ocean for missing Malaysia 
Airlines aircraft MH370. Photograph: Joint Agency Coordination Centre/PR IMAGE 
Fugro later clarified in a s 
<https://www.fugro.com/media-centre/news/fulldetails/2016/07/21/correcting-the-record>
tatement 
<https://www.fugro.com/media-centre/news/fulldetails/2016/07/21/correcting-the-record>
 that it believed the search area to have been well defined based on the data 
available.

“In short, we have been thoroughly looking in the most probable place – and 
that is the right place to search.”

But any doubts that the search teams are looking in the right place will fuel 
calls for all data to be made publicly available so that academics and rival 
companies can pursue an “open source” solution – a collaborative public answer 
to the airline industry’s greatest mystery.

 Fugro’s controlled glide hypothesis is also the first time officials have 
leant some support to contested theories that someone was in control during the 
flight’s final moments.

 Since the crash there have been competing theories over whether one, both or 
no pilots were in control, whether it was hijacked – or whether all aboard 
perished and the plane was not controlled at all when it hit the water. Adding 
to the mystery, investigators believe someone may have deliberately switched 
off the plane’s transponder before diverting it thousands of miles.

 The glide view is not supported by the investigating parties made up of 
Boeing, french company Thales, the US National Transportation Safety Board, 
British satellite company Inmarsat, the UK Air Accidents Investigation Branch 
and the Australian Defence Science and Technology Organisation.

The meeting on Friday between officials from China, Australia and Malaysia is 
expected to discussthe future of the search 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/17/mh370-search-decreasing-possibility-plane-will-be-found-say-authorities>
. The three governments have previously agreed that unless any new credible 
evidence arises the search would not be extended, despite calls from victims’ 
families.


MH370 search: 'rogue pilot' theory still on Australian investigators' radar
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/19/mh370-search-rogue-pilot-theory-still-on-australian-investigators-radar>
 Any further search would require a fresh round of funding from the three 
governments on top of the almost $137m that has already been spent, making it 
the most expensive in aviation history.

 Deciding the search area in 2014, authorities assumed the plane had no 
“inputs” during its final descent, meaning there was no pilot or no conscious 
pilot. They believe it was on auto-pilot and spiralled when it ran out of fuel.

 But Kennedy said a skilled pilot could glide the plane approximately 120 
miles (193 km) from its cruising altitude after running out of fuel. One pilot 
told Reuters it would be slightly less than that.

 For the aircraft to continue gliding after fuel has run out, someone must 
manually put the aircraft into a glide – nose down with controlled speed.

 “If you lose all power, the auto-pilot kicks out. If there is nobody at the 
controls, the aircraft will plummet down,” said a captain with experience 
flying Boeing 777s.

 Fugro works on a “confidence level” of 95%, a statistical measurement used, 
in Fugro’s case, to indicate how certain the plane debris was not in the area 
they have already combed, a seabed peppered with steep cliffs and underwater 
volcanoes.

 “The end-of-flight scenarios are absolutely endless,” Fugro managing director 
Steve Duffield said. “Which wing ran out of fuel first, did it roll this way or 
did it tip that way?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fmh370-hunt-team-leading-search-says-they-may-have-been-looking-in-wrong-place%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F637436bc60b51034a182393cde5cac50baa82ce8%2F0_0_3873_2576%2F3873.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=MH370%20search%20team%20says%20they%20may%20have%20been%20looking%20in%20wrong%20place&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fmh370-hunt-team-leading-search-says-they-may-have-been-looking-in-wrong-place%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=MH370%20search%20team%20says%20they%20may%20have%20been%20looking%20in%20wrong%20place&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fmh370-hunt-team-leading-search-says-they-may-have-been-looking-in-wrong-place%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F637436bc60b51034a182393cde5cac50baa82ce8%2F0_0_3873_2576%2F3873.jpg>
 Fight officer Rayan Gharazeddine on board a Royal Australian Air Force plane 
searching for wreckage from MH370 in the southern Indian Ocean. Photograph: Rob 
Griffith/AP 
 The Australian Transport Safety Bureau (ATSB), the agency coordinating the 
search, has consistently defended the defined search zone. It did not 
immediately respond to questions over whether it was assessing the controlled 
glide theory.

 Authorities used data provided by Inmarsat to locate the likely plunge point 
through communication between the plane and satellite ground station.

 “All survey data collected from the search for missing flight MH370 will be 
released,” an ATSB spokesman said.

 * This story was amended on 22 July 2016 to include the later clarification 
from Fugro.
 