
Debris thought to be from the missing Malaysia Airlines flight MH370 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia-airlines-flight-mh370> has been 
languishing in storage for months awaiting collection by Malaysian authorities, 
prompting questions about the ongoing search effort.

Scorched debris could suggest missing MH370 plane suffered fire
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/14/scorched-debris-missing-mh370-plane-fire>
Blaine Gibson, the US independent investigator who has previously discovered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/03/mh370-debris-finder-says-he-thought-it-was-from-a-smaller-plane>
 debrisconfirmed to be from MH370 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/24/mh370-debris-found-in-mozambique-almost-certainly-from-missing-plane>
, found several further pieces on beaches in Madagascar in June that that he 
believed to be from the missing plane.

He told the Guardian that he notified Australian and Malaysian authorities, 
but the items have not been picked up byMalaysia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia>, which oversees the retrieval and 
analysis of evidence in the plane’s disappearance.

Six pieces of possible aircraft debris remain with authorities in Madagascar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/madagascar>, awaiting collection, Gibson 
said, three months after he discovered them. There were also “possible personal 
effects” of the plane’s passengers, he added.

Gibson has been investigating the plane’s disappearance for more than a year 
and has found several pieces of debris on beaches bordering the Indian ocean. 
He delivered five separate finds to analysts at the Australian Transport Safety 
Bureau (ATSB) in Canberrain person on Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/14/scorched-debris-missing-mh370-plane-fire>
.

“I brought it myself this time because I was coming [to Australia] and because 
the Madagascar authorities have been waiting for three months for them to pick 
[the other pieces] up,” Gibson told Guardian Australia in Sydney.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fmh370-debris-madagascar-malaysia-not-collected%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7b84ea2346e0ae8b95f5f940ac19c0f2ecef611%2F0_0_2616_3500%2F2616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=MH370%3A%20debris%20found%20in%20Madagascar%20in%20June%20still%20not%20collected%20by%20Malaysia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fmh370-debris-madagascar-malaysia-not-collected%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=MH370%3A%20debris%20found%20in%20Madagascar%20in%20June%20still%20not%20collected%20by%20Malaysia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fmh370-debris-madagascar-malaysia-not-collected%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7b84ea2346e0ae8b95f5f940ac19c0f2ecef611%2F0_0_2616_3500%2F2616.jpg>
 The ‘no step’ debris found by Blaine Gibson in Mozambique, later confirmed to 
be a horizontal stabiliser panel segment from the right-hand tail of MH370. 
Photograph: Reuters 
The ATSB, which is coordinating the underwater search for the plane, said it 
was seeking advice from Malaysian authorities on how to proceed with the pieces.

Dato’ Sri Azharuddin Abdul Rahman, the director-general of the Malaysian 
department of civil aviation,confirmed in a statement 
<http://www.themalaymailonline.com/what-you-think/article/process-must-take-its-course-on-possible-mh370-debris-department-of-civil-a>
 published in the Malay Mail this week that the authority had been notified of 
the debris found by Gibson in Madagascar.

He said his department was seeking help from the Malaysia high commissioner in 
Pretoria, South Africa, to retrieve the debris from the relevant authorities 
and courier it to Malaysia.

Malaysian investigators would then determine whether or not to send it to the 
ATSB for further analysis in Canberra.

The department also noted that it was “in constant touch with the relevant 
authorities … as more debris are coming on to land”.


It added: “We wish to urge all parties to allow the experts to conduct the 
verification processes.”

Guardian Australia’s requests for further clarification were responded to with 
the same statement.

Gibson was critical of the pace of the Malaysian authorities’ response, but 
acknowledged they had now pledged to act.

“I’ll believe that when I see that, but there is some reaction from Malaysia, 
there is some movement. So I don’t want to be too critical of them now if 
they’re fixing it.”

He had appealed to the Malaysian prime minister, Najib Razak, in a post to 
Facebook on 5 July: “I found some pieces of your plane about a month ago. 
Please send your people to come pick them up and investigate … and if they 
don’t, let’s request ATSB and ICAO [International Civil Aviation Organisation] 
to please do it.”

Malaysia confirms debris found near Tanzania is from missing MH370 jet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/15/malaysia-confirms-debris-near-tanzania-missing-mh370-plane>
Gibson has found several items of debris that have been linked by 
investigators to MH370, includinga tail part that came to be 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/03/mh370-debris-finder-says-he-thought-it-was-from-a-smaller-plane>
 known as the “No Step”, washed up in Mozambique in March.

Six pieces of debris have so far been confirmed as MH370 wreckage.

The ATSB has previously analysed several pieces and concluded that four of 
them were “almost certainly” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/12/mh370-two-new-aircraft-fragments-almost-certainly-from-missing-plane>
 from the missing plane.

In addition, on Thursday it said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/15/malaysia-confirms-debris-near-tanzania-missing-mh370-plane>
 a wing flap found on Pemba island, off the coast of Tanzania, in June “was 
confirmed as originating from the aircraft registered 9M-MRO and operating as 
MH370”.

A flaperon found on Réunion Island off the coast of Madagascar in July last 
year was the first piece to beformally identified 
<http://a%20piece%20of%20aircraft%20wing%20found%20on%20the%20shore%20of%20r%C3%A9union%20island%20in%20the%20indian%20ocean%20has%20been%20formally%20identified%20as%20part%20of%20the%20wreckage%20of%20malaysia%20airlines%20flight%20mh370%2C%20a%20french%20prosecutor%20has%20said./>
 as part of the plane wreckage.
 