
Australian officials have confirmed that data recovered from a home flight 
simulator owned by the captain ofMalaysia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia> Airlines flight 370 showed that 
someone had used the device to plot a course to the southern Indian Ocean, 
where the missing jet is believed to have crashed.


Flight MH370: modelling shows debris may be further north, say scientists
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/28/flight-mh370-modelling-shows-debris-may-be-further-north-say-scientists>
The Australian Transport Safety Bureau (ATSB), which is leading the search for 
the plane off Australia’s west coast, told the Guardian on Thursday that “the 
MH370 captain’s flight simulator showed someone had plotted a course to the 
southern Indian Ocean”.

It is not known whether the simulation was made by Captain Zaharie Ahmad Shah, 
but the simulator was in his home.


The ATSB said confirmation of the plotted course did not prove theories that 
the captain planned a deliberate murder-suicide. The agency had previouslysaid 
in a statement on Monday there was no evidence 
<https://www.atsb.gov.au/newsroom/correcting-the-record/> to support the claim 
made by Byron Bailey, a former pilot, which was reported inthe Australian 
newspaper 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/news/nation/its-time-for-senate-probe-into-whats-known-on-flight-mh370/news-story/5162f543ef81b06f3c898f5c4c739318>
.

On Thursday, it warned against inferring too much from the data found on 
Zaharie’s simulator.

“The simulator information shows only the possibility of planning. It does not 
reveal what happened on the night of its disappearance nor where the aircraft 
is located.

“For the purposes of defining the underwater search area, the relevant facts 
and analysis most closely match a scenario in which there was no pilot 
intervening in the latter stages of the flight.”

The best available evidence of the whereabouts of MH370, the ATSB statement 
concluded, remained the last satellite communications with the aircraft, which 
were used to inform the area of ocean that has been searched for the past two 
years.

The Joint Agency Coordination Centre (Jacc), which oversees the Australian 
government’s response to MH370, saidthe same in its operational update 
<http://jacc.gov.au/families/operational_reports/opsearch-update-20160727.aspx> 
on Wednesday.

But the Australian authorities’ confirmation appears to directly contradict 
assertions from Malaysian officials that no such route had been found on the 
captain’s simulator.

New York Magazine reported last week 
<http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2016/07/did-australia-confirm-mh370-simulator-story.html>
, prior to Bailey’s report in the Australian, that an FBI analysis showed 
Zaharie had conducted a simulated flight to the southern Indian Ocean less than 
a month before the plane vanished along a similar route.


Missing flight MH370: hunt for debris likely to be suspended
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/22/missing-flight-mh370-hunt-for-debris-will-not-be-extended>
The Malaysian transport minister Liow Tiong Lai insisted there was no evidence 
to prove that Zaharie had used the simulator to plot the same course as the 
missing airliner.

“We are not aware of that and there is no evidence that was flying on that 
route,” he said. “As of today, the criminal investigation is still ongoing. So 
we leave it to the investigation team to detect whatever evidence they have.”

Regarding to FBI’s report on the evidence. “We don’t have the evidence as of 
now, if you have the evidence please hand it over to the criminal investigation 
team.”


An ATSB spokesman said he could not comment on behalf of Malaysia, but he did 
confirm the FBI analysis had taken place.


Earlier this week, Australian prime minister Malcolm Turnbull declined to 
offer any details on what evidence had been found on the simulator, saying it 
was a matter for Malaysia, which is leading the investigation into the missing 
plane.

“I just note that even if the simulator information does show that it is 
possible or very likely that the captain planned this shocking event, it does 
not tell us the location of the aircraft,” Turnbull told reporters.

Officials have been stymied in their efforts to explain why the Boeing 777 
carrying 239 people veered so far off course during a flight from Kuala Lumpur 
to Beijing on 8 March 2014. Theories have ranged from a deliberate 
murder-suicide plot by one of the pilots, to a hijacking, to a mechanical 
catastrophe.
Map of the search area 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/07/mh370debris-zip/giv-12515sZqkWsSNKOPN/>
A two-year search of a 120,000 sq km arc of the southern Indian ocean west of 
Australia has so far failed to find any evidence of the missing aircraft, 
although some debris has been discovered washed up in Tanzania, South Africa 
and La Réunion.


Officials from Malaysia, Australia and China agreed last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/22/missing-flight-mh370-hunt-for-debris-will-not-be-extended>
 that the hunt would be suspended if evidence of the missing jet is not found 
in the current search area. Less than 10,000 sq km of that area remain, though 
progress is slow due to poor weather conditions. That search is due to be 
completed within months.

Associated Press contributed to this report.
 