
Relatives of passengers who were aboard flight MH370 when it disappeared will 
travel toMadagascar <https://www.theguardian.com/world/madagascar> next month 
in the hope of rekindling efforts to find and recover seaborne debris from the 
Malaysia Airlines jet.

A next-of-kin association called Voice370 has repeatedly complained about the 
lack of a coordinated search in the western Indian ocean and along the African 
coast despite the recovery there of several pieces of debris which were either 
confirmed or declared highly likely to have come from MH370.


MH370: data suggests plane was out of control as it plummeted into ocean
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/02/mh370-australia-new-search-data-plane-plummeted-ocean>
“Despite these hugely important finds, there has been no systematic, organised 
search by any responsible party,” the group said. “This leaves the NOKs [next 
of kin] no other choice except to take it upon ourselves to do something to 
find answers and closure.”

Seven Voice370 next-of-kin will visit Madagascar December 3-11 to raise 
awareness, urge search efforts by local organisations and the public, and look 
for debris themselves.

The Boeing 777 jet was carrying 239 passengers and crew when it disappeared en 
route from Kuala Lumpur to Beijing on 8 March 2014.


It is believed to have crashed into the Indian Ocean, but an extensive 
deep-sea hunt off Australia’s west coast has so far failed to find a single 
piece of debris from the plane, with the search set to end by early 2017.

Many families are sceptical the right area is being searched, and Voice370 has 
previously called for a full public re-examination of satellite data that was 
used to determine the site of the suspected crash.

MH370 search: two more pieces of debris from plane found in Madagascar
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/10/mh370-search-two-more-pieces-of-plane-debris-found-in-madagascar>
The scattered seaborne fragments of MH370 found closer to Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/16/mh370-debris-madagascar-malaysia-not-collected>
 confirmed the plane went down but have shed no light on what caused the jumbo 
jet to inexplicably divert off-course.

The first piece of debris found from MH370 – a two-metre wing part known as a 
flaperon – washed up on the French Indian ocean island of Reunion in July 2015.

Since then a range of debris linked to the flight has been found along western 
Indian ocean shorelines.

Amateur investigator Blaine Gibson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/26/the-man-on-a-solo-mission-to-find-the-wreckage-of-flight-mh370>
, a lawyer from Seattle who has travelled the world trying to solve the MH370 
mystery, has also recovered other possible MH370 debris, but authorities have 
yet to confirm if any of the pieces belong to the missing plane.

A report released this month by the Australian Transport Safety Bureau, which 
is leading the search, said theplane was likely out of control 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/02/mh370-australia-new-search-data-plane-plummeted-ocean>
 when it plunged into the ocean with its wing flaps not prepared for landing, 
casting doubt on theories a pilot was still in charge.
 