
So after more than four years of Scotland Yard investigations, and months of 
agonising within the Crown Prosecution Service, ministers andMI6 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/mi6> are getting off scot-free over the 
abduction and subsequent torture of two suspected Islamists.

Abdel Hakim Belhaj and Sami al-Saadi were enemies of Muammar Gaddafi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/muammar-gaddafi> delivered to Tripoli, 
courtesy of MI6 and the CIA, in 2004 when Tony Blair’s government was cuddling 
up to the Libyan dictator. Gaddafi had promised to abandon his nuclear and 
chemical weapons programme and as a reward for British friendship – including 
the secret rendition of his opponents – he agreed to huge and lucrative oil 
deals for BP.

CPS will not bring charges against MI6 over rendition of Libyan families
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/08/cps-will-not-bring-charges-against-mi6-over-rendition-of-libyan-families>
In one of the deepest ironies in the history of British intelligence, clear 
evidence of British involvement in the rendition of Belhaj, Saadi and their 
families to Tripoli’s jails emerged in 2001. They were spelled out in a letter 
from Sir Mark Allen, then head of MI6 counter-terrorism operations, to Moussa 
Koussa, Gaddafi’s intelligence chief, written in March 2004. In it, Allen 
trumpeted MI6’s role in the operation. The letter was found among documents in 
Moussa’s office destroyed by Nato bombs.

Saadi accepted £2.2m compensation from the British government. Belhaj chose to 
fight on, demanding an apology. The supreme court is soon due to deliver 
judgment on his claim that Britain must take responsibility for his abduction. 
Lawyers for the government argue that British courts have no right to hear the 
case since the agents of foreign intelligence agencies – notably theCIA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/cia> – were also involved in the operation.

Eliza Manningham-Buller, then head of MI5 – MI6’s sister service responsible 
for British security as opposed to spying abroad – was so angry with what MI6 
had been up to, that,as the Guardian reported last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/01/mi5-chief-right-to-be-disgusted-over-mi6-role-rendition-blair>
, she fired off a letter to Blair complaining about it, saying its actions may 
have compromised the security and safety of MI5 officers and their informants. 
Such was her fury that she ejected MI6 staff from MI5’s headquarters, Thames 
House.

After the Allen letter came to light, Blair said he had “no recollection at 
all” of the Libyan rendition.Jack Straw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jackstraw>, then foreign secretary 
responsible for MI6, told MPs in 2005 – a year after the Libyan abductions – 
that “there is simply no truth in the claims that the United Kingdom has been 
involved in rendition full stop.” After the Allen letter emerged, Straw said: 
“No foreign secretary can know all the details of what its intelligence 
agencies are doing at any one time.”

Government officials have insisted that the operation was in response to 
“ministerially authorised government policy”. Sir Richard Dearlove, head of MI6 
at the time, has said: “It was a political decision, having very significantly 
disarmed Libya, for the government to cooperate withLibya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya> on Islamist terrorism.”

Referring to MI6’s links with Gaddafi, Manningham-Buller has stated: “There 
are clearly questions to be answered about the various relationships that 
developed afterwards and whether the UK supped with a sufficiently long spoon.”

Section 7 of the 1994 Intelligence Services Act, sometimes described as the “
James Bond clause 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/nov/11/jack-straw-and-senior-spy-could-avoid-torture-prosecution>
”, protects MI6 officers from prosecution for actions anywhere in the world 
that would otherwise be illegal. They would be protected as long as their 
actions were authorised in writing by the secretary of state.

Blair government's rendition policy led to rift between UK spy agencies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/31/revealed-britain-rendition-policy-rift-between-spy-agencies-mi6-mi5>
Andrew Tyrie, the senior Conservative backbencher and chair of the all-party 
parliamentary group on extraordinary rendition, told the Guardian last week: 
“It is now essential to establish who authorised this rendition. The chances of 
it not having been authorised would appear low. Were it unauthorised it would 
be criminal.”

An inquiry under Sir Peter Gibson, a retired senior judge, into earlier 
rendition programmes in which British intelligence was involved, was abandoned 
because of the new and dramatic evidence about the Libyan abductions. Among 27 
questions he said needed answering was, did the government and its agencies 
become “inappropriately involved in some renditions”?

The answers now lie in the hands of the parliamentary intelligence and 
security committee (ISC) under its new chair, the former attorney general, 
Dominic Grieve. The ISC has no judicial authority. Tyrie also intends to pursue 
the case. Yet it seems everyone involved in this affair will in the end escape 
prosecution, even though it involved torture – a crime which, in domestic and 
international law, is supposed to override all other considerations, including 
of course political embarrassment.
 