
Michael Stipe <https://www.theguardian.com/music/michael-stipe> wanders into 
the lobby of the Gramercy Park Hotel in Manhattan, looking flustered. He is 
running late for hisObserver photoshoot and interview. I introduce myself and 
he tells me he has had "heating problems" at his apartment. We chat amiably for 
a moment about the weather, which, even by New York standards, is extreme. 
"It's Inuit weather," he says.

He is wearing a reefer jacket, jeans, work boots, an ethnic-looking scarf, a 
snug woolly hat and a full beard. He looks healthy, which he has not always 
done. On his lapel, a little metal badge says Michael Stipe. This, of course, 
is very Michael Stipe: arty, playful, even a little bit pretentious.

A man walks past and shouts "Michael Stipe!" at him. Heads turn. On cue, the 
press officer materialises and, to Stipe's obvious relief, ushers him into a 
waiting elevator that whisks him up to where the photographer is waiting. "I 
just realised I haven't had breakfast yet," I hear him say as the doors close. 
It is almost 4pm.

Were there not already a Spike Jonze film called Being John Malkovich, 
(produced, incidentally, by Stipe's company, C00 Films) one could easily 
imagine one calledBeing Michael Stipe. Like the elusive, oddball actor, Stipe 
gives the impression of existing entirely inside his own self-contained 
universe. He exudes a certain otherness but one is never sure how much of it is 
natural and how much learned.

"I've been watching the Empire State Building change colour," he says, gazing 
dreamily out of the window, as I arrive in the room the record company has 
booked for the afternoon. He speaks quietly in small, quick flurries of words 
that often do not cohere into sentences. "I find myself often at a loss for 
words," he muses at one point. "There are TV shows I don't go on because I do 
not talk like that, I don't think like that, I don't debate like that. I've 
realised that to try and slot myself into that world is to diminish what I have 
to offer. And I do have something to offer but it's just in a different 
dialect, a different language."

Today though, he seems relaxed, reflective, talkative, which is a relief. I 
have interviewed him three times in the past, never to my satisfaction. It was 
not for want of trying on my part. The first encounter was way back in 1988, 
when REM's sixth album,Green, was just about to cross over into the mainstream 
charts. He was charming but elusive to the point of cryptic â€“ like his songs, 
in fact. "That was a long time ago," he says, nodding, when we settle down in a 
room that looks like a designer take on a Western movie bordello. "I still 
hadn't learned how to talk or how to look someone in the eye and finish a 
thought. I'm much better at that now but I'll carry that with me my whole life, 
the massive insecurity of not being articulate."

Now 51, Stipe has been lead singer of REM 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/rem> for just over 30 years. The band's new 
album,Collapse Into Now, is their 15th. In the interim, the group have gone 
from cultdom to indie sainthood to global superstardom. The tipping point came 
in 1991, with the release of their seventh album,Out of Time, and its stirring 
hit single, "Losing My Religion". It caused a seismic shift in their fortunes 
that bass guitarist, Mike Mills, later described, not altogether positively, as 
"life-changing". Even before then, Stipe seemed troubled by the whirlwind of 
fame, struggling to make sense of the stadium tours that followed 1987's hit 
single "The One I Love". He has had an uneasy relationship with his own 
celebrity ever since.

"I had to grapple with a lot of contradictions back in the 80s," he says, 
frowning. "I would look out from the stage at the Reagan youth. That was when 
REM went beyond the freaks, the fags, the fat girls, the art students and the 
indie music fanatics. Suddenly we had an audience that included people who 
would have sooner kicked me on the street than let me walk by unperturbed. I'm 
exaggerating to make a point but it was certainly an audience that, in the 
main, did not share my political leanings or affiliations, and did not like how 
flamboyant I was as a performer or indeed a sexual creature. They probably held 
lots of my world views in great disregard, and I had to look out on that and 
think, well, what do I do with this?"

The band, all teenage friends from Athens, Georgia, survived that particular 
trauma, as well as the departure of an original member, drummer Bill Berry, who 
quit in 1997, a few years after collapsing from a brain aneurysm onstage in 
Switzerland. Another wobble occurred in 2001 when guitarist Peter Buck was 
arrested for drunkenly assaulting two British Airways stewards in a violent 
struggle over a pot of yoghurt on a flight to London. (His evidence was that he 
had mixed a sleeping pill with a small amount of wine.He was cleared 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2002/apr/06/world.jeevanvasagar>, having 
pleaded "non-insane automatism".)

The new album, like its predecessor, Accelerate, sounds like a group who have 
rediscovered their mojo after a run of albums that sounded, well, like a big 
stadium band on cruise control. There are pop songs, and harder rock songs, and 
odd little in-between songs that could not have been made by anyone else. As 
always of late, they walk a tightrope between a signature and a formula. And, 
as always, it is Stipe's elliptical lyrics that, depending on where you stand, 
are the most intriguing or the most annoying aspect of the whole. He has not 
lost his facility for arresting titles. One song, which could be the first rock 
song about breaking wind (he's not saying), is suggestively called "Mine Smells 
Like Honey"; another, which sounds like an exercise in word association, is 
called "Alligator, Aviator, Autopilot, Antimatter". Even more intriguing is 
"Me, Marlon Brando, Marlon Brando and I", a kind of meta-pop song that 
references a Neil Young number called "Pocahontas".

In that song, Young imagines himself shooting the breeze around a campfire 
with Pocahontas and Marlon Brando, who, among other things, was a campaigner 
for Native American rights. I ask Stipe what his Marlon Brando song is about. 
"It's about me going to Neil Young for advice," he replies, as if this was the 
most natural thing in the world to write a song about. Has he actually done 
that? "Oh, no. It's entirely made up, but it's sincere. I hold Neil in high 
regard, but I have never asked him for advice, though I am sure he would have 
honoured it if I had."

As has been pointed out before, Michael Stipe is not your regular rock'n'roll 
star. For a start, he's too intelligent for that. And too curious. In his spare 
time he is also an activist (TheLA Times dubbed REM one of America's "most 
liberal and politically correct rock groups"), film producer (he was credited 
as executive co-producer onBeing John Malkovich, Velvet Goldmine and Man on the 
Moon), photographer (he published a book of photographs, Two Times Intro: On 
the Road with Patti Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/music/patti-smith>, in 
1998) and, latterly, conceptual artist. His current obsession, he says, is 
"making replica pieces in bronze or birch plywood" of objects that hold a 
particular and personal fascination for him. They include a Polaroid camera, a 
microcassette and a newspaper. "About five years ago I sat bolt upright in bed 
and said to myself, 'I want to make sculpture'," he says, growing visibly 
excited now that we have gotten the album out of the way. "I don't know where 
it came from, and I'm not even sure what sculpture is any more, but it just hit 
me like a truck. I'm making these replicas of things that have a personal 
fascination for me in order, I guess, to somehow explore that fascination, to 
remove myself from it in a way."

One of his pieces is called My Favourite Ever Edition of the New York Times. 
It features that favourite edition encased in a Plexiglas box. Could he talk me 
through it? "It is what it is. The date of the edition is not as important as 
the experience I had reading the paper on that day. It was a Thursday. TheTimes 
is always great on a Thursday. So I decided to commemorate and memorialise this 
experience by preserving the edition in Plexiglas."

It all sounds, I say, a bit Duchamp. He looks momentarily offended. "Well, I'm 
not a prankster. There is a sincerity to what I am doing. Always and sometime 
to a fault. In a way, that's all I've got."

It often seems, from the outside, that Stipe is entirely consumed by each new 
creative passion. Does he consider himself an obsessive? "Oh God, yes, no 
question," he says, laughing. "I'm working something out for sure. But, you 
know, that feels like a purely selfish reason for creating, and that's not what 
it's about. There's an ego and a desire to be loved that is colossal and so 
peculiar to public figures, the kind of people that do what I do, but I think I 
have a pretty good handle on that. With the artworks, it's more a need to 
create, to express myself in another form. It's like something I have to get 
out of me."

In all of this, Stipe has remade himself in the manner of his greatest idol, 
and now close friend, Patti Smith. Like her, he has become a polymath of sorts, 
though his approach to the making of music and art is altogether more, for want 
of a better word, postmodern than Smith's. Stipe is not rock'n'roll in the way 
that Smith is, though, lyrically, he shares her facility to tap into the 
unconscious and let the words and images flow out as if unedited. He has spoken 
in the past of the impact that Smith's seminal album,Horses, had on him as a 
confused 15-year-old. "It tore my limbs off and put them back on in a whole 
different order," he once said, "It was like, 'Shit! Yeah! Oh my God!'. Then, I 
threw up."

I ask if there is anyone in the world of fine art who has had the kind of 
impact Smith had on his younger self? He thinks about this for some 
considerable time. "Well, going to see a Brancusi show at the Philadelphia 
Museum of Art with Patti, when she was on tour with Bob Dylan in 1995. It took 
years for that to land on me but the impact when it did was incredible. I think 
Brancusi is a huge presence, perhaps even the greatest artist of the 20th 
century. I just look in awe at his work."

He is currently working on a replica of a Brancusi staircase. "It's the tiny 
staircase between his atelier and his sleeping quarters. You can visit it if 
you're around the Pompidou Centre [in Paris], free of charge, open daily. It's 
one of the most beautiful things I have ever seen. All the thought in the world 
went into that staircase, that he would climb up every night and walk down 
every morning, though the design was probably unconscious on his part. That's 
an example of something that just hit me, then I became fascinated with it, and 
then it became enough of a nagging obsession to be turned into a piece."

With hindsight, one can see that the songs Stipe wrote and sang back in the 
early 80s when REM were a small independent rock group operating out of their 
home town of Athens were the first clue to his otherness. Mostly they are 
cryptic, impressionistic, introverted and often wilfully elusive in their 
meaning. Back then, his singing style was best evoked by the title of REM's 
debut album,Murmur, released in 1983. One of those songs was called "Radio Free 
Europe". He later described it as "complete babbling". It often seemed to me 
that, as a fledgling songwriter, he was perpetually at war with the obvious, a 
stance that almost flew in the face of his ability to write great pop songs 
with big hooks.

"There's some truth in that. I've learnt to have fun fucking around with the 
medium. And the pop song is such a great medium to fuck around with. But it 
took a while."

Stipe's peripatetic upbringing may hold some clues to his elusiveness. He was 
born in Decatur, Georgia in 1960, the son of a serviceman whose constant 
relocations took the family across America, from Alabama to Illinois, as well 
as to Germany. His father served as a helicopter pilot in Korea and Vietnam. 
Stipe Junior once recalled how the family would gather nightly around the 
television to watch the news from Vietnam in the late 60s, their mother 
instructing him and his two sisters to look closely at the footage to see if 
they could spot their father. "We would of course sit there and go, 'I think I 
saw him' over and over again."

The family remain close. He spends every Christmas with them. In 2004 he said 
of his father: "I couldn't relate to my father's experiences, or the troops in 
Iraq who'd been at war, until 9/11. My father was a career army man, having 
been to Vietnam twice and Korea once. I'm very proud of him for that. But we 
agree on Iraq. Politically, we are almost down the line".

Politically, though, Stipe is right-on-going-on-radical. He has campaigned for 
Peta (People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals), and REM have espoused 
environmental, feminist and human rights causes. In 1988 Stipe campaigned for 
the Democratic presidential candidate Michael Dukakis, and in 2004 the group 
put their weight behind the doomed Democratic presidential candidate John Kerry 
on their Vote For Change tour. Will REM inevitably come out against the Tea 
Party? "Well, part of me says 'give them enough rope'," he says, laughing. 
"They are going to keep shooting themselves in the foot. I'm more concerned 
with the media, about what is being represented as truth and fact when it is 
not, and the whole issue of how news is being manipulated by certain powerful 
media corporations. It kind of terrifies me."

He pauses and thinks for a while. "For me, the great weapons used against the 
American people are fear and ignorance. Keeping people either so uneducated or 
distracted that they are not able to really form a valuable, educated choice is 
a great weapon. Fear is an even greater one. For one half of my life we have 
had administrations in this country that have used both of those to divide and 
conquer and to establish their particular vested interests in a way that best 
suited them and the people that they wanted to see profit. Has it got worse 
with the Tea Party? I don't know."

Back in the mid 1990s, when questioned in interviews about his sexuality, 
Stipe described himself as "an equal opportunity lech". That was after a 
periodof spiralling rumours that he was HIV positive. In 1999 a writer called 
Douglas A Martin published his first novel,Outline of My Lover, in which the 
main character describes a six-year relationship with the lead singer of a 
successful Athens-based rock group. Stipe and Martin had previously 
collaborated on a poetry compilation,The Haiku Year, and the latter later 
confirmed that the novel was indeed a fictional delineation of their 
relationship.

Then, in 2001, Stipe told Time magazine that he was "a queer artist". Last 
year he curated an exhibition to mark the 100th anniversary of Jean Genet's 
birth, which he tells me was "kind of like a queer history but from a 
peripheral point of view, but also about what might have happened if Genet and 
queer culture had impacted on me more". He does seem to be a whole lot more 
comfortable now with his sexuality. Was he troubled by it while he was growing 
up?

"Not troubled, no. Not confused either. But I felt there just wasn't a place 
for me. I hate and refuse to apply the term bisexual to myself. It doesn't seem 
appropriate. It feels like just another label. For a time I was conflicted by 
how I was represented, and then Aids came, and that's an era that has still to 
be spoken about in depth by people of my age. It was a very difficult time to 
be honest and frank about one's sexuality. And a very scary time for people 
like myself, who were not able to be tested anonymously without some concern. I 
mean, under Reagan, lest we forget, there was a time when they were talking 
about internment camps for people who were HIV positive. To this day I can't 
give blood to the Red Cross because I have sex with a man."

Would he still describe himself as "an equal opportunity lech". He smiles, 
then turns serious again. "On a sliding scale of sexuality I'd place myself 
around 80-20, but I definitely prefer men to women. I had sex with, and enjoyed 
sex with, women until I met someone that I fell in love with, and who is now my 
boyfriend. That's the only real news in the last 12 years, but when it's a slow 
news day I get dragged out of some closet again."

For the record, Stipe currently lives in a spacious Tribeca apartment with his 
partner, Thomas Dozol, an art photographer.

We talk for a while about the etymology of the word "queer", and I ask him why 
he finds it more acceptable than the word "gay". "I never identified with gay, 
that's all. I will always honour anyone who had to make different choices, then 
stand by them, and I would hope that honour would extend to me and my choices 
as well. I'm talking about how one chooses to define oneself, the community 
within which one feels comfortable. That's what it's about, really. It's the 
21st century," he concludes. "A lot of younger people have a much more 
it-is-what-it-is approach to sexuality. The black and white binary approach 
just does not work. So you find the terms that make you most comfortable.

As we come to the end of the interview, I tell Stipe he gives off a different 
kind of energy these days. It seems that, if anything, New York has calmed him 
down. Does he now consider it his home? "My second home, for sure. I've lived 
here now since the mid-80s with the exception of a few years in Los Angeles. 
There's even a New York song on the album, which you can discover for yourself. 
It's about a moment that occurred not far from here on Houston Street, when I 
was stumbling down the street having been at a party, a vodka in one hand and 
an espresso in the other, and just being so inspired by the energy of the city 
and the people. It's a moment-of-discovery song, about discovering oneself and 
suddenly feeling this huge sense of possibility. New York can do that to you," 
he says, smiling. "You come here to change the world but you end up changing 
yourself."
 