
Matt Ryan looked very much like an MVP, and the Atlanta Falcons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/atlanta-falcons> are headed to the NFC 
championship game.

Will the ascent of Donald Trump make American athletes irate again? | Bryan 
Armen Graham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/14/donald-trump-inauguration-us-sports-activism>
Ryan threw for 338 yards and three touchdowns, leading the Falcons to a 36-20 
victory over the Seattle Seahawks in the divisional round Saturday.

Ryan’s dominance was enough to spark a confrontation between the Seahawks’ 
defensive end Michael Bennett and a reporter. After the reporter said Seattle 
weren’t able to pressure the quarterback, Bennett lost his temper.

“We got a lot of pressure,” Bennett said. “He threw the ball really fast. 
There was some busted stuff going on so obviously you don’t know football. He 
threw the ball pretty fast. He did his thing. We rushed as good as we could. 
Don’t point and say we didn’t do what we needed to do, OK? Don’t do that.

“Don’t tell me I didn’t do my job, motherfucker,” Bennett added. “Get the fuck 
out of my face. Like I said, get out of my face. Don’t play with me. Don’t play 
with me. I just put my heart on the fucking field ... Try me again, see what 
happens.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fnfl-playoff-preview-green-bay-packers-dallas-cowboys-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=NFL%20playoff%20preview%3A%20Green%20Bay%20Packers%20at%20Dallas%20Cowboys%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fnfl-playoff-preview-green-bay-packers-dallas-cowboys-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=NFL%20playoff%20preview%3A%20Green%20Bay%20Packers%20at%20Dallas%20Cowboys%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fnfl-playoff-preview-green-bay-packers-dallas-cowboys-video&media=>
NFL playoff preview: Green Bay Packers at Dallas Cowboys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2017/jan/15/nfl-playoff-preview-green-bay-packers-dallas-cowboys-video>
Bennett was not the only Seahawk to let off steam after the game. Safety Earl 
Thomas, who is currently recovering from a season ending injury, went on 
Twitter to aim a shot at Tom Brady. The quarterback had led the New England 
Patriots past a weak Houston Texans team in Saturday’s other game. “Tom Brady 
has the easiest route... put his ass in our division and see what he does!!!” 
wrote Thomas. The Seahawks beat the Patriots earlier this season, something 
that Thomas also referenced. “Did you watch the game this year I owned Tom 
Brady!! That BS you showing I was hurt trying to help my team,” he tweeted 
later.
Earl Thomas (@Earl_Thomas) 
Tom Brady has the easiest route... put his ass in our division and see what he 
does!!!#salty <https://twitter.com/hashtag/salty?src=hash>!!
 <https://twitter.com/Earl_Thomas/status/820481349626818560> January 15, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/Earl_Thomas/status/820481349626818560> 
Atlanta will face either the Dallas Cowboys or the Green Bay Packers, who meet 
Sunday in the NFC’s other divisional game.


After the Seahawks zipped down the field for a touchdown on the opening 
possession, Atlanta’s young defense largely shut down Russell Wilson & co the 
rest of the way.

Ryan and the high-scoring Falcons took it from there – getting a huge boost 
from a holding penalty that wiped out an 80-yard punt return by Devin Hester.

Ryan hooked up with Julio Jones on a seven-yard touchdown and Tevin Coleman 
for a 14-yard score before finishing off the Seahawks with a three-yard toss to 
Mohamed Sanu in the corner of the end zone with just under four minutes 
remaining, sparking a raucous chant of “MVP! MVP! MVP!” from a Georgia Dome 
crowd that stood most of the game, giving the Falcons the sort of home-field 
advantage that Seattle is used to having at the Link.

Before a foot injury limited him in the second half, Jones made life miserable 
for Seattle cornerback Richard Sherman, who got away with an apparent pass 
interference penalty on Atlanta’s star receiver when the teams met during the 
regular season, preservinga 26-24 victory 
<http://pro32.ap.org/article/wilson-leads-seattles-late-rally-26-24-win-over-atlanta>
 for the Seahawks.

Jones was targeted eight times, coming up with six receptions for 67 yards to 
set a tone that Atlanta would not be intimidate by the Legion of Boom.

But, as usual, Ryan spread the ball around to everyone. Speedy Taylor Gabriel 
had a 37-yard reception.

Running back Devonta Freeman slipped out of the backfield to haul in a 53-yard 
pass, putting a dazzling fake on replacement free safety Steven Terrell right 
in the middle of the field.

In all, eight players caught passes for Atlanta.

For only the fourth time in their 51-year history, the Falcons (12-5) will be 
playing for the conference title and a spot in the Super Bowl.

They made their only Super Bowl appearance during the 1998 season, falling to 
Denver in John Elway’s final game, and lost in the NFC title game during the 
2004 and 2012 seasons.

The Seahawks (11-6-1) couldn’t follow up a dominating win over Detroit in the 
opening round, the game turning dramatically on a holding penalty in the second 
quarter that wiped out Hester’s return to the Atlanta 7.

Instead of having first-and-goal and a chance to extend a 10-7 lead, Seattle 
was backed up to its seven. After Thomas Rawls was thrown for a three-yard 
loss, Wilson attempted to drop back for a pass.

One problem: rookie right guard Rees Odhiambo, taking over after Germain Ifedi 
was injured, stepped back onto Wilson’s foot, sending the quarterback tumbling 
down in the end zone. Ben Garland fell on Wilson for a safety that turned the 
momentum Atlanta’s way.

Matt Bryant’s 35-yard field goal put the Falcons ahead to stay, and the home 
team closed out the first half with a 99-yard drive touchdown that was extended 
by Sanu’s brilliant, one-handed catch for 22 yards with Jeremy Lane grabbing at 
his arm.

After getting beat on Seattle’s first possession, an Atlanta defense featuring 
four rookies and a bunch of second-year players limited the Seahawks to a pair 
of a field goals before giving up a meaningless 31-yard touchdown pass to Doug 
Baldwin in the closing minutes.
 