
Wayne Coyne and Miley Cyrus can’t get enough of each other. The pop star and 
Coyne have already worked together on two tracks for the Flaming Lips’ Beatles 
covers album With a Little Help From My Fwends, and Cyrus appeared in the Lips’ 
video clipBlonde SuperFreak Steals the Magic Brain 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_C9hNuttoug>. Now Coyne says Cyrus and the 
Oklahoma psychdelicists have recorded a seven-track album which is being 
readied for release.

But what does it sound like? “She does the pop thing so great, so it still 
feels pop, but a slightly wiser, sadder, more true version,”Coyne told Billboard
 
<http://www.billboard.com/articles/columns/pop-shop/6553687/wayne-coyne-miley-cyrus-project-friendship-flaming-lips>
. “Some of it reminds me of Pink Floyd and Portishead.”

Wayne Coyne: 'I'm not having a mid-life crisis, I'm having fun!'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/apr/02/wayne-coyne-im-not-having-a-mid-life-crisis-im-having-fun-miley-cyrus>
The recordings were split between the Lips’ studio in Oklahoma City and 
Cyrus’s home in Los Angeles. “Her studio is just a little room with a desk,” 
Coyne said, “and Miley was sitting there mixing. I was like, ‘I can’t picture 
Beyoncé doing this!’ It’s not a ­putdown of Beyoncé. I just don’t see her 
recording her own vocals and then EQ’ing it. It’s so punk rock!”

The pair’s bonding goes beyond music. They also have matching tattoos, of 
which Coyne told the Guardian last month: “When I was growing up, the only 
people that you saw with tattoos were prisoners, or the Manson girls. But now 
it’s another experience you can have with each other, like going to a bar or 
getting your nails done together or going to the Grand Canyon, which we did as 
well. Being around her, you can be in three or four places in one night and 
they’re all just fun moments. You’ll be at someone’s house and they’re all 
having fun or getting high and suddenly it’s: “Let’s get a tattoo!” It’s not: 
“Oh my God, we’re bonded together for the rest of our lives.” I think Miley and 
myself think those things anyway; making music together bonds us more than 
tattoos. She’s awesome, true to what she is; just a real fresh, energetic freak 
to be around.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWV6XLTM5PdU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWV6XLTM5PdU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWV6XLTM5PdU&media=>
 The Flaming Lips and Miley Cyrus – A Day in the Life  