
Mining shares are leading the way in early trading, following the latest 
positive data from China.

Banks in the country, a major consumer of commodities, lent a much higher than 
expected 1.08trn yuan in June, compared to forecasts of 915bn. The move 
reflects renewed attempts by Beijing to boost the world's second largest 
economy.

As a consequence precious metals miner Fresnillo is up 19p at 938.5p, Anglo 
American has added 23p to 1524.5p and Rio Tinto has risen 41p to £32.83.

Overall the FTSE 100 has added 9.11 points to 6755.25, dipping from its 
earlier highs as UK inflation came in higher than expected at 1.9% and prompted 
talk once more of interest rate rises. The news came ahead of Bank of England 
governor Mark Carney's testimony to MPs later, and an appearance by Fed chair 
Janet Yellen at Congress in the afternoon.

Elsewhere Sports Direct International lost some of Monday's gains, down 14.5p 
at 708.5p while Primark ownerAssociated British Foods was hit by a Goldman 
Sachs sell note and is down 36p at £29.14.

Among the mid-caps Telecom Plus has added 95p to £13.33 after a well received 
trading update, butDairy Crest has dipped 9.6p to 428.7p despite confirming its 
outlook for 2014.

Provident Financial is down 49p at £21.16 as JP Morgan Cazenove cut from 
overweight to neutral. RBC Capital Markets issued an underperform rating, but 
said the announcement by the Financial Conduct Authority about capping the 
amount high cost lenders can charge should not affect Provident:
 We believe that headlines regarding further regulation of the short-term, 
high-cost loan market could result in negative sentiment around Provident. 
Further, we note that in April 2014 the FCA announced its intention to 
undertake a competitive review into the UK credit market at the end of this 
year, which may affect Vanquis Bank. However, we believe that the company 
already operates within the bounds of today's FCA directives and should be 
unaffected.  