
Minneapolis does not have the immediate look of a place set on becoming a city 
where lots of people ride bikes. Aside from the long, freezing winters, this is 
a place very obviously built around cars. The roads are generally multi-lane, 
often one way, and parking is largely straightforward, even in the centre. But 
things are changing.

Lisa Bender <http://www.ci.minneapolis.mn.us/ward10/>, the city council 
representative who has done as much as an anyone to push cycling in 
Minneapolis, laughs when asked if the aim is to make her home the second most 
bike-friendly city in the US, after the traditional cycling centre of Portland, 
Oregon.

“Oh no, first,” she says. “That’s the official policy. The best, possibly in 
the world. All joking aside, when I think about biking in Minneapolis I know 
that if you look at Copenhagen and the way they transitioned their city to 
non-motorised modes, we could do that here. If you look at the map of our city 
we have a grid. We have lakes and a river, and old rail corridors. Most of the 
neighbourhoods grew up around transit lines, and they are fairly dense.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fminneapolis-portland-america-cycle-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d8b3457e38cca33d55abfe0009da2571d36491b%2F0_0_2048_1360%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Minneapolis%20tries%20to%20topple%20Portland%20as%20America's%20most%20cycle-friendly%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fminneapolis-portland-america-cycle-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Minneapolis%20tries%20to%20topple%20Portland%20as%20America%27s%20most%20cycle-friendly%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fminneapolis-portland-america-cycle-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d8b3457e38cca33d55abfe0009da2571d36491b%2F0_0_2048_1360%2F2048.jpg>
 The Nice Ride bike share scheme in the twin cities of Minneapolis and St Paul. 
Photograph: Meet Minneapolis 
This might sound ambitious. Minneapolis does have something of a bike culture, 
thanks in part to to a well-establishednetwork of off-road paths 
<https://www.minneapolisparks.org/parks__destinations/trails__parkways/> 
running through parks. It has since 2010 also had a public bike share system,
Nice Ride <https://www.niceridemn.org/>, which stretches to parts of the 
smaller adjoining “twin city” of St Paul, and uses the Canadian Bixi-type bikes 
familiar to anyone who has used the London or New York schemes.

But, for all that, the overall share of bike trips in Minneapolis is just over 
4.5%. This is pretty good by US standards, but some way from Portland’s 7%, a 
figure cycle activists in Portland say rises to about 20% for commutes in some 
neighbourhoods. Copenhagen, meanwhile, sees about about 35% of all trips made 
on a bike, and has a 50% target for all commutes.

Minneapolis is, however, moving quickly. Its new cycle plan 
<http://www.minneapolismn.gov/bicycles/WCMS1P-135610> will supposedly see about 
230 miles of lanes built around the city, with 144 miles of these separated 
from motor traffic. These latter routes should be completed by 2020.

A good deal of this is down to Bender. A Minneapolis native, she spent eight 
years working in New York and San Francisco before returning in 2009 to find 
cycle planning in her home city moribund, and some bike lanes even being 
removed for bus routes.
 Pro-cycling city council representative Lisa Bender. Photograph: Carlee 
Hackl/TommieMedia 
“I was wondering: where are all the people on bikes?” Bender recalls from her 
office in the Italianate 19th-century city hall. “I knew we had this great 
reputation for supporting cycling, but when I got back I was surprised at how 
this all played out on individual street projects, or biking in the city.” What 
cycling there was seemed to happen despite rather than because of proper 
planning, she notes: “Frankly, I think it’s because our transit system isn’t as 
good as some other cities. If you have a choice between taking the bus and 
biking, a lot of people in Minneapolis choose to cycle because it’s faster and 
more reliable.”

Bender co-founded the Minneapolis Bicycle Coalition <http://www.mplsbike.org/>
, where she and her fellow activists agitated for better facilities, using 
innovative tactics like collecting hand-written letters from people about 
alternative ideas for a major road about to be rebuilt without bike lanes. In 
2013 she jumped the fence from advocacy to government, getting elected as a 
city representative.

Ethan Fawley, one of her co-founders at the Minneapolis Bicycle Coalition, now 
heads the group. He notes that one of the main obstacles to boosting bike use 
is the fact that driving in Minneapolis remains relatively easy.

My wife and I don’t own a car, but we were very intentional about where we 
would live and where we would work,” he says. “If we’d not been conscious about 
both of those things it would have been almost impossible. If you live outside 
of a couple of miles from downtown it gets much harder.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fminneapolis-portland-america-cycle-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e367b363682097fb2dd97abd5e543a9c07e3ff4%2F0_143_3600_2161%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Minneapolis%20tries%20to%20topple%20Portland%20as%20America's%20most%20cycle-friendly%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fminneapolis-portland-america-cycle-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Minneapolis%20tries%20to%20topple%20Portland%20as%20America%27s%20most%20cycle-friendly%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fminneapolis-portland-america-cycle-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e367b363682097fb2dd97abd5e543a9c07e3ff4%2F0_143_3600_2161%2F3600.jpg>
 The new Minneapolis bike plan will see more than 200 miles of new lanes. 
Photograph: Alamy 
Cycling <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/cycling>, Fawley argues, 
must be made a positive choice: “The reality is that we still have to very much 
develop the bicyclist. You have to want it, you have to be choosing it not 
solely because it’s the most convenient option but because it makes you feel 
good.”

This was Fawley’s own route into cycling: as a city planning student at the 
university he drove everywhere until his car broke down for good and he bought 
a bike instead. “When I changed that I was healthier, had more money,” he says. 
“I weigh less than I did then. I’m a lot happier because of it, and I think 
about how many people would be in the same situation. They’ve forgotten about 
it because of the systems and culture we have. It’s not going to make sense for 
everybody. But there’s more people who, if the system supported them, would 
have a similar thing where their lives would just be better. And that’s what 
it’s about for me.”

Bender, meanwhile, explains her push for cycle infrastructure in terms of 
social justice. Minneapolis has significant faultlines over race and poverty, 
and she sees the bike network, which is intended to stretch to all suburbs, as 
offering an option to people who cannot afford to run a car.

She describes working earlier in her career for a non-profit organisation 
which runs transport projects in developing nations, and being taken on a tour 
of a newly rebuilt former slum area in Bogotá by Enrique Peñalosa, the former 
(andnow just re-elected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/26/colombia-bogota-mayor-enrique-penalosa-re-elected>
) mayor of the Colombian capital, a major advocate for bike routes.

Streetfighting woman: inside the story of how cycling changed New York
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/mar/11/cycling-fights-new-york-mean-streets-janette-sadik-khan>
Peñalosa, she says, proudly pointed out a smooth, paved route for bikes and 
pedestrians. “There was this bicycle and pedestrian path and next to it was a 
dirt road,” she says. “Enrique made the point: ‘We made this choice 
intentionally. Cars don’t need paving, and this is a poor area, most people 
don’t drive anyway. So we prioritised putting the money into the bicycle and 
pedestrian lanes.’”

Bender adds: “It was a moment that really stuck with me. How you spend money 
as a city or a government really shows your values, shows what you are 
investing in. That’s really influenced how I do my job now.”

The new Minneapolis bike plan has as its target a doubling of cycling numbers 
by 2020, which would put it ahead of Portland’s current figure. Unsurprisingly, 
those in Oregon’s largest city, which made its first plan for cycling in 1973, 
stress that they have expansion plans of their own.

“I don’t think Portland is close to losing its place as America’s number one 
cycling city,” says Jonathan Maus, who runs the influentialBike Portland 
<http://bikeportland.org/> website. “Not at all. With bike share launching in 
July and a slew of protected bike lane projects coming soon, we’re about to 
make another big jump in ridership after years of stagnation.”

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 