
The hunt for Malaysia Airlines flight MH370 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia-airlines-flight-mh370> is to be 
suspended if evidence of the missing jet is not found in the current search 
area.

The transport ministers of Australia, Malaysia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia> and China, representing the 
country leading the search, the airline and the home of the majority of its 
passengers, met to discuss the future of the search in the Malaysian federal 
administrative centre of Putrajaya on Friday.

They announced that it would “not end, but be suspended” if the completion of 
the two-year search of a 120,000 sq km arc of the southern Indian ocean west of 
Australia fails to yield any new evidence.

Less than 10,000 sq km of that area remain, though progress is slow due to 
poor weather conditions.

In a joint statement, the ministers acknowledged that “despite the best 
efforts of all involved, the likelihood of finding the aircraft is fading.


“In the absence of credible new evidence leading to an identification of a 
specific location of the aircraft, the search would not end, but be suspended 
upon completion of the 120,000 sq km area.”

Liow Tiong Lai, the Malaysian transport minister, told reporters that cost was 
not a factor in the decision.

It was stressed that this did not mean the termination of the search, and that 
the aspiration to locate MH370 remained. But any next steps would be dependant 
on new information that could be used to identify the specific location of the 
aircraft.

“We remain hopeful that the aircraft will be located,” said Darren Chester, 
the Australian minister for transport and infrastructure.

The families of the 239 victims were informed before the press conference on 
Friday afternoon.
Sumisha Naidu (@SumishaCNA) 
"This does not mean we have given up on the search for #MH370 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/MH370?src=hash>" - @liowtionglai 
<https://twitter.com/liowtionglai> pic.twitter.com/QrAi4ewYvF 
<https://t.co/QrAi4ewYvF>
 <https://twitter.com/SumishaCNA/status/756392568338853888> July 22, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/SumishaCNA/status/756392568338853888> 
That the search would not be extended in the absence of any significant 
discovery has been consistently signalled by the Australian body in charge for 
more than a year.

The Australian Transport Safety Bureau has led the underwater operation for 
the wreckage of the missing aircraft, which disappeared en route from Kuala 
Lumpur to Beijing in March 2014.

Chester said in a statement on Thursday 
<http://minister.infrastructure.gov.au/chester/releases/2016/July/dc077_2016.aspx>
 that the search had been “unprecedented in both size and scale, conducted in 
some of the world’s most isolated waters and at times in extremely challenging 
weather”.

Progress on the final 10,000 or so sq km of the total search area – about the 
size of Greece – has been delayed by poor weather, meaning the search could 
extend into spring.

In March, on the two-year anniversary of the plane’s disappearance, Martin 
Dolan, the head of the ATSB,said it was “very likely” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/07/mh370-head-of-search-says-very-likely-plane-will-be-found-by>
 the wreckage would be found within that area.

But with that possibility dwindling with every square kilometre completed, 
experts have been forced to consider alternatives.

The three countries agreed in April last year not to extend the search area 
beyond that 120,000 sq km.

Paul Kennedy, the project director of Fugro – the Dutch company leading the 
search –acknowledged on Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/21/mh370-hunt-team-leading-search-says-they-may-have-been-looking-in-wrong-place>
 that, if the plane was not found there, “it means it’s somewhere else”.

The company later clarified that it believed 
<https://www.fugro.com/media-centre/news/fulldetails/2016/07/21/correcting-the-record>
 the search area was the most probable place and as such the right place to 
search.

But Richard Godfrey, a member of the so-called Independent Group of 
professionals conducting their own work to locate MH370,argued in a paper  
<http://www.duncansteel.com/archives/2695>published earlier in July that the 
ATSB were looking in the wrong place.


He identified a range of latitudes consistent with known data, ocean drift 
analyses and floating debris that was not captured in the priority search area.

“The failure to find sunken wreckage ... is not surprising,” he wrote. “The 
underwater search has produced no results so far and the assumptions made in 
determining the ATSB priority search area should be re-examined.”

To date, four pieces have been identified as almost certainly being from 
MH370, in addition to a wing flaperon found on La Réunion in July last year.

A large piece of aircraft debris found on an island off the coast of Tanzania 
in June arrived in Canberra for examination earlier this week.


It is thought to be a wing flap, but technical specialists from the ATSB are 
working with Malaysian investigators to determine whether it is from MH370.
Map of search area 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/07/mh370debris-zip/giv-12515sZqkWsSNKOPN> 