
Mitchell Silver, the parks commissioner of New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york>, sometimes goes incognito to one 
of the city’s recreation grounds, just to observe how the people behave there. 
It can be any one of the more than 1,700 parks in the city, spread out over 
five boroughs and serving a catchment area of 8.5 million people, ranging in 
ritziness from Central Park, with its huge private donors, to tiny playgrounds 
with cracked asphalt in the far reaches of Queens. There Silver sits, drawing 
conclusions about how people use outdoor space.


Bill de Blasio, the mayor of New York, recently announced a $130m improvement 
programme 
<http://www.nycgovparks.org/about/framework-for-an-equitable-future/community-parks-initiative>
 to bring the city’s small neglected parks up to scratch – what Silver calls 
“park equity”, the biggest buzzword of his department and the priority of his 
tenure. On a baking hot day in July, we had stood beneath a tree in West Harlem 
Piers Park, in the shadow of the motorway flyover and looking out across the 
Hudson River towards the tower blocks of New Jersey, while the parks 
commissioner reminisced about what an awful place it used to be.

Silver, who is 53 and a former urban planner, first submitted plans for 
regenerating West Harlem Piers almost 20 years ago. This was in the bad old 
days of New York, when that particular stretch of waterfront was fenced off, 
dangerous, with a crumbling structure once used for concerts that had fallen 
into disrepair.

Getting West Harlem Piers to its current state, a well-manicured park where 
people are fishing, doing yoga and sitting on benches eating their lunch, was, 
he said a David and Goliath story. “We never thought it was going to happen. We 
had the white people of Morningside Heights and Columbia with one point of 
view; they wanted to have a preservation plan. The Dominicans had a different 
idea about it. Then we had the African-Americans; and no one agreed.” 
Then-mayor Rudy Giuliani, meanwhile, wanted to build a high-rise development, 
blocking access to the waterfront and obscuring the view. Neighbourhood groups 
came to Silver, a planning consultant at the time, and asked for his help. 
“Let’s come up with a vision,” he said. And so it began.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Foct%2F30%2Fmitchell-silver-new-york-parks-bill-de-blasio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F29%2F1414618126487%2Ffb460e13-4efd-4b12-9c12-b47b9c9d97b2-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mitchell%20Silver%3A%20a%20man%20possessed%20by%20making%20New%20York%E2%80%99s%20parks%20havens%20of%20happiness%20for%20all&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Foct%2F30%2Fmitchell-silver-new-york-parks-bill-de-blasio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mitchell%20Silver%3A%20a%20man%20possessed%20by%20making%20New%20York%E2%80%99s%20parks%20havens%20of%20happiness%20for%20all&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Foct%2F30%2Fmitchell-silver-new-york-parks-bill-de-blasio%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F29%2F1414618126487%2Ffb460e13-4efd-4b12-9c12-b47b9c9d97b2-2060x1236.jpeg>
 New York’s parks commissioner Mitchell Silver, left, with the city’s mayor 
Bill de Blasio, who recently announced a $130m park improvement programme. 
Photograph: New York Daily News/Getty Images 
Parks in New York are political, the buffer zone between demographics in 
changing neighbourhoods and a potential source of shared interest as well as of 
conflict. In Morningside Park, a 10-minute drive south of west Harlem through 
ever-more gentrifying areas, there was ariot in 1968 
<http://www.columbia1968.com/history/> when Columbia University, which now 
dominates the neighbourhood, tried to build a gymnasium in the park used by 
low-income residents resentful of its high-handedness.


Silver is very aware that different ethnic groups in the city have different 
ideas about how public space should be used. “I don’t want to generalise but 
Latino populations tend to enjoy it as families; when they come to a park, 
soccer is not just playing a game, it’s a whole family experience. Others may 
come to read a book.” Accommodating everyone’s needs is tricky.

So too is park safety. Silver is a man constantly anticipating the likely 
direction of an incoming lawsuit. One of the biggest improvements made in the 
park system, he says, has been improving sight-lines. “I look at edges, I look 
at views, I look at texture. West Harlem has a low tree canopy. Typically I 
prefer higher canopies – Bryant Park – because that adds to safety. When you 
can see the other edge, you feel you can survey your space. When you feel you 
have a lot of vegetation, you’d be concerned as you turned a corner because you 
don’t know what’s waiting for you.”

As we approach the perimeter of Morningside Park, Silver talks me through the 
mental process he instinctively goes through. “As I approach a park, the first 
thing I do is look at the context: how many young people, how many seniors, how 
many families? I need to understand, is this a neighbourhood park, is it a 
destination park – who am I planning for?

“Once I understand that, I can begin to approach the park. I look at the edges 
and entrance. Some parks have no gates – no primary entry point. Most NYC parks 
have a perimeter fence, it’s better for watching children. I’m looking at the 
benches here; they’re facing the street. Should they be facing the other way? 
I’m looking at all the design elements, including the edge – can we extend the 
park experience to the sidewalks as well?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Foct%2F30%2Fmitchell-silver-new-york-parks-bill-de-blasio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F29%2F1414619243448%2F34e84a90-4bfc-4469-af74-1152f83549b3-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mitchell%20Silver%3A%20a%20man%20possessed%20by%20making%20New%20York%E2%80%99s%20parks%20havens%20of%20happiness%20for%20all&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Foct%2F30%2Fmitchell-silver-new-york-parks-bill-de-blasio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mitchell%20Silver%3A%20a%20man%20possessed%20by%20making%20New%20York%E2%80%99s%20parks%20havens%20of%20happiness%20for%20all&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Foct%2F30%2Fmitchell-silver-new-york-parks-bill-de-blasio%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F29%2F1414619243448%2F34e84a90-4bfc-4469-af74-1152f83549b3-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Parks commissioner Silver first submitted plans for regenerating West Harlem 
Piers Park almost 20 years ago. He calls it a ‘David and Goliath story’. 
Photograph: Stacy Walsh Rosenstock/Alamy 
Above all, Silver says, he is watching the people. It’s the psychological 
impact of open space that interests him. He looks around, noting a woman with 
her shoes off, wanting to feel the grass, wondering aloud if there’s enough 
shade, remarking upon the way in which, when people enter the park, their 
shoulders drop and they visibly relax. “When they enter a park space, you watch 
their whole countenance change. They feel they’re in a safe zone. Their guard 
is different. In a city where most people don’t have a yard, this becomes your 
living room.”

The perceived enemies of park life are developers and some city officials who 
see parks as blank space that doesn’t generate income. Silver, however, is far 
too diplomatic to let this characterisation stand. The success of the High 
Line, the raised strip of park in lower Manhattan that has brought so many 
tourists and visitors to an otherwise dead neighbourhood, has converted many of 
those in the commercial world to the value of commerce-free space. “Where 
there’s no space you can escape to, there’s no price-tag you can put on that. 
There are locations where having a park does have a direct effect on 
liveability and value on real estate.”

The health of New York’s parks is a kind of shorthand for the health of the 
city. When New York was failing in the 1970s, Central Park – with its muggings 
and reputation as wilder thandowntown Medellin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/09/medellin-colombia-worlds-most-dangerous-city>
 – became a symbol of the broken system as a whole. These days, violent crime 
in New York parks (as is the case across the city) is way down. The only rise 
in park crime, says the commissioner, is what is informally referred to as 
“apple picking”; the petty theft of personal property, mainly iPhones, nicked 
out of people’s bags when they’re strolling or sleeping on the grass.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Foct%2F30%2Fmitchell-silver-new-york-parks-bill-de-blasio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F29%2F1414618273677%2F7a77434e-b2a5-4777-b006-b4c6d1d22af7-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mitchell%20Silver%3A%20a%20man%20possessed%20by%20making%20New%20York%E2%80%99s%20parks%20havens%20of%20happiness%20for%20all&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Foct%2F30%2Fmitchell-silver-new-york-parks-bill-de-blasio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mitchell%20Silver%3A%20a%20man%20possessed%20by%20making%20New%20York%E2%80%99s%20parks%20havens%20of%20happiness%20for%20all&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Foct%2F30%2Fmitchell-silver-new-york-parks-bill-de-blasio%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F29%2F1414618273677%2F7a77434e-b2a5-4777-b006-b4c6d1d22af7-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Mitchell Silver: ‘I got to discover on my bike almost every inch of Prospect 
Park, at the age of nine.’ Photograph: New York Parks Commissioner office 
Silver has seen all iterations of New York life, having grown up in Brooklyn 
in the 1960s and 70s a few blocks from Prospect Park. It was a different time 
then, when kids were free-range: “I got to discover on my bike almost every 
inch of Prospect Park at the age of nine.”

Urban planning isn’t an obvious career choice for a small boy to fixate on, 
but Silver’s imagination was fired by the experience of being taken along to 
the 1964 World’s Fair. It was in Queens, New York, and included a model 
panorama of the city. “I would have dreams about this big giant map. I took art 
classes and always wanted to draw buildings, not other still life. In college, 
I took architecture and wasn’t just passionate about the buildings, but the 
neighbourhoods.”

Every morning, he gets a report on overnight incidents in the parks. Increased 
usage brings with it new dangers. A few weeks after we meet, a woman will die 
after colliding in Central Park with one of the high-speed cyclists bombing 
around the loop. In Morningside Park, we stroll past a small lake where Silver 
points out a double-crested cormorant standing on a rock, an unusual visitor 
and good advertisement for the space. Seconds later, though, he is distracted 
by the water safety issue: there is no fence around the waterfront.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Foct%2F30%2Fmitchell-silver-new-york-parks-bill-de-blasio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F29%2F1414620398745%2F7379f702-0fdd-43c5-9132-d2728d11fe23-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mitchell%20Silver%3A%20a%20man%20possessed%20by%20making%20New%20York%E2%80%99s%20parks%20havens%20of%20happiness%20for%20all&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Foct%2F30%2Fmitchell-silver-new-york-parks-bill-de-blasio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mitchell%20Silver%3A%20a%20man%20possessed%20by%20making%20New%20York%E2%80%99s%20parks%20havens%20of%20happiness%20for%20all&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Foct%2F30%2Fmitchell-silver-new-york-parks-bill-de-blasio%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F29%2F1414620398745%2F7379f702-0fdd-43c5-9132-d2728d11fe23-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Every morning the NY parks commissioner receives a report on overnight 
incidents; increased usage has brought new dangers. Photograph: Tim 
Clayton/Corbis 
The addition of water features is one of the great park improvements, mostly 
in the form of sprinklers for kids to run through. Referring to one of the 
great visual cliches of the city, Silver says, “In New York, a lot of children 
used to play in fire hydrants. A horrible thing for the city, dangerous for 
cars, so there’s no question that having these simple spray showers is fun; the 
surfaces are safe.”

We get back in the car and drive through Times Square (with its large new 
pedestrianised space) and around Central Park – Silver won’t be drawn on the 
controversy of the Central Park carriages and whether they’re cruel to the 
horses or not; it is, he says carefully, “a policy issue that’s being handled 
out of the mayor’s office”. Ten minutes later, we pull up outside the most 
successfully re-generated park in the city, Bryant Park, a space now host to 
ice rinks and Christmas fairs in the winter, free wifi, and heaving numbers of 
office workers relaxing on the manicured lawn. It used to be full of drug 
addicts, with a high wall that kept people out.

Others things have changed, too. A recent study was done into how the public 
uses the moveable iron chairs in the park and discovered that, while people 
once looked for chairs in pairs, so as to talk to each other, now they drag 
chairs away to look at their phones. Somewhat depressing but, says Silver, 
“interesting how technology has transformed use of the space”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Foct%2F30%2Fmitchell-silver-new-york-parks-bill-de-blasio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F29%2F1414618411533%2F53d5078d-720a-4e14-b0ed-8019028e2237-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mitchell%20Silver%3A%20a%20man%20possessed%20by%20making%20New%20York%E2%80%99s%20parks%20havens%20of%20happiness%20for%20all&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Foct%2F30%2Fmitchell-silver-new-york-parks-bill-de-blasio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mitchell%20Silver%3A%20a%20man%20possessed%20by%20making%20New%20York%E2%80%99s%20parks%20havens%20of%20happiness%20for%20all&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Foct%2F30%2Fmitchell-silver-new-york-parks-bill-de-blasio%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F29%2F1414618411533%2F53d5078d-720a-4e14-b0ed-8019028e2237-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Actress Kristan Johansen performs The Winter’s Tale during the successfully 
re-generated Bryant Park’s celebration of Shakespeare’s 450th birthday in 
April. Photograph: Brendan McDermid/Reuters 
Bryant Park has become a case study of how an area can transform, and 
attitudes with it. When the idea of having floating chairs was first raised, 
there was “push-back”, says Silver, “because they said people are going to 
steal the chairs. I’m sure some chairs walk, but ...” This park is as pleasant 
a space as any in New York.

We walk back to the car and Silver remarks on the effects of communal space in 
a city where the stereotype is that no one knows their neighbours. Like 
libraries, perhaps, he sees it as a way for people to be together while 
maintaining their individual space. The ideal park, he concludes, “is not 
sitting in isolation; it’s connected to everything else around it”.

 * The best parks and green spaces in US cities: share your favourites 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/oct/30/best-parks-green-spaces-us-cities-share-your-favourites> 