
1. Helicon 1 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ypaVdpvGXlE>

In the late 1990s Mogwai arrived like a brick through the window of Britpop in 
its death throes: they could say more with a dark, spare, mysterious guitar 
instrumental than any number of Oasis copyists could in a thousand insipid 
strums. Over the years, they would create their own strange iconography by 
dressing in Kappa tracksuits, picking song and album titles invoking all from 
Glasgow gang culture (Mogwai Young Team) to surreal in-jokes (Oh! How the Dogs 
Stack Up) to, um, Scottish football referees (Hugh Dallas). Arriving two years 
after they formed, Helicon 1 was one of the first pieces of music Mogwai ever 
released, a limited-edition single better recognised today for its inclusion on 
the compilation album Ten Rapid. It made No 2 on John Peel’s 1997 festive 50 
(Peel proved instrumental in boosting Mogwai, inviting them for five sessions 
between 1996 and 2004, some of which are on the 2005 BBC album Government 
Commissions). Helicon 1 has ever since been an anchor in Mogwai’s live set and 
the ultimate manifestation of the quiet-loud formula that defined their 
embryonic phase – a brutal-sweet symphony which, like the best ofMogwai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/mogwai> songs, is poised between giving you 
a manly hug and sticking the head in you.


2. Stanley Kubrick <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VNSGFG1keT4>

Hugely prolific in their first few years, Mogwai released a string of EPs and 
singles between 1997 and 2001 containing all kinds of treasured non-album 
offcuts and oddities, from the trippy electronic jam Superheroes of BMX to Burn 
Girl Prom Queen, a slow sigh of guitar and horns featuring an unlikely cameo 
from the Cowdenbeath Brass Band. A studio in Cowdenbeath gave birth to Stanley 
Kubrick. Initially released in 1999 on an untitled EP issued by Mogwai’s first 
label, Chemikal Underground, this is surely the most stunning of all early 
Mogwai rarities. Dominic Aitchison’s melodic bassline provides the backbone for 
four dreamy minutes of delay-pedal-swollen guitars, swirling organ and weird 
pitch-shifted samples like the sound of a dying wasp, which together eschew the 
shock tactic of some earlier material in favour of a steady textural glow. The 
most beautiful thing to come out of Cowdenbeath since, well, ever.


3. Mogwai Fear Satan <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=du4JbfK5okA>

Much is made of Mogwai’s music’s propensity to mess with your physical 
faculties – be it high, distorted frequencies to sear your eardrums or low end 
to liquidise your guts. Mogwai Fear Satan is the track most liable to cause 
heart palpitations. The fiercely beautiful two-chord, 16-minute climax of their 
first album proper, 1997’s Mogwai Young Team, expands the quiet-loud formula to 
the effect of quiet-loud-quieter-LOUDER. Listen to the supreme live version of 
this track on 2010’s live album Special Moves – or better still, watch said 
version in the accompanying concert film Burning by French directors Vincent 
Moon and Nathanaël Le Scouarnec. No matter how many times you might have heard 
Mogwai Fear Satan previously (it’s another staple of the Mogwai live set), it 
remains impossible to tell exactly when the woozy, flute-licked looping passage 
at the song’s deceptively mellow core is suddenly going to explode back into 
life and scare the hell out of everyone in earshot. Which, considering how loud 
Mogwai shows are, tends to be a lot of people.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgJRtMnZoYEs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgJRtMnZoYEs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgJRtMnZoYEs&media=>
4. Cody <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lm-AC8GkSPA>

There have been several noteworthy exceptions to Mogwai’s customary stance as 
an instrumental band over the years, from R U Still in 2 It, featuring Aidan 
Moffat of fellow 90s Scottish miscreants Arab Strap, to Dial: Revenge, 
featuring words in Welsh byGruff Rhys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/gruff-rhys> from the Super Furry Animals. 
The title of Mogwai’s prettiest and best non-instrumental, Cody, is based on 
the acronym for the album from which it emerged, 1999’s stunningly stark and 
skeletal Come on Die Young (another Glasgow gang reference). De facto frontman 
Stuart Braithwaite sings a shyly multi-layered vocal that feels all the more 
haunting for its less than match-fit fragility. “Old songs stay ’til the end / 
Sad songs remind me of friends” runs the chorus, verbalising the deep Scottish 
melancholy always so evidently at the heart of Mogwai’s music, even if it’s 
rarely put into words.


5. 2 Rights Make 1 Wrong <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s2LYuRzF-c8>

I’m going to stick my neck out and declare 2001’s Rock Action to be Mogwai’s 
best album (much as Braithwaite disagrees 
<http://noisey.vice.com/en_uk/blog/rank-your-records-mogwai-stuart-braithwaite>
). The band must be fairly fond of it themselves, being as they also chose Rock 
Action (the nickname of the Stooges’ drummer, Scott Asheton) as the title for 
their record label, on which they’ve released much of their own most recent 
material, plus work by the likes of Errors, Remember Remember, Envy, Part Chimp 
and others. Produced byMercury Rev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/may/18/mercury-rev-10-of-the-best#comments>
’s Dave Fridmann (who is currently producing their next album, due in 2017), 
Rock Action is the album with which Mogwai began the second act of their 
career, dabbling with electronic elements as well as guitar sounds and 
generally evidencing much broader sonic ambitions than they previously might 
have been given credit for. Chiming guitar arpeggios and a vocoder vocal are 
layered and layered upon, first with a hi-hat and ride cymbal, then bass and 
horns and electronics and eventually even a spot of unintelligible singing from 
their old pal Gruff Rhys and some banjo for good measure. This triumphantly sad 
masterpiece stops you in your tracks every time – simply stunning.


6. My Father My King <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U4WYnSFqh6k>

My Father My King is probably the most punk-rock one-third of an hour (and 13 
seconds) of music you will ever hear. It is a single droning, vaguely Middle 
Eastern-sounding riff with a couple of minor variations repeated ad infinitum 
until the whole thing is vaporised by distortion and white noise. ThisSteve 
Albini 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/17/steve-albinis-keynote-address-at-face-the-music-in-full>
-produced standalone single (based loosely on a melody from the Jewish prayer 
Avinu Malkeinu taught to Mogwai by producer Arthur Baker) was released in late 
2001 as a kind of belated coda to the unusually short Rock Action. A sticker on 
its cover described the contents as “two parts serenity and one part death 
metal”, and little more need be said than that. Mogwai went on to release a 
handful of other out-and-out mean-sounding compositions – as this 2006’s 
Glasgow Mega Snake and 2008’s Batcat for two – but none as mean as this. A 
weapons-grade encore number, it’s closed many a Mogwai gig, including all six 
of their 20th anniversary shows in Glasgow and London in 2015.


7. 7.25 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SAsRfkuWLxI>

Mogwai’s evocative instrumentals are ripe for soundtracking and scoring films 
and TV shows, but by and large the band have been selective about which screen 
projects they’ve contributed to (a presumably mortgages-paying spot on Michael 
Mann’sMiami Vice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2006/aug/04/actionandadventure> in 2006 
notwithstanding). They’ve provided original music for both seasons to date of 
the French supernatural dramaThe Returned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-returned>, for Mark Cousins’s 
documentaryAtomic: Living in Dread and Promise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/20/atomic-living-in-dread-and-promise-review>
 (released as a standalone album simply called Atomic in 2016) and the Leonardo 
DiCaprio/Martin Scorsese climate-change documentaryBefore the Flood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/20/before-the-flood-review-leonardo-dicaprio-climate-change-documentary>
. Back in 2006, Mogwai scoredZidane: A 21st Century Portrait 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2006/sep/29/documentary>, an extraordinary, 
almost nature documentary-like art film by fellow Scot Douglas Gordon that used 
17 synchronised cameras to track Zinedine Zidane in close up through a game for 
Real Madrid. Largely improvised in the studio, the music Mogwai produced was a 
return to the haunting, bare-bones stuff of the Come on Die Young album. 7.25 
was in fact an old unused outtake from the 1998 sessions for that record, and 
provides the score and the film’s spine-tingling emotional lift-off with a deep 
breath of droning harmonium, delay-smeared guitars and intricate melodic bass. 
It holds up outside the movie as one of Mogwai’s gentlest and most mesmerising 
compositions.


8. Friend of the Night <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fZKVNJqpBPQ>

Part of the reason why Mogwai have achieved greater career longevity than many 
other predominantly instrumental bands may have something to do with their 
intuitive savvy for making instruments sing what feel like wordless topline 
melodies (think the glockenspiel on Summer, or the high guitar parts onHunted 
by a Freak <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-F1TmBygqp8> and Sine Wave 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CxkB_SMPFkY>, to name just a few). Friend of 
the Night <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fZKVNJqpBPQ>, the lead track from 
their fifth album, Mr Beast, is carried gracefully over a signature rising 
storm of guitars and drums by an elegant, drifting Barry Burns piano line 
that’s irresistibly hummable, and once more kicks Mogwai’s music in an 
unexpected direction. A pocket symphony of stirring proportions, it’s 
officially the band’s biggest singles chart hit to date, having stormed the UK 
Top 40 at a dizzying No 38 in January 2006.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfZKVNJqpBPQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfZKVNJqpBPQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfZKVNJqpBPQ&media=>
9. Mexican Grand Prix <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8Jv64uhCIrU>

Clocking in at a by-Mogwai-standards light-speed 144bpm, Mexican Grand Prix is 
the purring engine in Mogwai’s seventh album, 2011’s menacingly-titled Hardcore 
Will Never Die, But You Will (home to a couple of the group’s all-time great 
song titles in George Square Thatcher Death Party and You’re Lionel Richie). 
Unusually for a band with such distinctive musical signatures, it’s a track in 
obvious thrall to another group – Neu!, or maybe more accurately Stereolab 
doing Neu! – from its electronic pulse to a driving drum beat and eerily 
indecipherable robotically processed vocals, like the sound of a Satnav gone 
tonto. Homage as it may be, it’s an instantly identifiable standout in the 
Mogwai oeuvre.


10. Teenage Exorcists <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D6Hek-AIcBw>

Another Braithwaite-sung rarity, and proof that, two decades in, Mogwai have 
still got it in spades. Coming on like Hüsker Dü fallen down a well – all muddy 
vocals, jagged guitar lines overdriven far beyond the point of conventional 
wisdom and swirling horror-movie organ drones – Teenage Exorcists is probably 
the least Mogwai song Mogwai have ever released. “It’s undone and uncertain / 
an apology accepted,” intones Braithwaite obliquely. Considered in 
juxtaposition to the very different soundtrack work they’ve done recently on 
Atomic and Before the Flood, it’s difficult to predict where Mogwai’s prolific 
and increasingly diverse output might lead them next, and long may that 
continue.

 