
A company that is implicated in an international bribery scandal has launched 
legal action against theSerious Fraud Office <https://www.sfo.gov.uk/>, 
alleging that the anti-corruption agency has unlawfully misused its powers.

The SFO is investigating Unaoil <http://www.unaoil.com/>, a Monaco-based oil 
and gas firm, over allegations that it paid bribes to win contracts in several 
countries for dozens of multinationals, including the British engineering firm 
Rolls-Royce. According to the SFO, the alleged corruption is “very extensive”.

Serious Fraud Office given extra funds to investigate Unaoil bribery claims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/nov/01/serious-office-given-extra-funds-to-investigate-unaoil-bribery-claims>
On Thursday, Unaoil opened its legal challenge in the high court in London, 
claiming that investigators working for the SFO unlawfully raided its 
headquarters in Monaco and seized a large cache of its documents, phones and 
computer equipment in a “cavalier” fashion. The firm alleges that the raid 
amounted to an “excessively wide fishing expedition rather than a proper 
exercise of” its legal powers.

Unaoil has denied all wrongdoing. In its submission to Lord Justice Gross and 
Mr Justice Nicol, Unaoil described how the SFO asked the police in Monaco to 
raid its HQ in March and used a truck to transport the seized material to the 
UK.

Serious Fraud Office opens criminal investigation into Unaoil
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/19/serious-office-opens-criminal-investigation-into-unaoil>
The raid was initiated after the SFO started investigating corruption 
allegations involving Unaoil,Rolls-Royce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/rollsroycegroup> and an Australian 
multinational, according to Unaoil’s submission. The allegations related to 
transactions in Iraq dating back to 2005, the submission said.

Hugo Keith, a QC acting for Unaoil, alleged that the SFO’s request to the 
Monaco police to carry out the raid “lacked candour” and had misled them over 
the seriousness and urgency of the reasons for the raid.

Ata Ahsani, chairman of Unaoil, and his two sons, Cyrus and Saman, are seeking 
a court order quashing the legality of the raid, compelling the SFO to return 
the seized material and destroy any copies it holds.

A day after the raid in March, reporters at Australia’s Fairfax Media alleged 
– based on a leak of thousands of Unaoil’s documents – that the firm had 
systematically corrupted the global oil industry, distributing millions of 
dollars of bribes on behalf ofRolls-Royce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/rollsroycegroup> and other multinationals 
which were seeking to secure contracts.

SFO expands Rolls-Royce inquiry over Iraq bribery allegations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/25/sfo-expands-rolls-royce-inquiry-over-iraq-bribery-allegations>
Rolls-Royce said it was fully co-operating with investigations into the 
allegations and could not comment in detail.

The SFO is opposing Unaoil’s legal challenge, maintaining that its actions 
were legal. In its defence, the SFO said it had “significant grounds to 
suspect” that Unaoil had “paid bribes and/or conspired together to pay bribes 
to high-ranking Iraqi and other public officials on behalf of” its clients.

The agency, which said its investigation was not limited to alleged bribery to 
Iraqi officials, added that Unaoil was “under investigation for the payment of 
a series of large bribes to government officials and officers of state in a 
number of countries in relation to the oil and gas sector”.

Jonathan Hall, the SFO’s QC, told the court that the agency “had reasonable 
grounds to suspect that Unaoil’s main activity is the paying of bribes on 
behalf of western oil infrastructure companies and the corrupting of tendering 
exercises to favour its clients”.

The SFO said it was concerned “that the effect of this flawed claim [by 
Unaoil] – whether that is its purpose or otherwise – will be to delay and 
disrupt an ongoing criminal investigation into serious fraud and corruption”.

Judgment will be given at a later date.
 