
Monash University is under increasing pressure to issue a “genuine apology” 
for appearing to threaten its Malaysian students with disciplinary action if 
they took part in anti-government street protests.


The university has apologised for an email it sent last week warning students 
at its Malaysian campus not to take part in theprotests, which have called for 
greater government transparency and accountability 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/19/thousands-call-for-malaysian-prime-minister-najib-razak-to-quit>
 following a multibillion-dollar misappropriation scandal.

The email, sent by the registrar of Monash University Malaysia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia>, Dr Susheela Nair, suggested the 
gatherings may be “illegal” and warned students against any involvement.

“You are advised not to participate in any illegal gathering/related activity 
which contravenes Malaysian laws,” he wrote. “Any student found to be 
participating in such gathering/activity or who is arrested by the authorities 
for doing so may be subjected to disciplinary proceedings.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fthousands-march-malaysia-demanding-prime-minister-resigns-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Thousands%20march%20in%20Malaysia%20demanding%20prime%20minister%20resigns%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fthousands-march-malaysia-demanding-prime-minister-resigns-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Thousands%20march%20in%20Malaysia%20demanding%20prime%20minister%20resigns%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fthousands-march-malaysia-demanding-prime-minister-resigns-video&media=>
Thousands march in Malaysia demanding prime minister resigns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/nov/19/thousands-march-malaysia-demanding-prime-minister-resigns-video>
The email was widely interpreted as a threat by Monash students in Malaysia 
and many took to social media, attacking the university for undermining their 
democratic rights.

Following a significant backlash online, the university issued an apology the 
next day, stating that the email “did not properly convey the intent of the 
message”.


“Monash University provides an unreserved apology for the wording of the 
recently issued communication to Monash University Malaysia students regarding 
illegal gatherings,” it said.

“The intent of the message was to remind students that taking part in unlawful 
assembly is contrary to the laws of Malaysia and students need to be aware of 
the consequences of undertaking unlawful activities.

“Students who do participate in such activities may be subjected to criminal 
charges by the Malaysian authorities and, as such, students need to consider 
carefully their participation in such events.”

The university appeared to suggest the email was sent out of concern for the 
safety and welfare of its students. But the apology appears to have done little 
to temper students’ anger.

Alumni and current Monash students took to Facebook to voice their disapproval 
of the university’s email.


“Monash, this is very disappointing,” Suzzane Huang, a former student, said. 
“You are precisely not empowering your students if you threaten them with 
disciplinary action when they are trying to participate in a democratic 
process.”

Another Monash alumni, Dhivya Kanaga, wrote: “This is incredibly 
disappointing. The right to peaceful assembly is written in our constitution.

“It’s a bit rich preaching integrity to a bunch of young people who are trying 
to hold government accountable for its lack thereof.”


Malaysia protesters seek to shut news portal accused of trying to unseat 
scandal-hit PM
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/07/malaysia-protesters-seek-to-shut-news-portal-accused-of-trying-to-unseat-scandal-hit-pm>
A public petition 
<https://docs.google.com/a/guardian.co.uk/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSehhttVF9ke4OKDMxu2Tg77bhlDf9MC9N7cabRzIk85m2f_wA/viewform?c=0&w=1>
, signed by academics from Australia and abroad, called on Monash to issue a 
“genuine apology” and retraction.

Saya Anak Bangsa Malaysia, a not-for-profit group representing Malaysians in 
Australia, issued a statement on Tuesday demanding the university retract its 
apparent threat and issue a full apology.


The group’s Australian president, Praveen Nagappan, said the university needed 
to issue a proper apology and discipline the registrar responsible.

Failing that, Nagappan said the university faced a boycott from Malaysian 
students.

“The implication is that the university could be said to be opposed to freedom 
of speech and assembly, which is shameful,” he said. “This is totally contrary 
to values expounded by successive Australian governments and the wider 
community for generations.

“Monash University has totally compromised its standing in academic 
communities around the world, a standing that has been irrevocably damaged by 
the threat of disciplinary action.”
 