
This week, the first major UK exhibition devoted to the Moomins opened. As 
well as featuring original artwork and archive material, the exhibition at 
London’s Southbank Centre captures the true spirit of the artist and writer 
behind some of children’s literature’s most enduring creations.

Tove Jansson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/oct/21/beyond-the-moomins-tove-jansson-art-gets-first-uk-exhibition>
 was born in 1914 in Helsinki, and often said that her leading character, 
Moomintroll, was her alter ego; an imaginary friend who loyally followed her 
everywhere. Initially, the “Moomintroll” was imagined as a terrifying, 
threatening beast; conjured up by Jansson’s uncle when she was young to 
prevent her from sneaking down to the pantry in the dead of night to steal jam 
and liver paté. The first time Jansson rendered Moomintroll visually was as a 
scrawl on the family outhouse wall, with a longer snout and an awful glare. But 
over the years the troll evolved and softened in shape, and developed friends 
who lived together in a magical setting: Moominvalley.

Beyond the Moomins: Tove Jansson's art gets major UK exhibition
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/oct/21/beyond-the-moomins-tove-jansson-art-gets-first-uk-exhibition>
Inspired by the Nordic scenery of her youth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jan/15/tove-jansson-life-words-westin-review>
, Jansson painted a luscious terrain, with steep sloping mountain peaks and 
blossoming flowers. She began creating from a young age, going on to art school 
in Stockholm and then Paris, not only producing paintings and illustrations but 
also a contributing to the satire magazine, Garm, in the 1930s and 40s. During 
the bombing of Helsinki in 1944, Jansson found sanctuary in her attic studio. 
It was there that she finished her first book featuring Moomintroll,The Moomins 
and the Great Flood, in 1945.

Through the eyes of the Moomins, Jansson was able to convert the ugliness of 
the world around her into something new and beautiful. She used the tales to 
tackle difficult subjects and challenge taboos. The characters of Thingumy and 
Bob, who are inseparable and carry a suitcase containing a ruby, are thought to 
be fictional representations of herself and her lover at the time, theatre 
directorVivica Bandler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jan/19/tove-jansson-sculptors-daughter-review>
, who was married. Unlike Jansson and Bandler, eventually Thingumy and Bob are 
able to open up their case and show the ruby of their love to the world.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fcelebration-moomins-exhibition-tove-jansson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef60147544acdb3d91a5c3f9b3db855eaa5fc003%2F0_183_3392_2035%2F3392.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Moomintroll%2C%20Thingumy%20and%20Bob%3A%20welcome%20to%20the%20Moomins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fcelebration-moomins-exhibition-tove-jansson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Moomintroll%2C%20Thingumy%20and%20Bob%3A%20welcome%20to%20the%20Moomins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fcelebration-moomins-exhibition-tove-jansson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef60147544acdb3d91a5c3f9b3db855eaa5fc003%2F0_183_3392_2035%2F3392.jpg>
 Tove Jansson, next to her self-portrait. Photograph: Erkki Raskinen/REX 
The Moomin series is read in more than 60 countries, and has spawned 
magazines, theatre performances and television programmes around the world. 
These plump, delightful creatures have shaped the childhoods of many with their 
simple lives of eating, sleeping, playing – as well as their deeper, layered 
meanings. But I can’t help think that it’s the essence of their maker that has 
made the Moomins so charming and relevant. Not only do the stories offer sweet 
escapism, they are underpinned by honesty, grace and grit. Their roots 
are deep, alive, and here to stay.

• Laura Dockrill has written the audio soundtrack to Adventures in Moominland 
at the Southbank Centre, London SE1, until 23 April.southbankcentre.co.uk 
<https://www.southbankcentre.co.uk/whats-on/119314-southbank-centres-adventures-moominland-explore-moomins-through-life-201617>
.
 