
“When we started the process, everyone thought ‘resilience’ was just about 
climate adaptation and fighting flooding,” says Jonas Kroustrup,chief 
resilience officer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/nov/09/what-chief-resilience-officer-summit-100rc-mexico-city>
 (CRO) forVejle 
<http://www.100resilientcities.org/cities/entry/vejles-resilience-challenge#/-_/>
, a city of just over 100,000 people in southern Denmark. “But when we started 
to unfold the topic and ask people what it meant to them, it came to the point 
where social resilience became the main heart of the strategy.”

Earlier this year, Vejle launched Europe’s first urban resilience strategy 
<http://www.100resilientcities.org/blog/entry/city-of-vejle-unveils-europes-first-comprehensive-resilience-strategy#/-_/>
, which will see more than 100 city-wide initiatives – from cycle highways to 
flood-adapted neighbourhoods – rolled out over the next four years, in order to 
develop the city’s adaptability to future challenges.

Resilient Vejle <http://www.resilient.vejle.dk/> is one of 11 strategies 
announced so far as part of the Rockefeller Foundation’s global initiative100 
Resilient Cities <http://www.100resilientcities.org/pages/about-us#/-_/> 
(100RC), withRotterdam 
<http://www.100resilientcities.org/blog/entry/resilient-rotterdam-ready-for-the-21st-century#/-_/>
 the latest to be launched today. Cities as far afield and as varied asRio de 
Janeiro, Byblos, San Francisco and New York 
<http://www.100resilientcities.org/blog/entry/city-resilience-strategy-hub#/-_/>
 have produced detailed strategies; each offers a bespoke blueprint for how the 
city will better prepare for, and bounce back from, all manner of pressures and 
shocks – not just climate change and natural disasters, but rampant 
urbanisation, economic downturns, social unrest, changing technologies and more.

Vejle fits the profile of a resilient city rather well. Located at the mouth 
of a fjord and the meeting point of two rivers, the city – whose name means 
“ford” – has always had a close relationship with water, beginning life as a 
fishing village before growing into an important port city for Denmark’s 
industrial trade.

Co-creation requires an openness to recognise that we don’t have all the 
answers and solutions
Ulla Varneskov 
But today, the water that brought Vejle such prosperity is its biggest threat: 
sea-levels are expected to rise by 25cm in the fjord by 2050, and it is at 
serious risk offlooding due to its low-level topography 
<http://www.floodmap.net/elevation/ElevationMap/?gi=2610613>.

During the industrial revolution, Vejle was known as “the Manchester of 
Denmark” for its thriving manufacturing industry, but in recent years, the city 
has suffered as a result of the financial crisis, and new technology creating a 
turbulent job market. Furthermore, Kroustrup explains, an ageing population and 
limited higher education options make it difficult for the city to retain young 
minds.

Vejle’s response to this challenge is fascinating in the context of the 
refugee crisis – a politically sensitive issue in Denmark as elsewhere in 
Europe. According to Kroustrup, the city is looking at immigration from a new 
perspective as a “step-up for the city to become a globalised society”, having 
been voted thebest municipality for refugee integration 
<http://www.politiko.dk/nyheder/vejle-kommune-haedret-for-god-integration> in 
Denmark in 2012.
 Vejle’s floating kayak club, the first of its kind in Denmark. Photograph: 
Nils Rosenvold 
In Vejle, protecting against climate, economic and social shocks takes on a 
very human form. Underlying all aspects of its resilience strategy is the 
mantra of “co-creation”, a bottom-up meets top-down approach that calls for 
collaboration between citizens and the municipality.

“Co-creation requires an openness to recognise that we don’t have all the 
answers and solutions,” says Ulla Varneskov, coordinator for integration and 
social resilience in Vejle. “Collaboration is a prerequisite for a better 
future for all … that requires a pinch of risk-taking to put one’s own 
resources and provisions into play.”

To make sure drawing up the strategy was not simply a “desktop process”, an 
architecture school from the neighbouring city of Aarhus ran workshops where 
residents were invited to shape and build 3D models of Vejle, adding in their 
priorities and concerns for the city. Open meetings were held and existing 
citizen networks engaged to ensure a collaborative relationship between 
citizens, the municipality and other stakeholders (which will continue to come 
into play as Vejle rolls out the resilient actions).

“By involving broad input from the beginning, on the one hand we reduced the 
obvious pitfalls [of miscommunication],” Varneskov says. “But on the other, 
this required an almost inhuman overview of a very complicated process to 
ensure that all voices are heard in a way that ensured a coherent strategy.”

Vejle has identified three neighbourhoods that will be used as “laboratories” 
for experimenting with different resilience projects, from physical 
infrastructure, to community cohesion initiatives. A waterfront neighbourhood 
will become a test-bed for storm management and flood adaptation, of which a 
large portion will be integrated into everyday public spaces to enhance 
liveability – a technique already underway in citiesincluding Copenhagen 
<http://citiscope.org/story/2016/why-copenhagen-building-parks-can-turn-ponds> 
– while another area with a large amount of social housing will become a 
laboratory for bottom-up community initiatives.

Looking further into the future, an 80-hectare brownfield site on the 
outskirts of Vejle will be developed into a new residential area by 2050, by 
integrating and scaling up successful solutions from elsewhere in the city.

Vejle may be tiny in comparison to a city such as New York, but its pledge to 
build urban resilience hasn’t gone unnoticed across the Atlantic. According to
Daniel Zarrilli 
<http://www.designingcityresilience.com/speaker/daniel-zarrilli/>, Kroustrup’s 
counterpart CRO: “Vejle may be a smaller city than New York, but it’s 
demonstrating creativity in tackling it biggest challenges. By studying 
practices from around the globe, we can be sure that even our own OneNYC 
strategy continues to evolve as we prepare our growing city to be even more 
equitable, more sustainable and more resilient.”
 New York’s resilience strategy includes how to repair the extensive damage 
from Hurricane Sandy. Photograph: Spencer Platt/Getty Images 
For New York, many challenges brought about by climate change, growth, ageing 
infrastructure and rising inequality will be faced in the coming decades. The 
city’s $19.5bn (£13.5bn)climate resilience strategy 
<http://www.nyc.gov/html/onenyc/downloads/pdf/publications/OneNYC.pdf> outlines 
more than 250 actions from elevating electrical infrastructure, to constructing 
flood walls and repairing the damage caused by Hurricane Sandy in 2012.


Vejle has taken a critical step by making resilience central to their city’s 
overall strategy
Daniel Zarrilli 
The city of New Orleans is also looking at how to bounce back from the impact 
of storm-related damage in the wake of Hurricane Katrina. Itsstrategy 
<http://resilientnola.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/08/Resilient_New_Orleans_Strategy.pdf>
 – which recently received abest practice award 
<https://www.planning.org/newsreleases/2016/mar30-c/> by the American Planning 
Association – adopts a technical approach to resilience, with actions including 
an urban water plan, redesigning the transport system and leveraging critical 
resources for coastal projects.

Kroustrup and others involved in Vejle’s resilience efforts recently returned 
from an ideas sharing event with other CROs in New York and New Orleans – the 
first two cities to deliver their strategies last year. “All cities have 
something to learn from each other,” he agrees. “Resilience isn’t a state 
you’re in, it’s something you do and it’s reflected in the way you’re 
organised.”

The visit to the US was a chance for cities in the 100RC network to exchange 
ideas around building resilience. A similar visit took place to Rotterdam 
earlier this year – flood-adapted solutions from this sea-level city have
inspired actions of other members of the network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/mar/02/100-resilient-cities-ideas-to-solve-chennai-flooding-problem-manatees>
, andcollaborative relationships 
<http://www.100resilientcities.org/blog/entry/water-management-and-multi-benefit-solutions-the-rotterdam-exchange#/-_/>
 are being formed.

Related: Expect the unexpected: how to measure and improve a city's resilience 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/may/18/city-resilience-index-expect-unexpected-how-measure-improve>

But as each new strategy is made public, it also becomes clear that each 
city’s approach must be unique to its circumstances. In contrast, perhaps, to 
the traditions of the Danish welfare society “where the citizen is a consumer 
of services”, Vejle hopes to learn from its citizens by supporting existing 
initiatives and enabling people to take ownership of services to create 
self-sustaining communities.

“It’s very difficult to see social resilience,” Kroustrup says. “It’s embedded 
in culture, communities and relationships. Our challenge is to inscribe this 
into infrastructure to make this city more liveable.”


But as is the case with all of the plans drawn up under the 100RC guidelines, 
they must be backed up with effective implementation. “Vejle has taken a 
critical step by making resilience central to their city’s overall strategy,” 
says NYC’s Zarrilli. “Now the hard work begins of partnering to deliver on 
their ambitious vision.”


Guardian Cities is a member of the Habitat III Journalism Project; read more 
about the project here <http://citiscope.org/journalism-project>. Follow 
Guardian Cities onTwitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 