
8.38am BST 

Summary

Middle East Live is now primarily a forum for readers to share links and 
offer commentary on developments in theMiddle East and North Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/middleeast>. Please post your comments below.

Here's a roundup of the latest news:

Egypt

• President Mohamed Morsi has blamed unspecified "enemies of Egypt" for 
sabotaging the democratic system and warned that the polarised state of the 
country's politics threatened to plunge it into chaos. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2013/jun/26/egypt-mohamed-morsi-mistakes> In a 
speech to mark his first year in office Morsi refused to offer serious 
concessions to the opposition – and pointedly praised the army, whom many 
opposition members hope will facilitate a transition of power in the coming 
weeks. Speaking before a planned mass demonstration this weekend by his 
opponents who are demanding that the president resigns and calls an early 
election, Morsi criticised opposition politicians for failing to engage in what 
he perceives to be constructive dialogue.

• Before Morsi's speech his supporters and opponents clashed in the northern 
city of Mansoura, the BBC reports. 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-middle-east-23063642> Two people were killed 
and more than 170 injured, according to a health ministry spokesman. 
 Egyptian President Mohammed Morsi addresses a conference to mark his first 
year in power. Photograph: Egyptian Presidency/AFP/Getty Images 
Syria

• Russia has evacuated the last of its personnel from Syria, including from 
its Mediterranean naval base in Tartus, in a move that appears to underline 
Moscow's mounting concerns about the escalating crisis. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2013/jun/26/russia-withdraws-personnel-syria>
 But there was no official confirmation of a claim from rebel Free Syrian Army 
sources that a Russian plane had been shot down and its pilot captured in the 
western Aleppo area.

• America's top military officer general Martin Dempsey has recommended 
bolstering Lebanese forces grappling with the fallout from Syria's civil war 
and helping Iraq better deal with the re-emergence of al-Qaida.  
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/2013/06/26/uk-syria-crisis-usa-lebanon-idUKBRE95P1KV20130626>
He said he had recommended sending military trainers and accelerating arms 
sales to the countries neighbouring Syria. "We've made a recommendation that as 
we look at the challenges faced by the Lebanese armed forces, the Iraqi 
security forces with a re-emerging al Qaeda inIraq 
<http://uk.reuters.com/places/iraq?lc=int_mb_1001>, and the Jordanians, that we 
would work with them to help them build additional capability," Dempsey told 
reporters at the Pentagon.

• Bashar al-Assad's forces have retaken Tel Kalak on the Lebanese border as 
they press an offensive against rebels in a conflict that has now cost more 
than 100,000 lives according to a new tally by activists, Reuters reports. 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/2013/06/26/uk-syria-crisis-idUKBRE95P0PR20130626>
 The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, which monitors violence through a 
network of security and medical sources in Syria, said the death toll from two 
years of conflict had risen above 100,000 - making it by far the deadliest of 
the uprisings to have swept the region.

Tunisia

• A Tunisian court has ordered the release of three European feminist 
activists who staged a topless protest in Tunis last month against the 
Islamist-led government. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2013/jun/27/tunisia-releases-european-femen-activists>
 The release of the three women – one German and two French members of the 
women's rights group Femen – may mollify the European Union, Tunisia's main 
economic ally.

United Arab Emirates

• State security officers have subjected detainees to systematic mistreatment, 
including torture, according to letters from detainees smuggled out to human 
rights groups. 
<http://www.hrw.org/news/2013/06/27/uae-reports-systematic-torture-jails> The 
mistreatment described in the letters is consistent with other allegations of 
torture at UAE state security facilities, and indicates that torture is a 
systematic practice at these facilities, according to Amnesty, Human Rights 
Watch and Alkarama.
 