
In the shadow of one of Stalin’s Seven Sisters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/20/activists-paint-moscow-stalin-tower-ukraine-colours>
 skyscrapers in Moscow’s Presnensky District, an unkempt park gives way to a 
trio of yellowing buildings in varying states of decay. The crumbling concrete 
and overgrown wall-garden don’t give much away, but this is the product of the 
utopian dreams of a young Soviet state – a six-storey blueprint for communal 
living, known as the Narkomfin building.

Designed by architects Moisei Ginzburg and Ignaty Milinis in 1928, the 
building represents an important chapter in Moscow’s development – as both a 
physical city and an ideological state. Built to house the employees of the
Narodnyo Kommissariat Finansov (Commissariat of Finance), Narkomfin was a 
laboratory for social and architectural experimentation to transform thebyt 
(everyday life) of the ideal socialist citizen.

In the years following the 1917 Russian revolution, living conditions in the 
newly established Soviet Union left much to be desired. Newcomers moving from 
the countryside with the promise of a new life arrived in an overcrowded and 
underdeveloped Moscow with very little infrastructure or housing. Architects 
were tasked with developing a solution for the housing shortage – and a 
framework to support the changing face of Russian society.

Enter the “social condenser”, an idea developed by the Organisation of 
Contemporary Architects, who spearheaded revolutionary ideas of collective 
living through standardised Stroikom units, confining private amenities to a 
single cell while facilities like kitchens and living space were communal. 
Thanks to this design, the Narkomfin building appears as one long apartment 
block, connected to a smaller communal structure by a covered walkway and a 
central garden space.

Occupying a central spot between the US embassy and a shopping centre, the 
Narkomfin is ripe for real-estate development
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F05%2Fmoscow-narkomfin-soviet-collective-living-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F4%2F1430736056314%2F7e54953e-7063-497a-ad27-d474a37bb3a3-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Moscow's%20Narkomfin%20building%3A%20Soviet%20blueprint%20for%20collective%20living%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2029&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F05%2Fmoscow-narkomfin-soviet-collective-living-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Moscow%27s%20Narkomfin%20building%3A%20Soviet%20blueprint%20for%20collective%20living%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2029&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F05%2Fmoscow-narkomfin-soviet-collective-living-history-cities-50-buildings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F4%2F1430736056314%2F7e54953e-7063-497a-ad27-d474a37bb3a3-2060x1236.jpeg>
 An old stove in one of the communal staircases. Photograph: Arcaid Images/Alamy
But communist values were not the only ideals behind the Narkomfin: women too 
were set to be emancipated. “Petty housework crushes, strangles and degrades … 
chains her to the kitchen”, wrote Lenin in A Great Beginning 
<https://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1919/jun/28.htm>. “The real 
emancipation of women, real communism, will begin only where and when an 
all-out struggle begins ... against this petty housekeeping.”

While the organisation’s architecture was set to transform the byt of the 
domestic soviet, head architect Ginzburg was in no rush. He spoke of 
architecture as being able to harness the activity of the masses, and to 
“stimulate but not dictate” their transition into a “socially superior mode of 
life”.

Yet the communal and feminist values behind Narkomfin went stale almost as 
soon as the building was completed in 1932, and only a handful of such projects 
were completed before Stalin’s Five Year Plan halted the experiment. After 
Stalin’s rise to power, the communal and emancipatory values the architecture 
intended to inspire were quickly rejected as “leftist” or Trotskyist, and 
Narkomfin’s communal spaces fell in disrepair. Residents illegally installed 
makeshift kitchen units into their homes and the recreation space originally 
planned for the building’s rooftop was instead dominated by a penthouse 
apartment for the commissar of finance, Nikolai Milyutin.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F05%2Fmoscow-narkomfin-soviet-collective-living-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F30%2F1430396939121%2Fe8e80de9-f5fc-431f-9fe4-1fd48526673e-1403x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Moscow's%20Narkomfin%20building%3A%20Soviet%20blueprint%20for%20collective%20living%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2029&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F05%2Fmoscow-narkomfin-soviet-collective-living-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Moscow%27s%20Narkomfin%20building%3A%20Soviet%20blueprint%20for%20collective%20living%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2029&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F05%2Fmoscow-narkomfin-soviet-collective-living-history-cities-50-buildings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F30%2F1430396939121%2Fe8e80de9-f5fc-431f-9fe4-1fd48526673e-1403x2040.jpeg>
 A corner detail of the Narkomfin, by MA Ilyin. Photograph: Schusev State 
Museum of Architecture 
Having since suffered years of neglect, Narkomfin is now caught in a 
tug-of-war battle between developers seeking to capitalise on the building’s 
central Moscow location, and those campaigning for its full restoration. 
Between 2006 and 2008, developer Alexander Senatorov bought up around70% of the 
building’s 54 flats <http://www.cityboom.ru/2014/07/01/narkomfin> (the Moscow 
government owns a further 20%, with the remaining 10% owned by individual 
occupants). Soon after, Senatorov began working with Alexei Ginzburg, the 
original architect’s grandson, to draw up plans for a boutique hotel.

The project fell flat after the 2008 financial crisis, however. The unique 
split-level units were then let to artists at a nominal fee, but more recently,
rental hikes <http://www.adwill.ru/offers/moskva/novinskiy-bulvar-25-str-1> 
have been forcing tenants out. They have been replaced by commercial 
establishments including a falafel shop, shisha lounge and yoga studio – and 
heightened security.

“These days it is more inviting to hipsters than historians,” says Natalia 
Melikova, a Moscow-based photographer and founder ofthe Constructivist Project 
<http://theconstructivistproject.com/>. “It’s catering to a certain public now.”

Warned of the security guards’ aversion to snoopers, I entered Narkomfin by 
reciting a rehearsed request to visit the sixth-floor shisha lounge. Behind the 
heavy metal entrance door, I was eyeballed, quizzed – “who gave you information 
about us?” – and eventually taken up to the rooftop where, ironically, I was 
free to roam.

In the place where Milyutin’s penthouse once stood, the Healthy Space 
<http://healthyspace.ru/> yoga studio now takes classes outside when the sun is 
shining, against a backdrop of Stalin’s ominous Kudrinskaya Square skyscraper.


Inside, “illegal repairs” 
<http://www.themoscowtimes.com/arts_n_ideas/article/police-halt-illegal-renovations-in-narkomfin/498828.html>
 have been carried out by Senatorov, who plans to spend around $12m (£7.7m) on 
a renovation project carried out by Kleinewelt Architects 
<http://kleinewelt.ru/#/projects/64/>, set to include private accommodation, a 
mini-hotel and a small museum of constructivism. Inside an 
apartment-turned-falafel shop on the fifth floor, I spoke to a resident who 
told me that he values the collective mentality of the occupants of the 
building, for whom rental hikes and hasty evictions loom large.

For now, the building has been temporarily filled with artists and trendy 
businesses, but the ghost of the communal living experiment lingers in the 
hallways of Narkomfin.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F05%2Fmoscow-narkomfin-soviet-collective-living-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F4%2F1430736335701%2Fe3c74dd9-8ab2-427e-ac50-a030cc2f8548-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Moscow's%20Narkomfin%20building%3A%20Soviet%20blueprint%20for%20collective%20living%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2029&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F05%2Fmoscow-narkomfin-soviet-collective-living-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Moscow%27s%20Narkomfin%20building%3A%20Soviet%20blueprint%20for%20collective%20living%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2029&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F05%2Fmoscow-narkomfin-soviet-collective-living-history-cities-50-buildings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F4%2F1430736335701%2Fe3c74dd9-8ab2-427e-ac50-a030cc2f8548-2060x1236.jpeg>
 ‘These days it is more inviting to hipsters than historians.’ Photograph: 
Athlyn Cathcart-Keays 
Occupying a prime spot between the US embassy and a shopping centre, the land 
around Narkomfin is ripe for real-estate development. Having previously 
appeared three times on theWorld Monuments Fund 
<http://www.wmf.org/project/narkomfin-building> watch-list, Melikova has 
nominated the building once again for 2016 listing – but its worsening state 
puts it at risk. If considered more than 70% dilapidated, she explains, 
Narkomfin could be razed, rather than restored: “It is a crucial time for all 
stakeholders – which includes the developer, the city of Moscow, city 
residents, and the international community - to work together for the Narkomfin 
building.”

Kharkiv's Derzhprom: Europe’s first skyscraper complex – a history of cities 
in 50 buildings, day 19
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/apr/20/kharkiv-derzhprom-building-europe-first-skyscraper-history-cities-50-buildings>
Many masterpieces of Soviet constructivism are now crumbling under capitalism, 
replaced by pastiche architecture or pale replicas of former buildings. When 
opening the neighbouring luxuryNovinsky Passage mall 
<http://en.travel2moscow.com/where/shopping/tradecenters/object1691.html>, 
former mayor Yuri Luzhov commented 
<http://theconstructivistproject.com/narkomfins-new-life>: “What a joy that in 
our city such wonderful, new shopping centres are appearing – not such junk”, 
pointing in the direction of Narkomfin.


Melikova, whose Constructivist Project aims to promote the preservation of the 
city’s avant-garde architecture, is hoping for a sensitive restoration of the 
building: “The changes are irreversible and Narkomfin’s authenticity is at 
stake. Moscow does not need another replica.”


 * Which other buildings in the world tell stories about urban history? Share 
your own pictures and descriptions with GuardianWitness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/mar/23/50-buildings-great-stories-urban-history>
, on Twitter and Instagram using #hoc50 or let us know suggestions in the 
comments below
 