
From the pedestrian bridge that crosses the Moskva river towards the Cathedral 
of Christ the Saviour you normally have a clear view of the Kremlin. But for 
several days last week its fairytale towers had disappeared behind an acrid 
grey pall. With the thermometer stuck at a record-shattering 40C and the smog 
hidden bysmoke from the burning marshes outside the city 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/gallery/2010/aug/06/russia-wildfires-gallery#/?picture=365536819&index=14>
, this was a hellish Moscow that none of its residents had ever seen before.

I was in the city to give a talk at a new school, the Strelka Institute of 
Architecture, Media and Design <http://www.strelkainstitute.com/en/>. Located 
just across the river from the cathedral, the Strelka occupies the garages of 
the former Red October chocolate factory, which until two years ago had been 
producing chocolate on that site since the late 19th century. The school only 
opened earlier this summer but already it's one of the liveliest nightspots in 
the city, with film screenings, clubs and a restaurant frequented by Moscow's 
glamorous media set. If you're thinking that this doesn't sound much like a 
school, then you'd have a point, but we'll address that later. In all other 
senses the sight of a former industrial complex being turned into a cultural 
hotspot is one that we've been accustomed to in Europe and the US for several 
decades. In Russia, however, it's a more recent phenomenon.

One reason is that the gradual switch from an industrial to a services economy 
didn't begin until the Yeltsin years. And it was only around the turn of the 
millennium that developers started to speculate on factories (the more 
unscrupulous ones earned the description "raiders"). The other factor in the 
slow speed of the post-industrial project is that the Russians appear to value 
new things more than old ones.

Any sightseers embarking on a tour of Moscow's avant-garde architecture from 
the early 20th century had better brace themselves for a catalogue of 
degradation. The more hallowed the building in the architectural history books, 
the greater its decrepitude. Take theNarkomfin building 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Narkomfin_Building>, designed by Moisei Ginzburg 
with Ignaty Milnis in 1928 to house the workers of the commissariat of finance. 
This radical apartment block, which spearheaded the idea of collective living, 
is one of the most important surviving constructivist buildings. Andit is 
literally crumbling <http://www.flickr.com/photos/archidave/462807057/> – 
indeed it's in such a sorry state that I was amazed to find that people still 
live in it. Then there is another constructivist masterpiece, Konstantin 
Melnikov'sRusakov workers' club 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rusakov_Workers%27_Club> of 1929, with its 
muscular geometric profile.It's still as dramatic as ever but empty now 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a-uIJ110JLw> except for an Azerbaijani 
restaurant that has attached its own folksy timber entrance (with lurid neon 
signage) to the unforgettable facade.

But it is not just the early modernist heritage of Moscow that is unloved. 
Even the pride of a more recent Soviet past is going to seed. TheAll-Russia 
Exhibition Centre <http://www.moscow.info/parks/vvts.aspx> (VDNKh), the expo 
site in the north of the city that was a town-sized advertisement of Soviet 
achievements, is today a rather seedy theme park. None of its grandiose 
pavilions still contain anything worth seeing. The grandest, announced by a 
Tupolev rocket in the forecourt, is the 1966 Space Pavilion. It now houses a 
garden centre that would embarrass your average parish hall, let alone this 
vaulted cathedral to the Soviet space programme. Under the dome, the giant 
portrait of Yuri Gagarin has a sheet draped over it. I asked a local why and he 
answered simply: "Shame." It would dishonour the legendary cosmonaut to look 
out over this mess.

This is the climate in which the Russian post-industrial project is taking 
shape. Preservation is not a major preoccupation here, which is ironic 
considering that much of the post-communist architecture has been built to look 
old (it's known unofficially as the "Luzhkov style", after Moscow's 
long-serving mayor). And yet one fifth of Moscow is made up of industrial sites 
– think of the impact that Tate Modern had on London's cultural scene and then 
imagine how much potential Moscow has. But destroy-and-rebuild is the model 
favoured here, with over 1,000 historical buildings knocked down in the last 
decade. There's no pressure from heritage bodies and no incentives to convert 
industrial buildings. Indeed, there tend to be disincentives, such as the 
regulation that only new buildings can qualify for class A office status. It's 
no wonder that developers have been either demolishing the factories to build 
luxury apartment blocks or turning them into business parks.

In the last few years, however, things have started to change. For one thing, 
the recession has put the brakes on developers, allowing nimbler entrepreneurs 
to slip in. The Red October factory, for instance, was meant to be turned into 
a luxury residential zone called Golden Island, with buildings byNorman Foster 
<http://www.fosterandpartners.com/Practice/Default.aspx> (much beloved of 
Russia) andJean Nouvel 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/art/architecture/7875616/Jean-Nouvels-Serpentine-Pavilion-review.html>
. Only the credit crunch enabled the Strelka's founders to lease their site. 
But there is also a new player on the Moscow property scene: the oligarch's 
wife, who knows only too well from the international circuit how to turn 
defunct industry into cultural prestige. One such isDasha Zhukova 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2008/aug/27/art.russia>, Roman 
Abramovich's wife, who two years ago turned Melnikov's temple-like Bakhmetevsky 
bus garage of 1927 into an art centre calledGarage 
<http://www.garageccc.com/eng/>. Last week it was holding a Rothko 
retrospective, the kind of show that normally only major museums can handle.

On a grander scale, though less refined architecturally, are the cultural 
developments in the Kursky industrial area. Here there isWinzavod 
<http://www.winzavod.com/>, a red-brick wine factory built in the 1860s. It was 
bought by Roman Trotsenko to turn into offices but again his wife, Sofia, saw 
the potential for a cultural centre. Today it's full of galleries, showrooms 
and creative studio spaces. And right next door to it is what used to be the 
Arma gasworks, which supplied the gas for Moscow's streetlights. Now its four 
brick gasometers are home to a clutch of nightclubs, creative agencies and 
publishing houses. In a strange hangover from Soviet bureaucracy, you have to 
show your passport to enter and you're not allowed to take photographs, which 
somehow is not quite in the spirit of the place.

Here's the question: is it to be left to the oligarchs' wives to deliver on 
all this potential cultural programming? One Muscovite I met referred to Garage 
and Vinzavod rather dismissively as "toys for rich people". "Still," he added, 
"they could just be buying more yachts."

Perhaps the Strelka offers a different model. The founders of this 
postgraduate design school, with a curriculum designed byRem Koolhaas 
<http://topics.nytimes.com/topics/reference/timestopics/people/k/rem_koolhaas/index.html>
, are at least using their wealth to invest in the next generation. And one way 
that they are making the school's name (while recouping some funds) is as a 
social hotspot. In fact, the Strelka is the kind of hybrid that could probably 
only exist in the turbo-capitalist experiment of Moscow: one part ideology, one 
part philanthropy (the education will be free) and one part the place to be 
seen. If the school succeeds, then while Russia may have come late to the 
post-industrial party, it will have contributed something new to the rather 
predictable formats we know so well in Europe. Meanwhile, locals are paying it 
a classic Muscovite compliment: "It's so not like Moscow."
 