
Myka Meier does not own a single pair of jeans. What she does own is 
impeccable manners, a deep admiration forKate Middleton, the Duchess of 
Cambridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/30/the-duchess-of-cambridge-ambassador-of-british-style-post-brexit>
, and a business that hopes to pass both those traits on to you.

The Duchess of Cambridge: ambassador of British style, post-Brexit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/30/the-duchess-of-cambridge-ambassador-of-british-style-post-brexit>
Meier runs a New York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> 
City-based international etiquette school that offers classes at locations 
including the Plaza Hotel, where, appropriately for classes on reinvention, the 
latest version of the Great Gatsby was filmed.

I am at the Palm Court inside the Plaza to take a one-hour sample class based 
on Meier’s popular Duchess Effect course, modelled on the former Miss 
Middleton, whose parents made millions in party supplies and who is set one day 
to be the queen of England.

As the Duchess of Cambridge, Middleton had to learn proper etiquette to turn 
her into a model royal, Meier reasons, and so can students at Meier’s school, 
Beaumont Etiquette.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fetiquette-kate-middleton-royal-manners%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5fbba120373fc4ad1be95914e876be25b546679f%2F0_0_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Moves%20like%20Middleton%3A%20the%20New%20York%20etiquette%20class%20that's%20fit%20for%20a%20queen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fetiquette-kate-middleton-royal-manners%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Moves%20like%20Middleton%3A%20the%20New%20York%20etiquette%20class%20that%27s%20fit%20for%20a%20queen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fetiquette-kate-middleton-royal-manners%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5fbba120373fc4ad1be95914e876be25b546679f%2F0_0_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
 Hair to the throne. Composite: Joshua Bright for the Guardian & Getty Images 
Etiquette, Meier explains as I take my seat for afternoon tea, is about 
respect, kindness and thoughtfulness. Practicing what she preaches, Meier 
immediately compliments me on the color of my cardigan (pink) to put me at 
ease. While her posture is perfect, her chin always parallel to the floor, her 
dress strictly conservative and her scarf neat and slightly fussy, there is 
nothing cold or unapproachable about Meier.


Like the Duchess of Cambridge, Meier is about reinvention. Having grown up in 
a family of “very modest means” in Sarasota, Florida, Meier is today a dual 
British and American citizen with a Swiss husband and training from top Swiss 
and British finishing schools under her belt.


As we sit chatting, a perfectly poised, handsome waiter (who I later learn is 
actually the manager of the Palm Court) brings us a tiered tray of scones, 
sandwiches and desserts for our afternoon tea, which Meier reminds me I am not 
to confuse with high tea (another meal entirely, apparently).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fetiquette-kate-middleton-royal-manners%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ed68f8c45540bc7d0d7f889047aa7ecffa6bb15%2F0_206_6917_4150%2F6917.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Moves%20like%20Middleton%3A%20the%20New%20York%20etiquette%20class%20that's%20fit%20for%20a%20queen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fetiquette-kate-middleton-royal-manners%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Moves%20like%20Middleton%3A%20the%20New%20York%20etiquette%20class%20that%27s%20fit%20for%20a%20queen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fetiquette-kate-middleton-royal-manners%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ed68f8c45540bc7d0d7f889047aa7ecffa6bb15%2F0_206_6917_4150%2F6917.jpg>
 Reporter descending a staircase: Oksman learns the proper way to walk 
downstairs. Photograph: Joshua Bright for the Guardian 



Before we start eating, Meier gives me a quick rundown of the only two ways a 
lady can sit. Knees and ankles together with legs off to the side (the Duchess 
Slant) or knees together and ankles crossed, with both heels on the ground (the 
Cambridge Cross). Sitting in that pose, my back perfectly straight, not 
touching the back of my chair takes a lot more muscle control than I 
anticipated. After a few minutes it starts to feel like holding a yoga pose, 
Upward Facing Ladyship. No wonder the duchess works out, I think: there is no 
other way to sustain muscle control for that long. Every prescribed movement 
and gesture has a purpose and a story, Meier explains. The Duchess Slant and 
the Cambridge Cross are the best ways to prevent a camera, or a companion, from 
seeing up your skirt. When people cross their legs, they often rock their 
knees, showing impatience, anxiety or other emotions. Part of good etiquette is 
hiding those emotions, which the knees-together method of sitting ensures.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fetiquette-kate-middleton-royal-manners%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18331a918ed6487d29ad52962026bdb835fe53ea%2F0_513_7206_4322%2F7206.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Moves%20like%20Middleton%3A%20the%20New%20York%20etiquette%20class%20that's%20fit%20for%20a%20queen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fetiquette-kate-middleton-royal-manners%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Moves%20like%20Middleton%3A%20the%20New%20York%20etiquette%20class%20that%27s%20fit%20for%20a%20queen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fetiquette-kate-middleton-royal-manners%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18331a918ed6487d29ad52962026bdb835fe53ea%2F0_513_7206_4322%2F7206.jpg>
 Chin up: posture is always important. Photograph: Joshua Bright for the 
Guardian 
Speaking of hiding emotions, big hand gestures and expressive faces are out 
too. During her training, Meier’s teachers went so far as to tie students’ 
hands together when they spoke so they could not gesticulate. Meier kindly 
informs me that she will not be tying me up as part of the class, but I am 
always to remember to slow down when speaking, and use words, not hand motions.


Tea and coffee are brought to the table, and more backstory around etiquette 
emerges. A proper lady pours milk into her coffee or tea, not the other way 
around. Back before affordable mass-produced china, explains Meier, only the 
wealthy could afford fine porcelain that would not crack if nearly boiling 
liquid was added to it. So coffee or tea would be poured and cold milk added 
after. Those of lesser means had to use clay cups that could not stand boiling 
liquids, and so would first pour in cold milk, followed by a hot liquid. While 
teacups no longer crack these days, no matter their price point, the tradition 
continues.


After drinking all that tea, or in my case, as an American, coffee, if you 
should need to use the restroom, stand up and say “excuse me”, Meier instructs, 
but never say “pardon me”, as only staff need to ask for a pardon. A lady, 
Meier emphasizes, never needs to ask for pardon. I silently thank Meier for 
giving me my new life motto as we move on to the next phase of the class, 
proper car etiquette.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fetiquette-kate-middleton-royal-manners%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27057829df928486d2faad6d044302b58211d50c%2F0_0_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Moves%20like%20Middleton%3A%20the%20New%20York%20etiquette%20class%20that's%20fit%20for%20a%20queen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fetiquette-kate-middleton-royal-manners%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Moves%20like%20Middleton%3A%20the%20New%20York%20etiquette%20class%20that%27s%20fit%20for%20a%20queen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fetiquette-kate-middleton-royal-manners%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27057829df928486d2faad6d044302b58211d50c%2F0_0_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
 Iron grip: who knew etiquette could be empowering? Composite: Joshua Bright 
for the Guardian & Rex Features 
Here I am on slightly better footing. My budget as a writer doesn’t normally 
stretch to expert etiquette classes, so over the years I have learned to 
improvise. Even in this rushed world where everyone complains manners are dead, 
good etiquette is there if you look for it. I learned the proper way to get in 
and out of a car in a skirt by watching the film Midnight in the Garden of Good 
and Evil, where the Lady Chablis, a transgender actor and nightclub performer, 
demonstrates the correct technique to avoid flashing her “candy”. I don’t have 
any candy, but the same rules apply. When Meier pulls out a chair so I can 
practice car exiting etiquette, I mention the candy lessons. The Lady Chablis 
does not disappoint. Scooting over to the edge of the car seat and swinging 
your legs out, knees firmly together, is indeed the right way to elegantly 
emerge from an automobile.


The last part of our lesson is spent on walking in high heels and descending a 
staircase. While I have always been a natural when it comes to walking in heels 
– head held high, shoulders back – walking down a steep staircase without 
looking down is another matter. Meier has me walk down a smooth marble 
staircase, one hand gently on the banister. It takes all of my self-control not 
to look down at my feet and a few tries before I stop clutching the banister 
for dear life. I am reminded of all the photos I have seen of Kate Middleton 
walking down the stairs of a private plane, baby on her hip, eyes locked 
smiling on the crowd, and it gives me new appreciation of the acrobatics 
involved.


The class I sampled is geared towards women, but Meier actually teaches a 
cross-section of ages and genders, with many clients coming from the corporate 
world who need to know how to behave at formal dinners and charity events. In 
fact, one of the most basic skills Meier teaches consists of proper handshake 
rules: firm hold, eye contact, two shakes for a business associate, three for a 
friend. A firm shake is important – don’t come across as weak and soft, Meier 
cautions me. Be a powerful and assertive woman. Who knew etiquette could be so 
empowering?

 