
Surveys of Britain’s favourite comedy – and indeed, Britain’s favourite 
anything – are 10 a penny; the more so in our click-bait era. TheRadio Times 
ran one last August 
<http://www.radiotimes.com/news/2016-08-23/mrs-browns-boys-voted-the-best-british-sitcom-of-the-21st-century>
, which foundMrs Brown’s Boys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/jan/29/mrs-browns-boys-worst-comedy-ever-made-smash>
 to be the nation’s best-loved sitcom of the century so far. Now here comes
another from the TV channel Gold 
<https://inews.co.uk/essentials/culture/television/top-comics-vote-fawlty-towers-greatest-sitcom-time/>
, in which “comics reveal their favourite British TV comedy moments and 
characters” of all time. What’s new is that this is a poll of professional 
comedians, and so more insightful, we assume, than those vox-pop efforts 
elsewhere. And so it is, to the degree that the sophisticate’s bete noire Mrs 
Brown’s Boys doesn’t get a sniff of glory. But beyond that, not so much.

The headline winners here are firmly from the drawer marked “usual suspects”, 
asFawlty Towers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/sep/18/the-10-best-fawlty-towers-moments-40th-anniversary>
 is named best sitcom, and Alan Partridge the favourite male comic character. 
“Don’t mention the war!” features in the top three best-loved scenes, a 
category that includes –look away now, Stewart Lee <https://vimeo.com/141220204>
 –Del Boy falling through the bar <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=63rcdLeXiU8> 
in Only Fools and Horses. The best one-liners in UK sitcom history are “Don’t 
tell him, Pike” from Dad’s Army and “A pint? Why that’s very nearly an armful!” 
fromThe Blood Donor episode of Hancock’s Half Hour 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IzJdS59ZiwA>. (Given how closely these results 
mirror conventional wisdom since the days of shillings and pence, we probably 
didn’t need professional comedians to tell us that.)

There are some distinctions between Gold’s survey and public polls on the same 
subject. The sitcom Top 10 finds room for Peep Show but not Dad’s Army, The 
Thick of It but not Mrs Brown’s Boys. The greatRik Mayall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/shortcuts/2014/jun/09/rik-mayall-alternative-comedy-changed-uk-standup>
 features prominently, and Alan Partridge apparently looms larger for comics 
than for the public. In that respect, it’s a slightly edgier list. 
Interestingly, Joanna Lumley, not primarily a comic actor, comes out on top for 
best female comedy performance (in Ab Fab). But one looks in vain for surprise 
entries, or to be introduced by this crack squad of comedy experts to some 
overlooked gem of a scene, some beautifully honed one-liner that’s escaped the 
nation’s notice. Instead, at No 9, we get this from The Vicar of Dibley: “You 
were expecting a bloke: beard, Bible and bad breath. Instead you’ve got a babe 
with a bob cut and a magnificent bosom.” I doubt that was in the Top 10 
funniest lines in that episode of The Vicar of Dibley, far less the entire 
history of UK sitcoms.


Should we blame the surveyed comics? Who knows? It’d be interesting to see the 
full list of all 100 contributors, but only a handful (including David Baddiel, 
Jenny Eclair, Reece Shearsmith and Alexei Sayle) are named on the press 
release. How diverse were they in terms of age, gender and ethnicity? But the 
blandifying effect of polls like these is beyond the influence of any 
contributor, as I’m reminded every Edinburgh fringe, whenthe TV channel Dave’s 
annual competition for best joke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/23/masai-graham-organ-donor-funniest-joke-edinburgh-fringe-2016>
 throws up another selection of so-what? one-liners.

 Partly that’s because selection by a panel of experts is a homogenising 
process that excludes rogue candidates and is susceptible to group-think. (It’s 
striking how the best characters, scenes and one-liners here are drawn from the 
same small pool of comedies – as if no bad sitcom ever generated a very funny 
line.) But mainly it’s because comedy looks much less funny when reduced to its 
component parts, particularly when those parts are then given hallowed, “best 
of all time” status. (Which is the kind of idiocy Lee mocked with his Del Boy 
sketch.) Most of the one-liners listed aren’t funny out of context, or indeed 
recognisable as one-liners. Several of the best-ever scenes aren’t even comedic 
– Tim and Dawn in The Office finally getting it together, No 2 in the poll, 
being an obvious example.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKnLWRJ-FUN4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKnLWRJ-FUN4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKnLWRJ-FUN4&media=>
Watch Tim and Dawn get it on in The Office 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KnLWRJ-FUN4> 
The irresistible conclusion is that the survey’s respondents lacked 
inspiration, and fell back on officially sanctioned “classic moments” or 
randomly selected quite-good bits from shows they loved. Fair enough; the 
things we love about sitcoms (as the high placing of that Tim and Dawn moments 
implies) aren’t easily reducible to one-liners and scenes; and great one-liners 
and scenes aren’t always what leap to mind when we think of them. Gold’s poll 
will raise some smiles and happy memories, and spark debates about what they 
got right and wrong. But if you’re looking for the inside track on sitcom, for 
insights into how professional and popular tastes in comedy differ, it’s a 
little less fruitful.

Favourite scenes from British TV comedy

Here are the comics’ top picks from the Gold survey.

1. Alan Partridge meets a superfan who has a room dedicated to Alan Partridge 
– I’mAlan Partridge <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/alan-partridge>

2. Tim and Dawn finally get together – The Office

3. Basil Fawlty argues with the Germans, stressing, “Don’t mention the war!” – 
Fawlty Towers

4. “Don’t tell him, Pike” scene with German prisoners – Dad’s Army

5. Del Boy falling through the bar – Only Fools and Horses

6. Father Ted and the terrified priests stray into the lingerie department – 
Father Ted <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/father-ted>

7. Mrs Richards complaining about her room to Basil Fawlty – Fawlty Towers

8. The entrance of Lord Flashheart in Blackadder II – Blackadder

9. Del Boy and Rodney running as Batman and Robin – Only Fools and Horses

10. David Brent begging for his job as he gets fired – The Office

Three to see
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fcomedians-pick-partridge-and-fawlty-for-funniest-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa50939ea4f7711079ccdf66376c7a62605ad83df%2F501_821_5075_3044%2F5075.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Move%20over%20Mrs%20Brown%3A%20comedians%20prefer%20Alan%20Partridge%20and%20Fawlty%20Towers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fcomedians-pick-partridge-and-fawlty-for-funniest-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Move%20over%20Mrs%20Brown%3A%20comedians%20prefer%20Alan%20Partridge%20and%20Fawlty%20Towers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fcomedians-pick-partridge-and-fawlty-for-funniest-tv%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa50939ea4f7711079ccdf66376c7a62605ad83df%2F501_821_5075_3044%2F5075.jpg>
 Dane Baptiste is heading to Leicester this week. Photograph: Graeme Robertson 
for the Guardian 
Leicester comedy festival preview gala
Madcap Irishman Jason Byrne headlines a one-nighter previewing the country’s 
second-biggest comedy festival <http://comedy-festival.co.uk/>, which kicks off 
proper on 8 February. This night’s lineup includes Jamali Maddix and the 
excellent Dane Baptiste.
• 6 January at De Montfort Hall 
<http://www.demontforthall.co.uk/events/events.php/2017/1669/leicester-comedy-festival-gala-preview-show/>
, Leicester. Box office: 0116-233 3111.

Frank Skinner
A second Soho run for Frank Skinner’s wholly improvised offering The Man With 
No Show, in which the Black Country man dusts down the extempore comedy skills 
he honed with ex-wingman David Baddiel 20 years ago.
• Until 14 January at Soho theatre 
<http://www.sohotheatre.com/whats-on/frank-skinner-the-man-with-no-show-2017>, 
London, until 14 January. Box office: 020-7478 0100.

Mr Swallow: Houdini
One of my fave raves on last year’s Edinburgh Fringe, Nick Mohammed’s spoof 
musical tracing the life of the renowned escapologist. You get comedy, songs, 
feats of derring-do – and Mohammed and his team are terrific at all of them.
• From 10 January until 18 February, Soho theatre 
<http://www.sohotheatre.com/whats-on/mr-swallow-houdini/>, London. Box office: 
020-7478 0100.
 