
A cost-benefit analysis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/11/barnaby-joyce-refuses-to-release-cost-benefit-analysis-of-moving-agency-to-his-electorate>
 for moving the commonwealth’s pesticides regulator to Barnaby Joyce’s own 
electorate has found significant risks, which if not managed properly could 
cost the agriculture sector up to $193m a year.

The $272,000 analysis 
<http://www.agriculture.gov.au/SiteCollectionDocuments/apvma-cost-benefit-analysis.pdf>
, which had been kept secret until after the decision was made, found the most 
significant risk related to the ability of the Australian Pesticides and 
Veterinary Medicines Authority (APVMA) to relocate, recruit or replace staff 
within the first two years of the move from Canberra to Armidale. Moving the 
agency of 189 staff is expected to cost $25.6m.

“Critically, the loss of technical assessment staff (regulatory scientists) 
has the potential to seriously disrupt the ability of the APVMA to successfully 
fulfill its purpose and achieve its objectives in the short and medium term,” 
the report finds.

The analysis by Ernst and Young found the dislocation could cause a delay in 
the approval of new products and the result could be costly for the industry.

“Based on conservative estimates of a one-year delay in the approval of new 
products, the potential impact on the agriculture sector for crops alone could 
be between $64 million and $193 million per annum,” the report finds.

“The risks to the agvet chemical industry associated with moving the APVMA are 
also significant with a one year delay in the approval of new chemicals 
potentially impacting industry to the value of between $0.8 million and $2.7 
million per annum in terms of lost revenues.”

The analysis was released two days after the finance minister, Mathias 
Cormann, issued a policyregulation 
<https://www.legislation.gov.au/Details/F2016L01795> which orders any agencies 
which regulate agriculture to move outside Canberra to regional areas “not 
within 150 kilometres by road of Canberra or the capital city of a state”.

 It then states: “The policy of the Australian government mentioned in section 
4 is applied to the Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority.”

The regulation allowed the Coalition to complete the APVMA move without going 
through the parliament.Due to the section used by Cormann 
<http://www.finance.gov.au/resource-management/pgpa-act/22/>, the senate cannot 
disallow the order.

Barnaby Joyce denies changing Hansard before department head fired
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/27/barnaby-joyce-denies-changing-hansard-before-department-head-fired>
The move has been opposed by the National Farmers Federation 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-06-24/federal2c-state-mps-slam-nff-vote-on-pesticides-authority-m/6569896>
. Joyce announced it during the election when he was facing a fierce battle for 
his New England electorate with the former independent member Tony Windsor.

On Friday Joyce couched the move as part of a broader strategy for 
decentralisation which has seen the theGrains Research and Development 
Corporation (RDC) 
<http://www.theland.com.au/story/3718479/rdc-relocations-confirmed/?cs=4932> 
establish four offices outside Canberra at Dubbo, Toowoomba, Adelaide and Perth.

Joyce also moved the Rural Industries RDC to Wagga Wagga in NSW and the 
Fisheries RDC has moved a regional office to Adelaide. TheCoalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> is also considering a 
new office for the south Murray Darling Basin and the expansion of an existing 
office in Toowoomba.

 “One of the key things our nation requires is decentralisation,” Joyce said. 

“Our government, the Liberal National Coalition believes in the process of 
decentralisation where that can be achieved.

“Part of the process is making sure the largesse of government is more equally 
spread across the nation.”


Joyce said there would be a temporary office opened by March next year and the 
government was in talks with the University of New England.

It is understood the $272,000 cost benefit analysis – which Joyce refused to 
release so far – will be made public later on Friday.


Government agenda in doubt as Barnaby Joyce rejects South Australia water deal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/18/government-agenda-in-doubt-as-barnaby-joyce-rejects-south-australia-water-deal>
Labor’s agriculture spokesman, Joel Fitzgibbon, said the APVMA move was a a 
blatant pork-barrelling exercise which would undermine the authority’s capacity 
to ensure that farmers are able to access farm chemical and animal medicines 
they need.

“This week Barnaby Joyce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/barnaby-joyce> has justified his 
19% backpacker tax by saying the National Farmers’ Federation supports it,” 
Fitzgibbon said.

“While that may be true, the NFF is vehemently opposed to the APVMA 
relocation. This clearly demonstrates that Barnaby Joyce will use the NFF when 
he needs them and ignore them when he doesn’t.

“It is now clear to all those in rural and regional Australia that Barnaby 
Joyce will always put his own political interest ahead of the interests of our 
farmers.”


But Joyce said the move would modernise the APVMA, with a “fresh digital 
strategy” and would provide opportunities for young scientists on the Northern 
Tablelands, with new University of New England courses being developed to 
complement the “hub of excellence”. A new regulatory science course will start 
at the University of New England in 2017.

Armidale was the first centre to get the National Broadband Network under the 
deal signed in the hung parliament between Julia Gillard and former MP Tony 
Windsor.
 