
Labour MPs turned out in force on Wednesday to help defeat a parliamentary 
motion calling forTony Blair <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> 
to be held to account for allegedly misleading parliament over the Iraq war by 
439 votes to 70, after a sometimes angry debate.

MPs debate motion accusing Blair of 'misleading' them over Iraq - Politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/nov/30/pmqs-may-corbyn-iraq-blair-brexit-chote-mps-set-to-debate-motion-accusing-blair-of-misleading-them-over-iraq-politics-live>
The motion, tabled by the Scottish National party’s foreign affairs spokesman, 
Alex Salmond <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alexsalmond>, was backed by 
MPs from six other parties, and called for parliamentary committees to 
investigate and take appropriate action against the former prime minister.

It said the Chilcot inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/06/iraq-inquiry-key-points-from-the-chilcot-report>
 “provided substantial evidence of misleading information being presented by 
the then prime minister and others on the development of the then government’s 
policy towards the invasion of Iraq”.

In his opening speech in the opposition day debate, which was peppered with 
angry heckles from the Labour benches, Salmond said Blair should be held to 
account for what was “very much a personal campaign, unbeknownst to cabinet and 
indeed to parliament”, citing the memo sent to the then US president, George W 
Bush, from the prime ministersaying: “I will be with you whatever.” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/06/with-you-whatever-tony-blair-letters-george-w-bush-chilcot>

“What Iraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> demonstrates is that 
currently at least there are no effective checks and balances in our system,” 
Salmond said. “The prime minister had the ability to create the circumstances 
in which this house followed him into an illegal conflict.”

Labour’s stance on the motion caused a row at Monday’s meeting of the 
parliamentaryLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party, with 
MPs indicating they would like to see the leadership impose a three-line whip 
in opposition to it, despite Jeremy Corbyn’s longstanding criticisms of Blair’s 
involvement in the war in Iraq.

The shadow cabinet instead imposed a weaker, one-line whip. Corbyn himself did 
not to take part in the debate, instead attending what a spokeswoman said was a 
“longstanding engagement” in his constituency. Several of his key allies, 
including Diane Abbott and John McDonnell, were also absent.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Flabour-mps-accuse-snp-of-opportunism-over-tony-blair-motion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6136a8148a08520762d4918b2f585cee88a0e2b7%2F0_0_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=MPs%20reject%20move%20to%20investigate%20Tony%20Blair%20over%20Iraq%20by%20369%20votes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Flabour-mps-accuse-snp-of-opportunism-over-tony-blair-motion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=MPs%20reject%20move%20to%20investigate%20Tony%20Blair%20over%20Iraq%20by%20369%20votes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Flabour-mps-accuse-snp-of-opportunism-over-tony-blair-motion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6136a8148a08520762d4918b2f585cee88a0e2b7%2F0_0_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 Salmond told MPs: ‘What Iraq demonstrates is that … there are no effective 
checks and balances in our system.’ Photograph: Bloomberg via Getty Images 
Salmond said: “The leader of the Labour party, if he were free to do so, would 
be joining us in the lobbies.

“I’m not really interested in the civil war in the Labour party. I’m 
interested in the real war that took place and resulted in the death of 
hundreds of thousands of people.”

Many Labour MPs who spoke in the debate said they had opposed the war but also 
opposed attempts to personalise the blame. Fabian Hamilton, the shadow minister 
of state for Europe, said he had heard nothing new in the motion that expanded 
on the arguments made in the Chilcot report.

“Nor will any of us benefit if we continue to try and turn a collective 
institutional and international failure in Iraq into an attempt to pillory and 
scapegoat one individual,” he said. “I voted against our government because I 
thought our prime minister was simply wrong. But never for one second did I 
believe he was acting in bad faith and I do not do so now.”

The Labour MP Joan Ryan said: “On my reading of Chilcot, it says there was no 
falsification or improper use of intelligence, there was no misleading of 
cabinet and no secret commitment to war. Sadly, I think the only deception is 
in this motion and its opportunistic nature does not serve this issue or this 
parliament well.”

However, the debate at times emphasised the long shadow cast over Labour by 
the aftermath of the conflict. There was a tetchy exchange between Labour 
backbencher Ian Austin and the former shadow Welsh secretary Paul Flynn, who 
said MPs had been “bribed, bullied, bamboozled” into backing military action.

 Austin intervened to ask the deputy speaker if Flynn could produce evidence 
for his assertion, saying: “What a disgrace.”

 Flynn then clarified that he had only intended to suggest “political bribes” 
had been dangled before wavering backbenchers.

 “I am not suggesting that anyone took any money,” he said. “There are such 
things as political bribes, with inducements and offers, of which we are well 
aware in this place. There was a very heavy operation here to convince members 
to vote for war.”

 Flynn was one of only a handful of Labour MPs, including Dennis Skinner and 
Kelvin Hopkins, who defied the Labour whip to vote in favour of the motion.

Senior backbenchers, including former ministers Ed Miliband, Margaret Beckett 
and Hilary Benn, turned out to join the Conservatives and vote down the motion.

 Corbyn’s critics said the SNP motion was a deliberate attempt to exploit 
divisions in the party over the issue, and he should have taken a stronger line 
against it, notwithstanding his own stance over the Iraq war. “There’s a sense 
of exasperation that there was massive opportunism being taken by the SNP and 
the Greens, and there wasn’t an appetite to call that out,” said the Nottingham 
East MP, Chris Leslie.

Replying to the motion for the government, the Cabinet Office minister Chris 
Skidmore said there had been a “long and exhaustive inquiry” by Chilcot into 
the matters being raised. “Lessons have been learned and will continue to be 
learned. Therefore the government can see no merit in undertaking any further 
inquiries into the Iraq war,” he said.

The Conservative MP Ken Clarke said the debate should not centre on one 
individual. “If we turn these post-Chilcot debates just into attempts to pursue 
and hound Tony Blair, the whole thing just turns into a party political 
argument with Labour members of parliament trying to defend the position of 
their government,” he said.

“Personalising it, if we are not careful, rather loses the point: are we 
satisfied everything possible is being done to ensure it cannot happen again?”

Caroline Lucas, the co-leader of the Green party, had earlier urged the Labour 
leadership to vote in favour of the motion. “Top figures in the Labour party 
like Jeremy Corbyn and John McDonnell fought long and hard against the Iraq 
war, and have called for those who led us into the disastrous conflict to be 
held to account,” she said.


 