
Fear is a powerful motivator that can influence behaviour hugely - something 
becoming increasingly evident in local councils across the country as they try 
to become financially self-sufficient.



With cuts of up to 40%  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/sep/01/local-government-association-cannot-cope-further-cuts>
 to local government budgets, it is not surprising that income generation is 
the new holy grail for councils. Earlier this year asurvey by law firm Trowers 
& Hamlins 
<http://www.themj.co.uk/EXCLUSIVE-Leaders-fear-losing-functions-if-they-fail-to-generate-income/203291>
 found that 61% of council leaders fear that parts of the public sector that 
fail to become financially self-sufficient will be “abolished or lose 
functions” and thinktank Localis has found that almost one in five senior local 
government managers expect that within four years, their council will generate 
up to 30% of revenue through commercial activity.

But the repercussions of this are yet to be fully understood. A new set of 
behaviours is taking over and the vital role of building and nurturing 
communities is quietly being replaced by the need to make a quick buck.

Building big commercial portfolios, buying housing to develop and let out at 
higher market rents is just the start. There’s not a building, park or open 
space that council managers aren’t eying eyeing up to exploit.

Jo Miller: ‘Councils can’t take more shocks to an already shocked system’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/15/jo-miller-doncaster-council-chief-executives-solace>
Local high streets are very much at the top of their income-generating list. 
Councils are snapping up shops, banks, pubs and offices. Eastleigh borough 
council, for example, isnow landlord 
<https://www.eastleigh.gov.uk/the-council/investment-portfolio.aspx> to Lloyds 
Bank, Wetherspoons and Costa Coffee among others. Such voracious property 
acquisition is usually linked to all sorts of regeneration schemes that are 
primarily designed to fill town hall coffers rather than improve communities.

In my own community of Radlett in Hertfordshire there is growing anger  
<http://www.watfordobserver.co.uk/news/14842308.Village_could_be__destroyed__by_hotel_and_supermarket/?ref=mrb&lp=3>
at how the council is seeking to force a hotel and a third supermarket on a 
local high street that doesn’t need one. There’s been little consultation and 
councillors have admitted the scheme is needed to generate income from a car 
park that they own. Independent shops will be forced out and the character of 
the village ruined if it goes ahead.

Clumsy schemes like this make a mockery of the mission statement on the 
Department for Communities and Local Governmentwebsite 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-for-communities-and-local-government>
, which claims that the role of government is “to give more power to local 
people to shape what happens in their area.” With such obvious financial 
pressures on councils, this sentiment is likely to become increasingly 
redundant in the years ahead.

When I presented  my review on the high street 
<https://www.retail-week.com/topics/policy-and-legal/the-grimsey-review-31-recommendations-to-government/5052595.article>
 to government three years ago, a key recommendation was that local authorities 
draw up long-term plans, work with local people and hold public meetings to 
share their vision of improving their high street.

Our aim was to create modern environments fit for the 21st century that fully 
met community needs and drove civic pride. The best minds in local government 
get this. But once we reach a stage where councils are no longer investing in 
communities but only prioritising schemes that generate the most money for 
them, the challenge of creating vibrant high streets and sustainable 
communities will become infinitely harder.

Bill Grimsey is the former chief executive of Wickes and Iceland and author of 
theGrimsey Review <http://www.vanishinghighstreet.com/the-grimsey-review/> into 
the high street.

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 