
In the old days, before Thomond Park was remodelled, we would come down here 
on freezing winter nights to be enthralled by the sight of glamour teams being 
beaten out the gate. The story varied from week to week but the theme largely 
stayed the same: you may think you know what it takes to get out of here in one 
piece, but living it is a different matter.

Whether you were in the upper reaches of France’s Top 14 or England’s 
Premiership, the odds did not vary much on a successful exit. And until 
Leicester, in 2007, the bookies were never far off the money. It was ironic 
that by the time the stadium re-fit arrived, Munster’s best days had just gone 
and full houses on hectic days would become the exception to the rule.

Sport picture of the day: Simon Zebo sheds a tear for Anthony Foley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/picture/2016/oct/22/sport-picture-of-the-day-simon-zebo-sheds-a-tear-for-anthony-foley>
We had one here on Saturday for their 38-17 win over Glasgow, the first time 
since the Saracens game two years ago this month that there were no yawning 
gaps on the terraces. But the rawness was of a different strain. In the most 
awful circumstances imaginable, it was a throwback to the best days in Limerick.

From early morning the streets around the stadium were busy with supporters 
making their way in and out of the local pubs, many heading over to the Shannon 
clubhouse where an array of flags, banners and jerseys had been hung to honour 
Anthony Foley, a man who had served club, province and country so well.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fmunster-glasgow-european-champions-cup-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3517cfb243b84c9f1fcaa040a8885b5bce48e4ff%2F0_0_5208_3125%2F5208.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Munster%20lay%20on%20fitting%20farewell%20for%20Anthony%20Foley%20on%20sombre%20day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fmunster-glasgow-european-champions-cup-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Munster%20lay%20on%20fitting%20farewell%20for%20Anthony%20Foley%20on%20sombre%20day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fmunster-glasgow-european-champions-cup-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3517cfb243b84c9f1fcaa040a8885b5bce48e4ff%2F0_0_5208_3125%2F5208.jpg>
 Anthony Foley’s sons, Tony, left, and Dan sing with the Munster players after 
Champions Cup match. Photograph: Sheridan/INPHO/REX/Shutterstock 
“I’m proud of how the city of Limerick has reacted to his passing, and how the 
Irish rugby community has rallied to shepherd our brother to his final resting 
place,” Dominic Crotty told us from his home in Milwaukee. Crotty first engaged 
Foley in battle in theMunster <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/munster> 
Schools Cup and at various points thereafter before they soldiered together in 
red.

“From Thomond to Vicarage Road, Bordeaux to Twickenham, Lansdowne Road to the 
Millennium Stadium, during tough games in Wales and in France, Anthony led from 
the front in all these battles. Understated yet central to victory: first man 
in and last man out.”

Anthony Foley obituary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/17/anthony-foley-obituary> 
The first sign on the pitch that this would not be your average day out was 
when a group of the Glasgow squad – 75 minutes before kick-off – were given a 
round of applause as they made their way to the changing room. By the time both 
teams were nearing the end of their warm-ups, and the lineups were read out, 
Glasgow were applauded with uncommon warmth. It reminded you of Lansdowne Road 
in 1973 when England turned up for a Five Nations Championship game where the 
previous season Scotland and Wales had chosen not to travel.

Back then, when the sustained applause died down, Ireland climbed into their 
opponents as if they were burglars rather than welcome guests. On this occasion 
however, Munster were circumspect. The preamble had set the scene: renditions 
of Shannon’s ‘There is an Isle’ and Munster’s ‘Stand up and Fight;’ a guard of 
honour provided by representatives of St Munchin’s and Shannon. And then a 
minute’s silence before kick off.

But there was something missing. Or rather there was an unwanted extra: a 
surfeit of respect.

Even when Munster had gone out to a 14-3 lead it was like you were watching a 
dress rehearsal where the players were tiptoeing around the subject. Then 
Munster’s Keith Earls was sent off for a tip tackle, and everything changed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fmunster-glasgow-european-champions-cup-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5114c45720254314bd25ff740ccf735104c7ca89%2F0_121_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Munster%20lay%20on%20fitting%20farewell%20for%20Anthony%20Foley%20on%20sombre%20day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fmunster-glasgow-european-champions-cup-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Munster%20lay%20on%20fitting%20farewell%20for%20Anthony%20Foley%20on%20sombre%20day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fmunster-glasgow-european-champions-cup-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5114c45720254314bd25ff740ccf735104c7ca89%2F0_121_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 A tribute wall to Anthony Foley is seen outside the ground. Photograph: 
Lorraine O'Sullivan/PA 
Cleary he thought his victim Fraser Brown had milked the situation. As he left 
the field Earls was remonstrating with Stuart Hogg and you could feel the lid 
coming off. When we had been talking to Crotty he recalled that no one did 
bitterness better than Anthony Foley. It was a pill he loved to roll around the 
tongue, savouring its every possibility.

How he would have enjoyed this dramatic shift in mood. At his funeral on 
Friday, Foley’s wife, Olive, delivered a brilliant eulogy in which she said her 
husband would have been so proud of the turnout, but “would have hated the 
fuss”.

Death of Munster head coach Anthony Foley linked to heart condition
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/18/anthony-foley-munster-autopsy> 
Well, he would have lapped up the way the script had been rewritten here. In a 
matter of moments the mood had gone from funereal and reserved to naked 
hostility. In keeping with the revised storyline, Earls – a fella who had grown 
up in the shadow of Thomond Park – had just been slighted. And with the blood 
boiling a new sort of day unfolded. Glasgow, bless them, looked they had just 
been handed free passes to the roughest bar in town. Who was going to be the 
first up to buy a round then?

The rights and wrongs of it were neither here nor there. This was the way it 
was supposed to be: a full house, partisan and vocal, hustling more would-be 
contenders out the door. Just like the old days, when Anthony Foley was leading 
the charge.
 