
The flanker CJ Stander paid tribute to the hard work of the late Anthony Foley 
and his fellow Munster coaches after their 32-7 Champions Cup bonus-point 
victory over Racing 92 in theEuropean Rugby Champions Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/european-rugby-champions-cup>.

Munster <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/munster> returned to Stade 
Yves-du-Manoir, where their round one fixture was postponed in October because 
of the tragic death of 42-year-old Foley.

Since then, the Irish province have hit a rich vein of form, with nine wins in 
10 competitive outings, reaching second in the Pro12 and topping the Champions 
Cup’s Pool 1 in the process.

Anthony Foley, a Munster legend to his core and ‘proper rugby bloke’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/16/anthony-foley-munster-man-ireland-death>
While acknowledging that they have been riding that wave of emotion, Stander – 
the man who wears Foley’s old No8 and who delivered another man-of-the-match 
performance in Paris – was quick to praise the work done behind the scenes by 
Foley, nicknamed “Axel”, and the director of rugby, Rassie Erasmus.

“We always keep this emotion in the back of our heads, but we’ve been working 
hard from pre-season onwards. We have good structures; Axel left a lot of what 
we’re working on, how we want to play,” said Stander.

“Our coaches – Rassie, Jacques [Nienaber], Fla [Jerry Flannery], Felix [Jones] 
– have got good plans, and we just want to go out on the pitch and play for 
them. From a team point of view, everyone worked very hard all week. We said 
we’d need work-rate and to stand up for each other in this match and honour the 
big man, as we try to do every week.

“Coming back to Paris after his death, you talk about it, the emotion of it, 
and it catches you again. It’s tough; you remember from last time, you get very 
emotional. You try to hide it, but it’s into you and luckily everyone’s in the 
same boat. I think we’ve been dealing with it quite well the last few weeks.”

The hooker Niall Scannell’s 56th-minute try sealed the bonus point for 
Munster, adding to first-half efforts from Simon Zebo, Stander and Andrew 
Conway that had established a 25-0 half-time lead.

Racing, who fielded a much-changed team as they were already out of contention 
for the knockout stages, had a consolation score from flanker Matthieu Voisin 
with 17 minutes remaining.

The result sets up a mouthwatering round five showdown against Pro12 rivals 
Glasgow Warriors at Scotstoun next Saturday. The second-placed Scots trail 
Erasmus’s side by three pool points and will be hugely determined to avenge 
October’s 38-17thrashing at Thomond Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/22/munster-glasgow-european-champions-cup-match-report>
.

The Munster captain, Peter O’Mahony, said: “It was a big win, it’s up there, 
but we’re not going to get carried away. Anywhere in France, especially against 
a team as passionate and with as much history as Racing, you’d be very proud of 
the boys. It was quite a mature performance.

“But there’s a lot of work to be done, especially with three big European 
games to play in as many weeks. We’ve to recover and then work hard to prepare 
for a side as good as Glasgow are.”
 