
On a Sunday afternoon in early September 2014, Sister Bernadetta Boggian drove 
into the compound of the Catholic convent where she lived in Bujumbura, the 
capital ofBurundi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/burundi>, and called out 
to her fellow nuns. There was no sign of the other elderly sisters who lived in 
the convent, so Sister Bernadetta went to find Father Mario Pulcini, the head 
of the mission, to ask if he had seen them. He tried phoning them, but there 
was no reply. So they walked across the shady compound to the nuns’ quarters, 
where they found the curtains drawn.

They knocked, and called out, but there was no answer. The priest was about to 
force open the door, but Sister Bernadetta walked around to a side entrance, 
which was unlocked. Inside she found a horrific scene. Sister Olga Raschietti 
was lying dead in her bedroom, blood pooling around her head. In the bedroom 
next door lay the body of Sister Lucia Pulici. Both women had been stabbed, and 
their throats slit.

Sister Lucia would have celebrated her 76th birthday the next day. Sister Olga 
was 82. Together, these three elderly friends had worked for almost 50 years in 
South Kivu, an eastern province of the Democratic Republic of Congo that was at 
the centre of a series of conflicts sometimes known collectively as the Great 
African War, the deadliest in the continent’s modern history. When the three 
sisters finally left South Kivu for Burundi, they were looking forward to a 
more peaceful retirement posting.

Father Mario called the local police, and his superiors in Italy. Lorries and 
pickup trucks arrived quickly, disgorging police and soldiers, and security 
forces circled the compound. At around 6pm, the congregation poured out of mass 
in their brightly coloured Sunday best, straight into a crime scene. A papal 
official stood over the bodies and wept. Outside the convent, young women the 
sisters had taught to sew wailed with grief.

When noises woke Sister Bernadetta in the night, she phoned Father Mario. “I 
think the killer is still here,” she said

Sister Bernadetta, who remained collected throughout, accompanied the bodies 
to the morgue, and then returned to the convent. Father Mario wanted to find 
somewhere else for sister Bernadetta and the other nuns to sleep. But the 
sisters insisted they wanted to stay together, and sleep at the convent. As 
night fell, heavily armed police patrolled the compound.

When noises woke Sister Bernadetta during the night, she telephoned Father 
Mario, who was still awake, writing down an account of the previous day. “I 
think the killer is still here,” sister Bernadetta told him in a shaky voice.

The priest hurried to the nuns’ quarters, but he was too late. Sister 
Bernadetta was already dead. In an act of violence unimaginable to those who 
knew the small and wiry 79-year-old, the killer had cut off her head.

The next morning, shocked and angry locals closed their businesses and 
gathered outside the convent to protest againstthe murders 
<http://globalsistersreport.org/news/ministry/murders-burundi-missionary-order-reckons-killing-three-sisters-40741>
. People claimed the killers were being protected by the police. Some 
protesters saw the notorious head of the state intelligence agency, General 
Adolphe Nshimirimana, enter the convent. Some time later, Father Mario emerged 
from the gates and appealed to the protesters to disperse peacefully. Three 
weeks on, a leaflet was found at the convent urging the mission not to pursue 
an investigation into the crimes.

The murders at the convent horrified Burundians, not just because of their 
brutality but because they took place almost a decade after the end of the 
country’s 12-year civil war, in which 300,000 were slaughtered and 1.2 million 
– a fifth of the population – fled their homes. In the wake of that conflict, 
which divided the nation along ethnic lines, between Hutu and Tutsi, Burundians 
vowed that their country would never again experience such brutal violence.

Church missions to countries riven by long-term civil strife are liable to get 
caught up in toxic politics. The powerful Catholic church in Burundi, which 
represents 80% of Burundians, has come under suspicion for providing aid to 
militant groups during the civil war. But it has also regularly criticised 
government abuses, and paid a price for it. In 1995, during the civil war, when 
the majority Hutus rose up against the abusive Tutsi military, gunmen executed 
two priests and a lay preacher suspected of supporting the rebels. A year 
later, a moderate Tutsi archbishop was murdered by gunmen. More than 10 
Catholic clerics were assassinated in Burundi in the first three years of the 
civil war. When church leaders have denounced the violence of the country’s 
warring factions, political leaders have often seen them as a threat – and done 
whatever was necessary to silence them.

The murders at the convent followed a ripple of unrest across the region. In 
April 2014, the United Nations envoy to Burundi had cabled UN headquarters in 
New York with a warning that the Hutu-led ruling party was distributing weapons 
and uniforms to its youth wing. In some areas, particularly outside the cities, 
the group acts “in collusion with local authorities and with total impunity”. 
It acts like a “militia over and above the police, the army, and the 
judiciary”, the cable said. The group was described as “one of the major 
threats to peace in Burundi and to the credibility of the 2015 elections as 
they are responsible for most politically motivated violence against 
opposition”. The government of Burundi issued a rebuttal to the UN, vehemently 
denying that it had been funding, arming or training the youth wing, known as 
the Imbonerakure. Nonetheless, the cable was received with alarm.
 The Italian nuns Bernadette Boggia, Olga Raschietti, and Lucia Pulici, who 
were murdered in a convent in Bujumbura, the capital of Burundi. Photograph: 
-/AFP 
A few weeks after the UN cable, Burundi’s most prominent human rights 
activist, Pierre Claver Mbonimpa, told listeners of the popular radio station 
Radio Publique Africaine (RPA), that arms and uniforms were being given out to 
hundreds of young men, who had gone for military training in the neighbouring 
Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). Mbonimpa described photographs he had seen 
of young Burundian fighters training in the DRC, and first-hand accounts he had 
heard from witnesses and former soldiers. During the civil war, Mbonimpa’s own 
mother, a Tutsi, had been hacked to death by Hutu youths armed with machetes. A 
decade later, he pledged to do what he could to stop what appeared to be the 
preparation of a new youth militia. “In my experience, it is always the youths 
that do the killing. Everywhere in the region, it’s the youth that are used for 
violence,” Mbonimpa told me earlier this year.

In the hot and humid city of Bujumbura, on the shore of Lake Tanganyika, the 
poor live in airless, dusty and tight-knit grid systems, clustered around the 
centre and to the north. These poor neighbourhoods, particularly Kamenge, where 
the convent stands, had been fertile recruiting grounds for rebel groups 
looking for young men during the war. Once again, it seemed the youth were 
being prepared to fight.

People were afraid of what the training of this new secret youth army might 
mean. In a bid to end the civil war, a peace deal had been tabled in 1998 by 
president Julius Nyerere of Tanzania. Talks had continued under Nelson Mandela 
and his successor, Thabo Mbeki. An agreement was eventually signed in 2000, 
which laid out rules for equal representation of Hutus and Tutsis, and said 
that no president could serve more than two terms. A ceasefire finally became 
law in January 2005. As the 2015 elections approached, critics were afraid that 
Burundi’s president, the former Hutu rebel leader Pierre Nkurunziza, would try 
to hold on to power. Government forces and their opponents were preparing to 
face off in a new round of violence and intimidation. The president’s 
supporters insisted his rule brought peace to the country, and regeneration to 
the rural economy - he is passionate about growing avocados. His office 
maintained thata third term in office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/07/burundi-president-to-defy-international-pressure-and-run-for-third-term>
 would be legitimate, as the first term (the result of an election by 
parliament, not the people) did not count.

Mbonimpa is a tall and powerful man, with a gentle manner and an unshakeable 
determination. Only the dusting of grey stubble on his head gives away his age. 
At 71 – in a country where life expectancy for men is 58 – he is considered one 
of the grandfathers of postwar Burundi, celebrated for his tireless work in 
exposing attacks on human rights workers, opposition politicians and 
journalists, enforced disappearances, illegal detention and torture. His work 
has earned him a loyal support base. In September this year, Human Rights Watch 
honoured his work with the Alison Des Forges award, given to leading 
campaigners for justice, describing him as “a man of extraordinary courage who 
has defied repeated threats to defend victims of abuse”.

Mbonimpa spent two years in prison during the war. Between 1994 and 1996, he 
was an inmate at the vast and overcrowded Mpimba prison, accused of a crime he 
did not commit. There, he was beaten and starved, he witnessed young boys 
locked up and abused by adults, women raped by guards and children born as a 
result. He emerged determined to reform the prison and justice systems in 
Burundi. Soon after his release, he founded the Association for the Protection 
of Human Rights and Detained Persons, now the most prominent human rights group 
in the country. He has secured the release of thousands of young Burundians who 
have been wrongfully imprisoned.

The day after Mbonimpa’s radio appearance, police called him in for 
questioning. They summoned him repeatedly over the next week, each time 
demanding that he reveal his sources – but each time, he refused. At midnight 
on 15 May, when he arrived at the airport for a flight to Kenya, a number of 
police officers were waiting for him. He had just enough time to call his wife 
before the police bundled him into a waiting car. At the end of the following 
day, Mbonimpa was indicted for “endangering the internal and external security 
of the state”, based on his comments in the media, and jailed once again.

When Mbonimpa was arrested 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2014/aug/28/burundi-dissent-pierre-claver-mbonimpa>
 in May 2014, four months before the nuns were murdered, a weekly protest known 
as “Green Friday” began in Bujumbura – with Burundians wearing green, the 
colour of prison uniforms, to show solidarity with Mbonimpa. Activists around 
the world joined in, tweeting photographs of themselves wearing green. His 
popular following infuriated the authorities, and radio stations were banned 
from reporting on the training and arming of militias.

But Mbonimpa had a surprising protector.

As commander of the ruling party’s military wing, General Adolphe was hated 
and feared by those outside his circle, but revered by his own men. At 50, he 
looked young for his age, sporting a moustache and wearing a heavy gold chain. 
A photograph popular with his followers shows him in a white baseball cap 
embellished with a gold eagle, the symbol of the CNDD-FDD, the Hutu rebel group 
that now runs Burundi. (The party’s full name translates from the French as The 
National Council for the Defence of Democracy – Forces for the Defence of 
Democracy. The repetition, Burundians joke, is just in case people need 
convincing their country is a democracy.)

The general owned a bar in Kamenge called Iwabo W’abantu, meaning “the home of 
the people”, just a few blocks away from the convent where the nuns were 
killed. A grandiose stone eagle marks the entrance. Inside, on a high shelf, a 
nervous monkey twitches in a cage. CNDD-FDD supporters and civil servants sit 
behind huge bottles of Primus, the local lager, and talk politics while nearby 
a crocodile basks in a dirty pond. “The home of the people” is rumoured to 
double as a torture chamber for dissidents – one of many said to be hidden 
across the country.

Adolphe, as he was generally known, was “not an educated man”, a former 
colleague said, but he was a gifted mobiliser, a man of the people. Generous 
and gregarious, he would stay up buying rounds of drinks until he was the last 
man standing. The Imbonerakure were largely made up of former Hutu rebels from 
the civil war and the general was like a father to them. During the civil war, 
he was a hero on the streets of Kamenge, the bastion of the Hutu rebellion.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fmurder-nuns-burundi-man-who-knew-too-much%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee19f78c2846ac238dd3d7d651dc8bf1ea7930d4%2F0_344_4557_2734%2F4557.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Murder%20in%20Burundi%3A%20the%20man%20who%20knew%20too%20much%20%7C%20Jessica%20Hatcher-Moore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fmurder-nuns-burundi-man-who-knew-too-much%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Murder%20in%20Burundi%3A%20the%20man%20who%20knew%20too%20much%20%7C%20Jessica%20Hatcher-Moore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fmurder-nuns-burundi-man-who-knew-too-much%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee19f78c2846ac238dd3d7d651dc8bf1ea7930d4%2F0_344_4557_2734%2F4557.jpg>
 Pierre Claver Mbonimpa in Burundi in 2015. Photograph: Carl de Souza/AFP/Getty 
Images 
After the war, Adolphe forged ties with a violent rebel group in the DRC 
formed by the remnants of Rwanda’s genocidaires. The UN reports that he used 
these ties to carry out large-scale gold smuggling from rebel-controlled mines. 
By 2014, people said that it was not President Pierre Nkurunziza, but Adolphe, 
his loyal and trusted lieutenant, who held the levers of power. According to 
Gervais Rufyikiri, the former vice president, who fled Burundi in June 2015, 
every decision in government first went past the general. After the peace 
agreement limited the president’s term of office, it was rumoured that Adolphe 
was training a private army to keep the president, and himself, in power.

As a human rights activist, Mbonimpa’s work involved challenging the brutality 
of Adolphe’s secret police – but the two men had a shared history. Mbonimpa was 
among the civilians who had supported the armed rebel movement during the war, 
providing food, information, money, and, occasionally, a place to hide, and 
General Adolphe was indebted to him for this. Mbonimpa’s own son was a rebel 
recruit. When Mbonimpa spoke out against the training of the Imbonerakure, he 
threw himself into direct conflict with the general, but he was confident that 
the general’s esteem would protect him. Adolphe had once told his son that if 
anyone killed Mbonimpa, the general would avenge him with his own hand – a vow 
that gave Mbonimpa courage to continue with his campaigning work.

But when Mbonimpa found out that the three nuns had been butchered with 
machetes in the trademark manner of Adolphe’s intelligence agents, the two men 
were once again set on a collision course – one that would threaten both their 
lives.

On 9 September, two days after the murder, the police arrested a local man 
named Christian Claude Butoyi and charged him with the nuns’ murder. Police 
told journalists that it was a revenge killing: the church had stolen Butoyi’s 
family land decades earlier, and bitterness at this injustice had driven Butoyi 
to rape and murder the nuns. Land disputes are common in Burundi – a tiny 
country with a barely functioning judicial system and one of the 
fastest-growing populations in the world – and are commonly resolved with 
violence. But Butoyi, 33, said nothing as police paraded him, handcuffed and 
dressed in ripped sports clothes, before the press. He showed no sign of 
remorse. Indeed, he showed no sign of any emotion at all. Residents of Kamenge 
recognised Butoyi as one of “les fous”, the mentally ill people who lived on 
the streets, surviving on scraps and charity – they doubted he possessed the 
physical or mental strength, never mind the motive, to carry out a series of 
brutal murders.

From his prison cell, Mbonimpa watched this farce unfold. It was clear to him 
that Butoyi was not the killer. The following week, a court freed Mbonimpa 
after four months in detention, on medical grounds – he is diabetic – but he 
remained under judicial supervision. A thousand-strong crowd gathered outside 
the court, singing and dancing in celebration.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fmurder-nuns-burundi-man-who-knew-too-much%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F14680ff945b084cb590c19945990dc638f540f59%2F0_25_2341_1565%2F2341.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Murder%20in%20Burundi%3A%20the%20man%20who%20knew%20too%20much%20%7C%20Jessica%20Hatcher-Moore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fmurder-nuns-burundi-man-who-knew-too-much%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Murder%20in%20Burundi%3A%20the%20man%20who%20knew%20too%20much%20%7C%20Jessica%20Hatcher-Moore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fmurder-nuns-burundi-man-who-knew-too-much%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F14680ff945b084cb590c19945990dc638f540f59%2F0_25_2341_1565%2F2341.jpg>
 Christian Claude Butoyi after he was arrestedfor the murder of the three 
Italian nuns. Photograph: Esdras Ndikumana/AFP/Getty Images 
When the authorities fail to deliver justice, Mbonimpa told me, it falls to 
journalists and human rights campaigners to discover the truth. To find out who 
was behind the murder of the three nuns, Mbonimpa approached one of Burundi’s 
leading investigative journalists, Bob Rugurika, the head of Radio Publique 
Africaine. The station, which broadcasts under the slogan “The Voice of the 
Voiceless”, was set up in 2001 with money from the Soros foundation; Samantha 
Power, US ambassador to the UN, was on the board. RPA’s goal was to heal the 
ethnic divisions of the civil war by getting Hutus and Tutsis to share airtime. 
There were one or two presenters who had managed to get members of militant 
groups to confess to killings on air – and express their remorse. A public 
confession could lay the foundations for reconciliation.

A small, energetic man, Rugurika joined RPA while he was at law school, and 
had become editor in 2010. His career has been split between revealing 
corruption and living with the consequences, which have included death threats 
and periods spent in exile.

While Mbonimpa was in prison, he had learned that as many as 1,800 members of 
the Imbonerakure had returned from the DRC and spread out across the country, 
ramping up their campaign of violence. On General Adolphe’s orders, the young 
fighters beat up suspected opposition candidates, disrupted meetings, and 
spread fear through the population.

Mbonimpa found a source close to the investigation who had been assigned to 
the nuns’ murder case – whose identity remains protected. The source reported 
that police officers guarding the compound had allegedly confessed to 
complicity, while four men had carried out the killings. They all claimed to be 
acting on the direct orders of officers loyal to Adolphe.

The police made a number of arrests based on these statements – but a few days 
later, Adolphe intervened. He ordered the suspects’ release, and the 
investigation into the nuns’ murder went no further.

In October 2014, at a secret meeting, Bob Rugurika was introduced to a former 
intelligence agent known as Mwarabu, or “the light-skinned one”. Over a number 
of meetings in darkened bars, parked cars and private houses, Rugurika won the 
trust of Mwarabu, who eventually confessed to taking part in the murders.

He even agreed to let Rugurika record his confession, on the condition that it 
could not be broadcast until he had fled the country. Mwarabu spoke into 
Rugurika’s microphone, and confessed that he and three others had killed the 
nuns, on the orders of General Adolphe.

According to Mwarabu, the nuns had seen the Imbonerakure training near their 
former mission in the DRC. When Adolphe had heard Mbonimpa on the radio saying 
that the youth militia was being re-armed and trained, the general was 
convinced that the nuns had been Mbonimpa’s secret source. After Mbonimpa’s 
arrest, Adolphe worried that the nuns would speak out in order to secure his 
release – and he knew enough about the courage of these elderly missionaries to 
understand that they, unlike many others, would be unafraid to testify against 
him.

The nuns had some additional inconvenient information, Mwarabu said. The 
former parish leader had been a legend among Hutus for surviving the 1995 
massacre of Catholic priests, and a close ally of Adolphe. The general had used 
the mission’s health clinic to stock a private hospital he owned in the 
neighbourhood, to avoid paying import tax on drugs. In mid-2014, the parish 
priest became seriously ill and left Burundi for treatment in Italy. When the 
nuns and father Mario found out about the abuse of church resources, they were 
determined to put a stop to it. (The mission did not wish to comment on these 
claims.)

A month after he won the trust of one alleged killer, Rugurika was introduced 
to another, Juvent Nduwimana, in a bar. Juvent, who grew up in Kamenge, was a 
rebel during the war and later became an intelligence agent working for 
Adolphe. Rugurika recorded his statement at the RPA office, and Juvent stated 
on the record that the nuns had been silenced to prevent them revealing the 
existence of an armed militia being trained by Adolphe to keep the president in 
power.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fmurder-nuns-burundi-man-who-knew-too-much%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F625f728d4388523246b41e8bd9433682865846b8%2F0_94_2957_1774%2F2957.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Murder%20in%20Burundi%3A%20the%20man%20who%20knew%20too%20much%20%7C%20Jessica%20Hatcher-Moore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fmurder-nuns-burundi-man-who-knew-too-much%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Murder%20in%20Burundi%3A%20the%20man%20who%20knew%20too%20much%20%7C%20Jessica%20Hatcher-Moore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fmurder-nuns-burundi-man-who-knew-too-much%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F625f728d4388523246b41e8bd9433682865846b8%2F0_94_2957_1774%2F2957.jpg>
 President Pierre Nkurunziza attends Burundi’s independence anniversary 
celebrations in July 2015. Photograph: Marco Longari/AFP/Getty Images 
In January 2015, the country came to a standstill at 12.30pm every day for a 
week as Bob Rugurika broadcast Mwarabu’s confession in a series of daily 
programmes on RPA. The streets fell silent as taxi drivers, traffic police, and 
street vendors gathered around radios to listen to the shocking admission 
of guilt.

Rugurika had planned to broadcast his interviews with Juvent as corroboration 
– but before he could do so,Rugurika was arrested 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2015/jan/23/burundian-journalist-arrested-after-reporting-on-of-nuns>
 on 20 January. Two days later, although he had not been charged, he was 
transferred to an isolation cell and denied visitors. The arrest outraged human 
rights groups. Mbonimpa addressed journalists outside his office: “They can 
imprison us, they can kill us, but they can’t shut us up,” he said.

Rugurika, informed that security forces now had orders to kill him, began 
sleeping in a different safe house every night

Burundians took to the streets again in protest. Mwarabu, the confessed 
killer, sent Rugurika a message of solidarity from his hiding place in exile. A 
month later, a court freed Rugurika on bail, and thousands lined the streets in 
celebration.

Rugurika broadcast Juvent’s confession in full on 30 March 2015. In the 
recording, Juvent’s voice was quiet – he sounded nervous – but his account was 
detailed and damning. He had heard from his recruiting officer that Adolphe was 
concerned that news of the Imbonerakure training in Congo would spread. The 
Catholic order to which the nuns belonged, the Xaverian Missionary Sisters of 
Mary, also ran a clinic in Luvungi, South Kivu, close to where the Imbonerakure 
were training. The soldiers had been getting treatment at the clinic, and the 
nuns, who travelled frequently between Bujumbura and the eastern DRC, were 
aware of this. Adolphe’s main concern was to stop them talking.

The interview with Juvent was even more explosive than Mwarabu’s initial 
confession – since it corroborated the first confession, and pinned 
responsibility directly on Adolphe. Rugurika began sleeping in a different safe 
house every night – informed, by reliable friends, that security forces now had 
orders to kill him on sight.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fmurder-nuns-burundi-man-who-knew-too-much%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1faef0d336971694441f4f0dcb4104e5127cfe7b%2F0_325_4731_2839%2F4731.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Murder%20in%20Burundi%3A%20the%20man%20who%20knew%20too%20much%20%7C%20Jessica%20Hatcher-Moore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fmurder-nuns-burundi-man-who-knew-too-much%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Murder%20in%20Burundi%3A%20the%20man%20who%20knew%20too%20much%20%7C%20Jessica%20Hatcher-Moore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fmurder-nuns-burundi-man-who-knew-too-much%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1faef0d336971694441f4f0dcb4104e5127cfe7b%2F0_325_4731_2839%2F4731.jpg>
 Bob Rugurika, one of the leading investigative journalists in Burundi 
Photograph: Carl de Souza/AFP/Getty Images 
In the weeks following Rugurika’s broadcasts, as fears of a return to civil 
war grew, more than 10,000 Burundians fled to neighbouring countries, a number 
that has since risen to around 296,000. There were reports of opponents being 
intimidated or dragged out of their houses and beaten.

On 25 April 2015, the ruling party announced that its candidate would be the 
incumbent Pierre Nkurunziza. For the third time in 12 months, thousands of men 
and women took to the streets, but this time they faced loaded guns. On the 
first day of the street protests, police shot dead at least one civilian. Armed 
men forced entry into RPA’s green-painted building and shut down all 
broadcasts. Observers watched with mixed feelings as Tutsis and Hutus united on 
the streets in defence of their hard-won peace agreement. A week later, 
Rugurika fled into exile, in fear of his life.

When President Nkurunziza flew to Tanzania to discuss the crisis with regional 
leaders on 13 May, news of a coup led by a senior general was broadcast on 
independent radio stations. The president was unable to return to the country 
after rebel soldiers took control of Bujumbura airport. General Adolphe, 
however, remained in Bujumbura, standing by to launch a counter-attack against 
the coup plotters.

State security forces attacked media buildings, throwing grenades at the 
headquarters of the Renaissance TV station. Flames licked the facade of the RPA 
building. Journalists who had stored sensitive evidence at the radio station, 
believing it to be the safest place, watched helplessly as years of their work 
went up in smoke. After dark, there was fighting in the streets, and bomb 
blasts shook the buildings. The next day, dead soldiers lay in the streets. No 
one knew who was in charge.

Later that day, news trickled out that the coup had failed. The government 
branded the coup’s plotters as terrorists, and launched a violent crackdown.

As journalists, politicians, activists, indeed anyone who might be perceived 
as anti-Nkurunziza, fled, Mbonimpa dug in. “I have no fear,” he told me in his 
office on 15 June 2015. In the previous six weeks, 94,000 people had fled. 
Ragged-looking men and women waited outside his office, either to report a 
crime or beg for news of a lost loved one. Mbonimpa had documented 77 dead (a 
figure that would later rise to more than 500) and 300 injured, but hundreds 
more – mainly young men – had disappeared.

Soon after RPA had broadcast the testimony of Juvent, the alleged second 
killer, at the end of March, Juvent was arrested. As police drove Juvent away, 
Mbonimpa followed in his car, in a dogged attempt to show they could not kill 
him, nor force him into changing his story about the nuns’ deaths.

President Nkurunziza surprised no one by winning the presidential election on 
21 July. But his victory was far from peaceful. That night, blasts and gunfire 
resounded through the capital.

Less than two weeks later, early on a Sunday morning, General Adolphe was 
driving through Kamenge, accompanied by his bodyguards, when four men in 
fatigues ambushed their armoured black SUV. The gunmen launched two rockets at 
the vehicle, fired automatic weapons and lobbed in a grenade to ensure there 
wereno survivors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/02/burundis-de-facto-internal-security-chief-killed-in-rocket-attack-on-car>
. Neither the rebels nor the ruling party claimed responsibility for killing 
Adolphe – although it was rumoured that his position as the head of the party’s 
militia made him a threat to its political leaders. One former ruling party 
politician in exile in Brussels said, “Adolphe had raised an army, and they 
became more important than the police, more important than the army itself.”

At the time, Mbonimpa was in the capital, Bujumbura, assisting African Union 
(AU) observers in their investigation of the illegal distribution of arms in 
Burundi. He remained at work, although he knew that with Adolphe’s 
assassination, he had now lost his protector.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fmurder-nuns-burundi-man-who-knew-too-much%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e9a2d127a845fa84571630d9f00a3c0189b86ec%2F0_136_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Murder%20in%20Burundi%3A%20the%20man%20who%20knew%20too%20much%20%7C%20Jessica%20Hatcher-Moore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fmurder-nuns-burundi-man-who-knew-too-much%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Murder%20in%20Burundi%3A%20the%20man%20who%20knew%20too%20much%20%7C%20Jessica%20Hatcher-Moore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fmurder-nuns-burundi-man-who-knew-too-much%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e9a2d127a845fa84571630d9f00a3c0189b86ec%2F0_136_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 The funeral cortege for General Adolphe Nshimirimana, the head of Burundi’s 
secret police, who was assassinated less than two weeks after the re-election 
of President Nkurunziza. Photograph: Griff Tapper/AFP/Getty Images 
The day after Adolphe’s death, at 5.30 in the afternoon, Mbonimpa said 
farewell to the AU delegation and got into his car. The driver took the road 
north through the city towards his home. At 6pm, two men on a motorbike pulled 
up alongside Mbonimpa’s car, and the passengerfired four times at his head 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/04/assassination-attempt-burundi-human-rights-activists-pierre-claver-mbonimpa>
. He lost consciousness for a few minutes. When he came to, he gave clear 
instructions to his driver, who was unhurt: “Take me home. I want to die with 
my family around me.” When they got to his house, his wife took one look at him 
and told the driver: “Take him to hospital.”

They raced to the Polyclinique Centrale in Bujumbura. Doctors stabilised 
Mbonimpa, and after a week he was flown to Brussels and was admitted to 
University Hospital. For four months, his head was clamped in a metal cage, and 
was fed by an intravenous drip.

But the attackers were not done with Mbonimpa. His daughter was forced to 
leave Burundi after getting death threats. In late September, her husband was 
murdered by men on motorbikes as he arrived at the gate of his home 
in Bujumbura.

On 6 November 2015, police in Bujumbura were searching the centre of the city 
looking for dissidents, when they tracked down Mbonimpa’s 28-year-old son, 
Welly Fleury Nzitonda. Seeing the police, he tried to run but they caught him. 
Hours later, neighbours found his body. He had been shot in the head and heart.

Mbonimpa, unable to attend his young son’s funeral, sent a note from his 
hospital bed for a colleague to read out after the burial. “Do not lose 
courage,” the note said. “The tragedies we face will end with a resolution of 
the conflict … I maintain hope that it will come soon.” Sitting in a 
fifth-floor temporary office on a grey day in Brussels on 10 May this year, 
recalling how he missed his son’s funeral, Mbonimpa wept.

On 9 December 2015, after four months in a head brace, Mbonimpa was sent for a 
scan by his doctor. Afterwards, he took a seat in the doctor’s office. The 
doctor looked at Mbonimpa for minutes without saying a word, then called in his 
colleagues. Six of them analysed Mbonimpa’s latest scan, and were amazed at his 
recovery.

After they removed the brace, the doctor asked: “Pierre Claver, what angel is 
it that walks with you? Even if we don’t believe in God, we have to believe in 
something because you, sir, have an angel that guides you every day.” Hours 
later, Mbonimpa walked out of the hospital with his wife, weighing just 56kg, 
but determined as ever.

In March 2016, the government alleged that a member of the opposition had 
ordered the nuns’ assassinations to tarnish the Burundi government’s 
reputation. Young rebels who trained in Rwanda carried out the killing, a 
government spokesperson said. “There was no Imbonerakure trained in South Kivu. 
So there was no need to cover up,” the spokesperson said, adding that Adolphe, 
a devout Christian, could not have been behind the assassination of members of 
a religious order. The spokesman blamed the crisis on the meddling of Rwanda in 
Burundi’s affairs, and on the international media, for fanning the flames.

Earlier this year, the international criminal court in the Hague announced 
that it would conduct a preliminary investigation into the violence that 
accompanied the re-election of President Nkurunziza in 2015. But the government 
of Burundi responded in October by announcing that it would simply withdraw 
itself from the court’s jurisdiction – “so we can really be free,” in the words 
of Gaston Sindimwo, one of Nkurunziza’s two vice-presidents. Other members of 
the AU have also withdrawn, claiming the ICC unfairly targets African countries.

“The day I feel well, I will return to my country,” Mbonimpa told me in March 
this year. Last month, the government revoked the licence of Mbonimpa’s human 
rights organisation, claiming it was responsible for destabilising the state. 
For now, he remains in exile.

Main picture: Phil Hatcher-Moore

• Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread 
<https://twitter.com/@gdnlongread>, or sign up to the long read weekly email 
here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/jul/20/sign-up-to-the-long-read-email>.
 