
Ellie Rowsell of Wolf Alice 

I vividly remember my friends circulating a mysterious song on YouTube by a 
band calledTemples 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/nov/07/new-band-temples> in 2012. I was 
so excited for a new band to emerge and now I’m excited to see where they go 
next. We played with them a couple of times and circulated the same festivals 
when we were starting off, so it’s a nostalgic kind of excitement to see them 
this spring. I’m also hugely curious about where they are going to take their 
songwriting and their trademark production. They can write killer melodies, so 
they could take the same route as Tame Impala and become more pop. If their new 
single is anything to go by, I’m looking forward to album number two.

Peter Hook of New Order

I’m looking forward to seeing what the 1975 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/15/the-1975-matt-healy-no-ones-asking-you-to-inspire-revolution-interview>
 do next. I’ve knownMatt Healy  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/11/matt-healy-the-1975-pretentious-not-apologising-interview>
since he was 12, because he’s from near me. I know his mother, Denise Welch, 
and the 1975 won the Wilmslow High School talent competition the year before I 
judged it. It was interesting watching him grow up because every time I was at 
a do where his mum was he’d be there and come over to talk. He’s a massiveJoy 
Division 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/15/joy-division-10-of-the-best> 
fan. My daughter put the first 1975 album on my iPod without telling me who it 
was, and I got quite into it. Then I saw them recently at the Manchester arena, 
in front of 20,000 people, and they’ve improved so much. Their songs are quite 
radical because they don’t have breaks or changes, just grooves. At the arena, 
I was struck by how much their music reminded me ofBrian Eno 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2017/jan/01/brian-eno-reflection-album-review-ambient-generative>
’s soundscapes – he’s made some of my favourite records – but with guitar and 
vocals. Afterwards I asked Matt: “Have you been listening to Eno, by any 
chance?” He said: “All the fuckin’ time, Hooky.”

Little Simz

I’m really excited about Welcome to Wonderland: The Experience, an event I am 
curating in February that is a part of the annualRoundhouse Rising festival. 
<https://www.ihouseu.com/festival/roundhouse-rising-festival-2017-programme-announced.html>
 I’m super stoked for this show because I’ve been involved with the festival 
for the last three years, but I’ve played the small room. Now I I am playing on 
the main stage, and to host it for the first time is incredible. I also get to 
bring out artists I love and appreciate and respect. The first person that 
we’ve announced is Mick Jenkins, who I believe will do great things in the 
future. Everything he stands for I relate to – I think it’s what’s needed right 
now, especially in hip-hop. I want the show to be for the people rather than be 
simply a major label putting a festival together. As well as music, we’re going 
to have exhibitions, with artists such as McKay Felt, who illustrated the album 
cover forStillness in Wonderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2017/jan/01/little-simz-stillness-in-wonderland-review-poison-ivy-lmpd-bad-to-the-bone-space-age-collective>
 and more. We want to make it feel communal.

Clem Burke of Blondie
 Clem Burke Photograph: PR Company Handout 
I am really looking forward to the new release by Crystal Fairy, a new group 
comprised ofthe Melvins’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/nov/17/cult-heroes-melvins-buzz-osborne-kurt-cobain>
 Buzz Osborne and Dale Crover along with Teri Gender Bender of Le Butcherettes 
and Omar Rodríguez-López fromAt the Drive In 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/28/at-the-drive-in-review>. All the 
musicians in Crystal Fairy are iconoclasts, so I can only imagine the 
innovation to come from this collaboration. I am also looking forward to the 
release ofThe Colossus of Destiny: A Melvins Tale <http://melvinsmovie.com/> 
film. The Melvins defied all the rules about how to survive in the wicked world 
of the music business, and I expect the film to show a band that doesn’t take 
itself too seriously – and is all the better for it. I’m also interested in 
hearing the new record byFat White Family 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/31/fat-white-family-social-protest-face-offs-interview-songs-for-our-mothers>
. I’ve seen them live several times, and I think their mix of Frank 
Zappa/Captain Beefheart-meets-Velvet Underground/Modern Lovers is very 
interesting indeed. I also hear that a new Flamin’ Groovies is record on the 
way. The Groovies’ Shake Some Action is a powerpop classic, and with three of 
the original members, including Cyril Jordan, involved in this new record I 
expect great things.

Karl Hyde of Underworld

I was first turned on to Efterklang 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/feb/25/efterklang-live-review> by John 
Peel. Rick [Smith] and I sat in for him on his Radio 1 show while he was on 
holiday in autumn 2004. When we asked if there was anything he wanted us to 
play in his absence, he pointed us in the direction of their first album, 
Tripper. Tragically, John – who’d been our mentor since we were kids – never 
came home and music lost arguably its greatest friend. In the weeks that 
followed, I decided I had to go and find Efterklang to let them know that John 
had requested we play them. We struck up a friendship and are now collaborating 
on a score for a multiscreen art installation I’ve created. Efterklang defy 
definitions of what a band can be, sometimes performing as a three piece, 
sometimes with a choir and orchestra, packing out small clubs or concert halls. 
Casper Clausen is one of the most naturally gifted singers I’ve ever heard – a 
magnetic presence on any size of stage. The last time I saw them was a hometown 
gig in Sønderborg in 2014. The encore consisted of the band leading a parade 
out of the hall to perform a second concert with their parents in the foyer. 
Theirnext London show, in March 
<https://www.barbican.org.uk/music/event-detail.asp?ID=19874>, is their take on 
an opera. Called Leaves and based on the story of an underground cult, it was 
conceived as a fully immersive performance staged in a cold war bunker under an 
abandoned hospital in Copenhagen. It’s been reworked to fit the main room of 
the Barbican. I can’t wait.

Shirley Collins

It’s the prospect of working with English morris dancers in 2017 that excites 
me. As with any art form, it can be good or bad. Done poorly, it’s feeble, but 
it’s thrilling when danced well. There’s not a better sight than the Brighton 
Morris Men, sticks raised, surging forward, manly and a bit threatening. These 
dancers care, there is athleticism in their high leaps, grace in their turns, 
and beauty in the waving of their handkerchiefs. Yes – really! And the music is 
so English – wonderful tunes and harmonies. They are appearing on my forthcoming
Lodestar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/27/shirley-collins-lodestar-album-review-austere-foreboding-folk-music>
 shows, along with the youthful women’s side, Boss Morris, formed by Alex 
Merry. I am proud to support this challenging side of light, graceful dancers, 
so appealing in their contemporary costumes. They dance the morris properly, 
bringing a breath of fresh air and fun to it while retaining an age-old mystery 
with their prowling animal figures. And like Brighton Morris Men, they 
understand how properly paced the dancing should be. Shake off your prejudices 
and allow yourselves to find pleasure and delight in honest, good-natured 
morris dancing. If it was good enough forthe English composer George Butterworth
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tI5qxjWutrs> …

Jason Williamson of Sleaford Mods 
 Photograph: Richard Saker for the Observer 
I’m not really big on getting excited about new releases. Saying that, I met 
Baxter Dury <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/oct/25/baxter-dury-review> 
the other week and he asked me to do a verse on a tune he’s worked on, which 
will hopefully be included on his new album. I was really influenced by some of 
his stuff on his album Floor Show, particularly Cocaine Man, so it was a great 
honour to have been asked. The stuff he played me that he’d been working on was 
really good, brutal in places. I’m looking forward to hearing it as a complete 
album.

Nelly Furtado


I am excited to see the Toronto urban music scene continue to take over the 
world stage in 2017. I have lived in this city for 20 years, and have always 
thought our urban music scene was a well-kept secret. But in the last couple of 
years all of that has changed, and I could not be more proud to have played a 
role in it, from when I first started banging out trip-hop songs on Queen 
Street under the name Nelstar in the mid-90s [to now]. It is satisfying, when 
you stay in a city because you believe in its creative prowess and versatility, 
to witness its maturity, and to meet a new generation of artists carrying on 
that legacy. My favourite Toronto artists right now areRiver Tiber 
<https://soundcloud.com/rivertiber>, Charlotte Day Wilson 
<https://soundcloud.com/charlottedaywilson> and Mustafa the Poet 
<http://www.mustafathepoet.com/>. They are all going to do big things in 2017.
 