
“That man cared for you, that man died for you, that man saw the madness in 
your area.” So ran Sounds’ near-hysterical tribute to the late Ian Curtis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/oct/12/ian-curtis-so-this-is-permanence-joy-division>
, the tragic singer of Joy Division. It was May 1980, and Curtis’ suicide by 
hanging was a despairing end to Britain’s darkest, bleakest band.


While the 2-Tone dance craze raged briefly and fiercely in the hearts of 
post-punk Brits, the storm clouds were gathering overhead.

If, as Malcolm McLaren would now have it, punk was bondage trousers, then the 
glamorous rebellion of antisocial dressing still held a great allure. Mod, 
skinhead and 2-Tone dressing was not glamorous, nor an expression of 
individuality.

But the shadow world inhabited by Joy Division 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/15/joy-division-10-of-the-best>, 
Siouxsie and the Banshees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/oct/29/siouxsie-and-the-banshees-10-of-the-best>
, the Cure et al definitely was. These bands had the right ingredients – sex 
and death; the fetishistic and the taboo. The ultimate end of Joy Division was
real; the others would simply thrive on the mystique.

Nick Cave: from Birthday Party boy to Bad Seed and beyond
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/aug/30/nick-cave-little-history-bleddyn-butcher-photographs-bad-seeds-birthday-party>
Bauhaus, UK Decay, Soft Cell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/jun/11/soft-cell-tainted-love>, the 
Cramps and the Birthday Party were all quite different in their musical 
approach, but each had the necessary qualifications to be bound up in the same 
black leather bag – and labelled goth.

Ah yes, goth – that convenient umbrella that covers a multitude of sins. The 
handy, media-friendly label that points an accusing finger at a coven of 
crimped youths who all cringe together: “But we’renot.”

This brings us to popular goth misconception No 1: that the media invented the 
word goth – an untruth. Checking back through the Sounds mausoleum, we find 
that reviewers searched for months for that elusive phrase to sum up these 
post-punk, post-Numan, pan-sticked beauties. Were the Cramps graveyard chic? 
Was Pete Murphy an aesthetically pleasing zombie? Was Marc Almond a little 
pervert? Nobody knew quite how to say it.

Then along came Abbo, singer of grungy noise-masters UK Decay. “We’re punk 
gothique,” he burbled in May 1981, oblivious to the great meaning his innocent 
words would soon take on. Therefore Abbo (who is now, incidentally, the manager 
of the Claytown “Not Cult” Troupe) was the perpetrator of the term. The media 
just exploited, revelled in, and ultimately hackneyed it to death.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F29%2Fmusic-of-the-macabre-goth-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F29%2F1446116485009%2Fb98bd0f8-98c0-4509-b8a6-1c91a3da40cb-992x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Music%20of%20the%20macabre%3A%20revisiting%20goth's%20evolution%20%E2%80%93%20from%20the%20vaults&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F29%2Fmusic-of-the-macabre-goth-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Music%20of%20the%20macabre%3A%20revisiting%20goth%27s%20evolution%20%E2%80%93%20from%20the%20vaults&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F29%2Fmusic-of-the-macabre-goth-music%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F29%2F1446116485009%2Fb98bd0f8-98c0-4509-b8a6-1c91a3da40cb-992x1020.jpeg>
 Robert Smith of the Cure. Photograph: Brian Rasic/Rex Features 
The period from 1980 to 82 was a great, blossoming period for our noble 
gothfathers. This was the age of innovation, and from it came the greatest of 
all goths.

Of course, Nick Cave <https://www.theguardian.com/music/nick-cave>, Robert 
Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/sep/10/robert-smith-the-cure-bestival>, 
Andrew Eldritch andMarc Almond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/apr/26/marc-almond-review-songs-of-life-tainted-love>
 have since moved on and more than proved themselves as tragicomic geniuses, 
not content to stay forever festering under goth’s protective veil.

But back then the icons were cast. With her continuous death fixation, raven, 
gravity-defying spiky hair, Egyptian makeup and pervy fishnet tights, Siouxsie 
Sioux was the perfect role model for aspiring gothettes.

She has never been surpassed. The Ice Queen was as sensuous as a switchblade, 
and the Banshees’ 1981 classic album, JuJu, defined all the rules of The Book 
of Goth: vampire sex, murdering your mate and collecting shrunken heads under 
your bed.

Meanwhile, Bauhaus took Bowie <https://www.theguardian.com/music/davidbowie>’s 
vision of androgyny to its most sinister limits. Guitarist Daniel Ash, tall, 
skinny and paint-splattered, had probably the most influential hairstyle of the 
first half of the decade. He would only be bettered byRobert Smith 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/juliegerstein/things-robert-smiths-hair-looks-like#.srG08popv>
 who, in 1985, had the cunning foresight to allow a large tarantula to nest on 
his head.

Depravity and the ultimate nihilism came in the explosive form of the Birthday 
Party, whose 81 debut Prayers on Fire and awesome live shows all but burned the 
ears off their listeners.

Nick Cave: 'I have to spend hours talking to fucking idiots like you'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jul/02/nick-cave-interview-jack-barron-rocks-backpages>
Nick Cave <https://www.theguardian.com/music/nick-cave> immediately became a 
living legend – a drug-crazed, satanic messiah; the bastard offspring ofIggy Pop
 <https://www.theguardian.com/music/iggy-pop> and Herman Munster. “It amuses my 
mother,” shrugged the man dryly in 1982. He remains the coolest of all.

Master magician Marc Almond began perverting and illuminating the charts with 
Soft Cell’s 1981 No 1, Tainted Love, a kitsch, gloriously sleazy version of 
Gloria Jones’ northern soul classic. The duo’s Soho-obsessed Non-Stop Erotic 
Cabaret LP added scandal with the meat-cleaving midgets of the (banned) Sex 
Dwarf video, but was a masterwork of David Ball’s pioneering synth art and 
Almond’s sensual torch singing.

The Cure <https://www.theguardian.com/music/the-cure> and the Bunnymen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/echoandthebunnymen> kept the pasty face of 
long-mac miserablism uncracked with Faith and Pornography, Crocodiles and 
Heaven Up Here, respectively. Each added grandeur to Joy Division’s stark 
design, with the latter sliding in some Doors-inspired psychedelia – a pointer 
to a future goth mutation.

Stateside, the Cramps and the Gun Club mixed voodoo rockabilly with a camp, 
theatrical horror show derived from great spirits likeScreamin’ Jay Hawkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2000/feb/16/guardianobituaries>. Fine days 
indeed, and a time when goth implied a romantic escapism, with individuality 
the key. Of course, it couldn’t last.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F29%2Fmusic-of-the-macabre-goth-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F29%2F1446116748578%2F3cdd9dfb-8ea0-4260-a806-43ca886bc0b2-2060x1662.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Music%20of%20the%20macabre%3A%20revisiting%20goth's%20evolution%20%E2%80%93%20from%20the%20vaults&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F29%2Fmusic-of-the-macabre-goth-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Music%20of%20the%20macabre%3A%20revisiting%20goth%27s%20evolution%20%E2%80%93%20from%20the%20vaults&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F29%2Fmusic-of-the-macabre-goth-music%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F29%2F1446116748578%2F3cdd9dfb-8ea0-4260-a806-43ca886bc0b2-2060x1662.jpeg>
 Goths at London’s Batcave in 1984. Photograph: Dave Hogan/Getty Images 
The next three years were a breeding ground for lesser goths, most of whom 
were mere fashion followers.London’s infamous Batcave club 
<http://thequietus.com/articles/09610-the-bat-cave-alien-sex-fiend-goth>, run 
by Specimen singer Ollie (who bore a stunning resemblance to Tim Curry in The 
Rocky Horror Picture Show) even guided Smash Hits through its portals of doom. 
The Batcave travelled to locations around London, and was started because 
Specimen could only get gigs by providing the venue. But it thrived for a few 
years and was made credible by the patronage of all our esteemed gothfathers. 
An embarrassed Ollie even admitted: “We do make a fair bit of money.”

Essentially, the Batcave was about frivolity and fun rather than doom and 
gloom, and rated “10 on the gothometer”, according to the ever-articulate Abbo. 
When the woodwork squeaks …


Out spring the arty clotheshorses. Flesh for Lulu, Alien Sex Fiend, Skeletal 
Family, and a host of even more unmemorables did battle with a fresher new 
breed of drum-machine aficionados – Danse Society, the March Violets and – 
original and best – the Sisters of Mercy.

Cries of “bloody hippie” often greeted the young Eldritch as he led out his 
Mercy machine. But, despite his giveaway sideburns and crushed velvet 
frock-coats, these taunts were water off a deathwatch beetle’s back. With a 
twinkle behind those permanent sunglasses, Spiggy would mercilessly flay his 
audience with historic versions ofHot Chocolate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/may/06/why-errol-brown-hot-chocolate-died-strange-group>
’s Emma,the Stones <https://www.theguardian.com/music/therollingstones>’ Gimme 
Shelter,the Velvets <https://www.theguardian.com/music/velvetunderground>’ 
Sister Ray andAbba <https://www.theguardian.com/music/abba>’s Gimme! Gimme! 
Gimme! (A Man After Midnight).

Unfortunately, this eloquence was not enough to dispel popular goth 
misconception No 2, which decrees that all those who dress in black are 
pompous, humourless bastards. We can only fast forward to the current good work 
being done bythe Cult 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/aug/23/the-cult-fulham-of-rock-music> 
and the Nephilim to begin to dispel this myth.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F29%2Fmusic-of-the-macabre-goth-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F29%2F1446117198198%2Fcafe17a7-5215-4ce3-bdaf-bddb8a0fdaba-1881x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Music%20of%20the%20macabre%3A%20revisiting%20goth's%20evolution%20%E2%80%93%20from%20the%20vaults&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F29%2Fmusic-of-the-macabre-goth-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Music%20of%20the%20macabre%3A%20revisiting%20goth%27s%20evolution%20%E2%80%93%20from%20the%20vaults&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F29%2Fmusic-of-the-macabre-goth-music%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F29%2F1446117198198%2Fcafe17a7-5215-4ce3-bdaf-bddb8a0fdaba-1881x2040.jpeg>
 High volume … Nick Cave of the Birthday Party in 1981. Photograph: David 
Corio/Redferns 
Back in the mid-80s, strange days were dawning. The start of 84 was 
particularly bad, with the Birthday Party,Bauhaus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/bauhaus> and Soft Cell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/jun/11/soft-cell-tainted-love> all 
internally combusting. A heady debate raged in Sounds as to what made a true 
goth – was it an alien sex-fiend fan or a Bunnymen fan? Such was goth’s 
widespread appeal.

This madness had to stop somewhere, but instead it chose to go completely over 
the top.

Tired of wearing nothing but black, and of finding out any more new ideas for 
themselves, the goths took a mighty swerve into gross Technicolor. The 
instigators of this cunning move were Christian Paris and his charge, the 
Doctor, men hooked on psychedelia, wearing flares big enough to engulf the 
minds of a nation.

His Alice in Wonderland club in London’s Soho became the Batcave’s unnatural 
heir. Here Doctor and the Medics set about turning the disciples of darkness 
into foaming, multicoloured paisley love kids.

But not only did the whiff of incense transport the goths – it also got into 
the minds of their glorious leaders. Ian Astbury, who had for some months been 
battling with Eldritch for the best live cover of Louie Louie, was transported 
from a punkish “Red Indian” into a love bead guru, as surely as Love is his 
testimony.

The Doctor also lent a songwriting hand to the Damned’s Grimly Fiendish, the 
chart hit which tuned in the teenies. Dave Vanian, resplendent in Edwardian 
ruffle chic, cut another stirring image ripe for pilfering.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8gT1nsDPZ7g&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8gT1nsDPZ7g>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8gT1nsDPZ7g&media=>
 Listen to the Doctor and the Medics cover of Spirit in the Sky 
But 1985 was marked by a sad incident – another tombstone to be erected down 
the passageway of goth. For it was in June that year that the Sisters split. 
Founding guitarist Gary Marx had already left by the time of their final gig at 
the Royal Albert Hall on 17 June. For the last time the head of Eldritch, 
framed by its distinctive cowboy hat, loomed out of the dry ice and was gone.

The following few years were less than inspirational. The Medics blew their 
credibility to pieces by reaching No 1 with a cover of Spirit in the Sky, in 
the summer of 86. Eldritch and Hussey fought it out for the Sisters’ name, and 
slunk off despondently to make the cold, lifeless Gift and the bad Bunnymen of 
God’s Own Medicine, as the Sisterhood and the Mission, respectively.

Only Nick Cave <https://www.theguardian.com/music/nick-cave> distinguished 
himself, with Kicking Against the Pricks and Your Funeral … My Trial, in which 
he began carving himself into the Bertolt Brecht to Marc Almond’s Jacques Brel 
of the late 80s. But who was doing it for the kids?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F29%2Fmusic-of-the-macabre-goth-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F29%2F1446117725307%2F5bca8c51-cd61-4992-a39e-7bcac57dba37-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Music%20of%20the%20macabre%3A%20revisiting%20goth's%20evolution%20%E2%80%93%20from%20the%20vaults&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F29%2Fmusic-of-the-macabre-goth-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Music%20of%20the%20macabre%3A%20revisiting%20goth%27s%20evolution%20%E2%80%93%20from%20the%20vaults&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F29%2Fmusic-of-the-macabre-goth-music%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F29%2F1446117725307%2F5bca8c51-cd61-4992-a39e-7bcac57dba37-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Marc Almond of Soft Cell. Photograph: Fin Costello/Redferns 
“If you wanna ride my rocket ship, baby / First you’ve gotta light the fuse,” 
boasted self-proclaimed new messiah Zodiac Mindwarp in 1987. On one brilliantly 
funny pastiche of metal’s rotting carcass, The High Priest of Love, Zody zoomed 
into goth’s next dimension. Unfortunately, the plan backfired.

A terrible by-product came of Zod’s riff repetition, fake Yank accent and 
tongue-in-cheek sexism. He succeeded in making metal fashionable to the goths. 
As a result, ex-March Violet Simon Dee tried it on with the dismal Batfish 
Boys, greboes were everywhere and the Cult took a trip to Johnson Leathers and 
made Electric.

Goth for life
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/apr/26/goth-life-fields-nephilim> 
The more traditional line was becoming increasingly depressive, too. No longer 
the place of the forward thinker, goth plunged into the realm of the tribal. In 
this arena of backwards logic, the Fields of the Nephilim rose.

Snatching an audience of predominantly underage goths, the Neph exploited dry 
ice, cowboy hats and deep gurgling vocals for all they were worth. Coupled with 
the attractive, though dubious mysticism of singer Carl McCoy, the Neph had it 
all, and ghost-rode out of the mess with all the glory.

And yet, despite having made videos in which Carl is hanged by irradiated 
mutants (Preacher Man) or boiled alive in a cauldron surrounded by elfin witch 
doctors (Blue Water), the Neph claim to have always taken their work seriously 
– and never to have known of the Sisters’ existence.

In the late 80s, elitism and imagination have long since fled the passageway 
of goth. The Cult and the Mission both boast mass stadium gross-outs in their 
battle to become the Led Zeppelins of the 90s. The Neph, with their burgeoning 
army of followers, are not that far behind.

Goth has become mainstream enough for the chain stores to exploit, and has 
(un)inspired as much of a sheep-like response from its followers as any 
standard fashion victims.

But all is not quite lost. The next goth mutation is already upon us, although 
all those involved can rightfully scream in anguish at being so unfairly 
labelled. It’s just that all their followers wear black …

Loop, Spacemen 3, Thee Hypnotics, the Telescopes and a host of others have all 
unlocked the gates to the passageway of doom. In a not dissimilar fashion to 
the end of the 60s, the 80s are riding out on a tidal wave of mutant feedback, 
hyper-driven wah-wah pedals and disenchanted nihilism.

In particular, Loop’s Reading festival appearance this year made a sparkling 
promise of greater things to hope for.

Goth’s rich escapism has been a necessary part of the austere 10-year 
Conservative reign. And despite its troughs – which, incidentally, have 
coincided with periods of dilution of mainstream pop and rock music – there is 
still a veritable army of people left who don’t want to become part of the Me 
generation.

The colours of darkness are still bewitching and beguiling.
 