
In October 1991 I went with my dad and cousin to Edgar Street, the rickety 
home of Hereford United, to watch them play Aldershot in the old fourth 
division. The match itself was a forgettable experience but afterwards we at 
least got the autograph of Greg “he’s got no hair, but we don’t care” Downs. 
The formerCoventry City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/coventry> 
full-back and FA Cup winner, who would go on to become the Bulls’ 
player-manager, had been signed for Hereford by John Sillett, the architect of 
that most unexpected of triumphs for the Sky Blues in 1987.

Coventry City’s fingers caught in Sisu sliding door that Saints dodged | 
Daniel Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/05/coventry-city-sisu-southampton>
I recall the post-match so vividly only because my cousin, a Hereford fan, was 
given a replica shirt by one of the Aldershot players. I’m not sure if either 
of us knew the state Aldershot were in at that point – in fairness we were nine 
and eight years old and were rather more concerned with our Subbuteo rivalry 
than the fortunes of actual clubs.

Aldershot were liquidated by the high court later that season, the first club 
to be wound up mid-season since Accrington Stanley in 1962. And despite 
Hereford later climbing into the third tier, they eventually slid through the 
divisions, were briefly expelled from football and were also wound up because 
of debts in 2014. The fates of those clubs come to mind now as I follow with 
trepidation the declining fortunes of Coventry, my team.

The catalogue of mismanagement at City over the past 15 years, and in 
particular under the investment fund Sisu (now Otium) who took over in 2007, is 
so extensive and so warped that even as a fan it sometimes feels impossible to 
keep track. Suffice it to say: the club was thrust into administration, forced 
to play its home games in another town, shorn of its most promising talent, 
robbed of its stadium and robbed of its dignity; our precious academy is now
under threat from the “local” rugby club, Wasps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/nov/14/wasps-coventry-city-ricoh-arena>
, who may also oust us from the Ricoh Arena when our tenancy expires; our 
training ground could be sold off for housing; we have sunk to the foot of 
League One (we are second bottom) and seem certain to fall into League Two next 
year.

Daniel Taylor’s excellent piece for the Guardian last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/05/coventry-city-sisu-southampton>
 chronicled the devastation in eye-opening fashion. As he put it, Coventry have 
been “dragged through a hedge-fund backwards”. Quite.

Sisu/Otium are widely despised by Coventry fans, despite their initial 
investments, because they have always valued the financial potential of the 
stadium (though they could never get their hands on it) more highly than they 
valued the supporters. The recentpitch invasions against Sheffield United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/15/coventry-city-protest-sheffield-united>
, during the team’s sixth straight league defeat, followed on from other 
supporter protests at Charlton Athletic and Rochdale this season. Fans are 
gasping for air, hoping someone will come to our rescue.

The state of the club is so parlous that the local paper, the Coventry 
Telegraph, was moved to demand in a front-page editorial in September that the 
owners “Sell Up And Go”. These owners have at least curbed heavy annual 
operating losses, but their intentions remain unclear and their past behaviour, 
which has been castigated by the courts and the council, is portentous. The 
appointment this weekof Russell Slade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/21/coventry-city-appoint-russell-slade-manager-league-one>
 as our eighth manager in nine years – until the end of the season – does not 
yet feel stabilising. Like some fans, I fear for the club’s long-term future.

Unfortunately the Football Association doesn’t give a damn about us. Given the 
chance to free the Sky Blues from the tyranny of Sisu when the club went into 
administration in 2013 they instead granted Otium, a subsidiary, permission to 
take over the “golden share”. Fit and proper? Do me a favour.

As I now live on the other side of the world I witness our downfall through 
the prism of fans’ blogs, social media and online reports. I stay up until 5am 
watching the live-text feed every weekend, repeatedly hitting refresh until I 
learn that another goal has been scored against us. There is no joy anymore. 
I’m just clinging to memories, to the past, in the same way that I am by 
keeping my collection of autographs, sticker albums, programmes and ticket 
stubs from my youth.

I looked back at that collection on my last trip to the UK and remembered how 
my dad and I used to sneak into the main stand after matches at Highfield Road, 
wait for a gap in the security, then dart up into the executive suites and down 
into the restricted zone where the away players exited. The list of visiting 
Premier League stars whose autographs I got was quite remarkable – almost as 
remarkable as the Sky Blues’ frequent relegation escapes.

Coventry stayed in the top flight until 2001, 34 consecutive years. Their 
tenacity (beating Spurs 2-1 away on the last day of the season in 1996‑97 when 
only victory would do) and luck (there were nine other last-day escapes over 
the years, some rather more deserved than others) at times gave rise to shoots 
of genuine talent. The 1997‑98 season was the high-water mark of my youth when 
they came from behind todefeat Manchester United 3-2 at Highfield Road 
<http://www.dailymotion.com/video/x4tg2z5_coventry-c-v-manchester-utd-1997-98_sport>
 with Darren Huckerby’s electrifying, jinking run from the halfway line 
securing victory at the death. That was 19 years ago this Christmas.

Such was the exalted company we kept in the top flight that Jimmy Hill’s 
originalSky Blue Song <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qWzlridBD9c>, written 
before the promotions of the 1960s, had to be amended. Where he penned “Proud, 
Posh or Cobblers, Oysters or anyone, they shalln’t defeat us, we’ll fight ’til 
the game is won”, we gleefully name-dropped “Tottenham or Chelsea, United or 
anyone”. But I was naive. I never expected anyone could do what Sisu/Otium have 
done to us.

By misjudgment, misfortune, intention and neglect they have broken our club 
apart. Every day they remain in charge is a defeat.
 