
This is a story about how trolls took the wheel of the clown car of modern 
politics. It’s a story about the insider traders of the attention economy. It’s 
a story about fear and loathing and Donald Trump and you and me. It’s not a 
story about Milo Yiannopoulos, the professional alt-right provocateur who was
last week banned from Twitter for directing racist abuse towards the actor 
Leslie Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/20/milo-yiannopoulos-nero-permanently-banned-twitter>
.

But it does start with Milo. So I should probably explain how we know each 
other and how, on a hot, weird night in Cleveland, Ohio, I came to be riding in 
the backseat of his swank black trollmobile to the gayest neo-fascist rally at 
the Republican national convention.

Milo Yiannopoulos is a charming devil and one of the worst people I know. I 
have seen the death of political discourse reflected in his designer 
sunglasses. It chills me. We met four years ago when he was just another 
floppy-haired rightwing pundit and we were guests on a panel show. Afterwards, 
we got hammered and ran around the BBC talking about boys.

Since that day, there is absolutely nothing I have been able to say to Milo to 
persuade him that we are not friends. The more famous he gets off the back of 
extravagantly abusing women and minorities, the more I tell him I hate him and 
everything he stands for, the more he laughs and asks when we’re drinking.

“Feminism is cancer” is one of Milo’s slogans, and yet it took him only 
seconds after learning we would both be at the RNC to offer me a lift to his 
“Wake Up!” rally. This time – God help me – I said yes.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F23%2Frepublican-national-convention-fear-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Fear%20Factory%3A%20the%20driving%20force%20of%20the%20RNC%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F23%2Frepublican-national-convention-fear-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Fear%20Factory%3A%20the%20driving%20force%20of%20the%20RNC%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F23%2Frepublican-national-convention-fear-video&media=>
The Fear Factory: the driving force of the RNC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/jul/23/republican-national-convention-fear-video>
So, here we are at the convention, where howling psychopath Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/01/donald-trump-has-fascinating-parallels-with-caligula-says-historian>
 has just been confirmed as the presidential nominee. Milo is loving every 
second. He lost no time climbing on the back of the clown car of the demagogue 
who, with ghoulishly oedipal glee, he calls “Daddy”.

I wait for Milo outside the Ritz. After half an hour, I’m ushered into a large 
black Ford, where Team Milo is off to pick up their star.

Team Milo consists of his tour manager, Tim, one writer for the rightwing 
website Breitbart, one young man with a neat beard and a “Dangerous Faggot” 
T-shirt, and Milo’s personal trainer and driver.

Just as we set off, news breaks that Milo has been suspended from Twitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter>. A frenzy of jubilant 
activity: this is a huge win for Milo. He’ll be trending worldwide within the 
hour.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fmy-night-out-in-cleveland-with-the-worst-men-on-the-internet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e09c79fe3c98bc9fd565e409be14aae9d8df428%2F138_0_2283_1370%2F2283.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20night%20out%20in%20Cleveland%20with%20the%20worst%20men%20on%20the%20internet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fmy-night-out-in-cleveland-with-the-worst-men-on-the-internet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20night%20out%20in%20Cleveland%20with%20the%20worst%20men%20on%20the%20internet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fmy-night-out-in-cleveland-with-the-worst-men-on-the-internet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e09c79fe3c98bc9fd565e409be14aae9d8df428%2F138_0_2283_1370%2F2283.jpg>
 Milo Yiannopoulos speaking at the Gays for Trump party. Photograph: YouTube 
The car pulls up outside a dinner being held by Fox News, and two giant 
security guards get in on either side of me. Then, at last, Milo arrives.

Milo is excited. This is his night. How does he feel about his suspension?

“It’s fantastic,” he says, “It’s the end of the platform. The timing is 
perfect.”

He was planning for this. “I thought I had another six months, but this was 
always going to happen.”

Milo shows no remorse for the avalanche of misconduct he helped direct towards 
Jones, who is just the latest victim of the recreational ritual abuse he likes 
to launch at women and minorities for the fame and fun of it. I have come to 
believe that Milo believes in almost nothing concrete – not even in free speech.

Milo puts on a bulletproof jacket. He does this “because it’s funny”, although 
he worries that it may be insufficiently flattering. “I’m going to send it to 
my guy at Louis Vuitton.” It’s all an act. A choreographed performance by a 
career sociopath. Milo Yiannopoulos is the ideological analogue of Kim 
Kardashian’s rear end. Trickster breaks the internet.

The larger of the two security guards takes the wheel. Milo strokes his arm 
and tells him it’s all right to go fast. There follows the single most 
terrifying car ride of my life. I make it to the venue intact apart from my 
faith in humanity.

“Get Laurie a cigarette, darling,” Milo says to his personal trainer. We smoke 
in the car park as his camera crew arrive. Then the crew livestreams the 
delighted Twitter martyr’s Reservoir Dogs strut through to the VIP room – a 
carpeted ballroom on the seventh floor of hell full of manic trolls and smug 
neo-fascists from every slimy corner of the internet. Over by the bar is Geert 
Wilders, the Dutch far-right leader. I realise that I have stumbled into a den 
of goblins. It’s way too late to cast a protection spell.

Milo swoops away to hold court. I hear a throat clear right in front of me. It 
is Daryush Valizadeh, also known as Roosh V, self-styledleader in the 
“neo-masculinity” movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/04/daryush-roosh-v-valizadeh-cancels-neo-masculinist-meetings-over-safety>
, author of a suspicious stack of sex travel guides and headline-hunting 
nano-celebrity in the world of ritualised internet misogyny. Roosh hates 
feminists for a living. He asks me what I’m doing here. I ask him the same 
question.

Roosh is tall and well-built and actually rather good-looking for, you know, a 
monster. I have the opportunity to observe this because he puts himself right 
up in my personal space, blocking my view of the room. He asks me if I believe 
that it’s right for gay men to be able to adopt children. I tell him that I do. 
He appears as flummoxed by this as I do by his presence at what is supposed to 
be a party to celebrate gay republicans. But he’s here for the same reason I 
am: Milo invited him.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fmy-night-out-in-cleveland-with-the-worst-men-on-the-internet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d01b93a39d24496a7bc1b06f212d5ae14e41535%2F910_139_1004_1254%2F1004.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20night%20out%20in%20Cleveland%20with%20the%20worst%20men%20on%20the%20internet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fmy-night-out-in-cleveland-with-the-worst-men-on-the-internet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20night%20out%20in%20Cleveland%20with%20the%20worst%20men%20on%20the%20internet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fmy-night-out-in-cleveland-with-the-worst-men-on-the-internet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d01b93a39d24496a7bc1b06f212d5ae14e41535%2F910_139_1004_1254%2F1004.jpg>
 Daryush Valizadeh ... extravagantly bearded sociopath. Photograph: YouTube 
What surprises me about Roosh is that he seems to be a true believer. Unlike 
Milo, he appears to be – to some extent – convinced of the truth of what he’s 
saying. He is bitter and vindictive, convinced of his own victimhood. He tells 
me that the reason I have a column is that I’m a useful idiot and all my 
readers have low IQs.I ask him if he’s negging me 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jan/21/negging-loathsome-trend>.

I turn to leave, and Roosh suggests that we should start some sort of “fake 
fight” on the internet, because that’s “part of the game”. “I’m good,” I say, 
genuinely confused. There is no way I could have a fake fight with this man. We 
have real, profound differences. I think he’s a dangerous manchild with an army 
of credulous misogynists at his disposal. I cannot fight him insincerely, and I 
don’t want to fight him in good faith because he has already had too much of my 
attention. What – truly – does this extravagantly bearded sociopath think he’s 
playing at?

The most widely accepted definition of a troll is a provocateur – someone who 
says outrageous, extreme or abusive things to elicit a reaction. For them, the 
reaction itself is the win. The key distinction is between the 
attention-hustlers – the pure troll howlers who play this grotesque game for 
its own sake and their own – and the true believers. Roosh is a true believer, 
and that puts him at a disadvantage.

Roosh means what he’s saying, but he’s still aware that he’s playing a game – 
the same game almost everyone in this crucible of A-list internet conmen is 
playing. It’s the game of turning raw rage into political currency, the 
unscrupulous whorebaggery of the troll gone pro. These are people who cashed in 
their limited principles to cheat at poker. Like Trump, they channel their own 
narcissism to give voice to the wordless, formless rage of the people 
neoliberalism left behind. Welcome to the scream room. There’s a cheese plate.

Now Roosh V and his band of sad men in dark rooms know how it feels to be 
bombarded with bile
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/07/daryush-roosh-v-valizadeh-and-his-acolytes-pilloried>
I run into a British writer from the Spectator, who is as bewildered as I am 
by the way Americans take Milo and his ilk seriously, by their willingness to 
take pride in performative bigotry and call it strength. It works. It sells. 
It’s the unholy marriage of that soulless debate culture that works so well in 
Britain, transplanted to a nation with no social safety net and half a billion 
guns. It works, in part, because of the essentially cult-like nature of US 
culture and the structured ignorance that accompanies it. America is a nation 
eaten by its own myth. The entire idea of America is about believing impossible 
things. Nobody said those things had to be benign.

I stumble downstairs to hear the convention speeches. The hall is packed with 
nervous journalists and plastered with photos of naked young men in Trump caps. 
Pamela Geller, a minor rightwing pundit, is speaking her brains, telling the 
punters that Islam is the real threat to gay rights, and that Trump will save 
America by kicking out immigrants.

Then it’s Milo’s turn.

His speech is cabaret from start to finish. He sashays up to the podium and 
strips off his bulletproof vest, giddy with the attention, and announces that 
he has been banned from Twitter. The news draws cheersfrom the assembled 
Gamergate goons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jan/11/gamergate-a-brief-history-of-a-computer-age-war>
.

I’m not going to quote Milo’s speech here. You can find it online if you want 
to. It’s a very good speech, for a given value of “very good” that’s designed 
to leave decent people keening in a corner over the death of reason. He tells a 
racist joke. The crowd goes wild.

Milo peddles a pageant of insincerity that is immediately legible to fellow 
Brits. The crowd of excitable young and young-ish people gathered to hear him 
pontificate believe what he’s saying, even if he doesn’t. Which he doesn’t. And 
it doesn’t matter.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fmy-night-out-in-cleveland-with-the-worst-men-on-the-internet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb237390345d5fa6272bd171bafa0fe427fa117e%2F0_147_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20night%20out%20in%20Cleveland%20with%20the%20worst%20men%20on%20the%20internet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fmy-night-out-in-cleveland-with-the-worst-men-on-the-internet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20night%20out%20in%20Cleveland%20with%20the%20worst%20men%20on%20the%20internet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fmy-night-out-in-cleveland-with-the-worst-men-on-the-internet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb237390345d5fa6272bd171bafa0fe427fa117e%2F0_147_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
 Donald Trump after his acceptance speech at the Republican convention. 
Photograph: Brendan Smialowski/AFP/Getty Images 
It doesn’t matter that he doesn’t mean it. It doesn’t matter that he’s 
secretly quite a sweet, vulnerable person who is gracious to those he considers 
friends. It doesn’t matter that somewhere in the rhinestone-rimmed hamster 
wheel of his mind is a conscience. It doesn’t matter because the harm he does 
is real.

He is leading a yammering army of trolls to victory on terms they barely 
understand. This is how we got to a place where speakers at the RNC are 
actively calling for the slaughter and deportation of foreigners, declaring that
Hillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> is an 
agent of Satan, and hearing only cheers from the floor.

They ventriloquise the fear of millions into a scream of fire in the crowded 
theatre of modernity where all the doors are locked, and then they watch the 
stampede.

I’ve seen enough. This is an evil place, as airless and soulless as the inside 
of Pamela Geller’s head. We have to get out. In the humid dark of the plaza 
outside the event, a dozen young activists have got together an impromptu 
protest. Shellshocked members of the press stumble out into the street.

“It’s just – there’s so much hate,” says one as she breaks down in tears. 
“What is happening to this country?”

What’s happening to this country has happened before, in other nations, in 
other anxious, violent times when all the old certainties peeled away and 
maniacs took the wheel. It’s what happens when weaponised insincerity is 
applied to structured ignorance.Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> is the Gordon Gekko of the 
attention economy, but even he is no longer in control. This culture war is 
being run in bad faith by bad actors who are running way off-script; it has 
barely begun, and there are going to be a lot of refugees.

Laurie Penny is a contributing editor at the New Statesman.
A longer version of this piece originally appeared on Medium.com 
<https://medium.com/welcome-to-the-scream-room/im-with-the-banned-8d1b6e0b2932#.n52owp782>
.
 