
Myanmar’s Rakhine state erupted in violence over the weekend with more than 30 
insurgents killed, the military said, as fears grow for the strife-torn region.

Northern Rakhine, which is home to the Muslim Rohingya minority and borders 
Bangladesh, has been under military lockdown ever since surpriseraids on border 
posts killed nine police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/10/myanmar-nine-police-killed-insurgents-bangladesh-border>
 last month.

Soldiers have killed scores and arrested many more in their hunt for the 
attackers, who the government says are radicalised Rohingya militants with 
links to overseas Islamists.

Myanmar casts minorities to the margins as citizenship law denies legal 
identity
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/03/myanmar-casts-minorities-to-margins-citizenship-law-denies-legal-identity>
The crisis and reports of grave rights abuses have piled international 
pressure on Myanmar’s new civilian government and raised questions about its 
ability to control the military.

Days of apparent calm were shattered on Saturday when the army said six 
attackers and two soldiers were killed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/13/eight-dead-in-clashes-between-myanmar-army-and-militants-in-rakhine>
 during a series of coordinated ambushes that were defeated only with the help 
of helicopter gunships.

The death toll jumped on Sunday following further clashes. 

In a statement Myanmar’s military said 22 attackers armed with swords were 
killed near Dar Gyi Zar village on Sunday morning after they charged at 
soldiers.

Six other insurgents were killed during clashes elsewhere in the state on 
Sunday, the statement added.

Authorities have heavily restricted access to the area, making it difficult to 
independently verify government reports or accusations of army abuse.

On Saturday evening, Rohingya activists uploaded a graphic video showing the 
corpses of eight people dressed in civilian clothes, including a baby.

The video’s shooter, speaking in Rohingya, said the victims died that day near 
Dar Gyi Zar village, with some showing bullet wounds. It was not possible to 
verify the authenticity of the footage.

The resurgence of violence in western Rakhine has deepened and complicated a 
crisis that already posed a critical challenge to the new administration led by 
democracy activist Aung San Suu Kyi.

The state has sizzled with religious tension ever since waves of violence 
between the majority Buddhist population and the Muslim Rohingya killed more 
than 200 in 2012.

More than 100,000 people, mostly Rohingya, were pushed into displacement camps 
by the bloodshed and have languished there ever since.

Rights groups say they face apartheid-like restrictions on movement and have 
repeatedly called on Aung San Suu Kyi to create a solution.

But Buddhist nationalists at home viciously oppose any move to grant them 
citizenship, claiming the Rohingya are illegal immigrants fromBangladesh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bangladesh> despite their long roots in the 
country.

The latest surge in fighting came as new satellite images 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2016/11/13/burma-massive-destruction-rohingya-villages>
 released by Human Rights Watch on Sunday showed what the group said was 
evidence of mass arson attacks against Rohingya villages.

Their analysis showed more than 400 buildings torched in three Rohingya 
villages where the fighting has been taking place.

The group said active fires and burn scars showed that most of the destruction 
was caused by arson. The latest images were taken on 10 November.

Brad Adams, the group’s Asia director, said the new photos showed “widespread 
destruction” that was “greater than we first thought”.

“Burmese authorities should promptly establish a UN-assisted investigation as 
a first step toward ensuring justice and security for the victims,” he said in 
a statement.

The military and government have rejected allegations that troops have burned 
Rohingya villages, accusing insurgents of lighting the fires.
 