
Thousands of Rohingya Muslims in Myanmar have fled to neighbouring Bangladesh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bangladesh> to escape military operations 
that have left scores of people dead and as many as 30,000 displaced.

A senior UN official accused Myanmar on Thursday of seeking to ethnically 
cleanse the country of its Muslim minority, as Bangladesh stepped up border 
patrols and summoned theMyanmar <https://www.theguardian.com/world/myanmar> 
ambassador to complain about the exodus.

“Despite our border guards’ sincere effort to prevent the influx, thousands of 
distressed Myanmar citizens including women, children and elderly people 
continue to cross the border,” the Bangladeshi foreign ministry said.

Myanmar violence: dozens killed as army clashes with Rohingya in Rakhine state
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/14/myanmar-rohingya-violence-dozens-killed-army-clashes>
“Thousands more have been reported to be gathering at the border crossing.”

The Rohingya are a minority of about a million people who, despite living in 
the country for generations, are treated as illegal immigrants and denied 
citizenship. They have been persecuted for years by the government and 
nationalist Buddhists.

On Tuesday, Bangladesh said it had sent 20 boats carrying Rohingya back to 
Myanmar. They said they were fleeing military sweeps, which were launched in 
response toa coordinated attack by armed men on 9 October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/10/myanmar-nine-police-killed-insurgents-bangladesh-border>
 who killed nine police officers.

Seven Rohingya were feared drowned after a boat sank during an attempt to 
cross a river while trying to escape. “There was a group of people from our 
village who crossed the river by boat to come here, but suddenly the boat 
sank,” Humayun Kabir told Reuters, adding that three of his children were 
missing.

John McKissick, the head of the UN refugee agency’s office in the Bangladeshi 
coastal resort town of Cox’s Bazar, said the country should assist and protect 
them.

“Difficult as it is for the Bangladesh government to absorb large numbers, it 
seems to me there is no other choice, because the only other choice is death 
and suffering,” he said.

In an interview on Thursday with the BBC, however, McKissick said keeping the 
border open “would further encourage the government of Myanmar to continue the 
atrocities and push them out until they have achieved their ultimate goal of 
ethnic cleansing of the Muslim minority in Myanmar.”

‘It will blow up’: fears Myanmar's deadly crackdown on Muslims will spiral out 
of control
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/18/myanmar-deadly-crackdown-muslims-rohingya>
The bloodshed is the most deadly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/14/myanmar-rohingya-violence-dozens-killed-army-clashes>
 since hundreds were killed in communal clashes in 2012. Aung San Suu Kyi, the 
Nobel peace prizewinner and de facto leader of Myanmar, has been criticised for 
not doing more to stop military action in the area.

The army has deployed infantry and helicopters to fight what it says is an 
armed insurgency, but Rohingya say soldiers have raped and killed civilians. 
About 90 people have died.

Human Rights Watch has released satellite images which it said show hundreds 
of razed homes in Rohingya villages 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-38049106>.

Myanmar denies reports of abuses, saying Rohingya were setting fire to their 
own homes to attract international attention. The presidential spokesman Zaw 
Htay said Myanmar was “releasing correct news immediately” to prevent the 
spread of misinformation.

“The international community misunderstood us because of Rohingya lobbyists 
who distributed fabricated news,” he said. “No one in the world would accept 
attacks on security forces, killings and looting of weapons.”

Reports cannot be independently verified because the government restricts 
access for journalists and aid workers. Aung San Suu Kyi has said a 
government-led investigation is under way.

The UN has warned that more than 3,000 severely malnourished children may die 
without help. Food and medical aid to more than 150,000 people has been 
suspended for more than 40 days in the area, which is under military lockdown.

Myanmar must react to humanitarian crisis | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/28/myanmar-must-react-to-humanitarian-crisis>
Last year, thousands of Rohingya trying to flee Rakhine – the province that 
borders Bangladesh – were stranded at sea while trying to reach Indonesia, 
Malaysia and Thailand. There are about 300,000 Rohingya living in Bangladesh.

The recent rise in violence has increased calls for Myanmar to recognise the 
Rohingya’s rights and prevent intercommunal and state violence.

The US State Department spokeswoman Nicole Thompson expressed concern about 
“reports of ongoing violence and displacement in northern Rakhine state”.

“We continue to urge the government to conduct a credible, independent 
investigation into the events in Rakhine state, and renew our request for open 
media access.”

Agence France-Presse and Reuters contributed to this report
 