
‘Everything we’ve done has stemmed from the fun factor. I can’t do boring,” 
saysNadia Rose 
<https://twitter.com/nadiarosemusic?ref_src=twsrc^google|twcamp^serp|twgr^author>
 emphatically. The 22-year-old Croydon rapper’s first music video, last year’s
Station <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zQZEPyAbRRc>, found her dancing on 
railway tracks, unperturbed by the train pulling into the platform behind her. 
“We didn’t have permission,” she admits. “We literally had one shot to do that 
clip otherwise they’d have called the operators, but the videographer knew when 
the train was coming and timed it perfectly.”

The fun factor is very much present in the handful of singles Rose has 
released to date. She speeds up, slows down, drops into patois; stacks rhymes 
on rhymes, doubles up meanings, bounces between pop culture references. It’s no 
surprise to learn she used to read the dictionary for fun (“My mum wanted the 
Bible by my pillow, but I had the dictionary there!”); now, that childhood 
nerdiness is put to good use rapping circles around her targets and turning up 
the energy for her crew.

“Poured me a rum and I chased it with rum/ Bought your tape and I want a 
refund,” she snarks on party anthemBoom 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EwfYGAL5y7s>, whose video was shot on a 
genuine night out for Rose that ended up at a jacuzzi in a house party. “It 
wasn’t staged!” she says. “I put out a call on Twitter, ‘Where are the parties 
tonight? We’re gonna roll.’ The cameras didn’t go off, we’ve got the whole 
night on camera. There are a lot of bits that will never surface. It was a 
wicked night.”

I don’t like the fact that female MCs are separated out: the guys are our 
competition too

Most impressively, Rose seems to have skipped the amateur experimentation 
stage to emerge as a fully formed artist with her own distinct voice. There are 
echoes of her influences: Missy Elliott’s verbal eccentricity, Eminem’s 
technical panache with a dollop of dancehall, and she shares the penchant for 
banter that marks out her British peers such asLady Leshurr 
<https://twitter.com/LadyLeshurr>. But on singles such as D.F.W.T. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4cz8sPUEEKI> (her first viral moment, scoring 
nearly half a million YouTube views since last October) andMufasa 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M_cfb4ecxaw>, her confidence in taking on two 
well-known, disparate beats – Mila J’s DJ Mustard-producedMy Main 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q3-xPHyorME> and Wiley’s classic grime riddim 
Eskimo <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mO3dl25gR_g> – and making them her own 
is breathtaking. It’s no shock, then, that Rose’s rise has been meteoric. This 
year alone, she’s signed a deal with Sony, played her first festival main 
stages and been invited to perform at an Alicia Keys showcase.

But just two years ago, there was rather more boredom in Rose’s life. Juggling 
university with a job in one of the many betting shops that have proliferated 
on Croydon’s high street since she was a kid, Rose would scribble lyrics on 
betting slips and go home to record them but kept it a secret from all but her 
closest friends. “It was a barrier. I wanted to do it, but I couldn’t,” she 
says now. So she quit her job, with no safety net. “I didn’t have a timescale, 
I didn’t have a plan. But I had the best people around me, and I haven’t looked 
back.”


The most formative of those people included her dad, a DJ who passed on a love 
of the musical spectrum from jungle to the Spice Girls; Rose remembers the 
first time his music drew her downstairs: “It was Capleton’sCuyah Cuyah 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Duj_XYmWMhw>, I came down and would just sit 
there and take everything in from the speakers.” The charisma and hint of 
arrogance that magnetised her then still inspires her now: “There’s no point 
doing this if you’re not confident.”

There was also her friend Tiana Rochelle, aka producer and beatboxer the Black 
Obsidian, who made the skeletal, skittering beat to Station. On Rose’s new 
single,Squad, <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uXIkgbX55Mc>, she pays tribute 
to a group of brilliant-sounding girlfriends. “When all of that energy is 
together, it’s incredible what you can achieve.” On a sadder note is the memory 
of her grandmother, who passed away last year just as Rose’s career was lifting 
off, and to whom she paid moving tribute in abittersweet freestyle for SBTV 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5mFakrhzwk8>. “I’d literally just come back 
from Ghana, where we buried her, the week before I recorded that,” Rose 
remembers. “Before I could have done anything else, I had to do that.”

And then there’s her cousin Stormzy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/21/stormzy-grime-skepta-kanye-drake>
, one of the undisputed leaders of the UK’s current grime renaissance, who’s on 
hand with music industry advice, not that Rose always listens. When she was 
booked on the main stage for July’s Wireless Festival in Finsbury Park, he was 
every inch the proud cousin but thought Rose should have worked her way up from 
a smaller stage first. Did his opinion change her mind? “No!”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4cz8sPUEEKI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4cz8sPUEEKI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4cz8sPUEEKI&media=>
Watch the video for Nadia Rose’s D.F.W.T. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4cz8sPUEEKI> 
Neither did she back down when an unusual turn of events resulted in another 
main-stage appearance, at this month’s Born & Bred festival. Initially 
headlined by Azealia Banks, the Harlem rapper’s all-night Twitter spree of 
racist and homophobic insults that culminated in cheerfully insulting the 
entire UK music scene saw herkicked off the bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/11/azealia-banks-axed-uk-music-festival-zayn-malik-twitter>
 in May and replaced, following a grassroots Twitter campaign, by Rose.
“@AZEALIABANKS what’s good?” 
<https://twitter.com/nadiarosemusic/status/730317267976728576> the affronted 
Londoner had tweeted in the middle of the social media storm, repurposingNicki 
Minaj’s infamous diss of Miley Cyrus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/31/nicki-minaj-confront-racism-catfight>
 at the 2015 VMAs. “I definitely champion and appreciate UK music, so I think 
I’m more deserving of the spot,” she grins now.

A wave of charismatic, rapid-witted British female MCs is coming through along 
with Rose, such as Lady Leshurr and Lady Lykez. Rose is wary of a box that can 
be a trap for female artists, though. “We’re cool, but I don’t like the fact 
that we’re separated from the guys. Sometimes I feel they like to force the 
‘unity’ too much and therefore separate themselves even more. Like, we’re the 
girls, we stick together.

“But right now we’re trying to bridge the gap. It’s cool that unity’s there, 
but also understand that the guys are there and they’re still our competition 
as well. We need to be drilling all angles.”

Rose, a fan of high-octane activities who’s planning a day go-karting for her 
birthday, will be doing so in the fast lane.
 