
Her boots may have been made for walkin’, but Nancy Sinatra’s  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2005/apr/15/2>Boots also jumped, ran and 
scrambled up the pop charts in both America and Britain, reaching No 1 in the 
NME Chart in only three weeks!


 It’s a fantastic instant-success story for a record that came about quite 
accidentally. As I talked with Nancy on the set of Shivaree, a local weekly pop 
show in Hollywood, she told me how she came to record These Boots Are Made for 
Walkin’.

 “Lee Hazlewood, the writer and producer, who produced all of Duane Eddy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/jun/23/duane-eddy-richard-hawley-review>
’s records, wrote it for himself,” Nancy related. “He wrote it with a 
country-and-western flavour, but wanted it to hit the ‘middle-of-the-road’ 
market. I heard it and told him I thought a girl should sing it. I loved it the 
first time I heard it!

 “He was fooling around, playing some things he had written, and I said, ‘Lee, 
I’ve got to do that song.’ He said ‘Well, it’s for a boy.’ And I said ‘No, it 
isn’t! It’s for a girl. If a boy does it, it will sound mean. “These boots are 
gonna walk all over you” sounds awful. But if a girl does it, it can be a 
joke.’ And that’s the way it turned out.”

 Only 25 years old, Nancy has managed to absorb the maturity and poise that 
has always surrounded her and speaks quite matter-of-factly. She began her 
career by doing amateur television, but felt the thing that gave her the 
biggest boost “was probably a TV show I did when I was 18. It was a show I did 
for my dad when Elvis Presley got out of the army in May 1960. It was Elvis’s 
first appearance since he had been out of the service and it drew a tremendous 
audience.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSbyAZQ45uww&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSbyAZQ45uww>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSbyAZQ45uww&media=>
 When I questioned Nancy about her famous father’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/jan/19/frank-sinatra-send-clowns-live> 
influence, she confided: “Daddy has always been there if I needed advice, but 
he has never interfered. If the help I seek is something to do with work, 
naturally he gives professional advice. And, if it’s a personal thing, he’s a 
daddy.”

 In her dressing room, the brown-haired beauty continued as she changed for 
her next number: “Having a famous person in the family opens many doors that 
would otherwise be difficult to open. But once you’re on the inside, you’re on 
your own and you must prove you are qualified to be on the ‘inside’.”

 Nancy is much lovelier than her pictures suggest and her voice has a 
soothing, deep quality. She bubbled: “The things that really keep you going in 
this business are the little things. When someone comes over to you with a big 
smile on their face and says, ‘Nancy, that was really good, I really enjoyed 
it,’ it’s so gratifying.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F03%2Fnancy-sinatra-in-1966-no-career-is-as-important-as-a-husband-and-children%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F3%2F1433337649624%2F90e0cb80-b7e7-4520-87f1-9e7c0b821c38-768x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nancy%20Sinatra%20in%201966%3A%20'No%20career%20is%20as%20important%20as%20a%20husband%20and%20children'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F03%2Fnancy-sinatra-in-1966-no-career-is-as-important-as-a-husband-and-children%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nancy%20Sinatra%20in%201966%3A%20%27No%20career%20is%20as%20important%20as%20a%20husband%20and%20children%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F03%2Fnancy-sinatra-in-1966-no-career-is-as-important-as-a-husband-and-children%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F3%2F1433337649624%2F90e0cb80-b7e7-4520-87f1-9e7c0b821c38-768x1020.jpeg>
 ‘Daddy has always been there’ … Frank Sinatra with his first wife, Nancy, and 
their daughter Nancy Jnr. Photograph: Everett Collection/Rex Feature 
 Nancy told me she was very disappointed she couldn’t make a trip to England 
to promote her record. “I had no idea the record would spring up as it has! I 
can’t go to England now, because I have too many commitments here. Today’s tape 
is being sent to England for TV there.”

 On the show, Nancy does her Boots recording and As Tears Go By 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Dyr4zXZsgIA>, which she had recorded that 
morning for her new album. Also included in the album tracks are Day Tripper, 
Run For Your Life, and Lies, recorded here by the Knickerbockers group, who 
back Nancy on the film.

 The young singer admitted she loved working with her father in the movie 
Marriage on the Rocks 
<http://www.tcm.com/mediaroom/video/196616/Marriage-On-The-Rocks-Original-Trailer-.html>
 and that they met no difficulties. But she did mention that “the long hours 
can be gruelling! It’s so much harder for an actress, because you have to get 
to the studio two hours early for makeup, that’s about five in the morning! You 
shoot until eight or nine at night. Then, if you live by yourself, as I do [she 
has a home in Beverly Hills], you’ve got to worry about cooking and cleaning 
house. It can be rough!”

 Nancy observed: “The thing I always try to maintain is good health. With it, 
I think we could conquer the world. We could conquer any problem imaginable.” 
While she is continually busy doing records, television and movies, Nancy could 
not choose a favourite. She said, “They’re all so different, and I like them 
all. You can’t choose, because each is different and each is gratifying. 
They’re all great fun and aid hard work.”

 This young career girl is, surprisingly, not intent on a long-range career. 
“If a man came along I fell in love with and wanted to marry, I’d give up show 
business. No career is as important as personal happiness with a husband and 
your own children. I want this before anything else.”

 It appears Nancy’s Boots will carry her just about anywhere she wants them to 
go. It’s up to her to point the way.

 © Ann Moses, 1966
 