
Narendra Modi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/narendra-modi> has sought to 
further ratchet up international pressure on Pakistan by urging leaders from 
major developing nations to stand together against the “mothership of 
terrorism”.

India calls Pakistan a 'terrorist state' as 17 soldiers die in Kashmir
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/18/india-accuses-pakistan-of-being-terrorist-state-17-die-kashmir>
In a barely concealed reference to Pakistan, the Indian prime minister accused 
his country’s neighbour of promoting terrorism. “Tragically the mothership of 
terrorism is a country in India’s neighbourhood,” Modi told a gathering in 
India of the heads of governments of the Brics countries – Brazil, Russia, 
India, China andSouth Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica>.

“Terror modules around the world are linked to this mothership,” he said. 
“This country shelters not just terrorists. It nurtures a mindset. A mindset 
that loudly proclaims that terrorism is justified for political gains. It is a 
mindset we strongly condemn. And against which we as Brics need to stand and 
act together.Brics <https://www.theguardian.com/business/brics> must speak in 
one voice against this threat.”

Sunday’s meeting in the Indian state of Goa was attended by the president of 
Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, Vladimir Putin, and the 
president of China, Xi Jinping.

Modi’s Hindu nationalist government has hardened its stance against Pakistan 
since a September attack on a military base in Uri that killed 19 soldiers. 
India firmly blames the attack on Pakistan-based jihadis – a charge Islamabad 
denies. The attack prompted India to launch what it said werea series of 
cross-border “surgical strikes” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/29/pakistani-soldiers-killed-surgical-strikes-kashmir-india>
 on “terror launch pads”. .
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fnarendra-modi-mothership-of-terrorism-pakistan-brics-goa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcab895edea475de02f19a6c71464c534063bbb54%2F0_42_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Narendra%20Modi%20labels%20Pakistan%20'mothership%20of%20terrorism'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fnarendra-modi-mothership-of-terrorism-pakistan-brics-goa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Narendra%20Modi%20labels%20Pakistan%20%27mothership%20of%20terrorism%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fnarendra-modi-mothership-of-terrorism-pakistan-brics-goa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcab895edea475de02f19a6c71464c534063bbb54%2F0_42_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Demonstrators burn Pakistan’s national flag during a protest against the Uri 
army base attack in Kashmir last month. Photograph: Mukesh Gupta/Reuters 
India has also moved to isolate Pakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> at a time when Islamabad is 
struggling to focus international attention on months of civil unrest in the 
India-controlled half of Kashmir, a Himalayan region that the two countries 
have contested since independence in 1947.


Last month India successfully encouraged Afghanistan, Bangladesh and Bhutan to 
boycott the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/28/pakistan-humiliated-by-south-asian-countries-boycott-of-summit>
 summit that was due to be hosted in Islamabad in November.

All the Brics countries condemned recent terror attacks in a “Goa declaration” 
released to mark the end of the summit, but did not mention Pakistan by name. 
“We strongly condemn terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and stressed 
that there can be no justification whatsoever for any acts of terrorism, 
whether based upon ideological, religious, political, racial, ethnic or any 
other reasons,” the statement said.

China is one of Pakistan’s closest allies and has committed to investing $46bn 
(£38bn) in infrastructure projects in the country. Although analysts say 
Beijing is uncomfortable with Pakistan’s alleged sponsorship of jihadi groups,
China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> has not joined in the 
international chorus of condemnation.

This month China once again blocked Indian-led moves to include Masood Azhar, 
the head of a Pakistan based militant organisation, on the UN’s official 
terrorism sanctions list. Azhar’s Jaish-e-Mohammad group was blamed by India 
for adeadly attack on India’s Pathankot airbase 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/13/pakistan-holds-members-of-group-blamed-for-india-airbase-assault>
 in January which killed seven military personnel. Although Pakistan did launch 
a limited crackdown on the group it said it had not been able to find evidence 
linking Azhar to the Pathankot attack.
 