
In Nashville <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/nashville> this week, a 
music festival and conference attempted to draw a line in the sand between 
mainstream country, as heard on TV awards shows and in sports arenas, and 
Americana, meaning almost everything else.

John Prine review – legendary songwriter looks back to the beginning
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/24/john-prine-songs-music-review-nashville-first-album-concert>
Throughout the week, in conference rooms and ballrooms, in clubs and back yard 
parties, labels, promoters and musicians came together in an attempt to define 
a community that has struggled to survive since the collapse of the traditional 
recording industry.


Unlike other such gatherings, particularly South by Southwest, held each March 
in Austin, Texas, theAmericana <https://www.theguardian.com/music/americana> 
Music Conference was not primarily focused on the nuts and bolts of industry 
negotiations. Instead, attendees sought to reclaim their music as a necessity 
of personal expression in the digital era, when artists face an uphill battle 
for fair compensation and may feel forced to compromise or feel belittled by a 
tech-obsessed wider culture.

“We are not here to advocate for the business,” said conference executive 
director Jed Hilly. “We are here to advocate for the art.”

One of the dividing lines between Americana and elsewhere is the integrity of 
a fundamental: songwriting. That became especially resonant with the deaths 
this year ofGuy Clark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/17/guy-clark-dies-nashville-country-music-singer-songwriter>
 andMerle Haggard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/10/merle-haggard-maverick-legacy-hank-williams-jr>
, both considered masters of their craft.

At a panel discussion on Thursday, the songwriter Rodney Crowell said the 
country <https://www.theguardian.com/music/country> music industry had changed 
priorities when it veered away from the vision of individual songwriters to 
seeking songs crafted by committee, often involving a half-dozen songwriters 
constructing components as on an automotive assembly line.

“I can definitely hear the difference between the two,” he said. “It switched 
from art to commerce along the way.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fnashville-americana-festival-country-music-songs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ec860020c090864796a5f7a1caec54088f64485%2F0_187_3263_1958%2F3263.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nashville%20music%20festival%20defines%20'Americana'%3A%20the%20art%2C%20not%20the%20business&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fnashville-americana-festival-country-music-songs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nashville%20music%20festival%20defines%20%27Americana%27%3A%20the%20art%2C%20not%20the%20business&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fnashville-americana-festival-country-music-songs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ec860020c090864796a5f7a1caec54088f64485%2F0_187_3263_1958%2F3263.jpg>
 Bonnie Raitt presents an award at the show in Nashville. Photograph: Mark 
Zaleski/AP 
The most dire warning came from producer T Bone Burnett, a hero for, among 
other things, his role in producing the Grammy-winning gospel, folk, and blues 
soundtrack to the 2000 film O Brother, Where Art Thou? In a keynote speech on 
Thursday he denounced Silicon Valley as home to technocrats who assume artists 
“should be grateful, subservient even, and use their flimsy new tools happily 
to make them ever more powerful”.

“Our work is being commoditized,” he said. “The price of music is being driven 
down to zero. The internet technology that has been so wildly promoted as being 
the key, the final solution, to our freedom, has become our prison.

“What the false prophets of the internet said would replace governments and 
nation states and commerce, and create a free world of community and sharing, 
has led instead to a consolidation of wealth and power that makes the 
monopolies of the early 20th century – Morgan and Rockefeller and Carnegie – 
look weak and ineffective.”

This is the 17th year of the conference, but only in recent years has it hit 
its stride – more than 2,270 artists and industry professionals attended this 
year, a spike of 24% since the last. One reason for that, Hilly said, was a 
retooling of the organization, focusing on the artists instead of the industry 
with the hope of building a coalition that can speak with one voice.

The new model, he said, is the Sundance film festival, which formed to help 
define independent film as a genre separate from Hollywood.

Defining Americana has always been tricky. The festival itself included 
singer-songwriters, country soul singers, bluegrass players, folk artists such 
as Billy Bragg and soul men such as William Bell. Relying on region is no help, 
as showcasing artists had arrived from everywhere from East Nashville to New 
Zealand. In the past, terms like “alternative country” and “roots rock” have 
tried to create some kind of continuity – without much effect.

The Americana Music Association, the not-for-profit group that organizes the 
festival, is tightening its focus. An early victory, after trying for four 
years, was getting the word “Americana” accepted by the Merriam-Webster 
dictionary. Its official definition is “a genre of American music having roots 
in early folk and country music”.

The organization is also responsible for helping create three Grammy 
categories for Americana artists: best album, best roots performance and best 
roots song. In the past, Americana artists were crowbarred into folk or blues 
categories, or not nominated at all.

Billboard has launched an Americana chart, intended to reflect the commercial 
power of the genre, which benefits not from hits on country radio but from 
exposure the old-fashioned way: touring, word of mouth, public radio and 
written features.

There is also the organization’s own awards ceremony, held this week to air 
for the first time on PBS stations in November. Stocked with veterans including 
Alison Krauss, Bob Weir, Bonnie Raitt, Emmylou Harris, Dwight Yoakam and Steve 
Earle, the show also brought together newcomers such as John Moreland and Margo 
Price. Held on Wednesday at the historic Ryman Auditorium, the event had the 
familiar trappings of televised awards shows: red carpet, live feeds to 
satellite radio and a star-studded finale.Jason Isbell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/24/jason-isbell-review-london> won 
album of the year andChris Stapleton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/05/chris-stapleton-steals-cma-awards-justin-timberlake>
 artist of the year.

Their recent albums have become underground hits, showing the commercial 
viability of Americana artists. Veteran artists such as Harris, who has not 
been heard on country radio for decades, recognized the value of 
self-identification, suggesting it highlights an audience that is underserved 
by commercial radio.

“They didn’t know what to call us,” she said. “We were kind of left-field 
hippies. Now we’re Americana.”

One major hitmaker showed up to voice his thanks. George Strait appeared to 
present a lifetime achievement award to Jim Lauderdale, the songwriter whose 
work has supplied Strait hits including The King of Broken Hearts.

“I know him mostly as a songwriter – a really, really, really, really good hit 
songwriter,” said Strait.

Evening showcases throughout the six days included familiar faces such as Lee 
Ann Womack, Kasey Chambers, and Bragg and Joe Henry, all with new albums to 
promote. Bob Weir of the Grateful Dead did an intimate session at the Country 
Music Hall of Fame and Museum on Friday, talking with producer-songwriter Buddy 
Miller before an audience of 200 about his work with the National on his 
forthcoming album, his first set of new songs in 30 years.

“A record like this can’t be made easily. It wasn’t slapdash. We slept on it 
and came back a month or two later,” he said of the three-year process.

He also delved into the impact the Dead had on Americana, going back to the 
early 1960s, when he formed a jug band with Jerry Garcia.

“The Beatles came out that year. They looked like they were having a lot of 
fun and making big waves,” he said. “The electric instruments out front looked 
awfully attractive.”

The majority of artists showcasing at Americana were ripe for discovery. They 
included Bonnie Bishop, a Nashville singer whose powerful voice raised the bar 
for to-the-rafters country soul, and Aaron Lee Tasjan, who filled the Cannery 
Row Ballroom to near capacity for wry, hook-driven country rock straight out of 
Tom Petty’s playbook.

Maybe the most unique find was 15-year-old Sammy Brue. Hidden behind glasses 
and a wide-brimmed hat, with hair hitting his shoulders, he fingerpicked 
melancholy folk songs on an acoustic guitar, all with a complexity beyond his 
years and baring a weary soul with which anyone of any age would be familiar.
 