
The Israeli prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, has joined calls for an 
Israeli soldier to be pardoned after being convicted of manslaughter for 
shooting deada severely wounded Palestinian attacker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/24/israeli-soldier-filmed-shoot-dead-wounded-palestinian-attacker-hebron>
 in the West Bank city of Hebron last year.

As soon as the verdict was handed down on Wednesday at the end of one of the 
country’s most polarising court cases in recent memory, there were calls from 
Israeli ministers demanding that Sgt Elor Azaria, an army medic who was 19 at 
the time of the shooting, be granted an immediate pardon by the Israeli 
president, Reuven Rivlin, as others accused the Israeli military of abandoning 
the soldier.

In a short statement, Netanyahu said: “This is a difficult and painful day for 
all of us – and first and foremost for Elor and his family, for IDF soldiers, 
for many soldiers and for the parents of our soldiers, and me among them.

“We have one army, which is the basis of our existence. The soldiers of the 
IDF are our sons and daughters, and they need to remain above dispute.”

The three-judge military court sitting in Tel Aviv said Azaria had acted 
outside the military’s rules of engagement when he killed Abdel Fattah 
al-Sharif by shooting him in the head as he lay on the ground, shortly after 
Sharif and another Palestinian had stabbed and wounded a soldier at an Israeli 
military checkpoint.

Reading for more than two hours from the verdict, the chief judge, Col Maya 
Heller, said Azaria shot Sharif out of revenge. The court ruled that accounts 
of the incident that he had given were “unreliable and problematic” and his 
defence contradictory and flawed.


“We found there was no room to accept his arguments,” she said. “His motive 
for shooting was that he felt the terrorist deserved to die.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fisraeli-soldier-guilty-manslaughter-shooting-palestinian-elor-azaria-abdel-fattah-al-sharif%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe5cffcb5d8ae072a174a648d526c7632353c34f4%2F0_114_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Netanyahu%20backs%20calls%20for%20convicted%20Israeli%20soldier%20to%20be%20pardoned&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fisraeli-soldier-guilty-manslaughter-shooting-palestinian-elor-azaria-abdel-fattah-al-sharif%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Netanyahu%20backs%20calls%20for%20convicted%20Israeli%20soldier%20to%20be%20pardoned&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fisraeli-soldier-guilty-manslaughter-shooting-palestinian-elor-azaria-abdel-fattah-al-sharif%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe5cffcb5d8ae072a174a648d526c7632353c34f4%2F0_114_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Azaria sitting with his parents and his girlfriend Orel (left) as he awaited 
the verdict at the military court in Tel Aviv on Wednesday. Photograph: Heidi 
Levine/AFP/Getty Images 
The other Palestinian involved in the knife attack was shot and died 
immediately, but Sharif was still alive, badly injured and posing no threat 
when Azaria shot him, the judges ruled.

As the verdict was read out, Azaria’s mother shouted at the panel of judges: 
“You should be ashamed of yourselves.” Other members of Azaria’s family clapped 
as the decision was delivered, shouting: “Our hero!”

Outside the court there were clashes between Azaria’s supporters – some 
notorious fans of Beitar football club, which is known for its anti-Arab 
followers – and the police. Some supporters chanted death threats against the 
Israeli army chief, Gadi Eisenkot, insinuating he would face the same fate as 
Yitzhak Rabin, the former prime minister killed 20 years ago by an 
ultranationalist Israeli.

Sharif’s father welcomed the verdict. “For me, a just verdict will be one that 
is similar to the verdicts our sons [in Israeli prisons] get … [a] life 
sentence,” Yusri al-Sharif said. “ButIsrael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> is trying its own son, so there is a 
possibility it will be lenient.”

Initially prosecutors had called for Azaria to be charged with murder but 
instead settled on a lesser charge of manslaughter, which carries a maximum 
sentence of 20 years. Sentencing is expected in about a month.

The end of the trial has coincided with one of the most febrile periods in 
recent Israeli politics, with the two-state solution on its last legs and the 
US president-elect, Donald Trump,threatening to move the US embassy to Jerusalem
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/21/us-israel-embassy-jerusalem-peace-process>
.


A resurgent and pro-settler far right, emboldened by Trump’s imminent 
inauguration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/04/bill-hillary-clinton-donald-trump-inauguration>
, has been pushing Netanyahu’s rightwing government on issues from the Azaria 
case, Jewish settlement expansion and calls to annex large parts of the 
occupied Palestinian territories.

Elor Azaria: the Israeli soldier who exposed the country's faultlines
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/04/elor-azaria-israeli-soldier-exposed-faultlines>
Among the earliest calling for a pardon was the leader of the far-right Jewish 
Home party, Naftali Bennett. Describing the trial as politically “contaminated 
from the beginning”, Bennett said: “Today a soldier who killed a terrorist who 
deserved to die, who tried to slaughter [another] soldier, was placed in 
shackles and convicted as a criminal.”


Israel’s culture minister, Miri Regev – a member of Netanyahu’s Likud party – 
said she would also work to win a pardon. “That’s not how you act toward a 
soldier [who belongs] to all of us,” she said.

However, the defence minister, Avigdor Lieberman – who has previously 
supported Azaria – said he “didn’t like the verdict” but Israelis should 
respect it.

Commenting on the demands for a pardon, Rivlin’s office said such requests 
could only be “submitted by the applicant themselves, or by one with power of 
attorney, or an immediate relative, following a conclusive judicial ruling” – 
in other words at the end of all appeals.

The shooting on 24 March last year, captured on video by a Palestinian human 
rights activist,prompted international condemnation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/25/un-envoy-condemns-palestinian-killing-by-israeli-soldier-hebron>
.In the footage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/mar/24/israeli-soldier-shoots-dead-wounded-palestinian-attacker-video>
, the wounded Sharif is surrounded by soldiers, medics and settlers. Azaria 
then appears and unslings a weapon before shooting Sharif in the head.

The discussion at the heart of the case was whether Azaria was justified in 
killing Sharif.


Heller rejected the defence’s two central but contradictory claims, the first 
suggesting that Sharif was already dead at the time of the shooting, and the 
second that Azaria felt threatened, telling the court: “You can’t have it both 
ways.”

Prosecutors had argued Azaria’s motive was expressed in comments witnesses 
said he had made: that Sharif “deserved to die” for wounding a comrade. The 
court accepted this account, noting that the words carried “serious 
significance” in its ruling.

UN envoy condemns Palestinian attacker's 'gruesome' killing by Israeli soldier
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/25/un-envoy-condemns-palestinian-killing-by-israeli-soldier-hebron>
Azaria’s defence team said it would appeal against the verdict, and a family 
spokesman said the court had ignored evidence indicating the soldier was 
innocent. “It was like the court was detached from the fact that this was the 
area of an attack,” said Sharon Gal. “I felt that the court picked up the knife 
from the ground and stabbed it in the back of all the soldiers.”

Lt Col Nadav Weissman, a military prosecutor, said the verdict was “important, 
clear, decisive and speaks for itself”. He added: “This is not a happy day for 
us. We would have preferred that this didn’t happen. But the deed was done, and 
the offence was severe.”

The rare case of an active serviceman being charged had been seen as a test of 
Israeli military justice.


It also exposed deep divisions in Israeli society 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/29/most-israelis-support-soldier-accused-of-shooting-palestinian>
, not only between left and right, but between the Israeli military’s most 
senior officers – who pushed for the prosecution – and nationalist political 
figures, who have campaigned for Azaria’s acquittal.

On Tuesday, however, the Israeli military’s chief of staff pushed back at the 
most recent campaign slogan of Azaria’s supporters, which claims the soldier 
was “the child of us all”.


Speaking at a conference in Herziliya, Gen Gadi Eisenkot warned that the 
attempt to portray Azaria as immature and confused “undermines the most 
fundamental values that we look for in our soldiers”.


Among the pages of commentary in the Israeli media and on social media during 
the trial, perhaps most bizarre was the decision by Makor Rishon’s Profile 
magazine todeclare Azaria one of its men of the year 
<http://972mag.com/the-camera-that-made-elor-azaria-man-of-the-year/122371/> 
for “sparking the stormiest argument in Israeli society”, complete with a cover 
picture of the accused soldier posing with a gun.

The video of the killing was filmed by a Palestinian volunteer for the Israeli 
rights group B’Tselem, which accused the security forces of “routine 
whitewashing” in a statement after the verdict.

“The fact that one soldier was convicted today does not exonerate the Israeli 
military law-enforcement system from its routine whitewashing of cases in which 
security forces kill or injure Palestinians with no accountability,” B’Tselem 
said.

“The exception of a much-publicised trial, marked by a rare instance of video 
documentation, is not enough to change this norm.”
 