
Benjamin Netanyahu <https://www.theguardian.com/world/benjamin-netanyahu> 
reportedly told New Zealand’s foreign minister that support for a UN resolution 
condemning Israeli settlement-building in the occupied territories would be 
viewed as a “declaration of war”.

According to reports in Israeli media, the Israeli PM called Murray McCully, 
the foreign minister ofNew Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/newzealand>, before Friday’s resolution, 
which was co-sponsored by Wellington. Netanyahu told him: “This is a scandalous 
decision. I’m asking that you not support it and not promote it.

White House races to save Middle East peace process before Trump takes office
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/27/obama-and-allies-seek-to-isolate-netanyahu-before-trump-takes-office>
“If you continue to promote this resolution, from our point of view it will be 
a declaration of war. It will rupture the relations and there will be 
consequences. We’ll recall our ambassador [from New Zealand] to Jerusalem.”

McCully, however, refused to back down, telling Netanyahu: “This resolution 
conforms to our policy and we will move it forward.”


A western diplomat confirmed that the call took place and described the 
conversation as “harsh”.

The details of the call – disclosed in Haaretz – suggest a mounting sense of 
panic on the part of Netanyahu in the run-up tothe UN security council 
resolution that passed on Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/23/us-abstention-allows-un-to-demand-end-to-israeli-settlements>
 demanding an end to settlement building.

As well as the Netanyahu call, a senior official in Israel’s foreign ministry 
called New Zealand’s ambassador to Israel, Jonathan Curr, and warned that if 
the resolution came to a vote,Israel <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> 
might close its embassy in Wellington in protest.


Israel responded furiously to the vote, threatening diplomatic reprisals 
against the countries that voted in favour. Diplomatic ties with New Zealand 
were temporarily severed and ambassador Itzhak Gerberg was recalled.

 But in a sign that the international pressure may be being felt by the 
Netanyahu administration, scheduled plans to consider for approval 600 new 
settlement houses in occupied east Jerusalem were abruptly removed from the 
agenda of the city’s municipality on Wednesday.

Netanyahu’s language and behaviour – which has resulted in ambassadors being 
reprimanded and consultations with foreign leaders, including the UK’s Theresa 
May, cancelled – has raised eyebrows among foreign diplomats, who point out 
that the UN resolution does no more than confirm the longstanding view of the 
international community on Jewish settlements.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fnetanyahu-john-kerry-friends-security-council-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Benjamin%20Netanyahu%20to%20John%20Kerry%3A%20friends%20don%E2%80%99t%20take%20friends%20to%20the%20security%20council%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fnetanyahu-john-kerry-friends-security-council-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Benjamin%20Netanyahu%20to%20John%20Kerry%3A%20friends%20don%E2%80%99t%20take%20friends%20to%20the%20security%20council%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fnetanyahu-john-kerry-friends-security-council-video&media=>
Benjamin Netanyahu to John Kerry: friends don’t take friends to the security 
council 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/27/netanyahu-john-kerry-friends-security-council-video>
Later on Wednesday the US secretary of state, John Kerry, will make a speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/27/obama-and-allies-seek-to-isolate-netanyahu-before-trump-takes-office>
 outlining the parameters for how the Obama administration sees a settlement of 
the Middle East peace process.

Kerry’s speech, less than a month before Barack Obama leaves office, is 
expected to be the current administration’s last word on a decades-old dispute 
that Kerry had hoped to resolve during his four years as America’s top diplomat.

It could also be seen in Israel as another parting shot at Netanyahu, who has 
had an acrimonious relationship with Obama since they both took office in 2009. 
Israel’s public security minister, Gilad Erdan, told Israel Army Radio that the 
planned speech was a “pathetic move” and “anti-democratic”.

The US on Friday broke with a longstanding approach of diplomatically 
shielding Israel and abstained on aUnited Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> security council resolution 
that passed with 14 countries in favour and none against.

An Egyptian paper supportive of the country’s president, Abdel Fatah al-Sisi, 
reported what it said was a leaked memo allegedly confirming Israel’s 
allegations that the Obama administration and Palestinian officials had 
coordinated positions over the wording of the resolution to allow the US to 
abstain in the vote. The state department denied the report.



 