
Neurosis have been such a longstanding part of the heavy music landscape that 
it’s possible to forget what a profound oddity they are. They were born of the 
hardcore punk scene in 80s California and came to prominence with a cycle of 
albums – from Souls at Zero through to Times of Grace – that obliterated genre 
boundaries and effectively provided the template for all “post-metal” to follow.

The band acknowledge influences from Swans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/swans> and Skullflower to Hawkwind 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/aug/27/hawkwind-dave-brock> and Townes 
Van Zandt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2008/feb/26/wastownesvanzandtbetterth>
, but it’s the UK anarcho-punk scene of the early 80s that perhaps runs deepest 
through their collective taste. The music in question was rife with bitterness, 
rage and fear, but also possessed of a desire to experiment with punk rock’s 
parameters, be they sonic, visual or ideological. Ahead of their appearance in 
London next week, supported by their 80sBritpunk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/07/never-mind-bus-pass-punks-look-back-wildest-days>
 heroes Discharge and Subhumans, guitarist/vocalist Steve Von Till picked five 
of his favourites from the era. There’s no room for some he wanted to include 
(Flux of Pink Indians, Oi Polloi, Icons of Filth) and selecting a single track 
from Arise, the debut LP from Amebix, proved a task too herculean to 
countenance, but the tracks he chose represent qualities – heaviness, emotional 
depth, experimentalism and a quest for personal freedom – that can all be 
traced in Neurosis.

1. Discharge – Hear Nothing, See Nothing, Say Nothing
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Drk9v6AM1hUk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Drk9v6AM1hUk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Drk9v6AM1hUk&media=>
Discharge was my gateway to punk – to me they bridged the gap between Motörhead
 <https://www.theguardian.com/music/motorhead>, Venom and punk rock. They had 
this huge fucking wall-of-sound guitar that was just ridiculously punishing, 
taking on heavy metal’s gain and volume but creating something totally unique 
and new that didn’t seem to have a pedigree you could trace. I remember going 
to the record store and picking up Hear Nothing, See Nothing, Say Nothing, and 
the title track in particular seemed to embody the fear of that time – we were 
all convinced we were just going to go up in flames in a nuclear war with the 
Soviets. Over the years that album is one I keep coming back to – it never gets 
old. It’s got such dark, haunting imagery and it paints an incredible picture 
of humanity at its very worst.

2. Subhumans – From the Cradle to the Grave
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRLHaJokh8IY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRLHaJokh8IY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRLHaJokh8IY&media=>
This is my favourite Subhumans album, and the epic title track was a huge 
influence – it showed that punk wasn’t limited to two- or three-minute bursts 
of noise and anger and that there could be a real diversity of sound and 
musicianship. The way the melodic themes repeat, return and change, the way 
they’re approached from different angles – there’s almost a sense ofencryption 
there. I don’t want to use a dirty term like progressive rock because that’s 
not something I relate to, but there were a lot of changes and it was really 
musical. It’s a 17-minute song but you never feel like you’re getting bored, 
and perhaps the most important thing is the way it maintains an emotional 
resonance and an emotional flow from beginning to end. I also loved the way it 
takes the whole subject of socialisation and the idea that you’re meant to fit 
into a certain box, and that if you’re outside those norms then you’re not 
welcome in the bigger group. I think that’s something that all outsiders have 
had to face and deal with at every stage of the game.

3. Rudimentary Peni – When You Are a Martian Church
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPtnYplhNYpc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPtnYplhNYpc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPtnYplhNYpc&media=>
Rudimentary Peni came out of that same scene, but were so fucking bizarre. 
They were simultaneously psychological and psychedelic and had this strange 
archaic poetry that was literary and Gnostic, all wrapped in this incredible 
outsider art. They represented a crossover towards something more gothic – not 
in terms of a scene, but an energy and a vibe. The guitars were heavy, but also 
chorusy, slightly out of tune and relentless, the voices were menacing and it 
has this accelerated, aggressive, percussive, almost post-Joy Division 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/joydivision> beat driving the whole thing. 
The music, the artwork, the lyrics were a huge influence, as was the 
existential angst and the sense of spinning around inside your own mind that 
they conveyed. Again, how can someone who thinks like this, writes songs like 
this and generate these kind of lyrics fit into the norm?

4. Crass – Mother Earth
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxDW3mCQ8qHU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxDW3mCQ8qHU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxDW3mCQ8qHU&media=>
Crass 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/07/never-mind-bus-pass-punks-look-back-wildest-days>
 were perhaps the mother of all bands. I didn’t totally understand it when I 
was a teenager, because they had multiple layers and intellectual depths. They 
were unique and they made incredibly strange music – when you’re in a 
psychedelic mood and play this through your headphones it pounds straight into 
your skull and it’s fucking intense. The tape cut-ups, the challenging nature 
of the music – it’s just not listener-friendly. They also had that whole 
multimedia aspect, which was inspiring to us even though we’d never actually 
seen them. We knew they screened these weird films when they played, and it 
showed that punk could be multidimensional, from banners, flyers and album 
artwork to the tape cut-ups, films and what they were doing withDial House 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dial_House,_Essex> [the open-house artistic 
community and commune in Essex, of which Crass were part]. There’s a depth to 
all of it, and their energy and whole vibe was just absolutely epic. People 
might think they were a simple punk band, but when you dive in, they are 
anything but simple. This song also demonstrates something that was creeping 
through these bands’ lyrics at the time: a respect for the planet, which isn’t 
– or shouldn’t be – inherently political, since all of us are on the same 
spaceship here.

5. Chumbawamba – Stagnation/Liberation
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkWLHpuLrpyk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkWLHpuLrpyk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkWLHpuLrpyk&media=>
Chumbawamba came to the States in 1990 and we played with them twice on that 
tour. We lent them our gear, and that was a total honour. Last time I was in 
London I met some younger folks who only knewthe “popular” Chumbawamba, 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kS-zK1S5Dws> and they were surprised that I 
spoke of them so highly. I blasted the Revolution 7in on their stereo and just 
watched their jaws drop. It has this intense drive, these different atmospheres 
and this message about liberating yourself and your mind. Their first 7in 
really has to be taken as a whole, but Stagnation/Liberation is just great. It 
shows how powerful repetition can be, and that a band can be heavy without 
giant guitars. Chumbawumba never had big heavy-metal guitars, they were just 
heavy with ideas and passion. To me, all these bands represented passion and 
focus, and while you can draw similarities between them, they all sound unique.
Antisect <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=p2pYl_vYiyc> sounds different to 
Amebix <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kE7YoeVB6us> who are very different to 
Chumbawamba, but they sounded like they belonged together despite all having 
their own individual voices.

 * Neurosis play Koko in London on 7 November 
<http://www.koko.uk.com/listings/neurosis-07-11-2016> (supported by Earth) and 
8 November (with Discharge and Subhumans).  