
When the floorboards came up in the attic of Westminster Abbey, centuries of 
rubbish and thousands of pieces of fragile treasure were revealed: the 
sackloads of dust were sieved to make sure nothing was missed. The finds 
included a wooden Dutch clog, a clay pipe and 31,000 fragments of stained 
glass, some dating back to the 13th-century construction of the present church.

Some of the fragments came from windows blown out in the Blitz, some from the 
glass-smashing fury of the Reformation iconoclasts. All have been saved and 
carefully cleaned, and thousands are being reassembled into windows for a glass 
bridge linking a new tower, which will bring the general public for the first 
time into a hidden world.

Prince Charles, the patron of the £23m project, came on Wednesday morning to 
lay a foundation stone for the tower and take the builder’s lift up 70 ft (21 
metres) to the triforium, the attic space that will become a museum named the 
Queen’s Diamond Jubilee Galleries in honour of his mother.

Westminster Abbey wins permission to add first new tower in 300 years
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/feb/26/westminster-abbey-wins-permission-add-first-new-tower-300-years>
Visitors will be able to use either a lift or climb a winding staircase up to 
the oak, stone and glass tower: the slog up the stairs will be rewarded by a 
startling view of the abbey’s roofscape, bristling with statues and heraldic 
animals previously visible only to roofers and pigeons. Although it is the most 
dramatic intervention in the fabric of the abbey since towers were added to the 
western facade by Nicholas Hawksmoor in 1745, the new tower will be almost 
invisible behind a flying buttress and a towering plane tree. The planning 
application was passed without a vote by Westminster council, because there was 
not a single objection to it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fnew-tower-will-reveal-hidden-world-westminster-abbey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2914d2de237d41446605cef33be9c7d78440d359%2F0_286_6388_3833%2F6388.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20tower%20will%20reveal%20hidden%20world%20of%20Westminster%20Abbey&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fnew-tower-will-reveal-hidden-world-westminster-abbey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20tower%20will%20reveal%20hidden%20world%20of%20Westminster%20Abbey&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fnew-tower-will-reveal-hidden-world-westminster-abbey%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2914d2de237d41446605cef33be9c7d78440d359%2F0_286_6388_3833%2F6388.jpg>
 A statue is covered during restoration work at Westminster Abbey. Photograph: 
Dan Kitwood/Getty Images 
The attics are so grand, with handsome carved stone decorations that would 
never be visible from the church floor, that the dean, the Very Rev John Hall, 
thinks they were probably originally intended as extra chapels for priests paid 
to say masses for the souls of the wealthy dead, but never used for anything 
except storage. New grilles and handrails will allow visitors to step right to 
the edge of the open arches, for dizzying views down to the 13th-century 
Cosmati pavement, and the royal tombs far below.

The space, due to open in 2018, will be used to display some of the abbey’s 
treasures, including the battered but magnificent Westminster Retable, a 
painted, carved, and gemstone-studded screen believed to have been made in the 
13th century for the High Altar. It contains star-shaped motifs, formed by 
rotating one square on another, which the architect Ptolemy Dean has adopted as 
the floor plan of his new tower.

The new museum will complete the present development programme for the abbey 
but the dean still yearns to take on one more project: the central tower and 
spire that Hawksmoor proposed and began work on. Work stopped for the 
coronation of George II and never started again. “It won’t happen in my day,” 
Dean said wistfully, “if I were going to live for ever, I’d take it on.”
 