
Hometown: South-east London.

The lineup: Amy Love (vocals, guitar), Georgia South (bass, backing vocals).

The background: Nova Twins are all about that bass: the lurching, grinding, 
seismically distorted, FX-mangled sound that propels the music of this young 
London duo: Georgia South, 19, and Amy Love, who is in her early 20s (Tim 
Nugent,no relation to Ted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/06/ted-nugent-obama-is-a-psychopathic-america-hating-liar-republican-gun-control>
, adds drums). They call it urban punk but elsewhere their bass-heavy racket 
with irascible, sharply insinuating vocals has been variously titled hip 
hop-grime, grime-pop/“grop”, even “grunk”, such is their furious collision of 
grime and punk. “We are females of colour playing heavy music,” declares Love, 
who alternately sings (term used advisedly) and raps, with backing squeals from 
South. “Sometimes we have to shout a little bit louder. We don’t want to be 
pigeonholed.” Their heroes range from MC5 to Missy Elliott, Skunk Anansie to 
Skepta, and they get a broad demographic at their increasingly populous gigs, 
although to date they have attracted more punks and rockers than grime kids.

“Because our sound and delivery is so intense, and because we do it all live, 
without laptops or any programming, some grime people are put off,” explains 
Love. “But we want it to be more open – we want diversity in our audience ’cos 
that’s what we are,” she says of their mixed parentage. “We want guys in 
snapbacks next to guys with mohawks and nose rings. That would be amazing.”

South was at school with grime MC Novelist <https://soundcloud.com/novelist> 
while Love attended theBritish Academy of New Music 
<https://www.facebook.com/Access-To-Music-London-British-Academy-Of-New-Music-204562716234987/>
 in east London, where classmates included Ed Sheeran and Rita Ora. On Nova 
Twins’Bassline Bitch <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M-2XUOAufLQ>, from their 
self-titled debut EP, they threaten: “We’ll slap that look right off your 
face.” Isn’t Nova Twins’ fulsome metallic racket meant to be a reaction to 
Sheeran and Ora’s chart pabulum?


“No, they’re two different things,” says a diplomatic Love, who remembers 
Sheeran as “a nice guy who came up from the underground and does interesting 
things with loop pedals”. Don’t they have a Year Zero mentality like their 
spiky-bonced forebears? Aren’t they defined by who they hate? “No,” argues 
South, who was minus-20 inThe Year Punk Broke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2012/jul/16/archive-1977-punk-music-sex-pistols>
. “We’re defined by music we love. We don’t want to focus on other people. 
Grime is the modern-day punk. They don’t give a shit, they create their own 
scene. It’s very DIY,” she adds, pointing out that their video to Bassline 
Bitch was shot in 10 minutes, using a cheap Canon, by South’s mum.

Nova Twins are “mentored” by their parents, whose respective backgrounds are 
as jazz musicians and music teachers. They drive them on tour and get stuck in 
at gigs – “the dirtier the better,” laughs Love. What do they make of the 
colourful language and angry attitude? They’re all for it, apparently, 
especially Bassline Bitch’s underdog anthemia. “We’re saying, ‘Fuck [money], do 
what you like, make your own movement, shout until you’re heard,” says South. 
The video for Hitlist – another EP highlight that, like much of Nova Twins’ 
output, sounds like a warning – captured their spirit of frenzied 
gratification. “We only had a small budget, and we spent most of it on alcohol 
for our friends to dance to, to loosen them up – there were a lot of girls 
standing and screaming. Everyone had a really good time.”

One of punk’s dictums was “I’m bored”. Those very words open Nova Twins’ track 
Wave. How can anyone be bored in 2016? “The internet? That’s boring,” accuses 
Love. “It’s just looking at a screen!” Actually, Wave is about sex, famously 
described by Johnny Rotten as “two minutes and 52 seconds of squelching”. Are 
Nova Twins even bored by sex? “Sometimes,” they cackle, “sometimes not.”

They rarely if ever “talk about heartbreak – it’s more about anger” and are 
unlikely to pen a love song any time soon. They’re recording with Pat Collier 
(X-Ray Spex, Jakwob) and Adrian Hall (Goldfrapp, Anna Calvi) has been mixing 
their music. They’ve managed to maintain their position even faced with record 
companies eager to control what they do and how they sound.

“When we were younger and slightly more vulnerable, someone pissed us off, 
trying to make us sound less live, reduce the power of the bass and make us 
sound American,” recalls Love. “He was expecting us to be more pop, thinking, 
‘That’s a bit heavy.’ So we walked out, and he walked out. But we’re not making 
music for the record industry, we’re making it for us.”

“People do stereotype us,” adds South. “We’re both mixed [race] and we play 
guitars, so straight away we get, ‘Oh, you girls are going to be singing some 
R&B,’ and it’s like, ‘Oh come on, educate yourself!’”

What kind of reactions do they get live?

“Shock,” says Love. “We walk into venues and they expect one thing and we come 
out the other end doing something else. But it’s not aggressive. People feel 
liberated and leave with a smile on their face. They’re like, ‘YES! What the 
fuck is this?!’”

The buzz: “Bad-ass grime-punk 
<http://www.thegirlsare.com/2015/08/06/news-nova-twins/>.” 

The truth: Nova Twins are happening without your permission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2009/sep/14/myths-riot-grrrl-cribs-takeover>
.

Most likely to: Fuck Your Heart <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sYNGDG8VDN8>.

Least likely to: Rub the impossible to burst 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RY2fepSp_Ic>. 

What to buy: The self-titled EP is out now 
<https://NovaTwins.lnk.to/novatwinsep>. They play at Afropunk London 
<http://alexandrapalaceevents.seetickets.com/event/afropunk/alexandra-palace/992684/?src=992684>
 on 24 September and tour throughout the month.

File next to: Voodoo Queens, Daisy Chainsaw, Skinny Girl Diet, Skunk Anansie.

Links: novatwins.com <http://www.novatwins.com/>

Ones to watch: Bearstronaut, Hush Moss, Sophie Beem, Abroad, Jean-Michel Blais.
 