
In the depths of the emotional underworld at Ground Zero 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/may/14/9-11-memorial-museum-new-york>
, an eerie place of crushed fire engines on plinths and dramatically lit 
scorched steel columns, is a fascinating site of architectural archaeology.

Marching in a mute line around the exhibition halls of the 9/11 Memorial 
Museum stand the original foundation pads of New York’s iconic “twin towers”, 
their rusted steel plates still bolted firmly into the Manhattan bedrock. 
Across the hall, a grid of massive steel bolts emerges from the 20-metre-high 
slurry wall, the vast concrete barrier that was cast to keep out the waters of 
the Hudson River and which held firm when the towers collapsed on 11 September 
2001, stopping the subway tunnels beneath from flooding.

Along with a few charred columns which loom like devil’s forks above the 
entrance to the museum, this is all that exists of theoriginal World Trade 
Center 
<http://www.archdaily.com/504682/ad-classics-world-trade-center-minoru-yamasaki-associates-emery-roth-and-sons/>
. But perhaps even more so in their absence, the twin towers remain one of the 
most powerful symbols of New York City.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Fworld-trade-center-twin-towers-new-york-911-history-cities-day-40%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F19%2F1432031757957%2Ff644873d-0869-4a33-8988-1a9b9d74ff37-1003x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20York's%20twin%20towers%20%E2%80%93%20the%20'filing%20cabinets'%20that%20became%20icons%20of%20America%3A%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2040&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Fworld-trade-center-twin-towers-new-york-911-history-cities-day-40%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20York%27s%20twin%20towers%20%E2%80%93%20the%20%27filing%20cabinets%27%20that%20became%20icons%20of%20America%3A%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2040&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Fworld-trade-center-twin-towers-new-york-911-history-cities-day-40%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F19%2F1432031757957%2Ff644873d-0869-4a33-8988-1a9b9d74ff37-1003x1020.jpeg>
 The towers’ windows were so narrow partly because Minoru Yamasaki was afraid 
of heights. Photograph: Chris Kasson/AP 
Where the ungainly obelisk of SOM’s One World Trade Center 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/sep/08/-sp-one-world-trade-center-new-york-rebuild-ground-zero-twin-towers>
 now stands, surrounded by a motley collection of stubby slabs, once rose the 
two sleekest symbols of America’s unbridled capitalist ambition and technical 
prowess; the identical twin kings of global finance, dressed in matching silver 
pinstripe suits.

Designed by Japanese-American architect Minoru Yamasaki 
<http://nymag.com/news/9-11/10th-anniversary/minoru-yamasaki/>, they were the 
tallest towers in the world when they were completed in 1974, standing as 
glistening beacons of structural innovation. They employed a radical framed 
tube structure to carry the load in their facades – thereby doing away with the 
need for columns inside, freeing up the interior for more office space (and 
requiring as little as half the material needed for conventional steel-framed 
construction).

The elevator system was revolutionary, too. Buildings so tall didn’t usually 
make much economic sense, given the amount of space that had to be given over 
to lift shafts at the lower floors, the taller you went. So the engineers 
devised a plan to divide each building into thirds, with elevator “sky lobbies” 
where people would transfer to local lifts to reach their required floors. The 
system saved 70% of the space that would have been used in a traditional lift 
shaft.

None of these innovations, however, turned out to be of much use when the 
buildings first opened – given that, at the time, there was precious little 
demand for such office space in Lower Manhattan at all. The Port Authority of 
New York and New Jersey – which developed the buildings at the behest of Chase 
Manhattan Bank’s chairman David Rockefeller – filled much of the north tower 
with its own offices, while the State ofNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> ended up occupying 50 floors of 
the south tower to stop the embarrassment of it standing empty.

Nor was the project received with much warmth by contemporary critics. Lewis 
Mumford compared the towers 
<http://openbuildings.com/buildings/world-trade-center-profile-2964?_show_description=1>
 to a gigantic pair of filing cabinets, while others said they looked like the 
boxes that the Empire State Building and the Chrysler Building came in. 
Broadcasters raised concerns that the towers would interfere with television 
reception, while the bird lobby even protested that the buildings posed a grave 
hazard to migrating fowl.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Fworld-trade-center-twin-towers-new-york-911-history-cities-day-40%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F20%2F1432125209495%2F246bc386-03c0-4224-a7f5-540418cf30c4-2060x664.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20York's%20twin%20towers%20%E2%80%93%20the%20'filing%20cabinets'%20that%20became%20icons%20of%20America%3A%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2040&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Fworld-trade-center-twin-towers-new-york-911-history-cities-day-40%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20York%27s%20twin%20towers%20%E2%80%93%20the%20%27filing%20cabinets%27%20that%20became%20icons%20of%20America%3A%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2040&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Fworld-trade-center-twin-towers-new-york-911-history-cities-day-40%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F20%2F1432125209495%2F246bc386-03c0-4224-a7f5-540418cf30c4-2060x664.jpeg>
 The downtown Manhattan skyline, shown here from Liberty State Park in 1998, 
was utterly dominated by the twin towers. Photograph: Joseph Sohm/Visions of 
America/Corbis 
The architectural community had hesitations about Yamasaki, too, many seeing 
his soft-edged modernism as too mannered and prissy. “He has developed a 
curiously unsettled style,” wrote New York Timescritic Ada Louise Huxtable 
<http://paperzz.com/doc/1197717/a-brief-history-of-the-world-trade-center-towers---mit>
, “which involves decorative traceries of exotic extraction applied over 
structure or worked into it. His choice of delicate detail on massive 
construction as a means of reconciling modern structural scale to the human 
scale of the viewer is often more disturbing than reassuring”.

Huxtable took particular offence to the way his soaring metal columns branched 
into two to form gothic arches at the base of the towers: “Here we have the 
world’s daintiest architecture for the world’s biggest buildings,” she 
concluded.

Those who worked inside the towers didn’t really take to them either, with 
many complaining about the narrow windows. Often attributed to the need for all 
those denselypacked structural tubes of steel, their narrow width was also 
partly down to the fact that Yamasaki himself was afraid of heights, so didn’t 
like expansive panoramic windows at such altitude. He preferred the 
psychological sense of security provided by windows that were narrower than his 
own shoulder span, so he reduced their width even further than the structure 
demanded. Frustrating for the occupant, perhaps, but from the street, such 
narrow spacing of these great columns gave the towers the striking appearance 
of seamless blocks of solid metal.

The twin towers were not warmly received by critics. Lewis Mumford compared 
them to a gigantic pair of filing cabinets
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Fworld-trade-center-twin-towers-new-york-911-history-cities-day-40%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F19%2F1432032237197%2Fdc1307ee-5559-43ff-b015-0dd39bbac1b0-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20York's%20twin%20towers%20%E2%80%93%20the%20'filing%20cabinets'%20that%20became%20icons%20of%20America%3A%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2040&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Fworld-trade-center-twin-towers-new-york-911-history-cities-day-40%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20York%27s%20twin%20towers%20%E2%80%93%20the%20%27filing%20cabinets%27%20that%20became%20icons%20of%20America%3A%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2040&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Fworld-trade-center-twin-towers-new-york-911-history-cities-day-40%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F19%2F1432032237197%2Fdc1307ee-5559-43ff-b015-0dd39bbac1b0-1020x612.jpeg>
 Dedication ceremonies attract a standing-room-only crowd to the World Trade 
Center. Photograph: NY Daily News via Getty Images 
The objections of New Yorkers to the imposition of these gleaming twin totems 
were not just aesthetic. Having first been commissioned in 1962, by the time 
the complex opened, the tide had long since turned against the top-down 
approach of razing existing streets to build towers perched atop barren podiums.

The 16-acre site where the World Trade Center was built had been a densely 
packed area of existing industries, small businesses and more than 100 residents
known as Radio Row 
<http://untappedcities.com/2014/09/04/the-lost-neighborhood-of-radio-row-at-nyc-world-trade-center/>
, of the kind thaturban activist Jane Jacobs 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jane_Jacobs> fought so passionately to save. 
Radio Row was bought up under eminent domain, residents were evicted, and the 
14 irregular street blocks swept away to make way for Yamasaki’s abstract 
superblock. There, retail was hidden away in the depths of the podium, so as 
not to interfere with the clean white tabletop above – which became a plaza so 
windswept that it sometimes necessitated the use of ropes to cross it safely.

In his book, The Pentagon of Power, published in 1970 
<http://www.newworldencyclopedia.org/entry/World_Trade_Center>, Mumford raged 
that the project stood as an “example of the purposeless giantism and 
technological exhibitionism that are now eviscerating the living tissue of 
every great city”. Indeed, by the time it was completed, the whole endeavour 
seemed decidedly rearguard. With the rise of theLandmarks Preservation 
Commission <http://www.nyc.gov/html/lpc/html/home/home.shtml>, Radio Row might 
well have qualified as one of New York’s historic districts, along with 
Greenwich Village, Soho and Brooklyn Heights. It is telling that, less than a 
decade later,Battery Park City <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Battery_Park_City> 
(a development built on reclaimed land, using rubble from the World Trade 
Center excavations) made much of the fact that it would have “traditional” 
blocks and street frontages, like the rest of the city.

Pruitt-Igoe: the troubled high-rise that came to define urban America – a 
history of cities in 50 buildings, day 21
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/apr/22/pruitt-igoe-high-rise-urban-america-history-cities>
Since the entire complex was destroyed by the events of 9/11, the hated podium 
may have gone – but what has taken its place can scarcely be said to offer a 
much better example of urban design. The two waterfall voids, marking the 
footprints of the towers, may provide a spectacularly powerful memorial, but 
they are surrounded by the clumsy debris of security sheds, ventilation shafts 
and a gargantuan concrete bunker for screening vehicles.

Along with the 60-metre-high concrete base of what was once called the “
Freedom Tower 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/sep/08/one-world-trade-center-new-york-city-readers-photos>
”, Yamasaki’s minimalist hymn has been replaced by a compromised landscape, 
representative less of freedom than political compromise and paranoia.

 * Which other buildings in the world tell stories about urban history? Share 
your own pictures and descriptions with GuardianWitness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/mar/23/50-buildings-great-stories-urban-history>
, on Twitter and Instagram using #hoc50 or let us know suggestions in the 
comments below  