
In theory it is just another winter Tuesday. No big games are happening on 3 
January 2017, no one will instantly sense the change. Could it be, 
nevertheless, that the date will one day be ranked among the most significant 
in modern rugby union history? Might it also be the moment the cork is removed 
from the old-school bottle and, in a spray of sparkling foam, it starts raining 
tries?

World Rugby’s decision to tighten the tackle law with immediate effect and 
clamp down on high, dangerous “hits” is meant to be all about improving player 
welfare. Every minor tweak to rugby’s technical landscape inevitably has a 
side-effect and suddenly it is defence coaches who face a double-barrelled 
nightmare. If defenders can no longer risk targeting the upper chest for fear 
of the impact “riding up” and earning them a card, passing out of the tackle 
becomes far more practicable. The killer offload is suddenly back in vogue.

World Rugby isn’t doing enough to protect young players from head injuries | 
Allyson Pollock
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/21/world-rugby-rules-concussion-head-injuries>
Leave aside, for now, the other possible side-effect, namely games ending up 
with 12 players a side until the “steer clear of the head” mantra fully sinks 
in.

Overlook, too, the inconvenience to players of introducing such punitive 
measures – and stiffer sanctions – slap-bang in the middle of the northern 
hemisphere season.

Instead, just for a moment, consider the potential consequences should 
everyone embrace the spirit of the reinforced law as well as its letter. Could 
lowering the height of the hit, perversely, be rugby’s big-bang moment?

The possibilities, either way, are intriguing. Even accidental contact with 
the head is set to attract at least a penalty, as will any challenge that might 
conceivably be described as reckless. Players will have to change their 
behaviour and attitudes or risk spending a lot more time in the sin-bin. In the 
short term, if not longer, there should be more leeway for ball-carriers and 
try-scoring rates look set to soar.

Clearly rugby is about more than tries alone – low-scoring slugfests can 
sometimes be the most compelling of all – but in terms of allowing gifted 
athletes a fraction more scope to display their skills, this may turn out to be 
the most significant shift since the introduction of the five-point try in 
1992. Something had to be done to protect diminutive playmakers and as long as 
players do not appeal loudly to the referee every time an arm inadvertently 
grazes their cheeks, it should enhance the prospects of teams who aspire to 
play a bit more rugby.

With the majority of pitches also improving, there is already evidence to 
suggest greater ambition is not necessarily incompatible with success. Take a 
look at the Premiership table. Before last weekend only three clubs in the 
competition boasted a worse defensive record in terms of tries scored thanWasps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-wasps>, who have conceded 31 tries in 
12 games.

Yet Dai Young’s side still sit atop the table, having scored 48 tries at the 
other end: the same as they managed in the whole of the 2013-14 season. At 
their current strike rate they stand a decent chance of overhauling Newcastle’s 
record for a 22-game Premiership season of 85 tries, set in 1997-98, when 
professionalism was in its infancy and defences were nowhere near as organised.

Even Richmond’s longstanding mark of 96 tries in 26 games in 1998-99 could 
conceivably be within range, particularly if their opponents also sense attack 
is their best form of defence. In days gone by,Northampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> would have felt quietly 
happy to have conceded only 16 tries in their dozen games yet, beforeSunday’s 
narrow win at Gloucester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/01/gloucester-northampton-premiership-match-report>
, they were languishing in eighth place. The reason? Their modest tally of 18 
tries scored is four fewer than the bottom-placed Bristol. Defending stoutly is 
not enough on its own.

Richard Cockerill pays price for barren spell but Leicester will miss his 
loyalty | Robert Kitson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/02/leicester-tigers-may-miss-richard-cockerill>
It is a similar story in the Pro12, where the second-placed Ospreys, despite 
Sunday’s low-scoring encounter against the Dragons, have scored 47 tries in 
their 12 games. Last season they scored only 55 in 22 matches. There is a 
lesson here for the Lions this summer, given thatNew Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/new-zealand-rugby-union-team> pretty much 
always keep the scoreboard ticking. Since 2010 the All Blacks have failed to 
reach 20 points only six times in 94 Tests; even scoring 25 points against them 
is no guarantee of victory. Hence the reason why the remarkable individual 
finishing of Denny Solomona, Semesa Rokoduguni, Tom Varndell and Christian Wade 
either side of Christmas should not be casually dismissed. Players capable of 
making good defences look silly are coming back into fashion.

We are still waiting, even so, for any team to outdo the greatest try of all, 
scored by the Barbarians against New Zealand in January 1973 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8oVIRy-djlY>. The unpromising field position, 
Phil Bennett’s stepping sorcery, the musketeering support runners, the quality 
of the opposition … it would have merited a standing ovation had Gareth Edwards 
merely loped over the line unchallenged. What made it extra special, of course, 
was Edwards’ glorious surge of acceleration on to Derek Quinnell’s pass 
followed by that exhilarating full-body diving stretch past Grant Batty to 
score in the corner.

The game has moved on but the grainy replays still stand the test of time. 
Perhaps, 44 years on, scintillating attacking play is poised for a glorious 
comeback.

War of attrition

How sad and painful for all concerned to see a downcast Manu Tuilagi limp off 
with a worrying knee injury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/01/leicester-saracens-premiership-match-report>
 on New Year’s Day, just when he was looking forward to a happier, healthier 
2017. With the Vunipola brothers already likely to be out of the Six Nations, 
George Kruis nursing a fractured cheekbone and Joe Launchbury sidelined by a 
calf injury, England have some sizeable holes to fill; it will also not have 
escaped Eddie Jones’s notice that this time the players were injured on a club 
weekend before an international camp rather than vice-versa. Happily, England 
have no lack of depth … below are five potential XVs made up of players who 
have either worn the white jersey or nurse ambitions to make the 2019 Rugby 
World Cup squad. It will be a while yet before Jones’s squad are down to their 
bare bones …

A) Brown; Nowell, Joseph, Farrell, May; Ford, B Youngs; M Vunipola, Hartley, 
Cole, Itoje, Kruis, Robshaw, Haskell, B Vunipola.

B) Goode; A Watson, Daly, Tuilagi, Yarde; Lozowski, Care; Marler, George, 
Sinckler, Launchbury, Lawes, Wood, S Jones, Hughes.

C) Haley; Rokoduguni, Slade, Te’o, Wade; Cipriani, Robson; Genge, Taylor, 
Hill, Attwood, Ewels, Williams, Harrison, Clifford.

D) Abendanon; Ashton, Barritt, Eastmond, Strettle; F Burns, Spencer; Mullan, 
Cowan-Dickie, Brookes, Lees, Beaumont, Armand, Kvesic, Morgan.

E) M Tait; M Watson, Marchant, Twelvetrees, Charnley; Mallinder, Simpson; 
Catt, T Youngs, Cooper-Woolley, Kitchener, Slater, Wray, Underhill, Wilson.

And another thing …

In a different era it was Carlos Spencer’s trademark, a trick only a supremely 
gifted and confident fly-half could hope to perform. Hats off, then, to Gareth 
Steenson ofExeter <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/exeter> for the 
through-the-legs reverse pass thatset up James Short for the Chiefs’ winning 
try at Bath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/31/bath-exeter-premiership-match-report>
 on New Year’s Eve. ThoseBath <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bath> 
supporters feeling slightly aggrieved at losing a compelling game they should 
have won may remember they did the opposite against Exeter in late October, 
snatching anunlikely victory in the eighth minute of added time through Semesa 
Rokoduguni 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/30/exeter-bath-premiership-match-report>
. The margins separating success and failure grow ever finer.
 