
Angus Robertson, the Scottish National party’s leader at Westminster, has been 
elected deputy leader of the party, calling on all members to begin campaigning 
for asecond independence referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/13/nicola-sturgeon-challenges-may-with-second-referendum-bill-scottish-independence-snp-conference>
 immediately.

Describing himself as “bowled over” by the result, Robertson told more than 
3,000 delegates gathered in Glasgow for the first day of the SNP’s autumn 
conference: “We are very close to independence and we must start campaigning 
right now.”

Robertson emerged as an early favourite in the contest and was considered the 
establishment candidate. On the gradualist wing of the party, his profile has 
risen significantly over the past year thanks to confident performances atprime 
ministers’ questions <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/pmqs>, often in the 
face of lacklustre efforts by Labour.

Nicola Sturgeon challenges May with second referendum bill
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/13/nicola-sturgeon-challenges-may-with-second-referendum-bill-scottish-independence-snp-conference>
Robertson’s closest challenger, fellow MP Tommy Sheppard, is a former Labour 
council leader who is one of the many thousands who joined the party after the
2014 referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ng-interactive/2014/sep/18/-sp-scottish-independence-referendum-results-in-full>
. Sheppard’s campaign focused on the needs of the radically expanded SNP 
membership.

The contest was triggered in May after the Dundee East MP Stewart Hosie stood 
down as deputy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/22/stewart-hosie-step-down-deputy-snp-leader>
 following the revelation of an extra-marital affair.

The result, which was decided in a ballot of the SNP’s 116,000 members, gave 
52.5% of first preference votes to Robertson, with Sheppard taking 25.53%, the 
MEP Alyn Smith 18.6% and the Inverclyde councillor Chris McEleny 3.38%.

Speaking of the need to empower members to “reach out to the 55% who voted no 
[in 2014]”, Robertson said: “The SNP is the most effective political party in 
the country. Our strength comes from our members, branches, local grassroots 
campaigning and partnership with councillors and parliamentarians.”

He described his election as a “tremendous honour” and praised the other 
candidates for contributing to a “model election campaign”.
 