
Oakley Radar Pace Glasses, £400

The goal
I’ve always envied people who can run properly, but being a beer slob I can 
only manage about two miles without dry heaving. My aim is to at least double 
that distance within a month.

The method
A £400 pair of sunglasses. The Oakley Radar Pace 
<http://uk.oakley.com/en/radar-pace/> glasses look like any sports eyewear – 
sleek and futuristic – but with the novel twist of a voice-activated coaching 
system. They are adorned with removable earphones, three microphones and a 
clutch of internal sensors for real-time updates on your run or bike ride. 
These are delivered, Siri-like, with the vocal prompt “OK, Radar”.

The sunglasses are paired with an app on which you can customise a training 
plan based on your fitness levels. I chose the beginner setting, opting for 
some extra focus on improving my endurance. There are two other programmes 
available – speed and maintenance.

And so my first session begins with a stilted exchange. “OK, Radar,” I say, 
“what’s my workout plan for today?” Radar tells me I am to do a four-minute 
warm-up followed by an easy 1.5-mile run. Radar doesn’t give me any specific 
warm-up advice, so I improvise some stretches. And then we’re off.

The verdict
During each run I received regular updates on my pace, power, stride length 
and more. This abundance of data lends itself to a kind of gamification as 
you’re encouraged to log it all on the app and beat your previous record.

The glasses were comfortably light and ergonomic, with minimal sliding or 
shaking as I thudded along the pavement. The only notable discomfort was my 
self-consciousness as I ran through busy parks while breathlessly exclaiming 
“how long left?” like a 2016 doomsayer.

The draw here is the technology’s flexibility and responsiveness: I was caught 
off-guard at one point when a curt voice told me to “use shorter, quicker steps 
as you run”. The personalised planner is easy to use and surprisingly 
motivational. Whenever I missed a session, it was promptly rescheduled to a 
later date – no flaking out allowed. Motivation is important, I found, if you 
take up running in December.

Of course, the price tag will deter casual joggers like me, and the lenses 
aren’t available in prescription form, which seems a shame. But for the 
distance-running dataphiles of this world – who are the real target audience 
here, after all – they’ll go down well. Of the array of nerdy features to play 
with, my favourite was taking phone calls wirelessly from my pocket. You can 
also play music through the earphones and link the glasses to other devices 
such as heart-rate monitors or foot pods.

Given that most activity is tied to your mobile, the specs aren’t the most 
“wearable” of wearable technologies. But after being guilt-tripped by my coach 
for a couple of weeks, and once I’d become used to the relentless pain in my 
legs, my new routine became almost enjoyable. I even managed to crawl to my 
four-mile goal – without retching, I can report – and I might just continue 
into the new year.Alfie Packham
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fnew-year-revolutions-gadgets-for-a-better-you%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F45414613dce69da25393d9609cc2ae5dc33b57f8%2F0_0_3744_5616%2F3744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20Year%20revolutions%3A%20four%20gadgets%20for%20a%20better%20you&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fnew-year-revolutions-gadgets-for-a-better-you%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20Year%20revolutions%3A%20four%20gadgets%20for%20a%20better%20you&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fnew-year-revolutions-gadgets-for-a-better-you%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F45414613dce69da25393d9609cc2ae5dc33b57f8%2F0_0_3744_5616%2F3744.jpg>
 ‘I resolve to make a track, perhaps one that involves loops and beats’: 
Miranda Sawyer with the Roli Lightpad Block. Photograph: Katherine Anne Rose 
for the Observer 
Roli Lightpad Block, £169.95

The goal
The goal, says my editor, is for me to create my first single. “Single!” I 
laugh to myself. “How out of date!” I resolve to make a track instead, perhaps 
one that involves loops and beats. Maybe a few squelchy acid noises. Yodelling 
(optional). That kind of thing. Whether I can do it is another question. Anyone 
who listens to music a lot understands that making music is difficult. Even if 
your approach is “no talent DIY” – which, of necessity, mine will be – you 
either need mad innocence or mad bravery to create tunes that sound good, and I 
haven’t been innocent or brave for many years.

The method
A new instrument that looks like a muscle-bound drinks coaster. Meet the Roli 
Lightpad Block <https://roli.com/products/blocks>, and its companions the 
half-sized Loop Block and Live Block. This little system is made by the same 
company that invented the tech-pianoSeaboard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/nov/30/the-innovators-rubber-piano-playing-different-groove>
, which won many awards. I like the way the Blocks look: they’re perfectly 
pocketable and nice to click together. When I first get them, in packaging very 
similar to Apple’s (at the moment, you can only get Roli Blocks to work with 
iOS), my kids are excited: they think the Rolis are new phones.

Once they get over their mild disappointment, we get the Lightpad up and 
flashing, and connect to the free Noise app. And we start enjoying ourselves, 
making sounds by stroking and poking and sliding our fingers around the 
Lightpad. It has a series of square LED lights – think 1980s disco dancefloor – 
that you can play, and the Noise app, which visually mirrors the Lightpad, has 
an interesting collection of sounds, including Trap Drum, Old-School House Bass 
and Moraz Lead (Jean-Michel Jarre, essentially,).

The big deal about the Lightpad is how it responds to your touch: supposedly 
it can recognise how as well as where you touch it, which means you can use 
your fingers to express a mood. This was the USP of the Seaboard, too: the idea 
that you can get a piece of tech-ery to respond to you playing it with feeling. 
It’s a nice idea. Swirl your finger quickly around the pad for one type of 
sound, prod it for another. Unfortunately, for an amateur like me, this doesn’t 
really work. Every time I get a sound I like on the Lightpad, and try to record 
it as a loop, I can’t repeat it exactly. It makes me feel hamfisted, rather 
than piano-fingered.

The two extra blocks replicate the functions on the Noise app. You don’t 
really need them. And actually, as the Lightpad itself makes no sound at all, 
you don’t really need it either. The sound comes out of your phone. In fact, we 
soon discover that you can do everything the Roli Blocks offer on the Noise 
app. The blocks are just add-ons. Am I missing something? I don’t quite see the 
point of this. Especially as my iPhone screen proves to be more 
touch-responsive than the Lightpad.

I persevere, but keep forgetting to charge up the Lightpad. It goes back in 
the drawer, and we play on the Noise app instead. But that, too, becomes 
limited after a while. There are a lot of sound options, but only four drum 
tracks, oddly. Plus, the recording is really irritating. I try to record more 
than one sound over each other (overdubbing, get me) and the app won’t do it. 
And there is no way of recording anything outside the app, such as your voice, 
or an actual real-life instrument.

YouTube offers up a few professional musicians who appear to enjoy the Roli 
Blocks. And there are others, including RZA and Grimes, who have beensigned up 
to promote Roli <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AjHMFM1ykMs>. I notice, 
though, that unless they’re playing live, the musicians often combine them with 
their existing studio set-up. Amateurs like me are left stabbing frustratedly 
at their phone, and, really, who needs a soundtrack for that? In my head, I’ve 
already got asarcastic tuba player <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Rs4P1kKK-5k>
 parping along. (He’s always there.)

The verdict
The Roli Lightpad costs £170 <https://uk.store.roli.com/#collection-blocks>. 
If you buy everything you’re meant to (two Lightpads, plus Loops and Live), 
you’ll spend almost £500. Very expensive for a setup that has nice aspects – it 
fits into your pocket, it clicks together, it’s instinctive, it’s pretty – but 
is locked into Apple. You can only share your recorded musical efforts via the 
Noise app, not on to SoundCloud. As a musical device, the Blocks work much 
better for live messing about than they do as a recording device. And even 
then, if you were a musician, you’d probably have more fun if you combined them 
with something else, like a microphone. The Noise app is a laugh, though. Try 
that.Miranda Sawyer
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fnew-year-revolutions-gadgets-for-a-better-you%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb1415d3dbb60509bd2888416a4f9bb012728fac9%2F0_0_5377_3744%2F5377.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20Year%20revolutions%3A%20four%20gadgets%20for%20a%20better%20you&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fnew-year-revolutions-gadgets-for-a-better-you%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20Year%20revolutions%3A%20four%20gadgets%20for%20a%20better%20you&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fnew-year-revolutions-gadgets-for-a-better-you%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb1415d3dbb60509bd2888416a4f9bb012728fac9%2F0_0_5377_3744%2F5377.jpg>
 ‘Are my feet in the right place?’ Tess Riley in action. Photograph: Karen 
Robinson for the Observer 
TRX Home Gym, £149

The goal
I was never sure what core strength was. Then my fiance had a skateboarding 
accident, slipped a disc and spent months on painkillers before an enlightened 
GP balked at his repeat prescription and recommended core strength training 
instead. In support, I vowed to join him yet have failed to maintain my side of 
the bargain, which requires me to actually turn up to the gym, not just sign up 
to it. The TRX Home Gym promises to help you build your core “anywhere, 
anytime”. Could this be the answer?

The method
The TRX training kit consists of two adjustable straps, joined for suspension 
at one end, with handles at the other – apparently simple stuff that engages 
multiple muscle groups as you leverage gravity and your body weight to row, 
lunge, lean, push and pull. I started sceptical – it’s just a couple of straps! 
– but took it all back by day three as my muscles started to ache.

To use the TRX at home, I envisaged needing to bolt something either side of a 
door frame or screw a big hook into the wall. In fact, it comes with a padded 
attachment that anchors it either side of a closed door and a separate strap if 
you want to go outside. Bar the occasional chilly trip to the balcony, I used 
it inside. It may be an ingenious design, but I wasn’t so sure about our door 
frames, which I was convinced would collapse in on me like a scene from a 
Buster Keaton film.

As well as videos guiding you through each exercise, the TRX app 
<https://www.trxtraining.com/products/the-trx-app> provides curated workouts 
spanning anything from 10 to 30 minutes (add 50% extra time if you’re a 
beginner), all synced to the beat of whatever gems are lurking in your iTunes 
account – in my case, very few as it turned out.

The verdict
The TRX website promises the home gym suspension trainer “allows you to 
finally find the better you!”. What does that even mean? Marketing slogans like 
that are my only real gripes though. I’m amazed how much stronger I feel having 
added less than half an hour (once I got the hang of it) of exercise to my day.

The kit’s major upsides are how quick it is to assemble, how easy it is to 
transport and how simple it is to store. In fact, if I’m not taking it with me 
I just leave mine slung over the bedroom door now, ready for the morning – it’s 
harder to walk past than it was to ignore the gym.

There were several exercises I couldn’t do, but that gives me something to 
work on – I wonder what happens when you’re a pro at all of them? Hopefully it 
doesn’t lose its appeal at that point. The hardest thing I managed was an 
atomic pushup, which combines alternating pushups (your feet are hooked into 
the lowered TRX handles) with crunching your knees towards your chest. You’re 
so busy steading yourself, maintaining momentum and ensuring you can get back 
up that you don’t realise how much work you’re doing… until you collapse. Don’t 
be fooled into thinking that won’t happen to you too.

Without the app, which you can use to track your progress, I wouldn’t have had 
a clue what to do. Even with it, I have no doubt there’s much room for 
improvement. Are my feet in the right place? Do my elbows stick out? A personal 
trainer would be able to guide you on this; doing it on your own requires a bit 
of faith, alongside a few repeat watches of the instruction videos. With an 
increasing volume of research highlighting the importance of exercise to 
counteract thenegative health impacts of sedentary lifestyles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jul/27/health-risk-one-hour-activity-offset-eight-hours-sitting-desk>
, though, I don’t care if I’m not always doing it exactly right. At least it 
beats going to the gym.Tess Riley
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fnew-year-revolutions-gadgets-for-a-better-you%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F89f1a175b3dfa633f7e6a26e49aab8de18a497d1%2F0_0_4912_6144%2F4912.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20Year%20revolutions%3A%20four%20gadgets%20for%20a%20better%20you&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fnew-year-revolutions-gadgets-for-a-better-you%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20Year%20revolutions%3A%20four%20gadgets%20for%20a%20better%20you&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fnew-year-revolutions-gadgets-for-a-better-you%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F89f1a175b3dfa633f7e6a26e49aab8de18a497d1%2F0_0_4912_6144%2F4912.jpg>
 ‘Overall it helped’: Emma Graham-Harrison with the S+ Sleep Monitor. 
Photograph: Sophia Evans for the Observer 
S+ Sleep Monitor, £129.95

The goal
So simple and so elusive – a good night’s sleep. I’ve been a bad sleeper all 
my life. It may even run in the family. My grandmother put together an 
anthology for insomniacs and used to give me tips on how to get through long, 
sleepless nights without panicking and making the day to come even worse.

It hasn’t been made any better by a job as a foreign correspondent, which 
involves constant travel, irregular and often unfriendly hours; often, I’m up 
at 3am for a dawn flight, working long into the night then racing home. The 
stories I collect and people I meet often linger in my mind long after I have 
finished writing. So I’m always looking out for something to help me sleep or 
sleep better.

The method
The S+ uses sonar to monitor your breathing and movement 
<http://www.johnlewis.com/s-by-resmed-non-contact-sleep-monitor/p2629109> and 
with that information calculates whether you are asleep and the quality of your 
sleep. It seemed a bit less dubious than the apps I’d seen friends try, though
some experts suggest 
<http://www.wareable.com/internet-of-things/how-much-better-can-sleep-trackers-make-us-feel>
sleep-monitoring gadgets have trouble distinguishing the different types of 
sleep.

The machine is a small cube in a brushed aluminium stand, like an iPod for 
insomniacs. Just plug in, load up the app, key in a few bits of data (your 
weight, height, age), get some basic instructions (you mustn’t put a phone or a 
glass of water between you and the sonar, for instance) and you are ready to 
go. At night, you give the app a handful of details about your day, broadly 
covering alcohol and caffeine intake, stress levels and exercise, and then hit 
sleep.

The machine can play slightly new-age music in tune with your breathing to 
help you go sleep and has an alarm that claims to work out the optimum time to 
wake you up and so avoid grumpiness.

In the morning, the app calculates a “sleep score”, based on how long you were 
actually asleep, and the amount of time it thinks you spent in each sleep stage 
– light, deep and REM (rapid eye movement). Then in the day it gives you tips 
on how to rest more effectively or deal with tiredness.

The results
The hypnotic lullaby function (they call it “relax to sleep”) annoyed me with 
its tinny sound and options such as “ethereal” and “moonlight” but I have to 
admit I seem to crash into sleep when I put it on.

The alarm was much nicer to wake up to than the usual iPhone setting and I did 
feel a bit less exhausted and groggy in the mornings when I used it.

The sleep tracking may be unscientific but I felt it gave me an interesting 
insight into my rest (or lack of it). After one night when I got eight hours’ 
sleep and still woke up feeling exhausted, it suggested I mostly got light 
sleep, none of the deep or REM rest needed to make up a good night. That made 
sense and somehow I felt a bit less bad about being tired.

The tips, which I had expected to be the most helpful thing about the app, 
were often irritating, patronising or useless. “Try to keep regular hours” is 
exactly the type of pointless (for me) generic advice I had expected to avoid.

They have so much data, but their algorithms apparently ignore pretty basic 
variables.

“Well done!” it told me one morning. “The amount of times you woke during the 
night is down!” That may have been true, but didn’t really seem a very helpful 
reflection on a night’s sleep that began in the early hours of the morning 
after a boozy wedding and didn’t last more than three hours.

Overall, though, it helped my sleep. Knowing I’d get a readout in the morning 
felt a bit like having someone around to remind me to go to bed, I understood 
how I felt a little better and the alarm and digital lullaby worked quite well. 
At £130 though, those seem like quite pricey improvements.Emma Graham-Harrison
 