
Hometown: Hackney, London.

The lineup: Nao (vocals).

The background: Nao, not to be confused with Noa, although it’s easily done 
<https://soundcloud.com/chasenoa>, is one of several – many, to be honest – 
young R&B-tinged female artists eager for attention. There’sGrace Acladna 
<http://www.thelineofbestfit.com/new-music/discovery/grace-acladna-afterlife>, 
B Miles <https://soundcloud.com/bmilesofficial>, Mags 
<https://soundcloud.com/officialmags>, each of them soulful and experimental, 
yet with an attention to commercial imperatives – every base covered. And we 
say this not to show that talents such as Nao are 10-a-penny, but to prove how 
exceptional she is. Even in a field crowded with aspiring artists with strong 
voices and interesting musical ideas, she stands out.

She has released a couple of EPs, the first of which, So Good, drew the 
attention of all the right people and led to a No 1 on HypeMachine, as well as 
a No 4 on the iTunes electronic chart, a BBC 1Xtra playlist and 1.5m plays on 
Soundcloud. She then went on to sell out her first two London shows in a matter 
of days and was asked to join Little Dragon on their 22-date European tour. 
There were references in reviews to “nu-soul”, to ’90s R&B, as well as to 
classic funk and house, whereas on her second EP, titled February 15 but only 
just released, there is evidence of a shift towards the abstract.

However, she does divert from the more avant garde. Inhale Exhale is a radio 
hit in waiting, with the strut and crisp energy of ’8os electro-funk. 
Immediately appealing, along with the slick production, is Nao’s high, giddy 
voice, which suggests she’s been sucking on a helium lolly; it evinces no trace 
of her native London.

Zillionaire has a quirky, faltering tempo to match the lyrics about flying 
into someone’s bedroom and loving someone till September, and synth sounds like 
the muffled parps of an elephant. (Whoever is producing deserves a medal, or a
Sherbet Dip Dab. 
<http://www.treasureislandsweets.co.uk/user/products/large/sherbet_dip_dab__79788.jpg>
)

Apple Cherry has more of an R&B feel. This is twitchy, spacious, UK 
garage-inflected and Aaliyah/Cassie-indebted, with a hint in the esoteric 
delivery of FKA twigs. Golden features anEdge of Seventeen  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Dn8-4tjPxD8>guitar sample, finger clicks, the 
sound of crystals shattering. It’s somehow out-there yet irresistible.

It’s You, opening with the sound of speeded-up synth raindrops, could have 
been overly winsome and cute as Noa shares with us her vision of loveliness 
(“Your silver hair, your red and checked shirt” – who is he, Father 
Christmas?), but it’s made palatable by the forward-thinking production.

There’s another track on her Soundcloud produced by AK Paul, brother of the 
elusive but cultishly adored Jai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/may/10/new-band-jai-paul>, and it’s 
great, with the kind of beat ripe for sampling in 10 years’ time. Much of Nao’s 
greatness lies in her ability to pick the right collaborators, and now that 
she’s signed to RCA, there’ll be no stopping her. How soon is Nao, or something.

The buzz: “Nao plays with … purple-hued funk, smoky neo-soul, muted washes of 
dubstep and other UK bass permutations […] but integrates them so seamlessly 
that the stylistic breadth barely registers” – Pitchfork.

The truth: Nao that’s what we call music! 

Most likely to: Make twigs green with envy. 

Least likely to: Send us into a purple-hued funk. 

What to buy: The February 15 EP is out now. 

File next to: Jhené Aiko, Groove Theory, FKA twigs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/fka-twigs>, Jessy Lanza.

Links: soundcloud.com/thisnao <https://soundcloud.com/thisnao>. 

Ones to watch: Palace Winter, Nots, Eryn Allen Kane, Descartes A Kant, Damien 
Ike.
 