
It's a sight to behold. Just off Lagos, Nigeria's coast, an artificial island 
is emerging from the sea. A foundation, built of sand dredged from the ocean 
floor, stretches over ten kilometres. Promotional videosdepict 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=glYH_9lO0-0> what is to come: a city of soaring 
buildings, housing for 250,000 people, and a central boulevard to match Paris' 
Champs-Élysées and New York's Fifth Avenue. Privately constructed, it will also 
be privately administered and supplied with electricity, water, mass transit, 
sewage and security. It is the "future Hong Kong of Africa," anticipates 
Nigeria's World Bank director.

Welcome to Eko Atlantic, a city whose "whole purpose", its developers say, is 
to "arrest the ocean's encroachment." Like many low-lying coastal African 
countries, Nigeria has been hit hard by a rising sea-level, which has regularly 
washed away thousands of peoples' homes. To defend against the coastal erosion 
and flooding, the city is being surrounded by the "Great Wall of Lagos", a sea 
defence barrier made of 100,000 five-ton concrete blocks. Eko Atlantic will be 
a "sustainable city, clean and energy efficient with minimal carbon emissions," 
offer jobs, prosperity and new land for Nigerians, and serve as a bulwark in 
the fight against the impacts of climate change.

At least that's the official story. Other facts suggest this gleaming city 
will be a menacing allure to most. In congested Lagos, Africa's largest city, 
there is little employment and millions work and scavenge in a vast, desperate 
informal economy. Sixty percent of Nigeria's population – almost 100 of 170 
million people – live on less than a dollar a day. Preventable diseases are 
widespread; electricity and clean water hard to come by. A few kilometres down 
the Lagos shoreline, Nigerians eke out an existence in the aquatic slum of 
Makoko, built precariously on stilts over the ocean. Casting them as 
crime-ridden, the government regularly dismantles such slums, bulldozing homes 
and evicting thousands. These are hardly the people who will scoop up square 
footage in Eko Atlantic's pricy new high-rises.

Those behind the project – a pair of politically connected Lebanese brothers 
who run a financial empire called the Chagoury Group, and a slew of African and 
international banks – give a picture of who will be catered to. Gilbert 
Chaougry was a close advisor to the notorious Nigerian dictatorship of the mid 
1990s, helping the ultra-corrupt general Sani Abacha as helooted 
<http://www.pbs.org/frontlineworld/stories/bribe/2010/01/nigeria-chasing-the-ghosts-of-a-corrupt-regime.html>
 billions from public coffers. Abacha killed hundreds of demonstrators and 
executed environmentalistKen Saro-Wiwa 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ken_Saro-Wiwa>, who rose to fame protesting the 
despoiling of the country by Shell and other multinational oil corporations. 
Thus it's fitting for whom the first 15-story office tower in Eko Atlantic is 
being built: a British oil and gas trading company. The city proposing to head 
off environmental devastation will be populated by those most responsible for 
it in the first place.
 Eko Atlantic city will sit on ten million square metres of land built of sand 
dredged from the Atlantic Ocean. Photograph: Eko Atlantic 
The real inspiration for Eko Atlantic comes not from these men but the 
dreamworlds of rampant capitalism, stoked by a successful, thirty year global 
campaign to claw back gains in social security and unchain corporations from 
regulation – what we now know as neoliberalism. In Nigeria, oil wealth 
plundered by a military elite spawned extreme inequalities and upended the 
economy. Under the IMF's neoliberal dictates, the situation worsened: education 
and healthcare were gutted, industries privatized, and farmers ruined by 
western products dumped on their markets. The World Bank celebrated Nigeria; 
extreme poverty doubled. The most notorious application of the power of the 
Nigerian state for the interest of the rich came in 1990: an entire district of 
Lagos - 300,000 homes – was razed to clear the way for high-end real-estate 
development.

As elites in Nigeria and elsewhere have embraced such inequality as the very 
engine of growth, they have re-established some of the most severe forms of 
colonial segregation and gated leisure. Today, boutiques cannot open fast 
enough to serve the Nigerian millionaires buying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/mar/23/africa-super-rich-luxury-cars>
 luxury cars and yachts they'll be able to dock in Eko Atlantic's down-town 
marina. Meanwhile, thousands of people who live in communities along the coast 
expect the new city will bring displacement, not prosperity, says environmental 
activist Nnimmo Bassey. To get their way, the developers, backed by industry 
and politicians, havetrampled 
<http://tundeakingbade.wordpress.com/2011/11/07/eko-atlantic-city-rumbles-in-the-sea/>
 over the country's environmental assessment process. "Building Eko Atlantic is 
contrary to anything one would want to do if one took seriously climate change 
and resource depletion," he says.

The wealthy and powerful may in fact take climate change seriously: not as a 
demand to modify their behaviour or question the fossil-fuel driven global 
economy that has made it possible, but as the biggest opportunity yet to 
realize their dreams of unfettered accumulation and consumption. The disaster 
capitalists behind Eko Atlantic have seized on climate change to push through 
pro-corporate plans to build a city of their dreams, an architectural insult to 
the daily circumstances of ordinary Nigerians. The criminalized poor abandoned 
outside their walls may once have served as sufficient justification for their 
flight and fortification – but now they have the very real threat of climate 
change as well.

Eko Atlantic is where you can begin to see a possible future – a vision of 
privatized green enclaves for the ultra rich ringed by slums lacking water or 
electricity, in which a surplus population scramble for depleting resources and 
shelter to fend off the coming floods and storms. Protected by guards, guns, 
and an insurmountable gully – real estate prices – the rich will shield 
themselves from the rising tides of poverty and a sea that is literally rising. 
A world in which the rich and powerful exploit the global ecological crisis to 
widen and entrench already extreme inequalities and seal themselves off from 
its impacts – this is climate apartheid.

Prepare for the elite, like never before, to use climate change to transform 
neighbourhoods, cities, even entire nations into heavily fortified islands. 
Already, around the world, from Afghanistan to Arizona, China to Cairo, and in 
mushrooming mega-cities much like Lagos, those able are moving to areas where 
they can live better and often more greenly – with better transport and 
renewable technologies, green buildings and ecological services. In Sao Paulo, 
Brazil, the super-rich – ferried above the congested city by a fleet of 
hundreds of helicopters – have disembedded themselves from urban life, 
attempting to escape from a common fate. 

In places like Eko Atlantic the escape, a moral and social secession of the 
rich from those in their country, will be complete. This essentially utopian 
drive – to consume rapaciously and endlessly and to reject any semblance of 
collective impulse and concern – is simply incompatible with human survival. 
But at the moment when we must confront an economy and ideology pushing the 
planet's life-support systems to breaking point, this is what the neoliberal 
imagination offers us: a grotesque monument to the ultra-rich flight from 
responsibility.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2012%2Foct%2F04%2Flagos-living-off-the-water-in-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2012%2F10%2F4%2F1349350078854%2FStill-from-Lagos-film-015.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lagos%3A%20living%20off%20the%20water%20in%20Makoko%20%E2%80%93%20in%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2012%2Foct%2F04%2Flagos-living-off-the-water-in-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lagos%3A%20living%20off%20the%20water%20in%20Makoko%20%E2%80%93%20in%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2012%2Foct%2F04%2Flagos-living-off-the-water-in-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2012%2F10%2F4%2F1349350078854%2FStill-from-Lagos-film-015.jpg>
 A counter-point to Eko Atlantic, Nigerian architect Kunle Adeyemi has designed 
floating structures for the Makoko slum that are buoyed by plastic barrels and 
powered by solar panels. 
There are, however, alternatives, like one proposed for the Makoko slum, the 
home of a quarter-million Nigerians – the same number who are intended to 
inhabit Eko Atlantic. Nigerian architect Kunle Adeyemi hasdesigned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2012/oct/04/nigeria-floats-idea-for-life-on-water>
 what amounts to a counter-point, a floating settlement of which a school has 
already been built – making it only the second school that Makoko has ever had. 
The floating structures – made of low-cost wood and buoyed by recycled plastic 
barrels – have solar panels, sloped roofs to harvest rainwater, and compost 
toilets to solve dire sanitary needs.

Nnimmo Bassey thinks the floating settlements are just the thing to help the 
sustainable development of under-served communities across Nigeria's 
coastlines. "It is a structure that suits the environment, is easy to replicate 
and appropriate to peoples' lifestyle, and is sensitive to the challenges of 
sea level rise," he says. "It would help create what we need: communities for 
people, not gated anti-people communities."

The project is animated by a very different vision: that we must share rather 
than hoard, reduce inequality rather than increase it, and encourage the 
resiliency of everyone rather than the escape from the worst for a few. That 
the needs of the most vulnerable, rather than the desires of the most wealthy, 
must be the starting point of any effort to truly combat the climate crisis.

The choices before Lagos confront us all. While ours is not the first 
civilization whose elites have proved spectacularly indifferent to collective, 
ecological survival, it is up to us whether we will be the last.

Follow Martin on twitter: @Martin_Lukacs <http://www.twitter.com/Martin_Lukacs>
 