
Newcastle face Bath at Kingston Park on Friday night in the first Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership> match since World Rugby’s 
clampdown on dangerous tackles came into force as part of its policy to reduce 
head injuries.

There have been two changes to the laws: reckless tackles above the line of 
the shoulders should be categorised as yellow-card offences at least, while 
accidental contact with the head could also mean players are shown a card, 
although the minimum punishment is a penalty.

Leicester board at crossroads as old ways start to look like the wrong ones | 
Paul Rees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/05/the-breakdown-leicester-tigers-crossroads>
The changes, which have led to concern on fans’ forums that the game is 
becoming soft and that teams could end up with three or four players in the 
sin-bin each match and another sent off, have been welcomed by Premiership 
Rugby. Its rugby director, Phil Winstanley, said: “It has to be a step forward 
for the game because we have to reduce the number of head injuries where 
possible. We have to take action and we saw with tip tackles a few years ago 
that if you increase sanctions, it acts as a deterrent and leads to a change in 
behaviour. I very much support it.

“As a sport, and certainly within Premiership Rugby, we have made significant 
progress and significant investment in our attempts to identify the point of 
injury for head injuries and concussions. We also have some extremely 
well-qualified and diligent medical teams that deal with the aftermath, 
treatment and return to play.

“It follows that as a sport we need to reduce the number of potential contacts 
that we have. We welcome the changes that have been made and understand why 
they have been made. The challenge we have is that in a physical contact sport 
not all injuries are caused by a deliberate act of foul play or reckless 
behaviour. For the good of the players, coaches and match officials, we need to 
be able to establish where the parameters are.”

Wales give Leigh Halfpenny deadline over national dual contract offer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/05/wales-leigh-halfpenny-deadline-national-dual-contract-offer-cardiff-blues-toulon-rugby-union>
The changes make intent irrelevant. Contact with the head, even if inadvertent 
and even if it is made in a tackle which starts below the line of the 
shoulders, will see players penalised and, in many instances, sent to the 
sin-bin or shown a red card. If a referee is deemed to be too lenient, the 
citing process may be used.

The England wing Anthony Watson, meanwhile, makes his first start for Bath 
since the beginning of October. He will be appearing at full-back but will not 
face his brother Marcus, a try scorer against Wasps last week, who misses the 
match with a hamstring strain. Bath have the opportunity to reclaim third place 
while victory would takeNewcastle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/newcastlefalcons>, considered candidates for 
relegation at the start of the campaign, into the top half of the table.

Dean Richards, the Newcastle rugby director, said his team have a point to 
prove,having lost 58-5 at the Rec in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/10/bath-newcastle-premiership-match-report>
. “We were harshly done by a yellow card to Niki Goneva, which I thought was a 
really poor decision on the day,” Richards said. “As a consequence, we leaked 
three or four tries at the end of the first half, and that killed the game in 
the sense we were so far behind we were chasing it and leaving ourselves open.

“Yeah, we have got a point to prove, but it is all about ourselves and our 
ability to produce the game we want to produce.”
 