
Rumours that Lady Gaga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/sep/14/lady-gaga-10-of-the-best>
 would be blocked from speaking out about politics or Donald Trump during her 
forthcoming Super Bowl half-time show have been denied by the NFL.

On Tuesday, it was reported  
<http://www.vanityfair.com/hollywood/2017/01/lady-gaga-super-bowl-halftime-donald-trump>
that the NFL told the pop star she could not “say anything or bring anything up 
about the election, or mention Donald Trump”.

National Football League’s Natalie Ravitz has since claimed this story is 
“false”, with representatives forLady Gaga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/lady-gaga> confirming the statement.

“This is unsourced nonsense from people trying to stir up controversy where 
there is none. The Super Bowl is a time when people really come together,”
Ravitz told CNN 
<http://money.cnn.com/2017/01/17/media/lady-gaga-super-bowl-halftime-show-trump/>
. “Lady Gaga is focused on putting together an amazing show for fans and we 
love working with her on it; we aren’t going to be distracted by this.”

The 51st Super Bowl <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/super-bowl> game will 
take place in Houston on Sunday 5 February, televised around the world; the 
finalists will be decided by championship games on 22 January.
 Musician Lagy Gaga staged an election-night protest against Republican 
presidential nominee Donald Trump. Photograph: Dominick Reuter/AFP/Getty Images 
Gaga frequently expressed her opposition to president-elect Trump throughout 
his election campaign. A public supporter of Hillary Clinton,she spoke at her 
final election rally 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/08/lady-gaga-bon-jovi-hillary-clinton-north-carolina-video>
, and, in the wake of Trump’s win, tweeted: “Say a prayer America.” Gaga also 
joined a protest on election night outside Trump Tower in New Yorkwith a sign 
that read: “Love trumps hate.” 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/11/09/lady-gaga-protests-outside-trump-tower/>

Last year, Beyoncé used her performance to make a 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/08/beyonce-black-panthers-homage-black-lives-matter-super-bowl-50>
 political statement about race, with her dancers wearing Black Panther-style 
berets and posing with raised fists in a homage to theprotest by athletes 
Tommie Smith and John Carlos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2012/feb/08/olympic-moments-tommie-smith-john-carlos>
 at 1968 Olympics.
 