
Aaron Rodgers, master of the Hail Mary pass, struck again in another big 
moment.

Rodgers overcame a sluggish start and finished with four touchdown passes, 
including amomentum-swinging 42-yard heave 
<http://www.nfl.com/m/share?p=%2Fvideos%2Fnfl-cant-miss-plays%2F0ap3000000771691%2FCan-t-Miss-Play-Aaron-it-out-Rodgers-Hail-Mary-to-Cobb>
 to Randall Cobb at the end of the second quarter, to lead the Green Bay 
Packers to a 38-13 win Sunday over the New York Giants in an NFC wild-card game.
NFL (@NFL) 
Yup. @AaronRodgers12 <https://twitter.com/AaronRodgers12> just threw ANOTHER 
Hail Mary.

UNBELIEVABLE. #GoPackGo <https://twitter.com/hashtag/GoPackGo?src=hash> 
#NFLPlayoffs <https://twitter.com/hashtag/NFLPlayoffs?src=hash> 
https://t.co/ou4kvnMITb <https://t.co/ou4kvnMITb>
 <https://twitter.com/NFL/status/818234000120516609> January 8, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/NFL/status/818234000120516609> 
The Packers move on to face the Dallas Cowboys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/dallas-cowboys> in the divisional round next 
week.

Rodgers was 25 of 40 for 362 yards, continuing a remarkable run of quarterback 
play that helped the Packers win their final six games of the regular season to 
take the NFC North. Cobb finished with five receptions for 116 yards and three 
scores.

For much of the first half, the Giants’ defense flustered the two-time NFL 
MVP. They got pressure on Rodgers and the secondaryblanketed the Packers’ 
talented receiving corps 
<http://www.nfl.com/m/share?p=%2Fvideos%2Fnfl-game-highlights%2F0ap3000000771564%2FLandon-Collins-breaks-up-deep-pass-intended-for-Jared-Cook>
, and a few boos even rained down from the stands after New York built a 6-0 
lead on two field goals by Robbie Gould.

As it turned out, Rodgers was just getting started.

Green Bay scored two touchdowns in the final 2:20 of the second quarter, 
punctuated by another remarkable desperation pass by Rodgers.

Steelers crush Dolphins in NFL wildcard playoff thanks to Bell and Brown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/08/pittsburgh-steelers-miami-dolphins-nfl-playoffs-game-report>
With the ball on the Giants’ 42, Rodgers took the snap with six seconds left. 
He rolled to his right before heaving a throw from the Packers’ 47. Cobb 
somehow got behind three defensive backs near the back of the end zone to haul 
in the pass, getting both feet down before falling out of bounds.

The Giants looked stunned, just like how the Detroit Lions and Arizona 
Cardinals looked last season after Rodgers pulled off similar feats.
NFL (@NFL) 
The Aaron Rodgers Hail Mary TD Trilogy. #GoPackGo 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/GoPackGo?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/SYfIM3vuim 
<https://t.co/SYfIM3vuim>
 <https://twitter.com/NFL/status/818239753162063872> January 8, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/NFL/status/818239753162063872> 
Rodgers and Cobb weren’t done.

They connected again on a 30-yard touchdown pass 
<http://www.nfl.com/m/share?p=%2Fvideos%2Fnfl-game-highlights%2F0ap3000000771776%2FAaron-Rodgers-finds-Randall-Cobb-for-his-third-TD-catch-of-the-day>
 late in the third quarter for a 21-13 lead. That score answered a Giants 
scoring drive that briefly cut the deficit to one.

A Packers defense ranked 21st in points allowed (24.3) coming into the game 
limited the production of Odell Beckham Jr, and the Giants’ receiving corps in 
spite of a battered secondary.

Beckham finished with four catches for 28 yards. Eli Manning was 23 of 44 for 
299 yards, including the41-yard touchdown pass to Tavarres King 
<http://www.nfl.com/m/share?p=%2Fvideos%2Fnfl-game-highlights%2F0ap3000000771742%2FEli-Manning-hits-Tavarres-King-deep-for-the-41-yard-touchdown>
 in the third quarter.

But the Giants were plagued by a series of drops by their receivers 
<http://www.nfl.com/m/share?p=%2Fvideos%2Fnfl-game-highlights%2F0ap3000000771572%2FOdell-Beckham-Jr-drops-potential-28-yard-TD-catch>
.

Rodgers began dissecting the secondary after coach Mike McCarthy had his 
quarterback roll more outside the pocket, and the Packers started working the 
middle of the field.

Cobb had a big night after missing the last two games of the regular season 
with an ankle injury. Davante Adams had eight receptions for 125 yards and a 
score. Top receiver Jordy Nelsonwas knocked out 
<http://www.nfl.com/m/share?p=%2Fvideos%2Fnfl-game-highlights%2F0ap3000000771636%2FJordy-Nelson-gets-shaken-up-attempting-sideline-catch>
 of the game with 11 minutes left in the second quarter with a rib injury.

NFL divisional playoffs schedule

Saturday 14 January

Seahawks @ Falcons (4.35pm ET); Texans @ Patriots (8.15pm ET)

Sunday 15 January

Steelers @ Chiefs (1.05pm ET); Packers @ Cowboys (4.40pm ET) 
 