
For more than a year the NFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl> has cited 
an independent study to support its claims that Heads Up Football, a 
league-backed training program for youth players and coaches, was proven to 
reduce injuries and concussions.

But the New York Times reported 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/28/sports/football/nfl-concussions-youth-program-heads-up-football.html>
 on Wednesday that a review of the study “showed no such thing”.

Established by USA Football, the sport’s governing body, and funded by the 
National Football League, Heads Up Football has the goal of “creating a better, 
safer game <http://usafootball.com/headsup>”. Preliminary results 
<http://usafootball.com/blogs/heads-up-football/post/9900/datalys-center-study-finds-usa-football%E2%80%99s-heads-up-football-program-reduces-injuries-by-76-percent>
 from Datalys, a non-profit that researched the NCAA’s injury surveillance 
program, showed a 76% reduction in injuries for those involved in Heads Up 
Football.

“The research and interviews with people involved with it indicate, rather, 
that Heads Up Football showed no demonstrable effect on concussions during the 
study, and significantly less effect on injuries over all, than USA Football 
and the league have claimed in settings ranging from onlinematerials 
<https://usafootball.com/sites/default/files/uploads/usafbannual_2014.pdf> to 
Congressionaltestimony 
<http://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF02/20160513/104914/HHRG-114-IF02-Wstate-GregoryA-20160513.pdf>
,” wrote the Times.

The full results of the study 
<http://ojs.sagepub.com/content/3/7/2325967115594578.full.pdf+html> were 
released in July of last year. According to the Times, only Pop Warner football 
leagues, which have their own contact restrictions, saw a “meaningful drop in 
concussions”. Heads Up Football leagues saw a drop in practice injuries, but 
the total drop in injuries was only 45% when combined with injuries during 
games.

“The previously reported drops were clearly driven by a league’s affiliation 
with Pop Warner, not Heads Up Football,” the Times wrote.

Representatives from USA Football and the NFL told the Times that they were 
unaware that the preliminary numbers were unsupported by the study. The lead 
researchers from Datalys said they only informed USA Football of the 
discrepancy last month.

“We’re the ones that put out the numbers. We’re the ones that kind of blew 
it,” said Thomas Dompier, president and lead epidemiologist for Datalys.

Heads Up Football was established in 2013 and includes both online and in 
person instructions for safety. USA Football said it would remove the erroneous 
data from its print and online materials about the program.

A spokesman for USA Football told the Times that programs utilizing Heads Up 
Football have seen injury reductions, including in the Fairfax County school 
system in Virginia. The school’s director of athletics praised the program for 
its part in the reductions, but also said the school went beyond them and added 
their own.

The Guardian reached out to USA Football and Datalys for comment.


Controversy over concussions and injuries have plagued football in recent 
years. Last week, the Baltimore Ravens’Eugene Monroe retired early 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/21/eugene-monroe-retires-baltimore-ravens-cte-nfl>
 citing fears of head trauma. In May, Buffalo Bills general manager Doug Whaley
told a radio station 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/24/buffalo-bills-doug-whaley-nfl-violent-concussion>
: “It’s a violent game that I personally don’t think humans are supposed to 
play.” Some have suggested the best way to avoid injuries in football is tostop 
playing it altogether 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/30/smarter-football-concussion-crisis-nfl>
.
 