
Bristol played in an identical strip to the one worn by Worcester in the 
opening match 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/03/saracens-worcester-premiership-rugby-union-match-report>
, but there the similarity ended. The Championship champions tooktheir first 
game in the top flight for seven years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/03/bristol-rugby-premiership-survival>
 to Quins from the start, sticking to their plan of running from deep and from 
some way behind the gainline despite the heavy rain that started falling before 
the kick-off. They played the smarter rugby but lost the penalty count 18-5.

Schalk Burger scores on Saracens debut in Twickenham win over Worcester
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/03/saracens-worcester-premiership-rugby-union-match-report>
Bristol’s attacking triumvirate of Tusi Pisi, Gavin Henson and Will Hurrell 
outfoxed a rush defence and while their first two tries came through Quins’ 
largesse they created three opportunities through the slick way they moved the 
ball and they did not just cope with the pace of the game, but set it for the 
most part. They did not look a side destined for a quick return to the 
purgatory they took so long to escape from but it will be about how they 
finish, not start.

Quins complacently ran an early penalty only to be turned over by Jack Lam. It 
prompted a 25-minute period of such dominance by Bristol that it wasHarlequins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/harlequinsru> who appeared to be the newly 
promoted side – hesitant in defence, slipshod in attack and laden with a 
sackful of gifts. Bristol sought, and found, space with Pisi operating from 
deep, Henson achieving width with his trademark passing and Hurrell finding 
holes in the defence.

It was surprising that it took Bristol 20 minutes to score their first try, 
presented to them by the Quins captain, Danny Care, who ran a quick penalty 
from just outside his own 22. His attempt to find Marland Yarde with a pass 
that was undermined by the wet and as the ball fell well short of his target 
Tom Varndell marked his return to thePremiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership> with a 35-metre intercept and a 
typically opportunistic try.

Quins were sufficiently shaken to take the three points when presented with 
their next kickable penalty, but the mistakes multiplied. Yarde blew two half 
chances by dropping the ball, Bristol stole two lineouts, even though one of 
the throws was crooked and when Ross Chisholm had the opportunity to pegBristol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bristolrugby> back following a turnover he 
kicked the ball directly into touch.

Worse was to come for Chisholm when another poor kick gave Bristol the chance 
to counterattack from halfway. The full-back chased hard but sold himself in 
the tackle when Will Cliff picked up the ball, so that when the scrum-half 
found Pisi the Samoan found himself in space after jinking out of two tackles 
and even at the age of 34 easily had the pace to see off what remained of the 
defence.

Henson was revelling in his return to the big time, but it ended prematurely 
when he hobbled off after 29 minutes having been tackled late by Joe Marler, 
the England propwho was blighted by disciplinary problems last season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/18/joe-marler-pulls-out-england-match-wales-tour-australia>
. . Marler took him out after a kick downfield, but only marginally so, leaving 
any possible citing to be determined on whether the fact he used his shoulder, 
rather than his arms, merits a hearing. “Marler got there was early as he 
could,” said Bristol’s director of rugby, Andy Robinson. “It is a shame an 
injury occurs from something like that, but I hope Gav will be fit for 
Northampton on Sunday.”

Bristol’s hold on the game started to weaken without Henson and Quins, 
profiting from their opponents’ indiscipline, turned an attacking lineout into 
a driving maul that stalled before a number of backs arrived to add momentum 
and the ball was funnelled to Yarde, who managed to hold on to it.

It would have cut Bristol’s lead to eight points had Jordan Crane, their 
summer recruit from Leicester, not passed some unsolicited advice to the 
referee, Luke Pearce. Officials have been told to crack down on dissent this 
season and Harlequins were given a penalty on halfway. They turned it into 
another lineout and Chisholm cut the line and fed Joe Marchant with a 
try-scoring pass that was ruled not forward on review.

The lead did not settle Quins, who, within one minute of the restart, had 
supplied Bristol with another try. Ryan Edwards chased his own kick ahead with 
hope rather than expectation as it bounced towards the try line, outpaced by 
Marchant and Tim Visser. Marchant fell on the ball but lost control after 
aquaplaning and Edwards reached it just before Visser.

Quins stirred themselves enough to mount more pressure without ever looking 
convincing. Bristol had half-chances through Varndell and Ollie Robinson, who 
charged down Nick Evans’s lazy free-kick only to be just beaten to the bounce 
by Chisholm. The visitors were undermined by their indiscipline and two Evans 
penalties gave Harlequins a victory they barely merited. Bristol showed they 
had the legs; they just need to keep their head.

Leicester pull off brave late comeback to break Gloucester hearts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/02/gloucester-leicester-premiership-match-report> 