
Nicola Sturgeon has insisted she is “not rushing to another independence 
referendum”, after telling the Scottish National party conference in Glasgow 
that she would unveildraft legislation next week to prepare for a rerun of the 
2014 referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/13/nicola-sturgeon-challenges-may-with-second-referendum-bill-scottish-independence-snp-conference>
 within the next two years.

Asked on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme whether this was a threat to hang over 
Theresa May’s Westminster government, Scotland’s first minister insisted: 
“Threat is a very pejorative word. I’m being straight with people.”

Her phrasing appeared more cautious than in a later interview on BBC 
Breakfast, when Sturgeon said she believed a second referendum was “highly 
likely” within the next two years, repeating the wordingshe first used 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/23/eu-referendum-result-live-counting-leave-remain-brain-in-europe>
 on the morning after the vote to leave the EU in June.


Sturgeon added that her government would continue to consider options other 
than independence that could enableScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> to remain within the single market if 
the rest of the UK left. Negotiations are due to start in late October, when 
the prime minister will meet the leaders of devolved governments to agree on 
joint plans to prepare for Brexit.

The SNP leader added that she shared the concern of many moderate 
Conservatives that May’s concentration on free movement would make leaving the 
single market inevitable.

“I don’t want Scotland taken out of the single market ... The single market is 
so important to our economy and my worry – and many moderate Tories have this 
worry – is that by making this all about control of borders, Theresa May is 
making it inevitable that the UK leaves the single market.


“I think the UK would be taking a step off the edge of a cliff to leave the 
single market and I don’t want Scotland to have to do that too.”

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fnicola-sturgeon-announces-new-scottish-independence-referendum-bill-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nicola%20Sturgeon%20announces%20new%20Scottish%20independence%20referendum%20bill%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fnicola-sturgeon-announces-new-scottish-independence-referendum-bill-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nicola%20Sturgeon%20announces%20new%20Scottish%20independence%20referendum%20bill%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fnicola-sturgeon-announces-new-scottish-independence-referendum-bill-video&media=>
Nicola Sturgeon announces new Scottish independence referendum bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/oct/13/nicola-sturgeon-announces-new-scottish-independence-referendum-bill-video>
After confirming in her welcome address to SNP conference on Thursday that the 
SNP at Westminster would work with other opposition parties and pro-EU Tory MPs 
to vote against the government bill to enable Brexit to take place, which a UK 
government source later suggested would weaken her hand in future talks, she 
argued that “there’s a lot here for us to try to influence”.

“I think the prime minister should be seeking an outcome to keep the UK in the 
single market. Whether she’s going to do that is open to serious question; 
whether there’s a majority in the House of Commons for coming out of the single 
market is also open to question so there’s a lot here for us to try to 
influence.

“We’ll try to influence the whole of the UK away from a hard Brexit. We’ll put 
forward proposals that respect the view that Scotland expressed in the 
referendum but if all that fails then I think Scotland does have the right to 
ask itself again does it want to stay part of the UK coming out of the EU or 
does it want to choose a different and in my view a better path because the UK 
we voted to stay part of in 2014 is not the UK we now face the prospect of.”


Sturgeon said that, regardless of polling that indicates that a convincing 
majority in favour of independence has yet to be reached, even after the vote 
to leave the EU, “I’ve got a duty to tell people straight what I think needs to 
be done to protect our interests”.


While acknowledging that the slump in oil prices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/24/scottish-finances-worsen-fall-oil-revenues-15bn-deficit>
 meant that those advocating independence in the future would have to answer 
“hard economic questions”, she said the debate would no longer be about “the 
economic certainty and stability of the UK versus the uncertainty of 
independence” as it was characterised in 2014.

“Yes the oil price is low right now but Scotland has a strong and diverse 
economy. This is about how you give yourself the levers and controls to build 
greater economic strength.”
 