
Nicola Sturgeon <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicola-sturgeon> has 
argued that the changed circumstances brought about by the Brexit vote give the 
SNP the responsibility to lead a new debate onindependence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/scottish-independence>, while directly 
challengingTheresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> over 
her mandate to takeScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> out of 
the single market.

The SNP <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/snp> leader announced her plan 
to reach more than two million Scots in 90 days through online surveys, 
doorstep discussions and town hall meetings, as she launched “the biggest 
listening exercise in our party’s history”, which will run from now until St 
Andrew’s Day, on 30 November.

Speaking to an assembly of the party’s MPs, MSPs and MEPs in Stirling, she 
said: “We want to understand in detail how people feel now about Europe, Brexit 
and independence. We want to know the concerns that people have and the 
questions they want answered. We want to build, if we can, a consensus on the 
way ahead.”

The Guardian view on a second Scottish referendum: Sturgeon has no choice but 
caution | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/28/the-guardian-view-on-a-second-scottish-referendum-sturgeon-has-no-choice-but-caution>
In the most significant mass mobilisation of the party’s hugely expanded 
membership since September 2014, Sturgeon said each one of the SNP’s 120,000 
members would be sent a pack of survey cards, and would be asked to commit to 
completing the survey with at least five people each month for the next three 
months. Likewise, she asked the audience of parliamentarians to hold at least 
one town hall event each to engage directly with their constituents.

Sturgeon also suggested a potential red line in triggering a second 
independence referendum, saying: “My message to the prime minister is this: you 
may have a mandate in England and Wales to leave the EU but you do not have a 
clear mandate to take any part of the UK out of the single market.”

Party sources confirmed that Sturgeon’s view was that remaining within the 
single market was essential for bothScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> and the rest of the UK.

Sturgeon went on to challenge unionist assertions that a future vote in favour 
of independence would jeopardise trade and open borders with the rest of the 
UK. She said: “Just yesterday,David Davis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/daviddavis> made a speech in Belfast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/01/brexit-secretary-no-return-to-hard-border-in-ireland>
 ... that Brexit would not mean the end of the common travel area with 
independent Ireland, that it would not lead to a hard border between the north 
and south of Ireland and it would not result in barriers to trade ... The UK 
government cannot say that in Ireland but then get away with saying the 
opposite here in Scotland.”

In a speech that focused heavily on the economics of independence, which those 
leading the 2014 yes campaign acknowledge significantly weakened their case, 
Sturgeon said next week’s programme for government would outline measures to 
stimulate the Scottish economy and support jobs through the uncertainty of a 
Brexit.

Referring to last week’s government expenditure and revenue Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/24/scottish-finances-worsen-fall-oil-revenues-15bn-deficit>
 figures – which revealed a deficit of nearly £15m – as “not a verdict on 
independence but an indictment of generations of Westminster government”, she 
announced a new party growth commission, chaired by the former MSP Andrew 
Wilson. The commission will examine the prospects for Scotland’s finances as an 
independent country, and consider policies to both boost growth and reduce the 
deficit to a sustainable level.

Sturgeon insisted the case for independence was about more than EU membership, 
telling her audience: “Brexit is simply one illustration of the democratic 
deficit at the heart of the Westminster system.” With a nod to the 38% of Scots 
who voted to exit the EU in June, she said: “Whether you voted to remain in the 
EU or to leave, the more fundamental question is: who decides?”

She said this democratic deficit had been exacerbated over the summer by the 
“self-indulgence” of the Labour party, which had opened the door to “perhaps 
decades” of Tory government by its “self-destructive” behaviour.

The Scottish Labour leader, Kezia Dugdale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/kezia-dugdale>, said in response: “The 
majority of Scotland had hoped Nicola Sturgeon was listening on 18 September 
2014. In the coming week Nicola Sturgeon has the opportunity to lay a programme 
for government before the most powerful Scottish parliament ever. Instead of 
reforming education to give our young people the skills they need to compete 
for the jobs of the future, Nicola Sturgeon is deciding to drag Scotland back 
to the arguments of the past.”

Despite Sturgeon’s insistence that the Brexit vote had shifted Scottish 
opinion, a YouGov poll for the Times Scotland on Friday suggested the figure in 
favour of independence had barely shifted over the past two years, despite the 
June referendum. It also found that while 12% of previous no voters were now in 
favour of independence, 13% of previous yes voters had switched to supporting 
the union.

SNP sources said the new survey would be as focused on why previous yes 
supporters had changed their minds. It will be paid for entirely by party funds 
and the information gathered will remain for internal party use.
 