
Nicola Sturgeon <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicola-sturgeon> is to 
welcome 3,000 delegates to the Scottish National party conference in Glasgow 
with a commitment to seek common cause with Westminster opposition parties and 
moderate Conservatives in order to defeat hard Brexit.

Warning that “the right wing of the Tory party ... is seeking to hijack the 
referendum result”, she will pledge that SNP MPs will vote against the Brexit 
bill when it comes before the Commons next year, and that her party will seek 
to persuade Labour, Liberal Democrat and moderate Conservative MPs to “join us 
in a coalition against a hard Brexit: not just forScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, but for the whole UK.”

Quoting the Conservative manifesto, she will also argue that, while May may 
have a mandate to take England and Wales out of the EU, the prime minister “has 
no mandate whatsoever to remove any part of the UK from the single market”.

Thursday’s conference brings its challenges for the SNP leader, whose 
stewardship since the Brexit vote has been broadly admired but who must now 
balance competing demands among her growing party membership as to whether and 
how the EU referendum can offer a stepping stone to independence.

There will be a further indication of members’ sentiment when the result of 
the deputy leadership contest is announced on Thursday morning. The position 
was vacated by Dundee East MP Stewart Hosie in May, following the revelation of 
his extra-marital affair, and former Labour council leader Tommy Sheppard has 
emerged as anunexpectedly popular grassroots challenger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/02/snp-nicola-sturgeon-to-hold-away-day-for-all-mps-to-bolster-case-for-independence>
 to party stalwart and Westminster leader Angus Robertson.


Meanwhile, veterans of Scotland’s independence movement are staging an 
alternative fringe festival to run concurrently with the SNP’s conference in 
Glasgow this week. This follows complaints that the increasingly corporate 
character of the main conference is pricing out the SNP’s own grassroots 
supporters, as well as curtailing much-needed debate about the case for 
independence in advance of a potential second referendum.

Led by the thinktank Commonweal – which emerged out of the 2014 independence 
campaign and supported by Compass, the New Economics Foundation and Oxfam 
Scotland – IdeaSpace is based at the Glasgow Science Centre, a short walk 
across the river from the main conference venue, similar toMomentum’s 
alternative festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/18/momentum-jeremy-corbyn-john-mcdonnell-labour-party-conference-rival>
 at Labour’s conference in Liverpool two weeks ago.

Writer, broadcaster and land reform campaigner Lesley Riddoch was one of the 
first to draw attention 
<http://www.thenational.scot/comment/lesley-riddoch-snp-intransigence-is-pricing-their-own-grassroots-out-of-access-to-the-party.21835>
 to the problem of grassroots activists “who can’t afford an observer’s pass 
let alone an official stall”, with the pricing of the cheapest, single stall 
rising to nearly £3,000 and some charities refusing to take tables because of 
the high cost.

The SNP came in for particular criticism earlier this week after it emerged 
that Heathrow would operate a “private, airport-style lounge” in a premium site 
in the main conference auditorium, just days after the SNP governmentannounced 
its support for a third runway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/10/heathrow-third-runway-expansion-scottish-government>
.

Riddoch said: “People have got used to the fact that the SNP conference is not 
where those debates happen, and that it has sadly become like any other party 
conference with only corporates and serious charities able to exhibit. People 
are now using organisations like Commonweal and Women for Independence [another 
2014 campaign group that has continued successfully post-referendum] to have 
the open discussions they can’t have in the SNP.”

While IdeaSpace organiser Robin McAlpine insists that the event has grown 
organically and is “not about us taking off in a huff”, he hopes that the free 
panel discussions, involving around 40 different organisations, will attract 
non-SNP members to Glasgow as well as nearby conference delegates, despite 
suggestions that elected SNP representatives have been warned off attending.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fnicola-sturgeon-to-reach-out-to-other-parties-to-fight-hard-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5a1822c017bb525a5029b79eaca1e380132292a%2F0_41_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nicola%20Sturgeon%20to%20reach%20out%20to%20other%20parties%20to%20fight%20hard%20Brexit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fnicola-sturgeon-to-reach-out-to-other-parties-to-fight-hard-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nicola%20Sturgeon%20to%20reach%20out%20to%20other%20parties%20to%20fight%20hard%20Brexit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fnicola-sturgeon-to-reach-out-to-other-parties-to-fight-hard-brexit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5a1822c017bb525a5029b79eaca1e380132292a%2F0_41_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Many feel the SNP have not spent enough time since the Scottish referendum 
figuring out why the yes campaign lost. Photograph: Dylan Martinez/Reuters 
He notes the lack of discussion on the official fringe of key hurdles for the 
independence argument, such as what currency to use, and what he describes as 
the “dissent and unhappiness” of the rank and file about the SNP leadership’s 
intransigence over plans for a second referendum. “After Sturgeon described a 
second independence referendum as ‘highly likely’ immediately after the Brexit 
vote, the problem is that there is no agreement on strategy and no forum to 
discuss it.”

Nevertheless, on Friday a resolution in the main SNP conference hall will 
directly address whether Scotland should prepare for a second independence 
referendum “if no viable solution to safeguard our membership [of the EU] as 
part of the UK exists”.

Tabled by former Yes Scotland advisor and SNP Holyrood candidate Toni 
Giugliano, it is reflective of those very concerns noted by McApline that the 
SNP have been distracted by electioneering since the last referendum and have 
yet to conduct a sufficiently in-depth postmortem on why things went wrong for 
the movement in September 2014.

“We can’t start talking to people about a second referendum before we’ve 
discussed, for example, currency, pensions, research funding and other issues 
that we did not get right,” says Giugliano.


He also argues that, following Theresa May’s comments at the Conservative 
party conference last week, when she appeared to have closed off the 
possibility of Scotland staying in Europe as part of the UK, “she is putting 
Scotland in a position where we have no choice but to prepare for a second 
referendum, which would have to take place before the UK leaves the EU, ahead 
of the 2019 European parliament elections.”

This view is certainly not universal inside the SNP. Tommy Sheppard, recently 
warned that many activists – typically portrayed as champing at the bit for a 
second referendum – were worried about linking a new independence campaign to 
Brexit and wanted the case for leaving the UK to be “tested to destruction” 
before another poll was called.

Elsewhere, a number of senior MSPs – including the former health secretary 
Alex Neil - have been pressing the Scottish government to maximise the “Brexit 
dividend” for Holyrood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/04/scotland-gain-greater-independence-brexit-holyrood-told>
 but stopping short of chancing a second vote while public support continues to 
fall short of the consistent 60% that Sturgeon herself decreed necessary for 
another referendum.

Indeed, Sturgeon’s introductory call for a coalition may be best reflected 
across the river at IdeaSpace, where the Compass chair, Neal Lawson, and former 
Scottish government justice minister Kenny MacAskill will hosts a discussion of 
how progressive parties can work together, while another event focuses on the 
potential of a Scottish National Investment Bank, most recently championed by 
the Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn.

Key conference highlights

Thursday 10.30am Election of deputy leader of SNP announced

Thursday 10.45am Nicola Sturgeon makes her welcome to conference

Friday afternoon Main hall debates resolution on whether Scotland should 
prepare for a second independence referendum “if no viable solution to 
safeguard our membership [of the EU] as part of the UK exists”.

Saturday 3.15 Nicola Sturgeon makes her address to conference 
 