
The Nigerian president, Muhammadu Buhari, has said the Boko Haram 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/boko-haram> leader Abubakar Shekau is 
wounded in his first comments on military claims that the jihadi leader was 
injured in an attack.


Nigeria’s armed forces said on Tuesday that Shekau had been wounded in an 
airstrike on Boko Haram’s forest stronghold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/23/nigeria-says-boko-haram-commanders-killed-airstrike-wounded-abubakar-shekau>
, but released no further statement or evidence confirming his condition.

“We learned that in an airstrike by the Nigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria> air force he was wounded,” Buhari 
said in a statement from Nairobi, where he is attending a development 
conference.

“Indeed their top hierarchy and lower cadre have a problem,” Buhari said. 
“They are not holding any territory and they have split into small groups 
attacking soft targets.”

Buhari said Shekau had been “edged out” of the group, adding credence to 
claims thatIsis-appointed Abu Musab al-Barnawi is now in charge of the 
insurgency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/05/isis-tries-to-impose-new-leader-on-boko-haram-in-nigeria>
.

Signs of a power struggle in the top echelons of the jihadi group appeared 
earlier this month when Shekau released a video denying he had been ousted.

Barnawi is believed to be the 22-year-old son of the Boko Haram founder 
Mohammed Yusuf, and was announced as the group’s leader by Isis this month.

Buhari made his remarks from Nairobi this weekend where he is attending the 
Tokyo International Conference on African Development, a summit designed to 
boost ties betweenAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> and Japan.

The president also said he was “prepared to talk to bona fide leaders of Boko 
Haram” to negotiate the release of218 Chibok girls captured by the militants in 
2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/14/boko-haram-releases-video-chibok-schoolgirls-nigeria>
.

Boko Haram has ravaged north-east Nigeria in its quest to create a 
fundamentalist Islamic state, killing more than 20,000 people and displacing 
2.6 million from their homes.

Turning to another major security concern in Nigeria, Buhari gave a warning to 
militants sabotaging oil infrastructure in the southern swamplands of the Niger 
delta.

“We will deal with them as we dealt with Boko Haram if they refuse to talk to 
us,” Buhari said.

The country’s petroleum minister has said that as a result of the ongoing 
attacks Nigeria’s oil output has dropped 23% from last year to 1.5m barrels a 
day, according to Bloomberg News.

Groups including the Niger Delta Avengers are demanding a greater share of oil 
revenues, political autonomy, and infrastructure development in the southern 
riverlands where despite massive oil wealth people still struggle to access 
basic healthcare and education.

Buhari said his government was in talks with the some of the militants but 
said there was no “ceasefire”, despite an announcement by the Avengers last 
week.
 