
Less well-off couples trying to separate through divorce proceedings are 
facing a “perfect storm” of court closures, legal aid cuts and bureaucratic 
breakdown, says Nigel Shepherd, the newly appointed head of the family law 
organisationResolution <http://www.resolution.org.uk/>, a 6,500-strong 
association which represents solicitors, barristers and other professionals 
involved in family law.

Legal aid is a national institution like the NHS, so why is it not properly 
funded? | John Briant
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/09/legal-aid-nhs-criminals-lawyers-ben-butler-jennie-gray>
Shepherd, 60, who has taken up the post for the second time in his career, has 
already written to the new justice secretary,Liz Truss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/nov/05/barristers-urge-liz-truss-to-condemn-attacks-on-brexit-ruling-judges>
, pressing her department to carry out a review of the impact of thewithdrawal 
of legal aid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/oct/11/legal-aid-cuts-two-tier-system-amnesty-international-law-justice>
 in most family cases.

Unless individuals can demonstrate they are victims of domestic violence, 
courtroom representation is no longer available under the Legal Aid, Sentencing 
and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012.Advice “deserts”, 
<https://www.lawgazette.co.uk/law/shocking-infographic-highlights-housing-advice-deserts/5056873.fullarticle>
 areas where there are few agencies or solicitors able to give help, have begun 
to emerge. For poorer individuals who cannot afford a solicitor, the withdrawal 
of legal aid for family courts has caused a surge in litigants in person, whose 
claims, if pursued, take far longer to resolve, according to Shepherd. As many 
as80% of all family law cases 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201415/cmselect/cmjust/311/31109.htm>
 may now involve one party who is unrepresented.

“London has a real problem if you want a high court hearing [for divorce 
cases],” Shepherd says. “You may have to wait nine months to a year.” 
This means that custody battles are more protracted. Online divorce, being 
developed by the judiciary, is not yet available.

Local authority funding cuts have also made it harder to obtain reports from 
social workers, Shepherd says, pointing to the warning last month by Sir James 
Munby, who heads the family division, that family courts are facing a “clear 
and imminent crisis”because of the increase in childcare cases 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/sep/20/family-courts-face-imminent-crisis-over-huge-rise-in-care-applications>
.

London has a real problem if you want a high court hearing. You may have to 
wait a year

The Ministry of Justice’s austerity programme of court closures has 
placed further strains on access to justice. “There’s pressure from court 
closures; 86 in the latest slice. It means people have to travel a lot further 
– difficult for those who use public transport,” says Shepherd. Clients from 
parts of rural Cambridgeshire, who have to travel to Peterborough family court, 
for example, already have a two-hour journey each way involving several buses 
and a train, according to Resolution.

And the administration of family cases is also feeling the strain. Regional 
legal centres such as Bury St Edmunds, which is supposed to coordinate family 
cases across the south-east, are difficult to reach by phone, according to 
Shepherd. “One of my friends spent six hours trying to get through. It’s very 
frustrating. Service in the south is poor.”

Shepherd, who has worked as a family solicitor since 1981 and first chaired 
Resolution in the early 1990s, believes two changes would greatly improve 
outcomes for poorer households going through family breakdown:no-fault divorce 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/No-fault_divorce> and greater legal rights for 
cohabiting couples.

“Our key campaign is no-fault divorce,” he says.

There are around 110,000 divorces a year in England and Wales. No-fault 
divorce might reduce pressure on the courts, says Shepherd, since a lot of his 
work involves stripping away misconceptions divorcing couples hold, such as the 
belief that they are entitled to a larger share of assets if they can prove 
their partner was to blame for the breakdown.If separating partners realised 
they did not need to allocate blame, he believes, the process could be 
simplified. Although regulations allowing couples to dissolve unsuccessful 
marriages by mutual agreement without blame were included in the 1996Family 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/family> Law Act, they never came 
fully into force. In the face of a hostile Daily Mail campaign warning that 
they would undermine family life, Tony Blair’s Labour government decided not to 
proceed with changes that would have allowed couples to part after 12 months 
without having to apportion culpability. The powers were finally repealed by 
the 2014 Children and Families Act.

But as far as Shepherd is concerned, no-fault divorce is back on the political 
agenda. In September, the House of Commons Library produced a detailedbriefing 
paper <http://researchbriefings.parliament.uk/ResearchBriefing/Summary/SN01409> 
on the arguments surrounding the initiative and last year, Richard Bacon, the 
Conservative MP for South Norfolk, introduced a private member’s bill on no 
fault divorce.“None of the evidence suggests that when you change the law you 
get more divorces – other than a temporary blip when it’s first introduced.” 
Many countries allow no-fault divorce, including Spain and Scotland. But in 
England and Wales, unreasonable behaviour and adultery still account for more 
than two thirds of all divorces, as these are the main legal grounds that allow 
people to part straight away without waiting two years to get a mutually agreed 
divorce.

Shepherd believes no-fault divorces should be available after six months by 
mutual agreement. “There would have to be six months of separation,” Shepherd 
said. “We don’t want people to be able to wake up and get divorced. We are not 
anti-marriage, but we are anti-unnecessary conflict.

“At the moment it’s a blame game. [Lawyers] get together to talk about what we 
are going to put in the divorce petition. I would like to get rid of 
unreasonable behaviour, adultery and desertion. All other government policy is 
about trying to take the heat out of the situation.” Resolution’s other main 
campaign is extending legal rights to cohabiting couples, of which there are now
3.3 million in the UK, more than double the number 20 years ago 
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/families/bulletins/familiesandhouseholds/2016#main-points>
. A couple can live together for 30 years, bringing up children, but if they 
are not married there is nothing to protect against hardship if the 
relationship collapses and only one of the couple, usually the man, owns the 
house and assets.

“We think [partners] ought to be able to claim [support and assets] after two 
years of cohabitation, or earlier if they have children,” Shepherd says. 
“Forty-seven per cent of the population [mistakenly] still believes there’s 
such a thing as ‘common law marriage’ [to give them rights].

“For some people it’s a complete disaster. It’s particularly hard on women who 
have given up their career to raise children,” he argues. “Scotland protects 
cohabitees legally. At the last count in 2013,57% of MPs believe the law needs 
to be reformed <http://www.resolution.org.uk/news-list.asp?page_id=228&n_id=207>
.” Resolution is convening a debate tomorrow on how to improve cohabitation 
rights and a meeting in parliament at the end of the month.

Brexit is for many a traumatic divorce from the idea of the European Union. 
According to Shepherd, it is also fuelling marital breakdown. “We have 
come across a number of families in this country [who are splitting up] because 
one of them voted differently in the referendum,” he says.

“I suspect it was unlikely to have been the sole reason [for divorce], but we 
have heard of cases from a number of our members. It was a really 
divisive campaign. It pushed some couples [over the edge]. It was the last 
straw that made them think ‘we are really incompatible’.” Brexit is proving a 
challenge to the lawyers, too. “We prepare quite a lot of prenuptial agreements 
under the European system but we can’t say now where we would like issues 
determined,” Shepherd says. “We don’t know what marriage regulations will 
exist.”

In the end, much of the acrimony over divorce could be alleviated with greater 
clarity over financial settlements. Publishing some rough financial guidelines 
on the amounts of maintenance to be expected might help, he suggests.

“The problem is that the case law is up in the air; judges in southern England 
are more generous than those in the north when making maintenance awards. We 
[in London] are a generous jurisdiction for people seeking money. We are still 
the divorce capital of the world. There’s a battle between high court judges, 
so one judge may be at one end of the spectrum and one at the other. You can’t 
say either.”

Curriculum vitae

Age 60.

Lives Cheshire.

Family Married with two daughters.

Education Brentwood school, Brentwood, Essex; Manchester Polytechnic (as it 
then was), BA, law with German.

Career 2016-present: national head of family law, Mills & Reeve; 2016-18: 
chair, Resolution; 2008-present: family law specialist, Mills & Reeve; 
2006-present: fellow of the International Academy of Family Lawyers (worldwide 
group of peer-elected family law specialists); 1981-2007: family law specialist 
in a number of firms; 1995-97 chair, Resolution; 1991: elected to national 
committee of Resolution and chair of what is now the association’s dispute 
resolution committee; late 1980s: chair, Resolution’s north-west regional 
group; 1981: qualified as a solicitor.

Interests Family; football; tennis; golf; music; Twitter

Modern divorce: the new rules of splitting up
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/aug/23/divorce-new-rules-splitting-up-amicable-marriage-breakup> 