
When Nigel Farage used a radio interview 
<http://www.lbc.co.uk/radio/presenters/nick-ferrari/farage-brendan-cox-knows-more-about-extremism/>
 this week topublicly attack Brendan Cox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/20/nigel-farage-accuses-jo-cox-widower-brendan-cox-of-supporting-extremism>
, husband of the murdered Labour MP Jo Cox,he lashed out in the most 
unbelievable way 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/22/hope-not-hate-founder-attacks-nigel-farage-over-brendan-cox-remarks>
. Just six months after Jo was murdered by neo-NaziThomas Mair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/thomas-mair-slow-burning-hatred-led-to-jo-cox-murder>
, the former Ukip leader attempted to pin the extremist tag on Brendan Cox 
because of his association with the organisation I head, Hope not Hate.

Even by his standards, Farage’s comments were disgustingly offensive. Many 
were outraged 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/wires/pa/article-4051600/Farage-fire-linking-Jo-Cox-widower-extremists.html>
, not just us.

After we demanded an apology from Farage, his most loyal supporters leapt in. 
Arron Banks,the millionaire businessman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/15/panama-papers-reveal-offshore-secrets-arron-banks-brexit-backer>
 who bankrolled Ukip and the Leave.EU campaign,took to Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/Arron_banks/status/811233164530225156> to call us a “vile 
organisation”. He outrageously claimed we had “organised a mass confrontation” 
against Farage.

Raheem Kassam, the British editor of the US far-right website Breitbart, and 
Farage’s former chief strategist, began crowdfunding to finance research on us. 
We have also received thousands of abusive and threatening tweets, Facebook 
posts, emails and phone calls.

This is how these people operate. They attempt to vilify, abuse and bully 
their opponents into silence. Whether it is Farage in the UK or Donald Trump in 
the US, they think they can demonise their opponents without any thought for 
the damage it causes or the anger and hatred it incites in their supporters. 
And it’s a David v Goliath struggle, where the other side portrays itself as 
the underdog yet in reality is backed by an online army and millionaires in the 
wings.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fnigel-farage-hope-not-hate-brendan-cox%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b933d5faa243ba25a913a89f3e9a41211cfe169%2F0_43_4620_2773%2F4620.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nigel%20Farage%20has%20attacked%20us%20at%20Hope%20not%20Hate.%20It%E2%80%99s%20time%20to%20draw%20a%20line%20in%20the%20sand%20%7C%20Nick%20Lowles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fnigel-farage-hope-not-hate-brendan-cox%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nigel%20Farage%20has%20attacked%20us%20at%20Hope%20not%20Hate.%20It%E2%80%99s%20time%20to%20draw%20a%20line%20in%20the%20sand%20%7C%20Nick%20Lowles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fnigel-farage-hope-not-hate-brendan-cox%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b933d5faa243ba25a913a89f3e9a41211cfe169%2F0_43_4620_2773%2F4620.jpg>
 ‘Whether it is Farage in the UK or Donald Trump in the US, they think they can 
demonise their opponents without any thought for the damage it causes.’ 
Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian 
Farage dislikes us because we have shone the spotlight on Ukip and played a 
part in stopping him getting elected in Thanet. He and other Ukip elected 
officials and party members responded by calling us names and abusing us.

We began targeting Ukip in 2013 as it started adopting a more anti-immigrant 
stance, specifically whipping up scare stories with claims that 29 million 
Bulgarians and Romanians would come to the UK. Events since have proved we were 
right to do so.

When we tried to meet the party leaders to discuss the issue of its growing 
extremism, they failed to turn up to their own meeting. Not only that, the 
party’s conference thenpassed a motion 
<http://www.hopenothate.org.uk/blog/nick/don-t-make-us-carry-the-can-for-your-party-s-racism-nigel-3715>
 banning any Ukip member from supporting Hope not Hate.

Over the next few years we exposed their racist and homophobic councillors 
<http://www.hopenothate.org.uk/ukip/oxfordshire-ukip-candidate-exposed-as-racist-homophobe-4357>
, the strongly anti-Muslim views of some of its MEPs,as well as links to 
European far-right parties 
<http://www.hopenothate.org.uk/ukip/ukip-co-organises-freedom-award-for-european-extreme-right-5054>
, and highlighted the lies and exaggerations in its election leaflets.

Of course Farage and supporters such as Kassam conveniently ignore the 
community campaigning we carry out across the UK. We rely on a network of 
thousands of volunteers up and down the country, bringing together tens of 
thousands of people to celebrate a shared sense of community across apparent 
cultural and religious divides.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fnigel-farage-hope-not-hate-brendan-cox%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b490320fb671ec52be32136c2004d27212ed7c4%2F0_175_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nigel%20Farage%20has%20attacked%20us%20at%20Hope%20not%20Hate.%20It%E2%80%99s%20time%20to%20draw%20a%20line%20in%20the%20sand%20%7C%20Nick%20Lowles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fnigel-farage-hope-not-hate-brendan-cox%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nigel%20Farage%20has%20attacked%20us%20at%20Hope%20not%20Hate.%20It%E2%80%99s%20time%20to%20draw%20a%20line%20in%20the%20sand%20%7C%20Nick%20Lowles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fnigel-farage-hope-not-hate-brendan-cox%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b490320fb671ec52be32136c2004d27212ed7c4%2F0_175_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 ‘Raheem Kassam, the British editor of the US far-right website Breitbart, and 
Farage’s former chief strategist, began crowdfunding to finance research on 
Hope not Hate.’ Photograph: Neil Hall/Reuters 
From family fun days, picnics, food festivals and encounters between those of 
different faiths and none, we have enabled people to celebrate all that they 
have in common. Part of this work was our national#MoreInCommon 
<http://www.hopenothate.org.uk/more-in-common> campaign, launched in response 
to the murder of Jo Cox (with the support of her family) and to counter some of 
the negativity surrounding the EU referendum campaigning. We hosted85 events 
<https://www.facebook.com/hope.n.hate/videos/10153664788541854/> across the UK, 
bringing communities together.

Earlier this year we stood fast 
<http://www.hopenothate.org.uk/educational/blog/birmingham-is-choosing-hope-4735>
 with Birmingham’s Muslim community, creating a unity pledge with all the 
city’s main leaders, in response to a threatened far-right demo by Pegida UK.

Last summer we did the same with the Jewish and other community members in 
Golders Green, north London,dressing the entire area in gold and green ribbons 
<https://www.thejc.com/news/uk-news/golders-green-together-volunteers-mobilise-to-counter-extremist-rally-1.67241>
, before a neo-Nazi march. In Merthyr Tydfil we organised a football match 
between the local team and Portuguese and Polish migrants as a bridge-building 
exercise.

As we have seen so graphically this year, the lies of the populist right have 
consequences. They toxify debate, bully people into silence and whip up an 
angry base. That’s why it’s time to draw a line in the sand, and why we have 
demanded a retraction and an apology fromNigel Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nigel-farage>. He cannot keep getting 
away unchallenged with his lies any longer.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Ffarage-accuses-brendan-cox-of-backing-extremist-groups-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Farage%20accuses%20Brendan%20Cox%20of%20backing%20extremist%20groups%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Ffarage-accuses-brendan-cox-of-backing-extremist-groups-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Farage%20accuses%20Brendan%20Cox%20of%20backing%20extremist%20groups%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Ffarage-accuses-brendan-cox-of-backing-extremist-groups-video&media=>
Farage accuses Brendan Cox of backing extremist groups 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/dec/20/farage-accuses-brendan-cox-of-backing-extremist-groups-video>
But this issue is far bigger than just the words Farage used against us. It is 
about the politics of hope and hate. As Edmund Burke wrote: “The only thing 
necessary for the triumph of evil is for good men to do nothing.” So if you are 
horrified by the rise of the far right, whether that be rightwing populists or 
more traditional fascists, then we urge everyone to do what they can to support 
those,like ourselves 
<https://donate.hopenothate.org.uk/page/contribute/farage-to-court>, who want 
to protect communities from further division and hatred.
 