
The Nigerian air force claims to have killed several Boko Haram 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/boko-haram> commanders and possibly its 
leader, Abubakar Shekau, in an “unprecedented and spectacular air raid”.

The announcement came as the US secretary of state, John Kerry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/john-kerry>, arrived in Nigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria> and pledged his country’s support 
in fighting the extremist group, which has killed more than 20,000 people and 
displaced millions.

The Chibok girls are just one part of the ordeal of women in north-east 
Nigeria | Chitra Nagarajan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/18/chibok-abducted-girls-women-north-east-nigeria-boko-haram-video>
Sani Usman, an army spokesman, said the strike was launched “while the 
terrorists were performing Friday rituals” in a village in the Sambisa forest. 
The forest has been Boko Haram’s chief hideout for several years, and is 
believed to be where it is keeping agroup of girls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/14/anniversary-boko-haram-kidnapping-chibok-schoolgirls>
 kidnapped from a dormitory in Chibok in 2014, an incident that sparked outrage 
worldwide.

Shekau, who has recently been at the centre of a power struggle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/05/isis-tries-to-impose-new-leader-on-boko-haram-in-nigeria>
 within Boko Haram, was “believed to be fatally wounded on his shoulders”, 
Usman said, without giving further details. The account leaves unanswered 
questions of how the military knew the wounds were fatal, and how it could be 
so specific about a shoulder injury when the attack came from the air.

In a speech in the north-western city of Sokoto, Kerry did not mention Shekau 
or the military commanders supposedly killed, and cautioned against the 
military cracking down on “everyone and anyone” in the wake of militant attacks.

Boko Haram <https://www.theguardian.com/world/boko-haram> transforms “the most 
vulnerable among us into killers”, Kerry said, describing how in its quest to 
destroy knowledge, the group destroys schools, burns books, murders teachers 
and kidnaps students. “Make no mistake, we do not have to be prisoners of these 
extremists, they can be eliminated,” Kerry said. “We have to strike at the root 
of violent extremism. Nations need to do more than just denounce dead-end 
ideologies. There are far too many who join the ranks of these organisations 
because they have trouble finding meaning in their lives.”

Under Nigeria’s former president Goodluck Jonathan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2015/jan/18/president-nigeria-goodluck-jonathan-poor-boy-to-king-profile>
, the US blocked arms sales and withdrew training of its forces, largely 
because of corruption and human rights abuses by the military. However, since 
May this year, Washington has been poised to sell the west African country 12 
light attack aircraft, a deal that is awaiting approval in Congress.

Kerry praised the efforts of Nigeria’s armed forces, which have undergone 
reform under the new president,Muhammadu Buhari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/muhammadu-buhari>, who swept to power last 
year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/31/opposition-candidate-muhammadu-buhari-wins-nigerian-election>
 on a ticket to tackle endemic corruption. “There’s no question in recent 
months that important progress has been made. Nigeria and its neighbours are 
systemically degrading Boko Haram’s capabilities,” Kerry said.

Tuesday’s announcement by the air force is at least the fourth time that 
Shekau has been declared killed. In 2009 Nigerian security forces said they had 
killed him along with the group’s founder, Mohammed Yusuf, and 1,000 other 
members of Boko Haram. In September 2014 both the Nigerian army and the 
Cameroonian army claimed to have killed him. That October, Shekau appeared in a 
video mocking these claims.

Shekau appeared to have weathered an attack of a different sort in recent 
weeks: to his authority.Islamic State <https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis>, 
to which Boko Haram pledged allegiance last year, declared he was no longer the 
leader of their west African franchise, putting a former spokesman in his 
place. According to analysts, Isis had grown weary of Shekau’s attacks on 
mosques and Muslim markets.


Shekau, however, apparently rejected his dismissal in an audio message. Later, 
a video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/14/boko-haram-releases-video-chibok-schoolgirls-nigeria>
 believed to have come from him depicted about 50 of the kidnapped girls, one 
of whom was made to speak to the camera, saying several of them had been killed 
in military airstrikes and asking the government to negotiate their release.

 