
Ahead of the release of Nine Inch Nails' new album Hesitation Marks this 
September, we asked readers to help compile a playlist of ten tracks for people 
who have never listened to the band before. Here's what they came up with – 
listen viathe YouTube playlist 
<http://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLjjJcJNDIhap1rl3S_wotK4Aj37RgpTNs&feature=mh_lolz>
, or click each song title to view the individual track.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fvideoseries%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fvideoseries%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fvideoseries%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
1. The Hand that Feeds <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xwhBRJStz7w>

One of Nine Inch Nails' most polished pop records – a perfect fusion of dance 
beats and fuzz-laden guitars.Tripmywire says 
<https://twitter.com/tripmywire/status/349506733741318144> "It's catchy, 
confident and certain to make a beginner dance!"

2. Head Like A Hole <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ao-Sahfy7Hg>

The opening track on debut album Pretty Hate Machine is a favourite in rock 
clubs the world over.WarHoleRadTimes loves 
<https://twitter.com/WarHoleRadTimes/status/349510342608551936> the song's 
"skyscraper-sized angst, pulsing electro rhythms, and eardrum shattering noise."

3. Closer <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PTFwQP86BRs>

For jsinkersole <https://twitter.com/jsinkersole/status/349518759402283008>, 
Closer is "sexy as hell and slightly sinister." With its unabashedly explicit 
lyrics, it's probably not the best song to find yourself singing at work.

4. March of the Pigs <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PL72Tyxe1rc>

From second album The Downward Spiral, March of the Pigs brings together 
industrial rock influences and whimsical jazz piano.Frightened Rabbit say 
<https://twitter.com/FRabbits/status/349507655645151232> it encapsulates "both 
sides of NIN in one, brutal and tender."

5. La Mer <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nx-iq6Qwu_8>

Melodic and frenetically detailed, for @sukeyyy 
<https://twitter.com/sukeyyy/status/349515867266088960>, "it's got to be their 
ultimate instrumental, showing off Trent's less abrasive, more relaxed and 
groovy side."

6. Wish <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kuoFiIFkdAA>

From the band's Broken EP, its unflinching sonic barrage makes it one of their 
heaviest tracks.BluetapesUK says 
<https://twitter.com/BlueTapesUK/status/349507921584984066> "it sounds like 
computers playing Ace of Spades."

7. Something I Can Never Have <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l83F3KKUKig>

With its haunting piano and raw vocals, this is one of the stand-out tracks of 
their debut album.For ArchieWhit 
<https://twitter.com/archiewhit/status/349506198158049280>, it captures the 
very essence of the band: "beauty, sadness, machines, anger."

8. The Perfect Drug <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sSLqeZzTU8I>

Originally feature on the soundtrack to David Lynch's Lost Highway, The 
Perfect Drug saw Reznor push the drum and bass genre to its limits – it also 
has one of the coolest music videos of the 90s.n_mcguinness 
<https://twitter.com/n_mcguinness/status/349517967572217856> says it 
"represents the length and breadth of NIN."

9. We're In This Together <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P9BfvPjsXXw>

It's a track that crackles and broods before bursting out into one of the 
biggest rock choruses ever written – it's a song that needs to be played loud.
Eddasaurus says <https://twitter.com/eddasaurus/status/349508569302958083> it's 
"accessible, but unconventional."

10. Hurt <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PP2Dgftin6M>

Many people think that this song was written by Johnny Cash – many people are 
wrong. Hurt shows Reznor's song-writing at its peak. ForMaarten Schermer 
<https://www.facebook.com/musicguardian>, "Hurt has a great balance between 
harshness and beauty, something it seems Reznor has consistently strived for. 
And it's one hell of a song."
 