
Thirty-year-old Metal Hammer magazine and stablemates Classic Rock and Prog 
have been given a new lease of life after being saved from closure byFuture 
Publishing <https://www.theguardian.com/media/future-publishing>, owner of 
titles including Guitarist, Total Film and T3.

The titles, along with the Golden Gods Awards and the Classic Rock Awards, 
suspended publication and faced closure after owner TeamRock, which fashioned 
itself as the self-styled “home of rock and metal” <http://teamrock.com/>, went 
into administration in December.

The news, which put more than 70 staff out of work with no severance pay just 
days before Christmas, prompted British bandOrange Goblin to launch a 
fundraising drive on Just Giving that made more than £70,000 for staff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/23/campaign-70000-pounds-for-team-rock-staff-metal-hammer-classic-rock>
.

The band also held a fundraising gig at the Black Heart in Camden, London, on 
5 January.


Now Future Publishing, the publicly listed digital, events and magazine 
company, has struck a bargain basement deal to buy the magazines, events and 
licence for the Team Rock digital radio service for £800,000.

It was Future, which owns titles including Total Guitarist, Guitarist and 
Rhythm magazines and online site musicradar, thatsold the titles to TeamRock 
for £10.2m in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/apr/02/ex-gmg-radio-chief-buys-future-publishing-titles>
.

“The acquisition of these classic rock brands with their associated magazines, 
events and websites marks a further step in our buy and build strategy,” said 
Zillah Byng-Thorne, chief executive of Future.

“It further reinforces our creation of a leading global specialist media 
platform with data at its heart, which we are monetising through diversified 
revenue streams. We look forward to developing further these iconic and 
much-loved brands and to continuing to serve their communities of dedicated 
enthusiasts around the world.”

Metal <https://www.theguardian.com/music/metal> Hammer magazine, which uses 
the strapline “Defending the Faith”, launched in 1986 and sold about 20,000 
copies a month according to the last officially audited figures in 2015.

Classic Rock, launched in 1998, sold an average of 51,000 copies per issue in 
2015 and Prog, launched in 2009 to champion progressive rock music, has not had 
an audited sales figure released in years.

In May, Future acquired Blaze 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/11/total-film-future-blaze>, the 
parent company of events including the London Drum Show and the London Bass 
Guitar Show, as well as magazine including Acoustic, Bass Drummer and iDrum.

Only a handful of staff have been guaranteed jobs in the transition of the 
TeamRock business, handled by administrators FRP Advisory, although ongoing 
negotiations could allow more move to Future.

The call to help the affected staff attracted support from rock fans from all 
over the world, with donations from musicians such as Avenged Sevenfold, Black 
Stone Cherry, Asking Alexandra and Tesseract, while musician Frank Turner set 
up an auction to raise money for affected staff.

In recent years, Future shed almost 500 staff to reverse losses running to £35m
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/nov/27/publisher-future-slashes-losses-and-raises-33m-to-invest-in-digital>
 and implement a new strategy focussed on its biggest magazine brands, digital 
and events.

In June, Future acquired Imagine Publishing, owner of titles including All 
About History, Digital Photographer and World of Animals for £14.2m.

In 2014, Future sold off its 17 craft and bike titles to Immediate Media, the 
publisher of the Radio Times and Top Gear,in a £24m deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/may/29/future-publishing-cut-jobs-magazines>
.
 