
Part 1 of the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act, for which 
the Tories and the Lib Dems were equally responsible, was arguably the worst 
piece of legislation in the coalition years, and not just for family law (
Letters, 28 December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/dec/27/abuse-and-secrecy-in-the-family-courts>
). Social welfare law was almost destroyed too. It is ironic that but for a 
tied vote in the Lords, the government would have been forced to modify its 
legal aid domestic violence policy. I agree that the justice select committee 
report was woefully uncritical. Even now the government refuses to review this 
shocking mistake.
Willy Bach
Labour shadow justice minister in the Lords 2010- 12, House of Lords

• I have a great deal of sympathy with your new reader Don Abbey and his 
bafflement as to why your TV listings only begin at 6pm (Letters, 27 December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/26/whats-the-right-word-for-donald-trump>
). He will soon learn that your readers have no capacity to watch daytime TV 
due to the demands of your supposedly “Quick Crossword”, which regularly takes 
up to eight man hours to complete. Watching Homes under the Hammer is something 
of a rare treat.
Jane Moth 
Snettisham, Norfolk

• Kit Hill asks if Trump’s enthusiasm for a nuclear arsenal makes him a 
terrorist (Letters, 28 December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/26/whats-the-right-word-for-donald-trump>
)? Has he forgotten the standard definition of a terrorist: someone with a bomb 
but without an air force?
George Schlesinger
Durham

• Why is there only one Competition and Markets Authority (Letters, 28 December
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/27/gender-balanced-in-comedy-is-so-1950s>
)? The same reason there’s only one word for thesaurus.
Judith Flanders
London

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 