
Banks don’t very often play a starring role in protests, unless they are 
providing the windows to be smashed, the Mammonic effigies to be burned, or the 
slick corporate infrastructure from which banners may be strung. Which makes 
the headquarters ofHSBC Bank in Hong Kong 
<http://www.fosterandpartners.com/projects/hongkong-and-shanghai-bank-headquarters/>
, Norman Foster’s £700m oil rig of colonial capital, an unusual case.

For a year from 15 October 2011, the sloping granite plaza beneath the tower’s 
bulging glass belly sheltered the ad hoc tent-and-cardboard city of the Occupy 
movement. The protesters were fighting not against the tyranny of capitalism, 
but to preserve some of the very values that this imperial bastion represents: 
namely democratic rule, threatened by the coming transfer of power to the 
Chinese state.

When the board of the Hong Kong <https://www.theguardian.com/world/hong-kong> 
and Shanghai Banking Corporation came together in the mid-1970s to formulate 
plans for their new headquarters, the symbolic political power of their 
building was similarly at the forefront of their minds. In the run-up to the 
1997 handover of sovereignty to China, which was beginning to cause alarm 
amongst the more panicky of the island’s residents, the bank was keen to plant 
a conspicuous stake in the future of the territory. Whatever Chinese communist 
rule would bring, HSBC’s new building had to be designed to show that 
capitalism would have a prominent role. It must be a beacon of reassurance, 
proving that there was no justification for the flight of either people or 
capital from the fragrant harbour.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F28%2Fhong-kong-hsbc-hq-bank-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F28%2F1432805079004%2F440f2d4f-c6c5-4289-a789-0fab77100d1d-2060x1374.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Norman%20Foster's%20Hong%20Kong%20HSBC%20headquarters%20tore%20up%20the%20rule%20book%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2045&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F28%2Fhong-kong-hsbc-hq-bank-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Norman%20Foster%27s%20Hong%20Kong%20HSBC%20headquarters%20tore%20up%20the%20rule%20book%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2045&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F28%2Fhong-kong-hsbc-hq-bank-history-cities-50-buildings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F28%2F1432805079004%2F440f2d4f-c6c5-4289-a789-0fab77100d1d-2060x1374.jpeg>
 When it was completed in 1986, the HSBC HQ was the most expensive building in 
the world. Photograph: Bloomberg/Getty Images 
Until that point, major investments in private physical infrastructure had not 
been considered a priority in Hong Kong. It had always been seen as a 
high-octane pleasure island, a place to make as much money as quickly as 
possible, while keeping a keen eye on the escape route. But the coming handover 
provided the pressure for architectural ambitions to be crystallised. HSBC, 
which was practically an arm of government, issuing currency notes and shaping 
economic policy, decided they needed “the best bank building in the world 
<http://www.fosterandpartners.com/projects/hongkong-and-shanghai-bank-headquarters/>
” – an office tower that would have to be the highest quality both in name and 
reality for at least the next 50 years.

By the time it was completed in 1986, it would be the most expensive building 
in the world. Its astronomical bill (equivalent to £1.8bn at today’s prices) 
came down to Foster’s total approach to the project: every part of what an 
office building should be was to be fundamentally rethought from scratch. To 
make this building, the wheel had to be reinvented many times over: because in 
Foster’s world, there is always a better wheel to be made.

Office buildings don’t very often rewrite the way in which cities are built, 
but the HSBC building, both Foster’s first major project outside the UK and his 
first tower, tore up the rule book and influenced how commercial blocks and 
entire financial centres have been made ever since. It took the 1960s dream of 
a plug-in, prefab city and made it real, as well as reinventing the slab of 
stacked floor-plates as a series of vertical neighbourhoods, and it showed how 
a corporate monument of this scale could actually give something back to the 
city at street level.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F28%2Fhong-kong-hsbc-hq-bank-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F28%2F1432805506512%2Ff1779d2f-8f07-4a15-a2a1-e033c8261193-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Norman%20Foster's%20Hong%20Kong%20HSBC%20headquarters%20tore%20up%20the%20rule%20book%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2045&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F28%2Fhong-kong-hsbc-hq-bank-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Norman%20Foster%27s%20Hong%20Kong%20HSBC%20headquarters%20tore%20up%20the%20rule%20book%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2045&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F28%2Fhong-kong-hsbc-hq-bank-history-cities-50-buildings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F28%2F1432805506512%2Ff1779d2f-8f07-4a15-a2a1-e033c8261193-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Protesters move a tent during the “Occupy Central” campaign, which began in 
October 2011. Photograph: Bobby Yip/Reuters 
Much of the drive for innovation came down to speed. The need to build in over 
a million square feet of office space in a short amount of time pointed towards 
a high degree of prefabrication, leading the project conceived as a city-sized 
Meccano set. LikeRichard Rogers’ Lloyds building 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/shortcuts/2011/dec/19/lloyds-building-richard-rogers>
 – which was completed the same year, making these buildings and their 
architects the twin titans of the High Tech movement – it embodied the 
contemporary dream of factory-floor mass production, which in reality 
necessitated levels of bespoke manufacture and highly skilled craftsmanship 
worthy of a medieval cathedral.

It was to be a global assembly line, an international kit of parts that 
included 30,000 tonnes of steel modules made by ship-builders in Glasgow, along 
with service pods from Japan, lightweight movable flooring panels from America, 
as well as components from Holland, Germany and Italy, all assembled in Hong 
Kong like a vertical jumbo jet, with a degree of precision never before 
attempted in a building. The aluminium cladding system alone required 10,000 
drawings to be made.


As Foster wrote at the time: “The sheer visual delight of the cladding details 
on the bank could not have happened without a shared endeavour, enthusiasm and 
dedication which extended from a factory in Missouri, through to a Chinese 
workforce on site, and a highly mobile design team who were as much at home on 
the shop floor as on the drawing board. It is as much about aesthetics as water 
penetration and tolerances, but it is not about the architect as a remote 
aesthete removed from the production process.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F28%2Fhong-kong-hsbc-hq-bank-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F27%2F1432720613138%2F8921e85c-1230-48d9-b921-737a3d9fe66c-2060x1374.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Norman%20Foster's%20Hong%20Kong%20HSBC%20headquarters%20tore%20up%20the%20rule%20book%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2045&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F28%2Fhong-kong-hsbc-hq-bank-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Norman%20Foster%27s%20Hong%20Kong%20HSBC%20headquarters%20tore%20up%20the%20rule%20book%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2045&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F28%2Fhong-kong-hsbc-hq-bank-history-cities-50-buildings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F27%2F1432720613138%2F8921e85c-1230-48d9-b921-737a3d9fe66c-2060x1374.jpeg>
 The building’s escalators apparently symbolise the whiskers of a dragon 
sucking wealth into its belly. Photograph: Bloomberg/Getty Images 
The kind of structure was as revolutionary as the method of construction, 
having more in common with building a bridge than a conventional office block. 
In order to liberate the banking floors from the usual grid of structural 
columns and provide flexibility for future changes, the structure and servicing 
was banished to the edges of the plan, with groups of floors suspended from 
great coat-hanger trusses, dramatically slung between steel masts at either end 
of the building. All of these structural gymnastics are expressed on the 
facade, along with racks of solar shading louvres and typhoon bracing for the 
windows, giving the tower the look of a gleaming off-shore rig, a machine for 
drilling wealth from the bedrock beneath Central Hong Kong, a refinery built on 
opium and imperialism.

Inside, this hefty exoskeleton allowed for a revolutionary organisation of 
staff. Clusters of floors were organised in five “social villages”, separated 
by double-height communal floors where the trusses leap across the facade. 
Banks of high-speed elevators shuttle employees to these five levels, from 
where the individual office floors are accessed by a zig-zagging series of 
escalators, turning the circulation into a theatrical and sociable promenade.

The suspension structure also had implications at ground level, allowing the 
entire building to be jacked up on steel legs to free the area beneath for the 
public plaza. It was a significant gesture in high-density Hong Kong and it 
continues to be a well-used public space space, taking on a welcome lease of 
life as a sheltered carpet for pick-nicking Filipino maids at the weekend, who 
take advantage of the air-conditioning leaking out of the bulging glass ceiling 
above.


From here, two of what still purport to be the longest freely supported 
escalators in the world sweep up at odd angles for feng shui reasons – they 
apparently symbolise the whiskers of a dragon sucking wealth into its belly. 
They also serve to whisk visitors up into a 10-storey atrium, where a faceted 
glazed vault appears to funnel light down from above, belying the fact that 
there are in fact 25 storeys of offices stacked above this glass ceiling. The 
trick? It’s all done with mirrors. An early example of the nascent gadget 
fetish of the period, which led to a dysfunctional slew of computer-controlled 
building systems that have plagued the world’s caretakers ever since, the 
building employed a revolutionary mechanical “sunscoop”. A bank of mirrors 
projects out on the south-facing facade at 12th-floor level, like an oversized 
gutter, programmed to follow the position of the sun throughout the day and 
reflect the light back onto a curving mirrored ceiling at the top of the 
atrium. Thirty years on, it’s not really working out as planned: all the office 
lights are generally switched on in the middle of the day.

New York's twin towers – the 'filing cabinets' that became icons of America: a 
history of cities in 50 buildings, day 40
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/may/20/world-trade-center-twin-towers-new-york-911-history-cities-day-40>
But, in other ways, the structure has remained true to its flexible dream. 
Floors have been reconfigured over the years and a large dealers’ room has been 
incorporated on one level, which wouldn’t have been possible with a more 
conventional structure. Feng shui has returned too. Although the entire 
building was originally designed in collaboration with a trained feng shui 
geomancer, they could not have anticipated the arrival of IM Pei’s Bank of 
China building next door in 1990. The sharp corners of its faceted flanks can 
apparently be seen to represent knife edges, wilfully slashing away at the good 
fortune of its neighbours. Was it a coincidence that, in this bastion of 
Chinese might, one knife edge pointed towards British Government House, while 
the other jabbed in the direction of the HSBC building? And that, shortly after 
it was completed, the Governor died and there was a sharp downturn in HSBC’s 
fiscal fortunes?

Better safe than sorry, advised HSBC’s feng shui masters, who promptly saw to 
it that two cannon-shaped protrusions were installed on the roof, pointing
directly back at the Bank of China 
<http://www.visiontimes.com/2014/08/26/the-modern-day-legend-of-the-cannon-and-the-sword.html>
. They look more like window-cleaning gantries to me, but on an island where 
apartment buildings have holes cut through the middleto allow dragons to reach 
the water <http://apassportaffair.com/2013/06/07/hong-kong/>, it’s somehow 
appropriate for the architecture to acknowledge the invisible forces of 
financial and diplomatic warfare being waged across these streets.

 * Which other buildings in the world tell stories about urban history? Share 
your own pictures and descriptions with GuardianWitness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/mar/23/50-buildings-great-stories-urban-history>
, on Twitter and Instagram using #hoc50 or let us know suggestions in the 
comments below  