
Any thought Calum Clark might have had about making England's summer tour to 
South Africa vanished when he was banned for 32 weeks for breaking an 
opponent's arm, effectively ruling him out of the autumn internationals against 
the All Blacks, Australia and the Springboks too.

Northampton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints>, already 
without their captain and hooker Dylan Hartley after disciplinary problems, 
will go into the final weeks of the regular season and possibly the play-offs 
minus two members of Stuart Lancaster's England elite squad.

Calum Clark admitted hyper-extending the right arm of the Leicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> hooker Rob Hawkins during 
the final of the LV Cup 13 days ago. Television footage showed Clark pulling on 
an arm and then giving it what appeared to be a second tug. Hawkins was then 
seen in considerable distress and has since had an operation to repair the 
break and damaged ligaments.

Richard Cockerill, Leicester's director of rugby, immediately described the 
injury as as bad as anything he had seen on a rugby field, adding: "If Calum 
Clark is deemed to have done it on purpose it's pretty horrendous." Hawkins is 
not expected to play for at least another ten weeks and, being out of contract 
this summer, his career had been in jeopardy. However, Cockerill is understood 
to be offering the 27-year-old former Bath player another year at Welford Road.

Northampton suspended Clark, a former England Under-20 captain, immediately 
the citing was announced and the case was heard by the RFU's disciplinary 
officer, High Court judge Jeff Blackett. He will make his full judgement 
available on Friday. Clark, who has a right to appeal, was also ordered to pay 
costs of Â£500, but a 32-week ban will do no good to an aspiring England career. 
It is longer even than the 26 weeks Hartley received in 2007 for eye gouging. 
Stuart Lancaster may only have been confirmed as England's head coach, but he 
has already shown little patience with the likes of Danny Care, who has had 
drink issues, or Delon Armitage, who has a poor disciplinary record.
 