
Northampton Town have sacked their manager Rob Page. The League One club made 
the announcement on Monday morning 
<http://www.ntfc.co.uk/news/article/2016-17/rob-page-northampton-town-kelvin-thomas-3509012.aspx>
 following controversial post-match comments made at the weekend by Page 
following the defeat at Bristol Rovers.

Page kept his players in the dressing room for 45 minutes after the 5-0 
reverse, and subsequently told reporters that in his opinion the game was a 
case of “men against girls”.

Northampton’s Rob Page sorry for ‘unacceptable’ ‘men against girls’ jibe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/northampton-rob-page-unacceptable-men-against-girls-bristol-rovers>
Page subsequently apologised for the remarks 
<http://www.ntfc.co.uk/news/article/2016-17/rob-page-3507334.aspx> after coming 
in for heavy criticism, stating: “Saturday was a very difficult afternoon for 
everyone. After the match I made a comment, when speaking to our local media, 
about the game being a case of ‘men against girls.’

“I immediately realised that this comment was totally unacceptable. No offence 
was meant by it and I apologise wholeheartedly if any was caused. This was an 
error of judgment I made in the heat of the moment shortly after a very 
difficult defeat, but that is no excuse, I accept that.”

Northampton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/northampton> were promoted 
as League Two champions last season and enjoyed a promising start to life in 
the third tier, with the victory over Bury at the end of October moving them up 
to fifth in the table but the loss at Bristol Rovers was the eighth defeat in 
their last 10 League One matches.

Kelvin Thomas, the chairman, said: “We are disappointed to make this decision 
regarding Rob, however following the recent run of results we feel that a 
change is necessary.

“Rob has always been extremely professional throughout his time and has only 
ever wanted the club to be successful. It was always going to be a very tough 
challenge following last year and the expectation that created, so we thank him 
for his efforts and we wish him very well for the future.

“Paul Wilkinson will take temporary charge of the team whilst we begin 
discussions with potential replacements, and all focus will now shift to 
preparations for Saturday’s important fixture against Scunthorpe United here at 
Sixfields.”
 