
For a grand old club with an enviable, newly enlarged stadium, the modern 
history of Northampton Saints RFC is strangely fraught. Every team has its 
highs and lows but the Saints are currently besieged on all sides, trapped by 
unhappy accidents and assorted misjudgments of their own making.The George 
North saga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/07/george-north-saints-premiership-questions-to-answer>
,Dylan Hartley’s suspension 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/14/dylan-hartley-england-six-week-ban-six-nations>
, looming European oblivion: there is not a lot of jaunty, jazzy marching in at 
Franklin’s Gardens right now.

These have been particularly testing days since their 37-10 home drubbing to 
Leinster last Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/09/northampton-leinster-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
. Their England captainHartley has been banned for six weeks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/13/dylan-hartley-eddie-jones-england-captain>
, the investigation into how North’s most recent head knock was handled is due 
to be made public on Monday and they are now in Dublin to face more Irish chin 
music. “If we’re honest, the mood is not the best,” conceded the full-back Ben 
Foden, his personal outlook further clouded by a dislocated finger in training 
that has sidelined him for Saturday’s return fixture. “What we have all 
realised is that things need to change because there is something wrong.”

With other influential international players Tom Wood, Courtney Lawes, Luther 
Burrell and Louis Picamoles also conspicuously absent from the matchday 23, it 
will appear to many that Saints have already thrown in the European towel. In 
previous years they have rebounded instantly from similar heavy losses, not 
leastagainst Racing 92 last season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/12/racing-92-northampton-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
 andLeinster in 2013-14 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/dec/07/northampton-leinster-heineken-cup-match-report>
. If something similar unfolds it will be from the most unstable of platforms.

Leicester Tigers and Northampton Saints lose their way in new world order | 
The Breakdown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/15/leicester-tigers-and-northampton-saints-rugby-breakdown>
According to Foden, who won the last of his 34 England caps in 2013, worrying 
alarm bells have been clanging for a while. It was not so much defeat by a fine 
Leinster team that stung as the “rock bottom”home defeat to Newcastle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/25/leicester-bristol-tuilagi-northampton-newcastle>
 a fortnight previously. Even before kick-off against Leinster, the club 
skipper Tom Wood said he noticed something flat about his side’s body language 
which translated into a horribly sluggish first quarter. This week’s team 
meetings, accordingly, have focused on springing out of the blocks, cutting out 
the recent disciplinary lapses that have yielded bans for Hartley, Kieran 
Brookes and Calum Clark, and, crucially, playing with more collective enjoyment.

The darkest hour is supposed to preface a brighter new dawn. The Saints 
director of rugby, Jim Mallinder, and his assistants Dorian West and Alan 
Dickens could certainly use a ray of sunshine. For too long there has been 
little to enthuse supporters, with boos audible at the final whistle last 
Friday. The social media message boards have not been awash with consolatory 
words; even the parallel travails of neighbours Leicester are not offering the 
succour they might normally do.

It is all a far cry from the days when Saints, with many of the same players, 
made the2011 European final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/may/23/leinster-northampton-heineken-cup-final>
 and won the2014 Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/may/31/northampton-saints-beat-saracens-premiership-final-match-report>
. Whatever golden touch Mallinder and co possessed has gone missing; since the 
colossal Samu Manoa departed for Toulon in 2015, things have seldom felt the 
same.

Maybe, like Leicester, the club has been too slow to recognise the game has 
moved on, that bullying sides up front is no longer enough. Stephen Myler is a 
decent goalkicker but Saints are not exactly frightening teams at half-back. 
There have also been mutterings from at least one seniorNorthampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> figure that Hartley 
contributes more often for England than his club. When a record-breaking, 
apparently fit England captain cannot make the starting XV for a massive home 
European game something is not quite right.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fnorthampton-saints-george-north-dylan-hartley-winter-discontent%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f40e32d0d7fd6d83b31444ce10a26087f074d2c%2F0_0_1744_1046%2F1744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Northampton%20alarm%20bells%20clang%20with%20winter%20of%20discontent%20looming%20%7C%20Robert%20Kitson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fnorthampton-saints-george-north-dylan-hartley-winter-discontent%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Northampton%20alarm%20bells%20clang%20with%20winter%20of%20discontent%20looming%20%7C%20Robert%20Kitson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fnorthampton-saints-george-north-dylan-hartley-winter-discontent%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f40e32d0d7fd6d83b31444ce10a26087f074d2c%2F0_0_1744_1046%2F1744.jpg>
 Dylan Hartley is sent off minutes after coming on as a substitute in the 
defeat to Leinster. Photograph: Tom Dwyer/Seconds Left/Rex/Shutterstock 
A fourth straight defeat for a side currently ninth in the Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership> and marooned at the bottom of 
their European pool would also suggest little has improved since Alex King, 
just snapped up to coach Wales’s backs, departed in October. Mallinder has been 
in charge almost a decade but senior players are now questioning fundamental 
areas.

“The main thing is making sure everyone is seriously up for the game,” said 
Foden, admitting this critical element “hasn’t been there for the last couple 
of games”. For a player with more than 200 club appearances to be stressing the 
“need to make sure we put the passion back in the shirt” is revealing in itself.

No one likes to see a proud club down on its haunches. The handling of the 
latest North affair, however, has raised further uneasy questions. It would be 
wrong to pre-judge the inquiry’s outcome but the clearest testimony so far has 
come from his team-mates.

England captain Dylan Hartley is one thuggish act away from career oblivion | 
Robert Kitson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/14/dylan-hartley-england-six-week-ban-six-nations>
“Northampton are a struggling team so you want their best players back as soon 
as possible but I think George needs to be allowed to go away, clear his head 
and let his headaches – or whatever he’s having – settle down,” said Foden, 
North’s friend and neighbour. “Once head injuries become serious you need to 
look at them like an ACL knee reconstruction … it might take six months to get 
right. You only get one brain, it’s not the easiest thing to fix. Hopefully 
he’ll be away with the Lions in the summer and I’m sure we’ll see him back soon 
but we’ve got to look after our players. I think Northampton realise that.”

Inside the Saints dressing room there is also frustration that Hartley will 
miss the next six weeks when his club needs him most. “It’s annoying when you 
lose someone like Dyls because he is important to us and England,” said Foden. 
“To have a guy like that on the field is crucial but he has to take his 
medicine when it comes around. Dylan was on top of the world last week … all of 
a sudden he’s back on the shooting block with people saying he should be 
stripped of the England captaincy, that he shouldn’t be playing for Northampton 
any more, that he’s a thug. Dylan knows he’s messed up more than anyone.”

It has been left, instead, to others to pick up the fragments. “There’s no 
point being negative and moping,” said Foden. “We’ve been to European finals, 
we’ve won the Premiership but you’ve got to wrestle through the lows as well. 
It can be like quicksand: the more you struggle the more you sink. We haven’t 
been performing but I still think we’ve got a great bunch of players and we 
should be competing strongly in the biggest competitions. You just need to 
relight that fire and that’s what the coaches and us senior players need to 
do.” If not, a winter of serious discontent looms.
 