
Northampton’s director of rugby, Jim Mallinder, has described Saturday’s 
European Champions Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/nov/20/european-champions-cup-bath-northampton-wasps-leicester-eddie-jones-england>
 opponents, Glasgow Warriors, as “a class team” as Saints face an early 
away-day challenge of their tournament credentials.

Champions Cup provides platform for England hopefuls to impress Eddie Jones | 
Robert Kitson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/nov/20/european-champions-cup-bath-northampton-wasps-leicester-eddie-jones-england>
Glasgow, the reigning Pro12 champions, open their European campaign at 
Scotstoun Stadium after last weekend’s scheduled Pool 3 appointment withRacing 
92 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/racing-metro-92> was among several games 
in France postponed due to the Paris terror attacks.

English challengers such as Bath, Wasps, Exeter and Northampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> themselves have all 
suffered European defeats in Glasgow, which underlines the game’s degree of 
difficulty.

“Home games bring a lot of pressure because if you lose you have to pick up a 
couple of wins away, so Glasgow will be very determined,” Mallinder said. “They 
are a class team, playing with confidence, and we’ve got a good idea how they 
will approach this game. They will try to attack us from all over the field, 
will look to offload as much as they can and use their aggressive defence.”

Mallinder has made three changes from the side that edged out the Scarlets 
last Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/14/northampton-scarlets-european-champions-cup-match-report>
, with Ahsee Tuala starting on the wing, the fly-half Stephen Myler replacing 
JJ Hanrahan and Michael Paterson packing down at lock.

Racing, meanwhile, head to Llanelli to face the Scarlets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/scarlets>, with a minute’s silence and the 
playing of La Marseillaise planned before kick-off.

“The events in Paris have affected everyone around the globe,” the Scarlets 
head coach, Wayne Pivac, said. “We expect Racing to be very motivated to put on 
a performance for the people back home. There is going to be an emotional 
occasion out there on Saturday. It affects everybody in some way, but for the 
people of France and the players coming across, even more so.

“We will pay our respects, like all sides did last weekend and will do this 
weekend when playing a French side. The fact we are playing a side from Paris 
as well has a massive significance.”

Bath, whose game at the Champions Cup holders, Toulon, last Sunday was 
postponed, hostLeinster <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leinster> on 
Saturday, with the Irish team reeling from a 33-6 home defeat by Wasps that 
rocked their hopes of progressing from Pool 5.

“A week is a long time in sport,” said the Leinster and Ireland fly-half 
Jonathan Sexton. “We’ve got to move on now. Already our championship hangs on 
this game, and we have got to show a reaction. We’ve got to be better with the 
ball, we’ve got to show everything we didn’t show last week.”

Leicester, fresh from an impressive win against Stade Français 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/13/leicester-stade-francais-european-champions-cup-match-report>
 in the tournament’s opening fixture last Friday, include the full-back Telusa 
Veainu and the fly-half Tommy Bell for a trip to Treviso on Saturday, while the 
flanker Tom Croft returns and a powerful replacements’ bench features Matías 
Agüero, Dan Cole, Ben Youngs and Seremaia Bai.

The Tigers director of rugby, Richard Cockerill, said: “We made a really good 
start to the tournament with five points against Stade Français, but that will 
not count for much if we cannot follow up with another strong performance in 
Italy this weekend. We’ve got competition for places in the squad, which means 
we can pick the freshest team available for this week and have a potential 
threat throughout the 23-man squad.”

Also on Saturday, Exeter host Bordeaux-Bègles, knowing they cannot afford to 
slip up following lastSunday’s defeat by the Ospreys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/15/ospreys-exeter-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
, and a number of changes include starts for the England lock Geoff Parling, 
the prop Moray Low and the full-back Phil Dollman, with Henry Slade switching 
from centre to fly-half.
 