
Northampton expect George North to be cleared by specialists to return to 
action in Friday’sPremiership <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership> 
match against Sale Sharks.

Wasps ‘hugely disappointed’ by referee’s error but Connacht defeat stands
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/19/wasps-hugely-disappointed-refereeing-error-defeat-connacht-mathieu-raynal>
The Wales wing has been stood down since appearing to lie motionless 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/07/george-north-saints-premiership-questions-to-answer>
 following a tackle in the air by Adam Thompstone in Saints’19-11 defeat by 
Leicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/03/premiership-rugby-roundup-bath-saracens-maro-itoje>
 on 3 December.

A Concussion Management Review Group (CMRG), drawn up to investigate the 
handling of North’s potential head injury, is now expected to reveal its 
findings on Wednesday.

Northampton’s rugby director, Jim Mallinder, remains confident, however, that 
North will be free to faceSale <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/salesharks> 
at Franklin’s Gardens on Friday night.

“He’s back in training and he should be available to play against Sale,” he 
said. “As I said, he’s been training [on Tuesday], he’s had a bit of time off 
and he’s feeling really good about himself, he’s looking really sharp out there 
and he’s looking forward to playing.

“George is actually going back to the specialists, just to check again that 
everything’s OK. I’m not making decisions on whether he plays or not, that’s 
out of my hands. That’s down to the trained professionals to make the right 
judgments – and surely there’s no better people to make those correct 
decisions.”

North was allowed to return to action against Leicester, despite his heavy 
fall during the match, with Northampton since admitting the 24-year-oldmay have 
suffered a head injury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/06/northampton-george-north-concussion-leicester-premiership-rugby>
, despite him passing pitch-side checks.

The concussion management panel comprised of the RFU professional rugby 
director, Nigel Melville, Premiership Rugby’s rugby director, Phil Winstanley, 
and the independent chairman, Dr Julian Morris. The first-ever such panel was 
convened on 5 December and would have taken 16 days to finalise its conclusions.

North had a six-month spell out of the game in 2015 after a series of 
high-profile head injuries. Now, though, Mallinder believes the British & Irish 
Lions wing is back in rude health.

“It’s something that happened a few weeks ago and thankfully George is fine,” 
Mallinder said. “Physically, he’s been fine since the incident, so we’re just 
waiting to hear from the report and then we’ll make our comment after that. I 
don’t want to comment on the investigation any more, I spoke at length last 
week.

“What’s important now is that it comes out and we can comment on it then. 
We’ve said it right from the beginning: player welfare is the most important 
thing. If there’s any doubts the medics will come and talk to me and we will 
stand players down. So player welfare is number one.”

Northampton will head into Friday’s game fresh from their humiliating 60-13 
European Champions Cup defeat by Leinster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/17/leinster-northampton-saints-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
 in Dublin. The Saints rotated their resources for that game, leading to 
criticism of their selection.

The tournament organisers, European Professional Club Rugby (EPCR), may yet 
launch an investigation to determine whether Saints fielded a strong enough 
side. EPCR reviews all selections as a matter of course and is yet to determine 
whether to launch any investigation.

Mallinder believes he was right to mix up his resources in Ireland, however. 
“We stick by our decision, in that we’ve got a squad we register at the 
beginning of the season that we think are good enough to play in Europe,” he 
said.

“And we played that squad. We did register one extra player, young James Fish, 
who came in for Dylan Hartley, for obvious reasons. So that’s what we decided 
to do and hopefully the experience and freshness gained from them playing last 
week, hopefully that will benefit us down the line.”
 