
As I open the back door, the path shows up in a rectangle of light, the gravel 
sparkling like golden sugar. My breath shows in pale mists that billow and 
dissipate in the air. The owls that called repeatedly at dusk are now silent, 
hunting for voles across the frozenhaugh 
<https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/haugh>. There’s the sharp smell 
of cold, and the river seems much louder than it does by day.


Here, in the frost hollow of the valley 
<http://www.weatheronline.co.uk/reports/wxfacts/Frost-hollow.htm>, it is a 
couple of degrees lower than the surrounding hills. Cooler air, being denser, 
flows down into the bowl of the land. The grasses and seedheads of the garden 
become outlined inhoar frost 
<https://weather.com/science/weather-explainers/news/hoarfrost-explained>, 
coated in spiky crystals, the shrunken browns and greys of dying foliage 
enlarged into something magical.


I look up to the night sky through the black filigree of ash trees. There’s 
the Plough, looping its arc over the dark wooded hillside, and the bold W of
Cassiopeia 
<http://www.constellation-guide.com/constellation-list/cassiopeia-constellation/>
 overhead. These are the stars of my Berkshire childhood, pointed out by my 
mother, along with her favourite, Orion, which would rise each December above 
an old apple tree.

Here, under the dark skies of the North Pennines 
<http://www.northpennines.org.uk/Pages/DarkSkyDiscoverySites.aspx>, there are 
so many more, because of the lack of light pollution. Stars flicker and burn 
from horizon to horizon and theMilky Way 
<http://www.space.com/19915-milky-way-galaxy.html> stretches in a fuzzy belt 
across the sky.


How do I ... see the northern lights?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/oct/16/how-do-i-see-the-northern-lights>
On winter nights like these, it’s not uncommon to see the northern lights. 
Alerts are sent to my phone from aurorawatch 
<http://aurorawatch.lancs.ac.uk/alerts/%20includes%20a%20page%20on%20photographing%20the%20aurora>
, a free service of Lancaster University. Then we drive up out of the valley to 
better see the slanting streaks of pink and green, soft as if painted with a 
watercolour brush, more dramatic when revealed by the extended exposure time of 
a camera.

The lights dance and shift, fading or intensifying, rippling and undulating in 
curtains of colour. When the children were little, they would be bundled up in 
coats and blankets to be thrilled by this lumiere show. Then I would point out 
my mother’s stars and pass to them a love of the night sky and a sense of 
wonder.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>






 