
Northampton are set to discover whether they will face further action over the 
George North concussion saga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/07/george-north-saints-premiership-questions-to-answer>
. A meeting will be held on Friday between club officials and an independent 
medical expert as the investigation continues into how North was allowed to 
return to the field following a heavy knock in last Saturday’s Premiership game 
at Leicester.

Saints have declined to make any further comment since issuing a statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/06/northampton-george-north-concussion-leicester-premiership-rugby>
 claiming their medical staff were unaware North had lost consciousness because 
the correct footage was not available on their monitors. This stance has been 
questioned by the host broadcaster, BT Sport, which has also pointed out the 
relevant images were repeatedly shown on other screens at Welford Road.

The Wales winger landed heavily on his neck following a first half collision 
with Leicester’s Adam Thompstone and, after leaving the field for a head injury 
assessment, was permitted to return to the field.Northampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> issued a statement on 
Tuesday stating “if evidence suggesting a loss of consciousness had been 
available to the medical team at the time of assessment, George would not have 
been allowed to return to the field of play”.

Premiership Rugby guidelines, strongly supported by both World Rugby and the 
Rugby Football Union, state that any player even suspected of losing 
consciousness should be immediately removed. There is no precedent inPremiership
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership> Rugby for a club being 
punished for breaching the guidelines but if there is found to be a case to 
answer, Northampton could face a charge of bringing the game into disrepute and 
a fine.

A concussion-management review-group was set up earlier this week comprising 
the RFU’s director of professional rugby, Nigel Melville, Premiership Rugby’s 
rugby director Phil Winstanley and an independent chairman, Dr Julian Morris. 
Also monitoring the situation are the Professional Game Board (PGB), now headed 
by Judge Jeff Blackett. The PGB, comprising representatives of the RFU, 
Premiership Rugby and the individual clubs, was formed in 2008 to monitor and 
manage all issues relating to English professional rugby, including player 
welfare.
 