
The singers began rehearsing for the main event as long ago as September. At 
first light, the murmur of traffic would be punctuated with tentative trills or 
cadences that expired almost as they began. The gaps between plaintive coos of 
thewood pigeon 
<http://sounds.bl.uk/Environment/British-wildlife-recordings/022M-W1CDR0001376-0600V0>
 were filled withsotto voce snatches of song, making up for a lack of volume 
with notes of high piercing intensity. There is nothing that sings quite like a 
robin.

Robin song 
<http://sounds.bl.uk/Environment/British-wildlife-recordings/022M-W1CDR0001537-1500V0>
 comes on strong at the end of the year, as if the bird were living up to its 
status as an emblem of the season. The simple scientific explanation is that 
male and female birds are re-establishing pair bonds and territorial rights.

All this week, one has begun its front of house show well before dawn, while 
another has launched forth in answer or opposition at the back. Yesterday, 
befuddled by sleep, I stood up and parted the curtains in a bid to see one of 
these birds, only to reel back at the soupy glare of a street light. Today, I 
stayed in bed, clamped my eyes shut, and listened.

Robin brings a touch of home to the trenches: Country diary 100 years ago
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/25/country-diary-robin-trenches-first-world-war-1916>
The factory-like swish of cars spoke of overnight rain. A voice riding higher 
than a soprano easily subsumed this ambient roar into the background. For 20 
minutes or more, the robin uttered a sequence of 200 or so phrases, in which 
melodies rose out of nothing, and swept through the whole gamut between hope 
and despair in three or four seconds. But there was never a conclusion. 
Quavering runs halted and fevered cascades cut short. I counted the lulls 
between – one-and-two-and – then the song resumed. I wondered if the bird had 
one tune in its head, simply oscillating between soundlessness and 
vocalisation; to my ears, it was as if a badly tuned radio was dipping in and 
out of a complete work.

For millennia, humans must have woken to robin song, in half-light without 
electricity, in silence without motorised vehicles. When there was no wind or 
rain, it would have been the only sound, a lone voice of affirmation at the 
dying of the year.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>
 