
As night fell over Paris <https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris>, thousands 
of people sat cross-legged in the vast square at Place de la République, taking 
turns to pass round a microphone and denounce everything from the dominance of 
Google to tax evasion or inequality on housing estates.

Nuit debout protests: have you been involved? Share your story
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/11/nuit-debout-protests-france-paris-have-you-been-involved-share-your-story>
The debating continued into the early hours of the morning, with soup and 
sandwiches on hand in the canteen tent and a protest choir singing 
revolutionary songs. A handful of protesters in tents then bedded down to 
“occupy” the square for the night before being asked to move on by police just 
before dawn. But the next morning they returned to set up their protest camp 
again.


For more than a week, these vast nocturnal protest gatherings – from parents 
with babies to students, workers, artists and pensioners – have spread across
France <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>, rising in number, and are 
beginning to panic the government.

Called Nuit debout <http://petition.nuitdebout.fr/fr>, which loosely means 
“rise up at night”, the protest movement is increasingly being likened to the
Occupy <https://www.theguardian.com/world/occupy> initiative that mobilised 
hundreds of thousands of people in 2011 or Spain’sIndignados 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/may/13/spain-protests-indignados-first-anniversary>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fnuit-debout-protesters-occupy-french-cities-in-a-revolutionary-call-for-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F65fa23e6129481b68455b9f33074b92272ab030f%2F0_248_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nuit%20debout%20protesters%20occupy%20French%20cities%20in%20revolutionary%20call%20for%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fnuit-debout-protesters-occupy-french-cities-in-a-revolutionary-call-for-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nuit%20debout%20protesters%20occupy%20French%20cities%20in%20revolutionary%20call%20for%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fnuit-debout-protesters-occupy-french-cities-in-a-revolutionary-call-for-change%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F65fa23e6129481b68455b9f33074b92272ab030f%2F0_248_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
 Cherifa, a French student at Paris’ Louis-le-Grand high school, who is taking 
part in the night-time protests. Photograph: Elliott Verdier/AFP/Getty Images 
Despite France’s long history of youth protest movements – from May 1968 to 
vast rallies against pension changes – Nuit debout, which has spread to cities 
such as Toulouse, Lyon and Nantes and even over the border to Brussels, is seen 
as a new phenomenon.

It began on 31 March with a night-time sit-in in Paris after the latest street 
demonstrations by students and unions critical of PresidentFrançois Hollande 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/francois-hollande>’s proposed changes to 
labour laws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/09/end-of-term-protests-threaten-francois-hollande-labour-legacy>
. But the movement and its radical nocturnal action had been dreamed up months 
earlier at a Paris meeting of leftwing activists.

“There were about 300 or 400 of us at a public meeting in February and we were 
wondering how can we really scare the government?. We had an idea: at the next 
big street protest, we simply wouldn’t go home,” said Michel, 60, a former 
delivery driver.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fnuit-debout-protesters-occupy-french-cities-in-a-revolutionary-call-for-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7387b5bc6e40ab131d3a6f3b9a5bb0047c3330e6%2F0_86_4743_2847%2F4743.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nuit%20debout%20protesters%20occupy%20French%20cities%20in%20revolutionary%20call%20for%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fnuit-debout-protesters-occupy-french-cities-in-a-revolutionary-call-for-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nuit%20debout%20protesters%20occupy%20French%20cities%20in%20revolutionary%20call%20for%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fnuit-debout-protesters-occupy-french-cities-in-a-revolutionary-call-for-change%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7387b5bc6e40ab131d3a6f3b9a5bb0047c3330e6%2F0_86_4743_2847%2F4743.jpg>
 Protesters debate issues such as national security, housing and proposed 
changes to French labour law. Photograph: Loic Venance/AFP/Getty Images 
“On 31 March, at the time of the labour law protests, that’s what happened. 
There was torrential rain, but still everyone came back here to the square. 
Then at 9pm, the rain stopped and we stayed. We came back the next day and as 
we keep coming back every night, it has scared the government because it’s 
impossible to define.

“There’s something here that I’ve never seen before in France – all these 
people converge here each night of their own accord to talk and debate ideas – 
from housing to the universal wages, refugees, any topic they like. No one has 
told them to, no unions are pushing them on – they’re coming of their own 
accord.”

The idea emerged among activists linked to a leftwing revue and the team 
behind the hit documentary filmMerci Patron! 
<http://www.france24.com/en/20160320-French-film-Arnault-billionaire-workers-LVMH>
, which depicts a couple taking on France’s richest man, billionaire Bernard 
Arnault. But the movement gained its own momentum – not just because of the 
labour protests or in solidarity with theFrench Goodyear tyre plant workers who 
kidnapped their bosses in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/06/french-workers-bosses-hostage-goodyear-amiens>
. It has expanded to address a host of different grievances, including thestate 
of emergency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/26/frances-state-of-emergency-could-lead-to-abuses-human-rights-groups-warn>
 and security crackdown in response to last year’s terrorist attacks.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fnuit-debout-protesters-occupy-french-cities-in-a-revolutionary-call-for-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa29669ac9c7ed71ce0e3917bf2749474e7530193%2F0_8_4800_2881%2F4800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nuit%20debout%20protesters%20occupy%20French%20cities%20in%20revolutionary%20call%20for%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fnuit-debout-protesters-occupy-french-cities-in-a-revolutionary-call-for-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nuit%20debout%20protesters%20occupy%20French%20cities%20in%20revolutionary%20call%20for%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fnuit-debout-protesters-occupy-french-cities-in-a-revolutionary-call-for-change%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa29669ac9c7ed71ce0e3917bf2749474e7530193%2F0_8_4800_2881%2F4800.jpg>
 Students occupying an amphitheatre in Lille give a press conference to 
announce the start of the Nuit debout protests. Photograph: Philippe 
Huguen/AFP/Getty Images 
“The labour law was the final straw,” said Matthiew, 35, who was retraining to 
be a teacher after 10 years in the private sector, and had set up an impromptu 
revolutionary singing group at the square. “But it’s much bigger than that. 
This government, which is supposed to be socialist, has come up with a raft of 
things I don’t agree with, while failing to deal with the real problems like 
unemployment, climate change and a society heading for disaster.”

Many in the crowd said that after four years of Hollande’s Socialist party in 
power, they left felt betrayed and their anger was beginning to bubble over.

Jocelyn, 26, a former medical student acting as a press spokesman for the 
movement, said: “There are parallels with Occupy andIndignados. The idea is to 
let everyone speak out. People are really sick and tired and that feeling has 
been building for years. Everything Hollande once promised for the left but 
gave up on really gets me down. Personally, it’s the state of emergency, the 
new surveillance laws, the changes to the justice system and the security 
crackdown.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fnuit-debout-protesters-occupy-french-cities-in-a-revolutionary-call-for-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d828152d666bb8d31a69e1c6f01ae6374aabd9c%2F0_0_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nuit%20debout%20protesters%20occupy%20French%20cities%20in%20revolutionary%20call%20for%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fnuit-debout-protesters-occupy-french-cities-in-a-revolutionary-call-for-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nuit%20debout%20protesters%20occupy%20French%20cities%20in%20revolutionary%20call%20for%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fnuit-debout-protesters-occupy-french-cities-in-a-revolutionary-call-for-change%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d828152d666bb8d31a69e1c6f01ae6374aabd9c%2F0_0_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 A protester holds a sign which reads ‘#Panama leaks, people, racketeering, 
that’s enough’ in Paris. Photograph: Ian Langsdon/EPA 
The government and the Paris authorities are being cautious about the policing 
of the movement. An investigation is under way into the alleged assault by a 
police officer accused of hitting a student at a Paris high school last month 
during a demonstration against the labour overhaul.

The government is preparing possible concessions to students and youths to 
calm those expected to attend another such rally on Saturday.

Each night at Paris’s Place de la République, the “general assembly” begins at 
6pm and the crowd discuss ideas. Hundreds of demonstrators communicate using 
coded hand gestures: wiggling their fingers above their heads to express 
agreement or crossing their wrists to disagree.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fnuit-debout-protesters-occupy-french-cities-in-a-revolutionary-call-for-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6873c87fe857c9755c1bd021f6c1e8fd1cf09a1a%2F0_0_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nuit%20debout%20protesters%20occupy%20French%20cities%20in%20revolutionary%20call%20for%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fnuit-debout-protesters-occupy-french-cities-in-a-revolutionary-call-for-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nuit%20debout%20protesters%20occupy%20French%20cities%20in%20revolutionary%20call%20for%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fnuit-debout-protesters-occupy-french-cities-in-a-revolutionary-call-for-change%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6873c87fe857c9755c1bd021f6c1e8fd1cf09a1a%2F0_0_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
 Michel, an artist who hopes to be a candidate in the 2017 French presidential 
elections, joins the protesters in Paris. Photograph: Elliott Verdier/AFP/Getty 
Images 
Various committees have sprung up to debate a new constitution, society, work, 
and how to occupy the square with more permanent wooden structures on a nightly 
basis. Whiteboards list the evening’s discussions and activities – from debates 
on economics to media training for the demonstrators. “No hatred, no arms, no 
violence,” was the credo described by the “action committee”.

“This must be a perfect mini-society,” a member of the gardening committee 
told the crowd. A poetry committee has been set up to document and create the 
movement’s slogans. “Every movement needs its artistic and literary element,” 
said the poet who proposed it.

Demonstrators regularly help other protest movements, such as a bank picket 
over revelations in thePanama Papers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/panama-papers> or a demonstration 
against migrant evictions in the north of Paris.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2Ffrench-police-in-violent-clashes-with-student-protesters-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=French%20police%20in%20violent%20clashes%20with%20student%20protesters%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2Ffrench-police-in-violent-clashes-with-student-protesters-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=French%20police%20in%20violent%20clashes%20with%20student%20protesters%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2Ffrench-police-in-violent-clashes-with-student-protesters-video&media=>
French police in violent clashes with student protesters – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/apr/06/french-police-in-violent-clashes-with-student-protesters-video>
“Generation revolution”, was scrawled on the pavement. The concept behind the 
movement is a“convergence of struggles” 
<https://www.convergence-des-luttes.org/> with no one leader. There are no 
union banners or flags of specific groups decorating the protest in the square 
– a rarity in France.

Cécile, 22, a Paris law student at Thursday night’s general assembly, said: “I 
don’t agree with the state society is in today. To me, politics feels broken. 
This movement appeals in terms of citizen action. I come here after class and I 
intend to keep coming back. I hope it lasts.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fnuit-debout-protesters-occupy-french-cities-in-a-revolutionary-call-for-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec0a3d2a5c4f6484eefcfb0e8ef797180cc072c7%2F0_161_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nuit%20debout%20protesters%20occupy%20French%20cities%20in%20revolutionary%20call%20for%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fnuit-debout-protesters-occupy-french-cities-in-a-revolutionary-call-for-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nuit%20debout%20protesters%20occupy%20French%20cities%20in%20revolutionary%20call%20for%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fnuit-debout-protesters-occupy-french-cities-in-a-revolutionary-call-for-change%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec0a3d2a5c4f6484eefcfb0e8ef797180cc072c7%2F0_161_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 Protesters confront riot police in Paris. Photograph: Dominique 
Faget/AFP/Getty Images  