
The United States entered into the challenge of space exploration under 
President Eisenhower's first term, however, it was the Soviet Union who 
excelled in those early years. Under the bold vision of PresidentsKennedy 
<http://www.jfklibrary.org/Historical+Resources/JFK+in+History/Space+Program.htm>
, Johnson, and Nixon, and with the overwhelming approval of the American 
people, we rapidly closed the gap in the final third of the 20th century, and 
became the world leader in space exploration.

America's space accomplishments earned the respect and admiration of the 
world. Science probes were unlocking the secrets of the cosmos; space 
technology was providing instantaneous worldwide communication; orbital 
sentinels were helping man understand the vagaries of nature. Above all else, 
the people around the world were inspired by the human exploration of space and 
the expanding of man's frontier. It suggested that what had been thought to be 
impossible was now within reach.Students were inspired to prepare themselves to 
be a part of this new age. No government programme in modern history has been 
so effective in motivating the young to do "what has never been done before".

World leadership in space was not achieved easily. In the first half-century 
of the space age, our country made a significant financial investment, 
thousands of Americans dedicated themselves to the effort, and some gave their 
lives to achieve the dream of a nation. In the latter part of the first half 
century of the space age, Americans and their international partners focused 
primarily on exploiting the near frontiers of space with thespace shuttle 
<http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/main/index.html> and the 
International Space Station 
<http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/station/main/index.html>.

As a result of the tragic loss of the Space Shuttle Columbia 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Space_Shuttle_Columbia> in 2003, it was concluded 
that our space policy required a new strategic vision. Extensive studies and 
analysis led to this new mandate: meet our existing commitments, return to our 
exploration roots, return to the moon, and prepare to venture further outward 
to the asteroids and to Mars. The programme was named "Constellation 
<http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/constellation/main/>". In the ensuing years, 
this plan was endorsed by two presidents of different parties and approved by 
both Democratic and Republican Congresses.

The Columbia Accident Board <http://caib.nasa.gov/> had given Nasa a number of 
recommendations fundamental to the Constellation architecture which were duly 
incorporated. The Ares rocket family was patterned after the Von Braun Modular 
concept so essential to the success of the Saturn 1B and the Saturn 5. A number 
of components in the Ares 1 rocket would become the foundation of the very 
large heavy lift Ares V, thus reducing the total development costs 
substantially. After the Ares 1 becomes operational, the only major new 
components necessary for the Ares V would be the larger propellant tanks to 
support the heavy lift requirements.

The design and the production of the flight components and infrastructure to 
implement this vision was well underway. Detailed planning of all the major 
sectors of the programme had begun. Enthusiasm withinNasa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/nasa> and throughout the country was very 
high.

When President Obama recently released his budget for Nasa, he proposed a 
slight increase in total funding, substantial research and technology 
development, an extension of the InternationalSpace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/space> Station operation until 2020, long 
range planning for a new but undefined heavy lift rocket and significant 
funding for the development of commercial access to low earth orbit.

Although some of these proposals have merit, the accompanying decision to 
cancel the Constellation programme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2010/feb/01/barack-obama-nasa-moon-budget>
, its Ares 1 and Ares V rockets, and the Orion spacecraft, is devastating.

America's only path to low Earth orbit and the International Space Station 
will now be subject to an agreement with Russia to purchase space on their 
Soyuz (at a price of over $50m per seat with significant increases expected in 
the near future) until we have the capacity to provide transportation for 
ourselves. The availability of a commercial transport to orbit as envisioned in 
the president's proposal cannot be predicted with any certainty, but is likely 
to take substantially longer and be more expensive than we would hope.

It appears that we will have wasted our current $10bn-plus investment in 
Constellation and, equally importantly, we will have lost the many years 
required to recreate the equivalent of what we will have discarded.

For the United States, the leading space faring nation for nearly half a 
century, to be without carriage to low Earth orbit and with no human 
exploration capability to go beyond Earth orbit for an indeterminate time into 
the future, destines our nation to become one of second or even third rate 
stature. While the president's plan envisages humans travelling away from Earth 
and perhaps toward Mars at some time in the future, the lack of developed 
rockets and spacecraft will assure that ability will not be available for many 
years.

Without the skill and experience that actual spacecraft operation provides, 
the US is far too likely to be on a long downhill slide to mediocrity. America 
must decide if it wishes to remain a leader in space. If it does, we should 
institute a programme which will give us the very best chance of achieving that 
goal.

Neil Armstrong
Commander, Apollo 11 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/apollo-11-moon-landing>

James Lovell
Commander, Apollo 13

Eugene Cernan
Commander, Apollo 17

• The caption for the photograph accompanying this article was amended on 20 
April 2010. It originally stated that the photograph depicted Neil Armstrong. 
It is in fact of Buzz Aldrin, and taken by Armstrong. This has now been 
corrected
 