
In the heady days of Barack Obama’s campaign for the White House in 2008, the 
soon-to-be president made a speech at the Cuban American National Foundation 
that was to become a benchmark for his relations with a hemisphere.


“It’s time for a new alliance of the Americas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/americas>,” the candidate declared. “It’s 
time to turn the page on the arrogance of Washington and the anti-Americanism 
across the region that stands in the way of progress.”

US-Cuba relations: timeline of a tangled history
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2016/mar/20/us-cuba-relations-history-timeline>
He went on to promise that he would engage Cuba, help to end the conflict in 
Colombia, boost democracy and development in Haiti, crack down on drug cartels 
inMexico <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico> and strengthen trade and 
aid to Latin America as a whole.

After the stagnation of the Bush era, this sounded like a bold step forward, 
particularly given the regional mood at the time. Venezuela’sHugo Chávez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/hugo-chavez> was in his Washington-bashing 
pomp. Leftwing administrations dominated the continent. China’s influence was 
on the rise.

Even after Obama entered the White House, many doubted he would fare any 
better than his predecessors in winning the hearts and minds of his regional 
neighbours. The nerdy northern president looked like a soft touch compared with 
the caudillo hard-men of the south.

Amid all the euphoria over the thaw, it is sobering to look back at the other 
promises Obama made to Cuba in 2008

Fast forward eight years, however, and it is undoubtedly Obama’s vision that 
is in the ascendant. On Sunday, he will be in his pomp as the first sitting US 
president in 88 years to visit Havana, a move that looks likely to be 
remembered among the greatest legacies of his presidency. Meanwhile, the 
regional leaders who once isolated him are falling like flies. Declining 
commodity prices, election defeats and corruption investigations are reversing 
the “pink tide” of the Latin left that was once a source of hope for socialists 
around the world.

The past week has seen massive anti-government demonstrations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/18/brazil-braces-clashes-dilma-rousseff-lula-corruption-protests-45-cities>
 in Brazil and a heightened legal challenge against former Workers party 
president Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva. Last month, Bolivia’s formerly unbeatable 
president Evo Moraleslost his first election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/22/bolivia-evo-morales-president-national-referendum-fourth-term>
 – a referendum that would have changed the constitution so he could remain in 
power until the middle of the next decade.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F20%2Fobamas-cuba-visit-latest-step-towards-new-alliance-of-americas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F682eec315b7d0ec3548bca97a8bdf6798cbd5d63%2F0_4_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%E2%80%99s%20Cuba%20visit%20is%20latest%20step%20towards%20%E2%80%98new%20alliance%20of%20the%20Americas%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F20%2Fobamas-cuba-visit-latest-step-towards-new-alliance-of-americas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obama%E2%80%99s%20Cuba%20visit%20is%20latest%20step%20towards%20%E2%80%98new%20alliance%20of%20the%20Americas%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F20%2Fobamas-cuba-visit-latest-step-towards-new-alliance-of-americas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F682eec315b7d0ec3548bca97a8bdf6798cbd5d63%2F0_4_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
 An inflatable doll depicting Dilma Rousseff amid anti-corruption protests 
against her and former Brazilian president Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva. 
Photograph: Paulo Whitaker/Reuters 
Almost every day, there is grim economic news 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/18/venezuela-president-raises-fuel-price-by-1300-and-devalues-bolivar-to-tackle-crisis>
 from Venezuela, where Chávez’s successor, Nicolás Maduro, recently lost 
control of Congress. In Argentina, meanwhile, the new centre-right president, 
Mauricio Macri, is busyunravelling the policies of his populist predecessor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/29/argentina-settles-creditor-dispute-deal>
, Cristina Fernández de Kirchner. Obama will give this change of direction his 
stamp of approval by visiting Buenos Aires 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/04/obama-urged-not-visit-argentina-40th-anniversary-military-coup>
 after he leaves Havana.

His regional swagger was not always so confident. In the early days of his 
presidency, it looked as though his pledge of better neighborhood relations was 
just froth and talk, designed only to win over the sizeable Hispanic vote. Like 
many a president before him, Obama devoted his foreign policy attention to the 
Middle East and Russia. Latin America appeared an afterthought. Disappointed 
regional leaders turned against him. At the Summit of the Americas in 
Cartagena, Colombia, in April 2012, the US looked more isolated than ever.

Yes, he tried: what will Barack Obama's legacy be?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/19/yes-tried-barack-obama-legacy-gary-younge>
The main cause of friction was US policy towards Cuba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cuba>. Washington’s cold war embargo and its 
work to block Havana from neighbors was seen as a part of the arrogance and 
interference that had characterized US policy for decades. It left every other 
plan snarled in resentment.

But by reaching out with a surprise pope-brokered agreement  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/19/pope-francis-cuba-us-reconciliation-havana>
with Raúl Castro on 17 December 2014, Obama appears to have cut this Gordian 
knot. At last year’s Summit of the Americas in Panama, heshook hands and talked 
to Castro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/apr/11/barack-obama-and-raul-castro-handshake-captured-on-video>
, held a 10-minute dialogue with Chávez’ successor, and won plaudits (as well 
as the usual brickbats) from other leaders.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F20%2Fobamas-cuba-visit-latest-step-towards-new-alliance-of-americas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd481126f44bc8b206bd86a7d1e36881c75e1acce%2F1246_0_1905_2378%2F1905.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%E2%80%99s%20Cuba%20visit%20is%20latest%20step%20towards%20%E2%80%98new%20alliance%20of%20the%20Americas%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F20%2Fobamas-cuba-visit-latest-step-towards-new-alliance-of-americas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obama%E2%80%99s%20Cuba%20visit%20is%20latest%20step%20towards%20%E2%80%98new%20alliance%20of%20the%20Americas%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F20%2Fobamas-cuba-visit-latest-step-towards-new-alliance-of-americas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd481126f44bc8b206bd86a7d1e36881c75e1acce%2F1246_0_1905_2378%2F1905.jpg>
 A billboard in Cuba: ‘Socialism or death’. Photograph: Enrique de la 
Osa/Reuters 
Speaking at a panel in Washington this week, Mike Hammer, the US ambassador to 
Chile, said that normalized relations with Cuba go a long way to “removing what 
we all know was a tension point in US relations with the hemisphere”.

“It’s good for folks back here in Washington to grasp that,” he said, adding: 
as ambassador of Chile I can see, even among regular people that come up and 
say, ‘Well, it was about time,’ and ‘It was the right thing to do,’ really it’s 
quite significant.”

More acclaim is likely to follow in the next week, but amid all the euphoria 
over the thaw, it is sobering to look back at the other promises Obama made to 
Cuba and the region in 2008. The overall score card is good, but by no means 
perfect.

Running for president in the critical state of Florida, he told Miami’s 
powerful Cuban community that he would only engage the Castro government to 
stand up for freedom. He said he would push for the release of political 
prisoners – a goal that has beenlargely but not completely achieved 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/11/cuba-free-prisoners-pope-francis-visit>
 – but also vowed to promote freedom of the press, freedom of assembly and 
political reforms necessary for free elections. None of these latter three is 
close to success. This next week may move the needle, but not by much.

Another 2008 promise, peace in Colombia, may do far more. Negotiations in 
Havana are expected to reach agreement very soon on an end tothe world’s oldest 
conflict 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/15/colombia-government-farc-rebels-agreement-end-civil-war>
, the almost 70-year war between the government in Bogota and leftist 
guerrillas. The US, Cuba and Venezuela are among the key players backing a deal.

Other goals look more distant than ever, particularly with regard to crime and 
drugs. Mexico hasfallen deeper into cartel-related turmoil  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/15/el-chapo-mexico-president-enrique-pena-nieto-security-oil-economy>
and violence. Despite US funding for police forces in Central America, El 
Salvador sufferedthe most murderous year since its civil war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/04/el-salvador-violence-deaths-murder-2015>
 ended in 1992. In Honduras, where the US backeda 2009 coup that ousted the 
democratically elected president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jun/28/honduras-coup-president-zelaya>, 
civil rights and environmental activists are beingkilled at a higher rate than 
anywhere else 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/09/berta-caceres-honduras-activist-murder-nephew-silvio-carrillo-interview>
 in the world, and refugees arefleeing en masse to the US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/12/us-immigration-policy-georgia-detention-center-honduras>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F20%2Fobamas-cuba-visit-latest-step-towards-new-alliance-of-americas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6ae7a7c8364d8f5e918bafb79a4e035d897f2ff7%2F0_7_5760_3458%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%E2%80%99s%20Cuba%20visit%20is%20latest%20step%20towards%20%E2%80%98new%20alliance%20of%20the%20Americas%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F20%2Fobamas-cuba-visit-latest-step-towards-new-alliance-of-americas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obama%E2%80%99s%20Cuba%20visit%20is%20latest%20step%20towards%20%E2%80%98new%20alliance%20of%20the%20Americas%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F20%2Fobamas-cuba-visit-latest-step-towards-new-alliance-of-americas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6ae7a7c8364d8f5e918bafb79a4e035d897f2ff7%2F0_7_5760_3458%2F5760.jpg>
 Paint thrown by protesters stains police shields during clashes in Bogota, 
Colombia. Photograph: Fernando Vergara/AP 
In Haiti <https://www.theguardian.com/world/haiti>, meanwhile, presidential 
elections were twice postponed and remain inconclusive, underscoring the 
problems the poorest country in the hemisphere faces in moving towards 
democracy.

Obama cannot be held solely responsible for the disappointments of his tenure, 
saidCynthia Arnson <https://www.wilsoncenter.org/person/cynthia-j-arnson>, 
director of the Latin American programme at the Wilson Center thinktank, which 
hosted the panel. “He has accomplished a good deal,” she said, “but it’s 
important to remember the president doesn’t make policy alone and the Congress 
plays a role.

Colombia: is the end in sight to the world’s longest war?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/15/colombia-end-in-sight-longest-running-conflict>
“There’s currently no US ambassador to Mexico. We’re in the middle of an 
election campaign in which Latin Americans, and Mexicans in particular, have 
been vilified in the grossest terms.”

Speaking at the same panel, Bradley Freden, the US chargé d’affaires in 
Uruguay, suggested that the US had moved past its rigid ideological standards 
of the cold war. Citing the US’s ties to former president José “Pepe” Mujica, a 
former guerrilla, Freden said: “I think perhaps the most important thing we’ve 
done by embracing him is to show countries likeVenezuela 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/venezuela> that it’s not whether you’re left 
or right.

“The United States can have great relations with a country that’s run by a 
former guerrilla as long as he’s elected democratically and is committed to the 
rule of law, which certainly was the case.”

The US is finally giving up its old approach of telling the continent what to 
do
Harold Trinkunas 
US diplomatic presentation, however, has certainly changed in the last decade. 
Obama has adopted a more humble stance and called for a more equitable 
partnership with continental neighbours. Echoing comments he made in 2008, the 
president observed ina recent interview 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2016/04/the-obama-doctrine/471525/>
 that the US has to face up to the darker side of its foreign affairs record.

“We have history. We have history in Iran. We have history in Indonesia and 
Central America,” he told the Atlantic. “So we have to be mindful of our 
history when we start talking about interfering, and understand the source of 
other people’s suspicions.”

He has also cut rivals down to size, however, particularly Venezuela’s Hugo 
Chávez. “We made a very strategic decision early on,” Obama said in the same 
interview. “Rather than blow him up as this 10-foot giant adversary, to right 
size the problem and say, ‘We don’t like what’s going on in Venezuela, but it’s 
not a threat to the United States.’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F20%2Fobamas-cuba-visit-latest-step-towards-new-alliance-of-americas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F911f1f6ce3c4d01713a0ee4cae0f5b375a6ab103%2F1214_62_2212_2761%2F2212.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%E2%80%99s%20Cuba%20visit%20is%20latest%20step%20towards%20%E2%80%98new%20alliance%20of%20the%20Americas%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F20%2Fobamas-cuba-visit-latest-step-towards-new-alliance-of-americas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obama%E2%80%99s%20Cuba%20visit%20is%20latest%20step%20towards%20%E2%80%98new%20alliance%20of%20the%20Americas%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F20%2Fobamas-cuba-visit-latest-step-towards-new-alliance-of-americas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F911f1f6ce3c4d01713a0ee4cae0f5b375a6ab103%2F1214_62_2212_2761%2F2212.jpg>
 A man holds up an image depicting Argentina’s President Mauricio Macri, during 
a demonstration in Buenos Aires. Photograph: Marcos Brindicci/Reuters 
 Nonetheless, the White House subsequently initiated sanctions that declared 
exactly that.

Washington’s influence within the region has undoubtedly strengthened in 
recent years. Obama boasts that US trade with the region has doubled during his 
presidency. The value of the dollar has also appreciated enormously against 
most regional currencies. China’s demand, meanwhile, for minerals and food has 
slowed, and falling oil prices have hurt Venezuela, Ecuador, Bolivia, Brazil and
Argentina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/argentina>.

“In 2008, the region was neglected and understandably so, given the wars in 
Iraq and Afghanistan and the financial crisis,” saidHarold Trinkunas 
<http://www.brookings.edu/experts/trinkunash>, director of the Latin America 
initiative at the Brookings Institution in Washington.

“An important shift in the Obama approach has been an attempt to work with 
these countries bilaterally on an equal basis. Cuba is a final step in that 
direction. The US is finally giving up its old approach of telling the 
continent what to do.”

The political pendulum has already swung in the latter. Macri has introduced a 
swath of market reforms and emerged as a vocal critic of Venezuela. Obama’s 
trip next week makes him the first US president to visit Argentina in more than 
a decade.

Argentina looks likely to become an ally, a step towards the regional 
“alliance” that Obama envisaged in 2008. But this is neither certain, uniform 
nor irreversible. Old suspicions about US intentions remain, and new doubts are 
growing about the future of Washington’s policy after Obama leaves office.

But for at least the next few days while he visits the former heartland of 
regional revolution, the US president should be able to bask in an unusually 
balmy political climate of a US president in Latin America.

 