 Joan Tate, who has died aged 77, was an outstanding and prolific literary 
translator. She only started in the early 1960s, but worked on more than 200 
books from the Scandinavian languages. The list of authors she translated from 
Swedish was a roll-call of the major names in contemporary Swedish literature. 
Almost the same could be said of her work in the other Scandinavian languages.
Tate had the ability to get under the skin of a novel and to strike a rapport 
with the writer - becoming friends with the cream of contemporary Scandinavian 
writers.Of her many awards, the one she treasured most was from the Swedish 
Academy: typically, she used most of the money to finance the translation of 
novels she admired, but which had not found an English-language publisher.

Born into a schoolmaster's family in Tonbridge, Kent, Joan Eames used to claim 
her greatest achievements at school were sporting. In 1939 she began a 
three-week visit to Sweden, and found herself stranded by the outbreak of war. 
She learned Swedish by reading magazines, and took a series of jobs - she was 
especially proud of having qualified as a gymnastics teacher and 
physiotherapist before returning to England in 1943.

The next year she married Clive Tate, an agricultural adviser and 
conservationist, and they eventually settled in Shrewsbury with their son and 
two daughters.

In the postwar years she wrote books, mainly for children and young people, 
and developed an interest in puppet theatre, specialising in south-east Asian 
shadow theatre and writing a scholarly book on the subject, which was close to 
completion on her death.

It was easy to be scared stiff by Joan, but behind the daunting exterior was a 
kind, generous and hospitable personality. She held open house to authors, 
publishers, artists of all kinds, students, and, not least, translators. She 
was a founder member of the Swedish-English Literary Translators' Association 
(Selta), and especially liked to address students with a budding interest in 
literary translation. "Don't even think about it unless you can write," she 
would say. "And to write properly, you must read - not just in the foreign 
language, but more espe cially in English. Knowing the foreign language is only 
the first step, and a short one at that."

Students were particularly impressed when she produced the computer printout 
of her public lending right royalties: she explained she could estimate her 
annual earnings by standing at the top of her stairs, letting the printout 
unroll, and seeing how far down the hall the last page came to rest.

Her awards were invariably accompanied by thanks for her promotion of 
Scandinavian literature and culture. "I have never promoted anything," she 
replied. "I just translate books." But she knew what they meant, and was 
secretly proud.

She is survived by her husband and children. 

Cleodie Mackinnon writes: In the late 60s and early 70s, bookshops were 
closing in most of the English provinces and Shrewsbury was no exception. 
Almost single-handed Joan Tate enlisted volunteers, negotiated a deal with a 
benevolent wholesaler, and secured a room (in the building shared by the local 
arts centre, adult education classes and university extra-mural department).

The bookshop beat conventional rivals to win a national prize for its 
speciality on environmental issues, became a meeting place for Shrewsbury's 
literati, and kept the book-buying habit alive in the town until independent 
bookshops and Waterstone's opened there.

Three of the volunteers later opened their own bookshops - typical examples of 
Joan's enabling and liberating powers.

Â• Joan Tate, translator, writer and publisher's reader, born September 23 
1922; died June 6 2000
 