
No doubt nearly everyone is familiar with the story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia-airlines-flight-mh370>. In early 
2014, Malaysian flight MH370 left Kuala Lumpur Malaysia, on a flight to China. 
The flight disappeared from communication and was never found; despite great 
search efforts.

It isn’t that there is no evidence of the crash. In July of last year, a 
portion of a wing was found near Madagascar and Reunion Island in the Indian 
Ocean. Since then, other debris has been found in the Western Indian Ocean.

Using the location of where the wing debris were found, oceanographers from 
University of Santiago de Compostela (Spain), the United States National 
Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), the University of Miami, 
University of Hawaii, and the Commonwealth Science Industrial and Research 
Organization (CSIRO) in Australia have a lead. Their hypothesis is published in 
the Journal of Operational Oceanography and can be foundhere 
<http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/1755876X.2016.1248149>.

The authors used two sets of data to help track the possible paths of the 
debris. First, they took advantage of observations from NOAA’sGlobal Drifter 
Array <http://www.aoml.noaa.gov/phod/dac/index.php>. These drifters have a 
surface float and an anchor or drogue that extend to 15m deep, and a suite of 
sensors that communicate via satellite their location and parameters like ocean 
currents, surface ocean temperature, pressure, wind, and salinity. In the 
Indian Ocean alone, there are approximately 400 of these drifters at any time, 
providing continuous ocean measurement information. At some point the drifters 
loose their drogue and these are the ones used in this study as they better 
simulate debris dynamics.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fclimate-consensus-97-per-cent%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Foceanographers-offer-clues-to-malaysian-airlines-crash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6bf9fef7e1c4b8d63877b05ad7515928e3b0581a%2F0_0_1200_1000%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Oceanographers%20offer%20clues%20to%20Malaysian%20airlines%20crash%20%7C%20John%20Abraham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fclimate-consensus-97-per-cent%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Foceanographers-offer-clues-to-malaysian-airlines-crash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Oceanographers%20offer%20clues%20to%20Malaysian%20airlines%20crash%20%7C%20John%20Abraham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fclimate-consensus-97-per-cent%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Foceanographers-offer-clues-to-malaysian-airlines-crash%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6bf9fef7e1c4b8d63877b05ad7515928e3b0581a%2F0_0_1200_1000%2F1200.jpg>
 Deployment of a drifter. Photograph: NOAA 
The authors tracked drifters that were released or that traveled near the 
search area in the southeastern Indian Ocean. Several of these drifters 
traveled across the Indian Ocean to the final destination near Reunion Island, 
very near where the wing debris was found, and the duration it took the 
drifters to make their trek was similar to that of the debris.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fclimate-consensus-97-per-cent%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Foceanographers-offer-clues-to-malaysian-airlines-crash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35e3e4b102f29cd7436b08cb6fc05cf248d64c62%2F0_0_679_891%2F679.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Oceanographers%20offer%20clues%20to%20Malaysian%20airlines%20crash%20%7C%20John%20Abraham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fclimate-consensus-97-per-cent%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Foceanographers-offer-clues-to-malaysian-airlines-crash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Oceanographers%20offer%20clues%20to%20Malaysian%20airlines%20crash%20%7C%20John%20Abraham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fclimate-consensus-97-per-cent%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Foceanographers-offer-clues-to-malaysian-airlines-crash%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35e3e4b102f29cd7436b08cb6fc05cf248d64c62%2F0_0_679_891%2F679.jpg>
 Diagram of a drifter. Illustration: NOAA 
In addition, the authors used a computer model of ocean currents from the 
University of Hawaii <http://apdrc.soest.hawaii.edu/projects/SCUD/>. This model 
incorporated the surface ocean winds and provided a realistic simulation of 
ocean currents during and after the plane crash. Using these computer-derived 
currents, the scientists released thousands of replica drifters to see where 
they traveled.

By combining the real trajectories from actual instruments with the simulated 
trajectories, scientists were able to identify the location where a crash was 
most likely, shown in the image below.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fclimate-consensus-97-per-cent%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Foceanographers-offer-clues-to-malaysian-airlines-crash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5487b15a95252c0fc000eeb24dfb1991d342847%2F0_0_757_285%2F757.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Oceanographers%20offer%20clues%20to%20Malaysian%20airlines%20crash%20%7C%20John%20Abraham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fclimate-consensus-97-per-cent%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Foceanographers-offer-clues-to-malaysian-airlines-crash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Oceanographers%20offer%20clues%20to%20Malaysian%20airlines%20crash%20%7C%20John%20Abraham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fclimate-consensus-97-per-cent%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Foceanographers-offer-clues-to-malaysian-airlines-crash%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5487b15a95252c0fc000eeb24dfb1991d342847%2F0_0_757_285%2F757.jpg>
 Trajectories calculated from computer simulations. Illustration: NOAA 
More recent debris discoveries confirm the general westward drift predictions 
from the computer program and analysis. While the assessments from this study 
are interesting in that they are related to the MH370 accident, the techniques 
that the researchers developed can be used for other ocean-debris scenarios and 
are useful both for basic research as well as more tangible applications for 
societal benefits, such as search and rescue efforts, oil spills, and fish 
larval transports.

I contacted author Joaquin Trinanes to ask about the difficulties of this 
project and its importance. He told me:

There are many factors that affect the trajectories and distribution of ocean 
debris. A critical aspect is related to the exposure of the floating objects to 
the wind, which can greatly impact the forecast of the location of the debris. 
It is challenging to solve but imperative with the advance in the developments 
of the observational and modeling efforts.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fclimate-consensus-97-per-cent%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Foceanographers-offer-clues-to-malaysian-airlines-crash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F011a031bb15d1ca992b3775b523704a3deaa4e59%2F0_0_2910_3424%2F2910.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Oceanographers%20offer%20clues%20to%20Malaysian%20airlines%20crash%20%7C%20John%20Abraham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fclimate-consensus-97-per-cent%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Foceanographers-offer-clues-to-malaysian-airlines-crash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Oceanographers%20offer%20clues%20to%20Malaysian%20airlines%20crash%20%7C%20John%20Abraham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fclimate-consensus-97-per-cent%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Foceanographers-offer-clues-to-malaysian-airlines-crash%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F011a031bb15d1ca992b3775b523704a3deaa4e59%2F0_0_2910_3424%2F2910.jpg>
 Dr. Joaquin Trinanes 
His colleague, Gustavo Goni added, 

Studies like the one carried out here shows the value of maintaining a global 
ocean observing system to monitor different parameters in the oceans, such as 
ocean currents in this case, but of others like sea surface temperature, winds, 
salinity, oxygen, etc.; which are key to understand how the ocean is linked to 
weather, climate, and ecosystems. In addition, this monitoring also serves for 
other direct applications, such as debris tracking, oil spill monitoring, 
fisheries stock assessments, sea level rise, etc.

I think it is really great to solve a basic research problem but also to 
connect it to practical applications. Great work, folks.
 