
The impact of Odell Beckham’s Miami boat ride six days before the Giants lost 
to the Packers in an NFC wildcard game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/08/nfl-playoffs-green-bay-packers-new-york-giants-game-report>
 may never be fully known. There are those who believe his hands had lingering 
sea sickness and were unable to reel in football passes like they were South 
Florida marlin.Others believe it was Aaron Rodgers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/09/green-bay-packers-dallas-cowboys-nfl>
, cold weather and New York’s horrific pass defense that did the Giants in. 
Perhaps the truth, like proper weight distribution of an ocean-going vessel, is 
somewhere in the middle.

What we do know is that Beckham’s trip is being scapeboated for the Giants’ 
25-point defeat by media members and fans whose thinking is even lazier than a 
shirtless day of sunbathing on the high seas. One thing happened, then another 
thing happened, and so the first thing must have caused the second thing. The 
logic is both air and watertight. But the optics of Beckham and friends sunning 
in Miamiturned bad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/09/odell-beckham-jr-punches-hole-in-wall-giants-playoff-loss>
 and it’s unlikely Beckham or any other NFL players will be taking Miami boat 
trips on off days again soon.

Odell Beckham Jr punches hole in wall after nightmarish playoff debut
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/09/odell-beckham-jr-punches-hole-in-wall-giants-playoff-loss>
A problem remains, however: NFL players still do have days off 
<http://sports.yahoo.com/news/tom-brady-defends-odell-beckham-jr-gives-advice-about-how-to-spend-free-time-194126910.html>
. As much as some media members, fans and even coaches might hate it, the 
athletes we watch each Sunday while prone on our couches for hours at a time 
are allowed a 24-hour period during which they are given the opportunity to do 
something other than football. Sad! But true. So in the powerful wake of 
Beckham’s boat, they must now choose their free-time to please everyone but 
themselves. Here are a few activities they can consider that might enrage the 
fewest people.

Regional ferry rides

Did you know that Odell Beckham isn’t the only big NFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl> star who spent his free time before the 
playoffs on a boat? None other than Bill Belichick, the man often referred to 
as the greatest leader in football history, took a cruise on a vessel, as well.
Adam Markopoulos (@AdamMarko) 
Hey @OnlyInBOS <https://twitter.com/OnlyInBOS>, look who I found on the 
Nantucket ferry on their bye week...#RelationshipGoals 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/RelationshipGoals?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/mZkADW07MK <https://t.co/mZkADW07MK>
 <https://twitter.com/AdamMarko/status/818288023590891522> January 9, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/AdamMarko/status/818288023590891522> 
There are a lot of red flags here. First of all, Belichick is sleeping while 
the sun is out instead of game-planning for the Houston Texans. Perhaps he is 
not taking them seriously enough and the Patriots are primed for a huge letdown 
defeat. But the more serious issue is that Belichick’s laptop is sitting wide 
open. What if he had top secret plays on there that nearby passengers – 
passengers who could be fans of the Texans, Steelers or Chiefs – could memorize 
and pass on to their favorite teams? It’s stunningly irresponsible. 

Yet despite this photo being shared all over the internet 
<http://thebiglead.com/2017/01/09/bill-belichick-just-like-odell-beckham-is-on-a-boat-before-a-crucial-playoff-game/>
, Belichick is not getting any of the criticism that Beckham got. Why? The only 
explanation is that the Patriots coach is not on a Miami yacht, but a regional 
ferry. He’s supporting the local economy, proving he cares about New England. 
And if he cares about New England, he must care about the Patriots, too. 
Whereas Beckham flew three hours to Miami and boarded a boat in another market. 
Big difference! If the Giants receiver really cared about New York, he could 
have chartered one of those Hudson River tour boats and then sat shirtless on 
that, preparing his body for the Green Bay cold. Wasted opportunity.

Pity the Cowboys: No1 Dallas are facing the NFL's most dangerous team
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/09/green-bay-packers-dallas-cowboys-nfl>
Row boats

Boats themselves are not the problem. Beckham simply chose the wrong kind and 
sent the wrong message. Ferries say you’re going somewhere with a group of 
people. Yachts say you’ve already made it. Row boats? They’re the grittiest 
boat of all. You don’t get anywhere on a row boat if you don’t make it move 
with your own sweat and hard work. Bring a few team-mates on your row boat and 
you’ve got a team-building exercise, everyone toiling away, moving towards the 
same goal. If that’s not a metaphor for football, then you’ve been listening to 
the wrong color commentators. Imagine the camaraderie that Beckham and his 
Giants team-mates could have built while rowing from New York to Miami and back 
last Monday. He undoubtedly would have developed the strength to hold onto 
footballs. 

Social media curation

Odell Beckham’s biggest sin wasn’t hanging out shirtless on a yacht in Miami. 
It wasn’t partying withnoted sports team curse Justin Bieber 
<http://ftw.usatoday.com/2017/01/justin-bieber-new-york-giants-sports-curse-steelers-spain-cavaliers-list>
.  It wasn’t even wearing Timberlands while shirtless on a yacht in Miami, 
believe it or not. It was letting a picture of his day off hit social media. In 
this era of Twitter, Facebook, Snapchat, Instagram, andthe #brands of Russell 
Wilson and JJ Watt 
<http://www.complex.com/sports/2016/06/russell-wilson-personal-logo-terrible>, 
Beckham should know that a person’s image has nothing to do with who they 
really are or how they fill their days; it’s all about what they put online for 
the world to see. Beckham should have done exactly three things on his off day: 
1) tweet something like “Up early and grinding to get ready for the big game” 
first thing in the morning, along with a cliche-heavy hashtagged slogan; 2) 
relax the entire rest of the day by doing absolutely whatever he wanted, on or 
off watercraft; 3) make sure no one took pictures of him doing absolutely 
whatever he wanted. If those three things happened, there would have been no 
story of the boat that made Beckham drop passes. The Giants still would have 
lost and he still would have a bad game, but it would have been because the 
Packers were the better team. That’s it. Live and learn. Whoa. “Live and learn” 
would be good hashtag to use after a loss.

Hiding

Any athlete who has ever done stuff knows that the great risk of doing stuff 
is that people will criticize you for the stuff that you did. Relax on your off 
day, and you’re relaxing the wrong way. Work on your off day, and you should 
have relaxed and saved your energy for when it matters. Wear flashy clothes and 
you only care about getting attention. Wear casual clothes and you’re not 
professional. Don’t speak out about social issues and you’re not making an 
impact in your community. Speak out about social issues and be told that you 
should stick to sports. The only sure way for athletes to avoid having complete 
strangers tell them that they’re doing it wrong is to do nothing at all. Just 
hide in their house with the lights out and the blinds drawn. But it must be 
the right kind of house, not one of these huge, expensive ones that show an 
athlete cares more about wealth than winning. And whatever you do, athletes, 
don’t live on a yacht in Miami.
 