
It was party time for a group of elderly leaseholders in Berkshire last month. 
After years of paying high charges imposed by one of the UK’s most 
controversial property management firms, the residents have finally gained the 
right to manage (RTM) their own homes.

Now the happy controllers of their own block, the annual service charge on a 
two-bed flat has dropped from £2,558 to £1,652, while they also feel they’re 
getting better value for each pound spent.

Warner Court in Sandhurst was built by McCarthy & Stone, but for many years 
was under the control of a separate management company called FirstPort – and 
residents were far from happy. Nicola Frith, an accountant and the daughter of 
a Warner Court resident, spent months poring over the accounts for the complex 
of 33 retirement flats. She concluded that FirstPort had failed to comply with 
legislation designed to protect leaseholders, and that residents were 
overcharged and receiving a poor service in return. “As someone who has been in 
business for almost 25 years I have never seen anything like it,” says Frith.

The freehold of Warner Court is owned by Fairhold but run by Estates and 
Management, who appointed FirstPort as managing agents.

FirstPort, a 2014 rebranding of a number of property management companies such 
as Peverel, OM and Solitaire, has a chequered history. In 2011, Guardian Money 
highlightedwidespread allegations of excessive fees and poor service at Peverel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2011/feb/12/peverel-property-management-tenant-rebellion>
.

We also featured Cirrus Communications Systems, a subsidiary of Peverel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2013/dec/14/cirrus-ripping-off-elderly>, 
which colluded with other UK firms between 2005 and 2009 to rig so-called 
competitive quotes, and then obtain the business at an inflated price. 
Residents at some retirement homes, many in their 90s, subsequently did not 
know they could have paid far less for services such as door entry systems.

At Warner Court, Frith alleges a catalogue of failings by the management 
company. Many relate to alleged failure to comply with the Landlord & Tenant 
Act 1985 (as amended by the Commonhold andLeasehold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/leasehold> Reform Act 2002). Section 20 of 
the act sets out a consultation procedure that freeholders, or their agents, 
need to follow when carrying out qualifying works to a building where each unit 
would be billed £250 or more.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fright-to-manage-service-charges-firstport-peverel-warner-court-fairhold%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2645a4e02be534c9a94414fa148c317c84991d20%2F0_0_3264_2448%2Fmaster%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Older%20leaseholders%20who%20fought%20for%20right%20to%20manage%20their%20block%20%E2%80%93%20and%20won&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fright-to-manage-service-charges-firstport-peverel-warner-court-fairhold%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Older%20leaseholders%20who%20fought%20for%20right%20to%20manage%20their%20block%20%E2%80%93%20and%20won&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fright-to-manage-service-charges-firstport-peverel-warner-court-fairhold%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2645a4e02be534c9a94414fa148c317c84991d20%2F0_0_3264_2448%2Fmaster%2F3264.jpg>
 Warner Court residents have their cake after taking control of their block. 
Photograph: Warner Court Residents 
The consultation process allows leaseholders to check out recommended 
contractors and their tenders, or suggest alternative contractors to quote for 
the work. Frith alleges FirstPort broke section 20 several times by spending 
five-figure sums without prior consultation. The amounts included £18,000 spent 
on decorating in 2008, £17,000 on lounge furniture in 2014, and more than 
£10,000 on plumbing in the same year.

FirstPort accepted there had been “a historical issue” with its processes at 
Warner Court, meaning the section 20 consultation process was “not always 
followed”. “We have rectified this by investing in a major works team who have 
the single focus on ensuring the administration of the section 20 consultation 
process runs smoothly and effectively for residents,” it said.

In particular, it admits the £17,000 on furniture did not follow the rules. 
“As soon as we were made aware of this error we refunded residents the full 
amount owing to them,” it said.

But Frith says she recalls the incident differently: “No consultation was 
made, so I fought and managed to get back the difference because FirstPort knew 
it had broken the law,” she says.

What happened to the old furniture is a mystery. FirstPort said it was donated 
to charity Sue Ryder, but Frith says she can find no evidence of this. “I 
contacted the charity, which stated that it has not received the furniture and 
does not have the capacity to collect or store the amount involved.”

Frith also alleges that when a flood occurred in February 2014 a bill for more 
than £8,000 was paid from the block’s contingency fund, despite the fact that 
insurance should have paid for the bulk of the repairs.

Frith has numerous other examples of what she says was frivolous spending of 
leaseholders’ money. In six of the past eight years FirstPort said roof work 
was required. On one occasion it used a contractor based near Exeter, about 145 
miles away, despite there being plenty of local roofing firms. The roofers’ 
invoice, which Money has seen, included travel expenses and accommodation.

FirstPort denies that leaseholders were charged for travel expenses, and says 
it opted for the cheaper of two quotes. “Our national reach means we can 
realise cost benefits from working with national contractors, who are 
well-versed to working across the country and provide competitive quotes 
regardless of location,” it said in a statement.

Property service charges soar to average £2,777 per year for new-builds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/09/service-charges-soar-to-average-2777-per-year-for-new-build-flats>
But after years of gripes, the residents of Warner Court decided enough was 
enough. The Commonhold and Leasehold Reform Act 2002 provides a right for 
leaseholders to acquire the landlord’s management functions (if not the 
freehold itself) by transfering them to an RTM company set up by them .

This is, in theory, relatively simple. The right is exercised by the service 
of a formal notice on the landlord. After a set period of time the management 
transfers to the RTM company. At least half the flats need to join the RTM 
company, which will then appoint directors and other officers, usually all 
residents. By default, the freeholder is also entitled to membership of the 
company. Once in control of the building the RTM company needs to stick to all 
the terms in the lease concerning maintenance and repairs but, crucially, the 
directors can make decisions about which contractors to use and how much to 
spend.

Gaining the RTM has knocked about a third off the management fee for Warner 
Court residents. FirstPort budgeted £63,950 for service charges for the block 
in 2016, but the RTM company’s revised budget puts this at £41,699.

FirstPort was not keen to let the site go to another management firm, with one 
of its managers telling elderly residents not to join the RTM. It took the 
residents eight months to gain the RTM, costing £9,000. The bulk of the bill 
was for legal costs – residents must pay the freeholder’s costs as well as 
their own, and there’s no legal obligation for the freeholder to use a 
competitively priced solicitor.

“I can see how a lot of people are put off by this process – after a couple of 
months of legal battling I renamed it ‘Fight to Manage’ because that is exactly 
what it is,” Frith says.

Who are FirstPort?

FirstPort is the current name for property group Peverel, which was rebranded 
in 2014.

It manages around 180,000 properties across the UK, including about 60,000 
retirement homes.

FirstPort is part of Knight Square, which is jointly owned by the private 
equity companies Chamonix and Electra.

Formerly Peverel, FirstPort was renamed in 2014. Peverel went into 
administration in 2011 when a bank loan was called in shortly after its owner 
Vincent Tchenguiz and his brother Robert were arrested by theSerious Fraud 
Office <https://www.theguardian.com/law/serious-fraud-office>.

However, the investigation was subsequently dropped and the brothers received 
millions of pounds in damages and an apology. Peverel was rescued by Chamonix 
and Electra the following year in a £62m deal.

However, Peverel didn’t sever ties with Tchenguiz completely. The Tchenguiz 
Family Trust, based in the British Virgin Islands, still ultimately owns about 
65% of the freehold sites that are now under the management of FirstPort.

Since 2010 retirement developments built by builder McCarthy & Stone have been 
under the management of an in-house company.

Its developments that were completed before that date, are managed by 
third-party companies, led by FirstPort.

• This article was amended on 21 October 2016 to make clear that there is now 
no ownership interest in FirstPort byVincent Tchenguiz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/vincent-tchenguiz> or any of his 
companies.
 