
Om Puri <https://www.theguardian.com/film/om-puri> was a generous, 
warm-hearted man and an incredible international star who shone in Indian, 
British and Hollywood films. As one of the most talented and versatile actors 
of his generation, he showed in his characters how similar we all are – how 
human and imperfect – and in so doing changed the way we think about race and 
representation. He put a human face on a label and showed we all want the best 
for our children and families.


Om Puri obituary
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/06/om-puri-obituary> 
Om and I had been wanting to work together for many years and I was thrilled 
when we finally had the opportunity to do so last year when I directed 
Viceroy’s House <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=id_ZyNdvXKQ>. The film is the 
true story of the end of empire in India after centuries of British rule. It 
was a deeply personal film for both of us given that we were both from the 
Punjab and the end of the Raj had a profound impact on our families. We shared 
a passionate belief that we are all brothers and sisters, and in a world riven 
with the politics of division and hatred, we wanted our film to celebrate 
tolerance and the triumph of the human spirit.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Findian-actor-om-puri-dies-aged-66-video-report&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Indian%20actor%20Om%20Puri%20dies%20aged%2066%20%E2%80%93%20video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Findian-actor-om-puri-dies-aged-66-video-report>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Indian%20actor%20Om%20Puri%20dies%20aged%2066%20%E2%80%93%20video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Findian-actor-om-puri-dies-aged-66-video-report&media=>
Indian actor Om Puri dies aged 66 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2017/jan/06/indian-actor-om-puri-dies-aged-66-video-report>
I first saw Om on the big screen 35 years ago in Richard Attenborough’s 
Gandhi. We both recognised how much the world had moved on since then: here I 
was, not only a woman but an Asian British woman, given the chance to tell the 
story of empire from our point of view. In my film, Om plays a blind Muslim 
freedom fighter who marched withGandhi 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0adv8zQsa9I> and whose daughter falls in love 
with a Hindu boy. He brought the same dignity and compassion to the role as he 
brought to all his roles: I’m sure many will remember his wonderfully complex 
performance as the Pakistani patriarch George Khan in East is East 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x14OlebWSCQ>, as his was a humanity that 
transcended nationality and religious belief.

I’m conscious that all of the foregoing makes Om sound terribly serious. But 
he was also tremendous fun and full of mischief; on set his lovely smile and 
endless jokes were infectious. When others faded, he remained energised, and no 
matter the hour he was always happy to sit down for a drink with cast and crew 
at the end of a day’s shoot. It is painful to think that he won’t be standing 
alongside us when we celebrate not only the launch of Viceroy’s House next 
month but also the 70th anniversary of Indian independence and the birth of 
Pakistan. I will forever cherish the time we spent together and the wonderful 
legacy he has left for us all on screen.

• Viceroy’s House is out in the UK on 3 March
 