
The actor Om Puri, who has died aged 66 from a heart attack, exuded a 
reassuring warmth and gravitas over a long career divided largely between 
Bollywood and Hollywood. His Hindi hits included the political comedy Jaane Bhi 
Do Yaaro (1983), the Macbeth-inspired drama Maqbool (2003), the action romp 
Singh Is Kinng (2008) and the thrillers Don (2006) and Don 2 (2011). 
Appearances in twoMike Nichols 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2014/nov/20/mike-nichols> films – he shared 
a scene with Jack Nicholson in Wolf (1994) and starred withTom Hanks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/tomhanks> and Julia Roberts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/juliaroberts> in Charlie Wilson’s War 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/jan/11/drama.tomhanks> (2007), in which 
he was very wry as President Zia-ul-Haq – were among the US roles that followed 
his brief English-language debut in Gandhi (1982). He credited his more 
prominent part in Roland Joffe’s City of Joy (1992), where he was a struggling 
farmer who befriends a doctor (Patrick Swayze 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/sep/15/patrick-swayze-obituary1>) in 
Calcutta, with increasing his opportunities in Britain and the US.

It is for his performances in two low-budget British films about immigration 
and assimilation, however, that he will be most fondly remembered by UK 
audiences. East Is East (1999) explored the tensions between George (Puri), a 
Pakistani patriarch, and the family he is raising with his English wife (Linda 
Bassett) in Salford at the start of the 1970s. The picture was marketed as a 
Full Monty-style comedy about poor but happy northerners. Despite featuring 
gross-out humour (a frisky Dalmatian and a rubber vagina made an appearance 
alongside gags about bodily fluids), it took a darker turn when bumbling, 
well-meaning George descended into domestic violence. If East Is East felt at 
times like two different films welded together, it was the Bafta-nominated Puri 
who gave it weight and consistency. He reprised his role in a disappointing 
sequel, West Is West (2010), in which George returns to Pakistan with his 
youngest son.

Two years before East Is East, he had been impressive as another immigrant 
father in My Son the Fanatic (1997), written byHanif Kureishi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/hanif-kureishi>. He played Parvez, a 
Pakistani taxi driver whose open and progressive attitude towards racial 
integration in Britain places him at loggerheads with his son, a budding 
Islamic fundamentalist. The friction between them is exacerbated by Parvez’s 
affection for a local prostitute (Rachel Griffiths).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fom-puri-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1d1a5b59ac8bf0e0cc572c5c5b33972ba65d093%2F0_0_3504_1491%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Om%20Puri%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fom-puri-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Om%20Puri%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fom-puri-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1d1a5b59ac8bf0e0cc572c5c5b33972ba65d093%2F0_0_3504_1491%2F3504.jpg>
 Om Puri and Helen Mirren in The Hundred-Foot Journey (2014). Photograph: 
Allstar/Disney/Sportsphoto 
Puri was born in Ambala, in the northern Indian state of Haryana, the youngest 
of seven children of an army officer and his wife; three of his siblings died 
at a young age. He joined the theatre group Punjab Kala Manch while at college. 
“When I was doing these social plays, I felt [they were] giving words to my 
feelings,” he said. He insisted throughout his career on the social value of 
his work. “It is my first preference to do films with social significance. Art 
cinema has given me credibility and status as an actor, but commercial cinema 
has given me a comfortable living.”

He received scholarships to attend the National School of Drama and the Film 
and Television Institute of India, then both based in Delhi. He made his film 
debut in 1976 in Ghashiram Kotwal and received acclaim for Aakrosh (1980) in 
which he was Bhiku, a mute murder suspect whose silence through the picture is 
broken by a blood-curdling scream in its final minutes. “Om had lived Bhiku’s 
story by the time this scene was shot and empathised with him completely,”said 
the film’s director, Govind Nihalani 
<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/entertainment/hindi/bollywood/news/Story-behind-Om-Puris-chilling-scream-in-Aakrosh/articleshow/23335210.cms>
. “I just told him I did not want his expression to be either neutral or 
over-emotional and then left it to him. I don’t know what he did to build 
himself up, but Om’s screams touched me like they did each viewer.” Puri was 
proud of the film, and of Arohan (1983), in which he played a victimised 
farmer; he was named best actor in the Indian National Film awards for the 
latter.

His commercial breakthrough came in the tough drama Ardh Satya (1983), in 
which he was a conscientious young cop confronting Indian corruption. The film 
won him a second National Film award as well as the best actor prize at the 
Karlovy Vary film festival. He also appeared in its 1984 follow-up, Party.

Puri was seen by British television audiences in ITV’s The Jewel in the Crown 
(1984) and in the Channel 4 adaptation of Zadie Smith’s White Teeth (2002). He 
played a Hindi professor who interviews a great Urdu poet inIsmail Merchant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2005/may/26/guardianobituaries.film>’s In 
Custody (1994). His English-language films included theMichael Douglas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/michael-douglas>/Val Kilmer  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/val-kilmer>adventure The Ghost and the 
Darkness (1996),Michael Winterbottom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/michael-winterbottom>’s futuristic thriller 
Code 46 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/News_Story/Critic_Review/Guardian_review/0,,1306081,00.html>
 (2003), Mira Nair’s terrorism dramaThe Reluctant Fundamentalist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/may/09/reluctant-fundamentalist-review> 
(2012) andThe Hundred-Foot Journey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-hundred-foot-journey> (2014), a feelgood 
comedy-drama about competing restaurants in a French town, starringHelen Mirren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/helen-mirren> and produced by Steven 
Spielberg <https://www.theguardian.com/film/stevenspielberg> and Oprah Winfrey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/oprah-winfrey>.

After being appointed honorary OBE in 2005 for services to British cinema, 
Puri claimed the work dried up from this country. “I thought that was a golden 
handshake, that we [have] had enough of you – here is your prize, now get 
lost!” In recent times, he mourned the paucity of complex parts in Indian 
cinema such as those in Aakrosh and Arohan. “There are hardly any such roles 
left,” he said. Asked if he hoped one of his forthcoming movies would put him 
back on the map, he replied: “I have not gone anywhere from the map. I am very 
much here.”

He had a number of films awaiting release, including Viceroy’s House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/16/gurinder-chadha-on-viceroys-house-why-i-had-to-make-a-film-about-partition>
,Gurinder Chadha <https://www.theguardian.com/film/gurinder-chadha>’s drama 
about the last days of the Raj, in which he co-starred with Hugh Bonneville,
Gillian Anderson <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/gillian-anderson> and 
Michael Gambon <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/michael-gambon>. The film is 
due for release in March.

He is survived by Ishaan, his son from his second marriage, to Nandita, which 
ended in 2013.

• Om Puri <https://www.theguardian.com/film/om-puri>, actor, born 18 October 
1950; died 6 January 2017
 