
It’s fair to say that among those dependent on public transport, buses don’t 
have a good reputation for turning up on time. So when a model for a sci-fi 
looking “straddling bus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/26/china-straddling-floating-bus-beat-traffic-jams>
” capable of gliding over traffic was unveiled in China in May (six years after 
first being mooted 
<http://www.chinahush.com/2010/07/31/straddling-bus-a-cheaper-greener-and-faster-alternative-to-commute/?utm_source=feedburner&utm_medium=feed&utm_campaign=Feed:+ChinaHush+%28ChinaHush%29>
), we can safely say that the hopes of city commuters were, no pun intended, 
raised.

In the case of the so-called Transit Explore Bus (TEB), however, it seems that 
potential delays are the least of its troubles. Just one week after a “road 
test” of the futuristic bus – which, in the words of theShanghaiist 
<http://shanghaiist.com/2016/08/02/straddling_bus_launch.php>, proved: “They 
built it. They actually built it” –reports have emerged 
<http://china.huanqiu.com/article/2016-08/9263351.html> in the Chinese media 
<http://news.sina.cn/news_zt/swbt?from=qudao&wm=3049_b111> suggesting that not 
only is the bus’s current manifestation completely unfeasible, but that TEB 
might even be some kind of elaboratePonzi scheme 
<http://economics.about.com/od/financialmarkets/f/ponzi_scheme.htm>.

Such allegations have been indignantly refuted by the inventor Song Youzhou, 
who told the websiteSixth Tone 
<http://www.sixthtone.com/news/chinese-media-call-straddling-bus-scam>: “We 
haven’t done anything wrong at all. The latest tests show that the bus design 
is entirely possible.”

But leaving such murkier allegations aside, the ever-growing list of technical 
criticisms levelled at the project might seem enough to make Song and his team 
give up on their radical bus-on-stilts dream.

Detailed most comprehensively by Wired 
<https://www.wired.com/2016/08/concerns-chinas-traffic-slaying-straddling-bus/?mbid=social_fb>
, these include the fact that that the TEB has a ground clearance of just 2.1 
metres, meaning only small vehicles will be able to drive under it. It’s also 
unclear what a car is meant to do if the bus rolls over it when approaching a 
junction. And, keeping the electric vehicle charged would be a real challenge. 
On top of this, bridges, lamp posts and road signs would all have to be 
re-thought.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Ftransit-explore-bus-above-road-traffic-china-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bus%20that%20moves%20above%20traffic%20jams%3A%20model%20unveiled%20in%20China%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Ftransit-explore-bus-above-road-traffic-china-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bus%20that%20moves%20above%20traffic%20jams%3A%20model%20unveiled%20in%20China%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Ftransit-explore-bus-above-road-traffic-china-video&media=>
Bus that moves above traffic jams: model unveiled in China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/may/26/transit-explore-bus-above-road-traffic-china-video>
But perhaps the most cutting criticism of all: since the TEB runs on tracks, 
it’s technically not even a bus. It’s a train.

Even the “road test”, in hindsight, was found by local media to be 
unconvincing. It took place on a 300 metre highway and was hardly equivalent to 
actual traffic conditions. Was the test just a chance to show that TEB had 
actually built something? Anything? Playing it down since, the authorities in 
Qinhuangdao, where the bus was tested, have said the TEB will just be used for 
tourism rather than major transportation.

As the likelihood of the TEB coming to fruition in any meaningful way 
crumbles, descending from transport-solution-of-the-future to a folly evocative 
of that episode of the Simpsons whenSpringfield gets a monorail 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marge_vs._the_Monorail>, it looks set to join 
the ranks of other well meaning, but ultimately futile, urban traffic-solving 
ideas.

Like, for example, the Hyperloop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/aug/14/hyperloop-elon-musk-futuristic-technology-transport>
 (emphasis on the “hype”), in which pods full of people would in theory be 
fired down a large tube at speeds of up to 750mph. The concept was first put 
forward byElon Musk <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/elon-musk> – the 
guy behind commercial space travel enterprise SpaceX – in 2013, and since then 
two companies have been competing to make it a reality: Hyperloop 
Transportation Technologies (HTT) and Hyperloop One.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F98497797&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F98497797> 
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F98497797&media=>
Recently, Hyperloop One put on a demonstration in the Nevada desert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/11/hyperloop-supersonic-train-test-propulsion-system>
, shooting a test sled down a track at 115mph. But as Guardian Tech reporter 
Alex Hern pointed out, while it did represent a step forward,it is a small one 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/12/hyperloop-or-over-hyped-latest-demo-does-little-to-ease-doubts>
, writing: “Linear accelerators are nothing new: they’ve been usedin 
rollercoasters for 20 years <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flight_of_Fear> and 
slower versions are already used in metro systems all over the world.” So 
nothing revolutionary just yet.

If it does come to fruition, it will mean people could travel from San 
Francisco to Los Angeles in just 30 minutes, but – as with commercial space 
travel – it is still unclear how the project could be economically viable with 
so many design and development kinks still to be hammered out.

Then there’s SkyTran <http://www.skytran.com/>, a “patented, high speed, low 
cost, elevated Personal Rapid Transportation system” based in Nasa’sAmes 
Research Center <https://www.nasa.gov/centers/ames/home/index.html> in 
California. SkyTran’s design consists of sleek steel and aluminium pods pods 
(what is it with pods and the future?) that travel along an elevatedmaglev track
 
<http://science.howstuffworks.com/transport/engines-equipment/maglev-train1.htm>
 high above the street.

Urban oddities: cities used to do the strangest things …
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/jul/19/urban-oddities-cities-strangest-things-baby-cages-airships-skyscrapers>
This rapid transit system, developed by Nasa engineer Doug Malewicki, would 
carry two or four people in each pod, with the potential to move them at speeds 
of up to 155 mph. In the case of SkyTran, the argument is that it’s far more 
economical than building an underground system; the company claims it will cost 
just $13m (£9.8m) for every mile of track, compared to $160m per mile of subway.

Still, it is yet to appear in a city. It was due to launch in Tel Aviv in 
2014, andthen at the end of 2015 
<http://www.timesofisrael.com/skytran-demo-not-quite-ready-for-prime-time/>. 
Now the official line is that ademonstration track 
<http://fortune.com/2015/11/24/skytran-maglev-pod-system-tel-aviv/> will be 
completed at the end of this year. More recently it was announced that Lagos, 
Nigeria, would get aSkyTran track by 2020 
<http://www.techinsider.io/skytran-flying-pods-will-launch-in-nigeria-2015/#skytran-opened-a-900-foot-test-station-on-the-campus-of-israel-aerospace-industries-near-tel-aviv-in-late-2015-by-the-end-of-2016-it-will-start-construction-of-a-25-mile-track-in-lagos-an-exact-route-in-the-city-has-not-yet-been-planned-1>
. Fingers crossed.

Keeping in mind that most of these suggestions have barely existed beyond the 
drawing board, perhaps the best new public transport concept to be presented in 
recent years is the “cat bus <https://vimeo.com/15166847>”, which appears as a 
character in the Japanese animated fantasy filmMy Neighbour Totoro 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/My_Neighbor_Totoro>.

The cat bus can fly, it can take passengers to any destination they want – 
and, well, it’s adorable. And judging by the track record of some other urban 
transportation ideas doing the rounds, it’s also just as likely to happen.

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> to join the discussion
 