Mulberry Street, Manhattan, circa 1900 and 2015. 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/01/now-and-then-embed/embed/embed.html?mobile_before=//media.guim.co.uk/7c4f03550db98f27b47f167847b0fa8e49510efc/0_0_480_341/480.jpg&desktop_before=//uploads.guim.co.uk/2017/01/09/mulbery-of-old-compressor-compressor.jpg&label_before=Then&mobile_after=//media.guim.co.uk/dd8ef0349f26b7ab3e4f05a65c25dfad7e32a684/0_0_480_341/480.jpg&desktop_after=//uploads.guim.co.uk/2017/01/09/modern-mulberry-compressor-compressor.jpg&label_after=Now&>
 Operate the slider above to see the street then and now. Photographs: Jacob 
Riis/Detroit Publishing Co/Library of Congress; Jeff Chien-Hsing Liao 
There can be no more iconic photograph of Manhattan at its teeming, turn of 
the 20th century peak than the image of Mulberry Street taken by the famed 
documentarian Jacob Riis in 1900. “They are labourers; toilers in all grades of 
manual work; they are artisans, they are junkmen, and here, too, dwell the rag 
pickers,” theNew York Times had reported four years earlier, in 1896. “Here are 
all sorts of stores, pensions, groceries, fruit emporiums, tailors, shoemakers, 
wine merchants, importers, musical instrument makers … There are notaries, 
lawyers, doctors, apothecaries, undertakers …

More than a century later, the photograph from New York’s classic era forms 
the centrepiece ofNew York at its Core <http://www.mcny.org/nyatitscore>, a 
fascinating exhibition at theMuseum of the City of New York 
<http://www.mcny.org/> that attempts to explain the city’s unique energy, its 
mythology and enduring grip on the imagination, even as it becomes identified 
as a repository of extreme wealth for a global moneyed elite.

The timing of the exhibition, on the eve of the presidential inauguration of a 
New Yorker who claims to be anti-immigration, is especially acute. Donald 
Trump’s ancestry is both German and Scottish and in the early 1970s, when the 
young would-be US president was making his way in the city as a developer, 
Germans, along with Italians, Poles and Irish, remained the dominant immigrant 
groups.

“Even at that time the Lower East Side was considered to be quintessential New 
York in a way that it spoke to the diversity and struggle of the immigrant 
city,” says Sarah Henry, curator at the Museum of the City ofNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york>, surveying the artefacts that 
tell the story of three centuries of evolution.

The exhibition argues that there are four things that make New York the place 
it is: money, diversity, density and creativity, with creativity being the 
consequence of the first three. “We argue that immigration continues to 
influence the character of the city. The nature of the diversity has changed, 
the density has changed, and the way we see it has changed,” says Henry.

Nowadays, Henry says, the European groups have largely been subsumed, replaced 
by Dominicans, Puerto Ricans and Mexicans. “New York not only has the largest 
immigrant population in the world, but there’s no majority group within that 
immigration. So there’s extreme diversity but the slices of the pie are very 
thin.”

Walk down Mulberry Street today, as it skirts the western edge of the Lower 
East Side, and the changes are profound. At the north end is the Puck Building, 
home to Ivanka Trump and husband Jared Kushner. Adjacent is the home of the late
David Bowie <https://www.theguardian.com/music/davidbowie>. The middle is 
dominated by handbag boutiques and stores for expensive pushchairs. To the 
south are the remnants of Little Italy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fnew-york-city-mobsters-mean-streets-diversity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffbfb1bc6687d3aab881ee96140b3b076b8c6c81c%2F240_964_5586_3351%2F5586.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Once%20upon%20a%20time%20in%20Mulberry%20Street%20%E2%80%A6%20New%20York%20recalls%20romance%20of%20its%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fnew-york-city-mobsters-mean-streets-diversity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Once%20upon%20a%20time%20in%20Mulberry%20Street%20%E2%80%A6%20New%20York%20recalls%20romance%20of%20its%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fnew-york-city-mobsters-mean-streets-diversity%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffbfb1bc6687d3aab881ee96140b3b076b8c6c81c%2F240_964_5586_3351%2F5586.jpg>
 Five Cents a Spot, c. 1890 Photograph by Jacob A. Riis Photograph: Museum of 
the City of New York - Gift of Roger William Riis 
Here are the former mob hangouts such as Umberto’s Clam House, where Joe 
Gallo, of the Colombo crime family, was shot by rival mafiosi in 1972, and the 
beginnings of Chinatown. Here too are the ruins of Five Points, where the 
earlier wave of Irish and German immigrants ofGangs of New York fame had 
battled for control.

At its peak, the Lower East Side was one of the most densely populated places 
on Earth, with 500,000 people crammed into four square miles. The city was a 
manufacturing centre, making “everything from corsets to skyscrapers to 
aircraft carriers”, according to Joshua Freeman’sWorking-Class New York.

But perhaps the most striking thing is how little has changed. In the late 
1890s, the wealthy from other parts of the city would come downtown to 
experience the latest craze of “slumming”. The neighbourhood, with its 
newfangled native cultural mash-ups such as burlesque, and foreign ones, such 
as Chinese opium dens, was seen as intensely exotic. Even Charles Dickens came 
to visit.

“It’s part of the enduring story of how New York has been seen by the rest of 
the world but also how it has packaged itself as a cultural commodity that is 
both quintessentially American and profoundly foreign,” says Henry.

To New York, the greatest surprise of 9/11 was that the city, so accustomed to 
being forsaken by the rest of the US, became the recipient of empathy and was 
drawn, uncomfortably perhaps, to the nation’s bosom. For New Yorkers, says 
Henry, it was a “startling turn of events to find themselves for a moment 
embraced as the epitome of America”.

But through it all, its essential image has remained unchanged, including that 
of not being quite America. Last year, during the Republican primaries, Texas 
senator Ted Cruz disparagedDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> for holding “New York values” 
in an attempt to undercut his Republican credentials.

Trump, the ultimate suburban boy made good in the big city, responded by 
invoking 9/11 as proof that New York is at the heart of America. The criticism, 
says Henry, “resonated as part of a dynamic that has played out over the course 
of hundreds of years. It’s as germane to American politics in 2017 as it was a 
century or two centuries ago.”
Lower Manhattan 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2017/01/lower-manhattan/giv-390258rZwikkuAN8/>
In fact, the proportion of immigrants in the city is roughly the same as it 
was in 1900, though the largely Hispanic immigrant groups are now spread 
throughout the boroughs to enclaves in Brooklyn, Queens and the Bronx. Last 
week’s excitement at the opening of a subway extension into the working-class 
neighbourhoods of the Upper East Side after nearly a century of on-off 
construction signifies how New York remains in flux. The opening of the Q 
extension drew concerns that the neighbourhood would undergo rapid 
gentrification – as has Mulberry Street.

Such changes speak to competing visions for the modern city backed by its 
leading urban planners and theorists: Robert Moses, who envisioned New York as 
spread out and suburban; and Jane Jacobs, who championed it as intense and 
energetic.

“It’s not just nostalgia, but also that the values that urban dense 
development foster are attractive to people,” says Henry. “The churn of the 
street is part of what we value.”

What few anticipated is how New York’s contemporary success has shifted 
perceptions of the city. Henry considers that not only is the intensity now 
considered desirable but – in the space of a generation – the city has gone 
from being a place whose time people felt was over to one that, arguably, might 
have been spoiled by its own achievements.

It’s the familiar conversation about a city of mean streets obliterated by 
gentrification and soaring rents. “Activism for and against change, and the 
competing visions of what it should be, is also part of New York,” Henry points 
out. “We don’t know what will happen next, but we worry that if we lose 
diversity, or if diversity is threatened, creativity will go with it. Of 
course, affordability is a whole piece of that. I’d counsel people not to be 
complacent. The way New York turned out is about human agency, not about 
inevitable forces of history.”
 