
The frontman of heavy-metal band Orange Goblin has set up a JustGiving 
campaign aiming to raise money for the staff of music publisher Team Rock who 
were laid off on Monday.

With a target goal of £20,000, the launch of the campaign follows the 
announcement that over 70 members of staff who worked for titles such asMetal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/metal> Hammer, Classic Rock and Prog are to 
lose their jobs without severance pay with just under a week before Christmas.

“Today, 73 members of the Team Rock staff were told that the company is going 
into liquidation and that they are being made redundant with immediate effect 
with ZERO pay,” says Orange Goblin’s Ben Ward, who set up the fundraiser. 
“These are good, hard-working, committed people that through Metal Hammer, 
Classic Rock, Prog, TeamRock Radio and more, have supported the rock and 
heavy-metal scene in this country for decades and now we, the rock community, 
need to pull together to help give something back.”

Team Rock was set up in 2012. It bought the Classic Rock, Classic Rock 
Presents Prog and Metal Hammer magazines from Future Publishing in 2013. 
Administrators were called in after the firm got into financial difficulties 
and traded at a loss “for a significant period of time”, according to joint 
administrator Tom MacLennan.

“The company explored every option to secure the long-term future of the 
business. However, the constraints on the cash position of the business were 
such that administration was the only viable option,” he added.

“The administration presents an excellent opportunity to acquire high-profile 
rock music titles, products and brands that have a substantial global 
following.”

So far, the JustGiving page has received over £15,000, thanks to nearly 600 
supporters. For those who want to donate to the campaign, take a look at the
JustGiving page here 
<https://www.justgiving.com/crowdfunding/ukrockcommunity?utm_source=Facebook&utm_medium=Yimbyprojectpage&utm_content=ukrockcommunity&utm_campaign=projectpage-share-owner&utm_term=WQBJrAgqW>
.

 