
“Why do we build the wall, my children 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8sQ8R54C53o>?” growls Hades, king of the 
underworld, in Anaïs Mitchell’s folk opera Hadestown. This demon is a slick 
business guy, a billionaire steel tycoon who sings in an oily, impassive bass. 
The response comes from a thrawn chorus of the desperate and the damned: 
“Because we have and they have not / Because they want what we have got / The 
enemy is poverty / And the wall keeps out the enemy / And we build the wall to 
keep us free.”

Hadestown opened in a new off-Broadway music theatre production 
<http://www.nytw.org/show/hadestown/> just as Donald Trump detailed plans for a 
multibillion-dollar wall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/16/donald-trump-announces-run-president>
 along the US border with Mexico. Mitchell wrote her song a decade ago, but its 
resonance right now is inescapably loud.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F14%2Fanais-mitchell-hadestown-show-donald-trump-orpheus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95b4746231a7861913c3b9dcc867dab62c086544%2F7_739_2609_2609%2F2609.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Orpheus%20for%20the%20age%20of%20Trump%3A%20Ana%C3%AFs%20Mitchell%20on%20her%20folk%20opera%20Hadestown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F14%2Fanais-mitchell-hadestown-show-donald-trump-orpheus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Orpheus%20for%20the%20age%20of%20Trump%3A%20Ana%C3%AFs%20Mitchell%20on%20her%20folk%20opera%20Hadestown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F14%2Fanais-mitchell-hadestown-show-donald-trump-orpheus%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95b4746231a7861913c3b9dcc867dab62c086544%2F7_739_2609_2609%2F2609.jpg>
 Anais Mitchell. Photograph: Jay Sansone/Publicity image from PR company 
“People have actually been asking whether I think it’s a good thing for the 
show’s box office thatTrump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> 
is doing so well,” she admits, a few days into the run. We’re in a cafe near 
her home in Brooklyn, eye-blearingly early one Saturday morning – she’s been a 
busy woman since Hadestown opened and created a bit of a stir 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/24/theater/review-hadestown-reanimates-a-well-known-myth.html?_r=0>
. She frowns into her coffee. “Uh, no. Trump is not good for anyone. I want to 
make it explicitly clear to our friends across the pond that we are deeply 
shamed by all this.”

The politics of fear & the glint of a charismatic firebrand leader makes 
Hadestown’s production conspicuously well-timed

Mitchell is a 35-year-old folk singer and composer from small-town Vermont 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/jan/13/anais-mitchell-bon-iver-interview>
. She has a high voice that tugs and toys, a twisting, husky guitar sound, a 
knack for beguiling melodies and smart lyrics and – mark of the most valid folk 
artists – a way of respecting old forms while making them her own. (Try the 
elfin reimagined British balladry of her 2013 albumChild Ballads 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YTS9KXoMlOE> to get a sense of what I mean.) 

She started working on a folk retelling of the Orpheus myth 10 years ago. 
“George W Bush era,” she recalls, “when I was just coming out of college, still 
flying the idealistic student activist flag.” She still looks the part, folding 
herself cross-legged on her chair in a old pair of red corduroy dungarees.

“The Iraq war had happened in my first term and then Bush got re-elected just 
as I graduated. And then all liberal Americans had to ask some real hard 
questions about what our country really is. And meanwhile I had to grow up and 
get a job somehow, so there was a big mashup of my youthful idealism and the 
real jaded world – which I guess is why the Orpheus myth chimed so well for me 
back then.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F14%2Fanais-mitchell-hadestown-show-donald-trump-orpheus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e24442bcaf005fe989c18a3cfb28049ca0aff11%2F0_75_5537_3322%2F5537.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Orpheus%20for%20the%20age%20of%20Trump%3A%20Ana%C3%AFs%20Mitchell%20on%20her%20folk%20opera%20Hadestown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F14%2Fanais-mitchell-hadestown-show-donald-trump-orpheus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Orpheus%20for%20the%20age%20of%20Trump%3A%20Ana%C3%AFs%20Mitchell%20on%20her%20folk%20opera%20Hadestown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F14%2Fanais-mitchell-hadestown-show-donald-trump-orpheus%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e24442bcaf005fe989c18a3cfb28049ca0aff11%2F0_75_5537_3322%2F5537.jpg>
 Much of Mitchell’s show takes place in the speakeasies of Depression-era 
America. Photograph: 2016 Joan Marcus 
She relocated the story to Dust Bowl Depression time, the cotton fields and 
speakeasies ofDorothea Lange photographs 
<http://www.historyplace.com/unitedstates/lange/dor12-106.jpg>. Passengers wait 
for a train to an underground city-state called Hadestown, where there are jobs 
and bars and big bands. There are trade-offs, too, especially for young girls 
who catch the eye of the factory boss. Orpheus wants no part in it – he’s a 
dreamer, a bard, a charmer, convinced he can live off the beauty of rhyme and 
song – but his sweetheart Eurydice is lured when Hades beckons her by name. A 
station hobo called Hermes shows her the way down with a conspiring, weary 
drawl.

At first Hadestown was a loose theatre piece with some great songs and low-key 
narration that toured small venues around Vermont.Then came 2010’s album 
version with a cast of big-deal voices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/apr/22/anais-mitchell-hadestown-cd-review>
: Ani DiFranco as Persephone, Greg Brown as Hades, the Haden Triplets as the 
Fates in sassy three-part harmony. Bon Iver’s Justin Vernon sang Orpheus in his 
wistful, multi-sampled falsetto – a soft-grained indie take on the voice that, 
legend has it, tamed wild beasts and kings. Mitchell herself sang Eurydice and
Michael Chorney <http://www.michaelchorney.com/> arranged the instrumental 
parts with a terrific ear for space and swing. The result was potent and earthy.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQyki9IyoNmA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQyki9IyoNmA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQyki9IyoNmA&media=>
Watch a video on bringing Hadestown to the stage 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Qyki9IyoNmA> 
Now, the politics of fear and inequality and the glint of a charismatic 
firebrand leader makes Hadestown’s off-Broadway production conspicuously 
well-timed. “Sure,” Mitchell agrees. “But I’m no prophet. The wall is not a new 
image. It’s a powerful archetypal image, and Trump is simply tapping into that. 
It works and people respond to it. They hear about a wall and it makes them 
feel safe and strong. Unfortunately neither Trump nor Hades are un-clever.”

And the show is not the album. Much has changed: if you loved the grit in the 
original you’ll need to brace yourself for some serious sheen. The new cast 
sing with glossyBroadway <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/broadway> voices, 
phrasing locked in place, rough edges made safe and clean. The storytelling 
becomes faster and busier and loses some of the intimacy and fragility in the 
process, all suggestive cracks filled up. Pacing is cranked high and that means 
that the band – a superb collection of musicians usually more inclined to 
playing jazz or experimental improv and driven by the brilliant New York 
drummer Ben Perowsky – doesn’t have much space to breathe around the edges of 
the songs. The narrative gets fleshed out and spelled out to the point of 
blatancy via Hermes (a straight-talkin’ Chris Sullivan, best of the cast), but 
on the flip side we delve deeper into the relationship between Hades and 
Persephone, which becomes richly flawed and fraught and tender.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F14%2Fanais-mitchell-hadestown-show-donald-trump-orpheus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5f70d75ab622eaeb819dabb9ee2ec999cc4a2eb%2F0_132_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Orpheus%20for%20the%20age%20of%20Trump%3A%20Ana%C3%AFs%20Mitchell%20on%20her%20folk%20opera%20Hadestown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F14%2Fanais-mitchell-hadestown-show-donald-trump-orpheus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Orpheus%20for%20the%20age%20of%20Trump%3A%20Ana%C3%AFs%20Mitchell%20on%20her%20folk%20opera%20Hadestown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F14%2Fanais-mitchell-hadestown-show-donald-trump-orpheus%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5f70d75ab622eaeb819dabb9ee2ec999cc4a2eb%2F0_132_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Fraught and tender … Nabiyah Be and Damon Daunno. Photograph: Joan Marcus/2016 
Joan Marcus 
The most emotionally striking moments are the rare quiet ones: Hades 
deliberating over whether to let Eurydice go and darkly contemplating 
strategies of Machiavellian power (“Damned if you do, damned if you don’t / The 
whole damn nation’s watching you”). Or the crux of the drama, when Orpheus 
crumples with doubt and turns to check whether Eurydice is still behind him. 
It’s a powerful decision to play out that gesture in sudden silence.


“There was quite a bit of … push and pull,” Mitchell acknowledges with a 
diplomatic grin. “Tempos were a particular battleground: the band loves things 
to be slower so the instruments can stretch out, while the actors want to keep 
things super upbeat so the audience doesn’t drop out.” But she’s also sanguine 
about the compromises needed to make the show work as a mainstream hit.

And it is working. Its run has been extended 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EhKJz1dVrJ4>, there’s talk of shifting to 
Broadway proper, even of touring internationally. Will she write another 
theatre piece? “Already started!” she winks. “Though hopefully the next one 
won’t forecast some new political horror. I’ll try to keep it sweet.”


 * Hadestown is at New York Theatre Workshop until 31 July 
<http://www.nytw.org/show/hadestown/>.
 