
A dozen children with cerebral palsy lie on thin mattresses on the floor of a 
spacious room. A smell of cleaning products unsuccessfully masks the scent of 
urine.


Nearby, five children are tied to a rough metal frame. They are bandaged from 
the waist to the ankles, their hands bandaged too, looking half mummified in an 
attempt to teach them how to stand.

Eight million children live in orphanages across the world, despite more than 
90% having at least one living parent

There are 19 patients in total at Asociación Hogar Infantil San Luis Gonzaga, 
an institution located in Mexico City. They are aged between nine and 40, but 
the eldest look like teenagers – their bodies haven’t fully grown and they seem 
absent from their surroundings. Most still wear diapers. All were brought here 
by their families, but just half of them have sporadic contact with their 
relatives. As long as the monthly fees are paid (from £29 to £185, depending on 
the family’s financial situation) the child is allowed to remain there.

Here, time seems to have halted: teaching materials, orthopaedic contraptions, 
and physiotherapy techniques go back 30 years. Even the patient care model, 
which focuses solely on physical therapy, denies the residents any basic 
entertainment or volition, and essential personal support.
 A still from the DRI film in Mexico, showing Leonardo tied to his bed. 
Photograph: Disability Rights International 
Video footage taken inside the institution in May this year by NGO Disability 
Rights International <http://www.driadvocacy.org/> (DRI) shows 10-year-old 
Leonardo, who is autistic, fastened in a wheelchair. His wheelchair is tied to 
the neighbouring crib so that he is unable to move – even though he is capable 
of walking. This set up is not to punish him, says a staff member, but to keep 
him safe and stop him from throwing himself off the chair. His family live six 
hours from Mexico City, and are not financially able to take care of him.

Another video shows a boy who appears to be in his early teens with cerebral 
palsy lying in his bunk, banging his teeth on the wooden sides. The side boards 
are heavily marked by the force of his head and teeth against the wood. When 
the child opens his mouth, there are teeth missing.

A worldwide human rights issue


Up to eight million children 
<http://www.savethechildren.org.uk/sites/default/files/docs/Keeping_Children_Out_of_Harmful_Institutions_Final_20.11.09_1.pdf>
 (pdf) live in orphanages across the world, despite more than 90% having at 
least one living parent. Disabled children are overwhelmingly represented, and 
can remain in institutionalised care for life. Harrowingly, young adults raised 
in institutions are500 times more likely kill themselves 
<https://wearelumos.org/stories/8-million-children-are-institutions>. 

For the last 13 years DRI has been working on a worldwide campaign 
<http://www.driadvocacy.org/learn-about-the-worldwide-campaign-to-end-the-institutionalization-of-children/>
 to shut down orphanages and institutions that, in far too many cases, neglect 
or even abuse the rights of the children. In particular, they focus on people 
with disabilities. Over their years of research, DRI has documented abuse 
within state-run, and donor-funded facilities – including orphanages and 
psychiatric wards – from the Ukraine to Guatemala. In the process they have 
exposed institutionalisation as a worldwide human rights issue.

Last year, when investigating Mexican institutions for children with 
disabilities, DRI found “atrocious abuses that fall inside the definition of 
torture”. Investigators recorded prolonged use of restraints in centres – like 
those in San Luis Gonzaga – that caused high levels of suffering, physical 
deformities and dislocations. Any restraint of people with mental disabilities 
“even for a short period of time, may constitute torture and ill-treatment”, 
according to the UN’s rapporteur on torture.

Even in the best of institutions children don’t get their full needs met
Helen Dent 
In Paraguay, researchers found autistic children locked in cages at a 
state-run hospital. The children were only allowed to spend a few hours every 
other day in an outdoor “pen littered with excrement, garbage and broken 
glass”, asDRI described it <http://www.driadvocacy.org/strategic-litigation/>. 
There have beenreports of forced sterilisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/26/mexican-women-mental-health-problems-pressured-sterilisation>
 of patients in Mexico – some pressured by health professionals – to cover up 
sexual abuse within an institution. In Ukraine, the teams discovered that 
children were given classifications depending upon the “severity” of their 
disability. Children classed as level three or four were considered to be 
“uneducable”, and were expected to remain in an institution for life.

Though the organisation has come across well-equipped, clean facilities and 
many families believe they’re doing the right thing for their children, DRI’s 
president Laurie Ahern maintains “there is no such thing as a good orphanage. 
Nothing replaces a family.Children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> still have psychological and 
developmental delays – you need someone to look into your eyes, a primary 
caregiver, and that doesn’t happen in an orphanage.”

“Even in the best of institutions children don’t get their full needs met,” 
says Helen Dent, professor of clinical and forensic psychology at Staffordshire 
University. Dent watched DRI’s videos from the institution in Mexico, and her 
impression is of a “clean and modern” facility where “the staff are trying to 
care for the children with apparently few resources”.

She adds: “The young man banging his teeth against the cot side was clearly in 
need of adult attention both to stop him from self-harming and to provide 
positive stimulation to remove the need for self-harm. Most people kept in such 
circumstances would suffer serious consequences and show unusual behaviours.”

The alternative, argues DRI, should be that development funding is moved to 
community- and family-based care. Their campaign is a monumental task that 
requires changing mindsets on a global scale.

“They were literally hosed off to be cleaned”


It was after visiting the Samuel Ramirez psychiatric hospital in Mexico City 
more than 20 years ago that Eric Rosenthal decided to found DRI.

With a slight tremble in his voice he recalls an area surrounded by barbed 
wire where both children and adults were held naked. “They were literally hosed 
off to be cleaned. They were fed on trays ... they all lunged for common food 
and had to fight over it,” he says. “They were tied down. It was the most 
horrendous dehumanisation. These people look like animals when they’re left 
this way, and that’s how they were treated.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Forphanage-locked-up-disabled-children-lumos-dri-human-rights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdfa7a83382a48e725b233e3363f52b0749f60f25%2F1530_586_1379_828%2F1379.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Out%20of%20sight%3A%20the%20orphanages%20where%20disabled%20children%20are%20abandoned&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Forphanage-locked-up-disabled-children-lumos-dri-human-rights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Out%20of%20sight%3A%20the%20orphanages%20where%20disabled%20children%20are%20abandoned&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Forphanage-locked-up-disabled-children-lumos-dri-human-rights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdfa7a83382a48e725b233e3363f52b0749f60f25%2F1530_586_1379_828%2F1379.jpg>
 Eric Rosenthal, founder of Disability Rights International. Photograph: 
Jocelyn Augustino for the Guardian 
Rosenthal, 52, studied both mental health and international human rights 
before turning to law. A lifelong activist, he strongly felt the rights of 
people with disabilities had been overlooked by the international development 
and human rights communities. DRI was established with a $20,000 fellowship in 
an empty office above a dance studio in Washington DC.

The organisation bases its model on Amnesty International, researching and 
exposing injustices to push for change. Over the past two decades, Rosenthal 
has visited hundreds of institutions in more than 30 countries, accompanied by 
a team of volunteers who are often medical experts.

The team is small, but they’ve made some genuine advances over the years. DRI 
now has offices in Mexico, Guatemala, Ukraine and Serbia, and have produced 18 
major investigative reports. An expose of abuse in one particular facility that 
DRI collaborated on with theNew York Times Magazine 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2000/01/16/magazine/the-global-willowbrook.html?pagewanted=all>
, contributed to the historic 2006 UN treaty on people with disabilities, which 
called for disabled people to have the same human rights as the able bodied.

We’re exporting a model that we know is harmful to children
Laurie Ahern 
The organisation’s work has also led to the European Union introducing a 
policy where European money cannot be used for maintaining any kind of 
institution. And in Serbia, DRI’s efforts have led to a law that children under 
the age of three can’t be institutionalised. Serbia now has one of the lowest 
percentages of children in institutions – though the number of 
institutionalised children with disabilities remains high.

After the landmark UN treaty – the DRI focused its efforts on stopping new 
entrants to existing facilities. “It’s a lot easier to establish international 
law than enforce that law,” Rosenthal says. “If we could get countries to agree 
on a moratorium of no new admissions to institutions, then they would whittle 
[the numbers] away – it would save families, save kids at the most vulnerable 
point in their lives. And that was Laurie’s idea.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Forphanage-locked-up-disabled-children-lumos-dri-human-rights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e2b6de2be4038dcabaac3156ef5c4f84a3e4a6a%2F0_697_2832_3539%2F2832.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Out%20of%20sight%3A%20the%20orphanages%20where%20disabled%20children%20are%20abandoned&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Forphanage-locked-up-disabled-children-lumos-dri-human-rights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Out%20of%20sight%3A%20the%20orphanages%20where%20disabled%20children%20are%20abandoned&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Forphanage-locked-up-disabled-children-lumos-dri-human-rights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e2b6de2be4038dcabaac3156ef5c4f84a3e4a6a%2F0_697_2832_3539%2F2832.jpg>
 Laurie Ahern, president of Disability Rights International. Photograph: 
Jocelyn Augustino for the Guardian 
Laurie Ahern, 62, is the brainchild of DRI’s global campaign to end 
institutionalisation. Rosenthal sings her praises, and when speaking to her on 
the phone from her office in DC, it’s not hard to see why. Her passion for the 
cause is admirable. She cares deeply for her colleagues and seems to dedicate 
every waking hour to this campaign.



“We’re exporting a model that we know is harmful to children,” Ahern says. 
“When I began visiting orphanages and institutions for children some 13 years 
ago, and witnessed unimaginable human rights abuses and torture perpetrated 
against children – left to die lonely painful deaths, immobile children left in 
cribs for years, no touch, no love – I knew we had to do something big.”

“It’s something that we can change,” she adds. “This is really not a 
complicated problem; this is about donors putting money to families and not 
supporting orphanages.” Other organisations such asLumos 
<https://wearelumos.org/>, the charity founded by JK Rowling, also campaign for 
deinstitutionalisation, and Lumos has just launcheda global campaign 
<https://wearelumos.org/post/jk-rowlings-speech-special-lumos-gala-performance-harry-potter-and-cursed-child>
 to raise awareness of the issue. DRI, Lumos and other organisations including 
theReplace Campaign <http://www.replace-campaign.org/> all support the idea 
that we should change this culture of institutionalisation and work on keeping 
families together, supporting communities, and improving social networks. Lumos 
believes that the institutionalisation of children can beeradicated globally by 
2050 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/dec/17/jk-rowling-fairytale-orphanage-lumos>
 (backing this statement with figures including the 70% reduction of the number 
of children in institutions in Moldova over the last decade, despite the 
country’s high poverty rates).

There is also an economic argument, Ahern adds: “It’s so much less expensive 
for government to support families to [help] children with disabilities go to 
school, than it is to pay to keep them in an orphanage for a long time.” For 
example, in Tanzania’s Kagera region, the yearly cost for one child in 
institutional care isreportedly $1,000 
<https://wearelumos.org/sites/default/files/In%20Our%20Lifetime_2015_Sept2015_0_0.pdf>
 (£770) – six times the cost of supporting a child in foster care. And in 
Romania, residential care for children costs up to $280 (£216), while family 
reintegration and local adoption costs about $19 (£15) per child.

Volunteer travel: experts raise concerns over unregulated industry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jan/13/concerns-unregulated-volunteer-tourism-industry>


But in many senses they’re fighting an uphill battle. Institutionalisation is 
still a development model – and in some countries it even constitutes amethod 
of tourism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jan/13/concerns-unregulated-volunteer-tourism-industry>
, or voluntourism – supported by donors and governments.

Money is a big problem. There is little or no funding for the services that 
can prevent family separation or for social care networks. Any funding that 
does come through is often used to renovate or reopen institutions, especially 
facilities for people with disabilities, rather than support the structures 
that can help replace them.

Although 32 state-run institutions in Georgia were shut and replaced with 
family and community-based services in the last decade, a2013 DRI investigation 
<http://www.driadvocacy.org/report-documents-atrocious-human-rights-abuses-in-the-republic-of-georgias-orphanages-and-institutions-for-people-with-disabilities/>
 found that US government money had funded two institutions specifically for 
disabled people, in the years since. Between 2008-2012,€5.6m (£4.8m) of EU 
funding 
<https://wearelumos.org/sites/default/files/Lumos%20The%20Time%20is%20Now%20April2014%20FINAL_0.pdf>
 (pdf) was spent on renovating children’s institutions and those for people 
with disabilities in just one county in the Czech Republic. Despite this 
investment, the quality of care did not improve and the Czech ombudsman still 
reported concerns over serious neglect and abuse in these facilities.



‘When no one is watching out, bad things happen to children’

But for Ahern and her colleagues there is no question of giving up. I speak to 
her just before she is about to go on holiday for three weeks – her only time 
off throughout the year. Can she ever switch off? “Yes I can. It’s for my own 
survival and because I want to be able to stay and continue to do this work.” 
She is going to spend time with her granddaughter, who is a poignant reminder 
of why she works with DRI. “I can’t imagine her going through what I’ve seen 
other children go through unnecessarily. In recent years the investigations 
have become even more nefarious than I thought they ever could be – the 
trafficking of children for sex, pornography, organs. There’s no way I ...” she 
falters. “I can’t put that into the back of my mind and just let it go.”

When I ask Ahern about her motivation for the work, she says: “I was abused as 
a child. I wish someone had come and rescued me; I wish somebody had spoken to 
me when I couldn’t speak.” Ahern believes that children left in institutions, 
especially those with disabilities, are forgotten. “When no one’s watching out 
for children – whether that’s conflict or an orphanage – bad things happen to 
children. There’s a sphere for abuse and neglect.”

We need to stop treating people with disabilities as less than human
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jun/20/we-need-to-stop-treating-people-with-disabilities-as-less-than-human>
One of the most extreme cases of neglect she has seen was in the Tbilisi 
Infants Home in Georgia, where children with hydrocephalus – a buildup of fluid 
in the brain – were left untreated, which is extremely painful and 
life-threatening. “Babies, six months old with huge heads were just laying 
there moaning. I was overwhelmed with grief because we know the problem can be 
taken care of and the child can have a perfectly normal life,” she says. The 
NGO found more than 50% of the children with this treatable condition died in 
the institution.

“You can’t see this and not be moved,” Ahern says. She tells me about the time 
when, a few years ago, she walked into a Serbian institution to find teenagers 
with cerebral palsy who looked like children because they had not been allowed 
to leave their beds in 10 years. Worse, this was not the first time she had 
come across this situation.

“But you can take action, get a little angry, and then you see change. You see 
people’s minds change, and we see money change [from funding orphanages] 
because of that. That’s the only way for me to deal with [this].”

For more information about the work of Disability Rights International visit 
their websitehere <http://www.driadvocacy.org/>. For information about Lumos 
clickhere <https://wearelumos.org/>. 


Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 