
Owen Farrell <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/owen-farrell> is in a striking 
mood today. It is almost surprising to compare how relaxed and amiable he 
appears in contrast to the intense and often fiery man who plays for Saracens 
and England. There is a new lightness to Farrell, at least in the comforting 
surrounds of Saracens’ training ground in St Albans, and it is only when 
transcribing his words that it becomes clear how a concentrated ambition beats 
even more strongly inside him.

How the British & Irish Lions may line up on 2017 New Zealand tour
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jun/27/how-british-irish-lions-may-line-up-new-2017-zealand-tour-england-scotland-wales-ireland>
Amid the chit-chat about his love of watching sport on television and moving 
out of home so he can be looked after by his girlfriend, the recurring theme is 
obvious. It resonates so often that I count 16 separate occasions when Farrell 
uses the words “improve”, “improving” and “improvement”, or the short phrase of 
“get better”.

“All we’ve ever tried to do is get better,” Farrell says as he shrugs off a 
compliment for the way in which, 10 days ago, on his return from injury, he 
inspired Saracens to subject Toulonto a rare lesson in attacking rugby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/15/toulon-saracens-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
, and sealed the French club’s first home defeat in the European Champions Cup. 
“We know what we’re good at but we want to improve in every area of the game. 
We did well against Toulon but we were a long way from perfect.”

Farrell scored 16 points and his coach Mark McCall, who described him as the 
best player in Europe before the match, said: “The way Owen played was 
remarkable.” On Saturday, in his second game since injuring his back in 
pre‑season training, Farrell kicked 19 points, and created so much space for 
his backline, as Saracenscompleted a 44-26 European thumping of Scarlets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/23/saracens-scarlets-champions-cup-alex-goode>
.

“I enjoy giving this everything,” Farrell says simply as he relishes playing 
again. “It’s an obsession of mine and something I love doing.”

That second sentence contains the crux of Farrell’s approach while explaining 
how he has dealt with the tumultuous past year. Last October Farrell and 
English rugby were at a terrible low point after their humiliating World Cup. 
Twelve months on, following a grand slamand a 3-0 series whitewash in Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/25/australia-england-third-test-match-report>
, they have won 10 Tests in a row. Eddie Jones, the coach who sparked the 
transformation, hails Farrell as “solar-system class 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/25/england-dylan-hartley-australia-whitewash>
”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fowen-farrell-obsession-saracens-england-rugby-union-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0771ffedb9d489143502a025bf9e193a19869d1a%2F0_769_3648_3455%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Owen%20Farrell%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20wouldn%E2%80%99t%20say%20it%E2%80%99s%20comfortable%20playing%20for%20Eddie%20Jones%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fowen-farrell-obsession-saracens-england-rugby-union-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Owen%20Farrell%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20wouldn%E2%80%99t%20say%20it%E2%80%99s%20comfortable%20playing%20for%20Eddie%20Jones%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fowen-farrell-obsession-saracens-england-rugby-union-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0771ffedb9d489143502a025bf9e193a19869d1a%2F0_769_3648_3455%2F3648.jpg>
 Owen Farrell of Saracens surveys the scene after the victory over Toulon. 
Photograph: David Rogers/Getty Images 
Five months ago Farrell also won the Premiership and European Cup double with 
Saracens but success has sharpened his appetite. Past disappointments also 
underpin these achievements. Farrell remembers how, two years ago, he and 
Saracens endured a double blow. A week after they were crushed in the European 
Cup final by Toulon,the Premiership title was snatched away 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/may/31/northampton-saints-beat-saracens-premiership-final-match-report>
 when Northampton were awarded a controversial try in the last minute of 
extra-time.

“The disappointments probably make the big wins happen in the first place,” he 
says. “It’s not just that the lows make the highs more meaningful. They 
actually help you figure stuff out. You have to work out where you went wrong 
and what you need to do to get better. We’ve done that atSaracens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> and obviously things have changed 
at England. The main thing is that we’ve improved.”

The old southern hemisphere jibe – that England are satisfied too quickly by a 
few wins – is redundant in Farrell’s company. As the autumn internationals loom 
with Tests against South Africa, Fiji, Argentina and Australia, Farrell talks 
plainly: “We’ve still got a long way to go. We’re by no means anywhere near 
where we want to be. Our improvement is exciting but it’s not enough.”

Rugby union: talking points from the weekend's Champions Cup action
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/24/rugby-union-talking-points-european-champions-cup-action>
Any temptation to get carried away is curbed by the history-making All Blacks. 
On Saturday New Zealandbecame the first team to win 18 Tests in a row 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/22/new-zealand-make-history-beat-australia-all-blacks-18-consecutive-wins>
, beating Australia 37-10, and the gulf between them and every other 
rugby‑playing nation is obvious. Yet Farrell sounds more inspired than 
intimidated. “They’re a brilliant side and brilliant to watch. Obviously every 
team is different and you don’t want to try and be them. But you’ve got to 
figure out your own way and work hard to get to that level. I saw them against 
South Africa [when New Zealandscored nine tries while hammering the Springboks 
in Durban <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e-33rIhWPVA>] because you watch 
every big game and try to learn from it. New Zealand were very good. It was a 
clinical performance and that’s the standard they’ve set.”

Jones has been measured in analysing England’s progress. He also enjoys his 
reputation as a coach whom his own players often fear. Does Farrell feel any 
trepidation? “What you feel more than anything is that you want to perform. You 
want to do well for him. He works hard to create that environment. And we try 
to create it as a team – so you drive yourselves.

“I wouldn’t want this to come across the wrong way … but I wouldn’t say it’s 
comfortable playing for [Jones]. There’s no way you’re going to ease off.”

Before he began working with Jones had he heard about the Australian reducing 
some hardened Test forwards to tears 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/30/eddie-jones-england-six-nations>
? “You always hear stories but I can only speak from my experience. I was here 
when Eddie was at Saracens [as a consultant in 2006]. I was a young lad in the 
academy. I actually played my first game at Saracens under him – against 
Scarlets. We lost.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fowen-farrell-obsession-saracens-england-rugby-union-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb725df85cc430daee90804a110104fc75f15630b%2F0_90_1746_1677%2F1746.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Owen%20Farrell%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20wouldn%E2%80%99t%20say%20it%E2%80%99s%20comfortable%20playing%20for%20Eddie%20Jones%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fowen-farrell-obsession-saracens-england-rugby-union-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Owen%20Farrell%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20wouldn%E2%80%99t%20say%20it%E2%80%99s%20comfortable%20playing%20for%20Eddie%20Jones%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fowen-farrell-obsession-saracens-england-rugby-union-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb725df85cc430daee90804a110104fc75f15630b%2F0_90_1746_1677%2F1746.jpg>
 Owen Farrell makes his Saracens debut against Scarlets in October 2008. 
Photograph: John Gichigi/Getty Images 
Farrell smiles as he recalls how, in October 2008, 11 days after turning 17, 
he became the youngest player to appear for an English Premiership club when 
Saracens picked him in an Anglo‑Welsh Cup fixture. “I remember those times with 
Eddie really well. He was brilliant with me. Really brilliant. My experience of 
him then and now has been great.”

Jones can still be brutal. He picked Farrell at fly-half against Australia in 
June but, after 29 minutes, with Luther Burrell struggling defensively at 
inside centre and England 10-0 down in the first quarter, Jones made a dramatic 
substitution. Burrell was taken off, George Ford was sent on and Farrell moved 
to centre.England won 39-28 and Farrell scored 24 points 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/11/australia-england-first-test-match-report>
. The early replacement seemed cruel to Burrell but, in the blunt terms of Test 
rugby, it was justified.

“I guess it did surprise me,” Farrell says. “We spoke about it afterwards but 
that’s what needed to be done. Thankfully we ended up winning. You don’t like 
to see that happen but while you’re playing you just go: ‘Yeah, right, let’s 
get on with it.’”

I wouldn’t want this to come across the wrong way … but I wouldn’t say it’s 
comfortable playing for [Jones]

In all Jones’s other matches as England coach, Farrell has started at 
inside-centre. He retains the No10 shirt at Saracens. Does he prefer his club 
position? “I’d say so. I’d say I am a fly‑half. As regards being 12 for England 
I’ve not tried to play any different. I guess I’ve been like another 10. 
Obviously you do some things differently and you might not have your hands on 
the ball as much – but you’re still in the game and constantly communicating. 
You’re happy to fit in wherever you’re wanted.”

Any frustration Farrell feels at not being picked in his favoured role is 
offset by the pleasure of playing in a winning team with his close friend. “Oh, 
it’s great. Me and George have played alongside each other a lot. We did all 
the age groups together and we’re very open about how we see the game. We talk 
to each other and it works well.”

Farrell and Ford have similar backgrounds – the sons of rugby league men [Andy 
Farrell and Mike Ford] who became respected union coaches after moving from the 
north and ending up in the leafy Hertfordshire town of Harpenden. Apart from 
playing rugby together every day, either at St George’s School or in the 
street, Ford sometimes did Farrell’s French homework.

“He’s probably cleverer than me so he would help me out,” Farrell quips, “even 
though he was the year below me. So I like playing alongside George. The main 
thing is I’ve tried to get better at everything – that includes the attacking 
side, being a threat and taking people on.”

Farrell has endured enough bruising defeats to make him a rounded player – but 
his team-mate Maro Itoje has yet to learn the same harsh lessons.In his 
sensational first full season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/09/maro-itoje-saracens-racing-92-european-rugby-champions-cup-final>
 with Saracens and England, Itoje did not lose a single game he started. This 
season Itoje’s perfect record has suffered a single blemish as Saracens lost 
unexpectedly against Harlequins on 24 September – the then‑injured Farrell’s 
25th birthday.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fowen-farrell-obsession-saracens-england-rugby-union-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F629bc8b8299f2e2ebcb37949497be63ecd988519%2F0_68_4000_2606%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Owen%20Farrell%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20wouldn%E2%80%99t%20say%20it%E2%80%99s%20comfortable%20playing%20for%20Eddie%20Jones%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fowen-farrell-obsession-saracens-england-rugby-union-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Owen%20Farrell%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20wouldn%E2%80%99t%20say%20it%E2%80%99s%20comfortable%20playing%20for%20Eddie%20Jones%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fowen-farrell-obsession-saracens-england-rugby-union-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F629bc8b8299f2e2ebcb37949497be63ecd988519%2F0_68_4000_2606%2F4000.jpg>
 Owen Farrell scores the winning try against Australia in Melbourne. 
Photograph: Scott Barbour/Getty Images 
Itoje is only 21 and, despite fracturing his hand last Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/23/eddie-jones-england-maro-itoje-hand-injury>
 and beingruled out of the autumn internationals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/24/maro-itoje-miss-england-autumn-internationals-fracturing-hand>
, he must think it is easy winning Premiership, European and Test matches? 
“Yeah,” Farrell says wryly, “it’s the norm for him.”

Winning will not last forever – it never does in sport or real life. “No, of 
course,” Farrell says before he laughs. “Although I hope it does for Maro 
because I’ll be playing with him. He also went to St George’s and ever since 
he’s been at Saracens the most impressive thing about him is that he’s took 
everything in his stride. He’s never been in awe of anything. It doesn’t matter 
who is in front of him, he thinks he can dominate them. He might not even think 
like that – he might just do it.”

Farrell and Itoje are likely to be important figures for the British and Irish 
Lions in New Zealand this season. Farrell is understandably more comfortable 
talking about the 2013 tour of Australia than speculating on his possible role 
against the All Blacks. “I loved it,” he says of the last Lions series. “It was 
brilliant – especially as we won. I only got on at the end [as a substitute in 
the decisive third Test] but to be involved in the whole thing and to play with 
some special players was incredible.”

Saracens close in on European record but Alex Goode seeks improvement
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/23/saracens-scarlets-champions-cup-alex-goode>
Has he allowed himself to think ahead to New Zealand? “Not at the minute. I’ve 
just played my first games after injury and I’ve focused on getting fit. Now 
I’ll try my best to improve my consistency.”

Part of that improvement is built around Saracens inviting different people to 
address the squad. “We’ve had some amazing people talk to us.The Brownlee 
brothers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/sep/19/alistair-jonny-brownlee-brotherly-moment-world-best-triathletes>
 this month and people as different asAP McCoy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/apr/24/tony-mccoy-broke-bones-heart-sandown-retires>
, business guys and hostage interpreters. AP and the Brownlees have been at the 
top a long time and it’s cool hearing how much they put into it and how much 
drive they have. It makes you want to have the same drive.”

Farrell has also found a way to control his temper. “Yeah!” he exclaims. 
Presumably he is still boiling away on the inside? “No, no, not any more,” he 
says, laughing. “Rugby is a tough game. You’re never going to whisper on the 
field are you? I’m pretty loud – but I figured out it’s important being clear 
for 80 minutes and not switching off and having a little moment to yourself 
when you’re going mad. As soon as I got my head round that I was fine. I’ve 
improved.”

He flashes another grin after using his favourite word. Farrell knows we will 
discover how much he, Saracens and England have improved by the end of this 
long and testing season.
 