
The England head coach, Eddie Jones, came to watch Henry Slade, who missed the 
Six Nations because of injury, but it was another player whose career has been 
spent flitting between centre and fly-half who stood out asSaracens made an 
emphatic return to the top of the table 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/26/saracens-exeter-premiership-match-report>
.

Owen Farrell <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/owen-farrell> was named the 
man of the match after another performance, at No10 this time, that 
demonstrated how his game has evolved this season. A player whose strength was 
executing set plays and defending has become more reactive, playing what is in 
front of him and showing the Chiefs who was boss.

Owen Farrell and Billy Vunipola shine as Saracens go top with win over Exeter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/26/saracens-exeter-premiership-match-report>
He was behind a number of slick moves that left Exeter scrambling, scored one 
of his side’s five tries and was involved in two others. WhileSaracens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> were typically powerful, the likes 
of the Vunipola brothers and the hooker Schalk Brits looked to side-step rather 
than take contact, off-loading to create space, and with Farrell and Alex Goode 
alert playmakers behind, the home side overcame the wet and blowy conditions.

“The wind was the most horrendous I have known here,” said Farrell. “When I 
had a conversion from the touchline, I knew it would not be going over and it 
ended up on the halfway line. It was just good to be back with the boys here 
and put in a performance. It was not a case of coming back down to earth after 
the grand slam but cracking on.”

Farrell started at inside-centre for England in all five matches of the Six 
Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sixnations>, but fly-half is his 
preferred position. “I have played enough at 10 for it not to be too big a 
switch and it was not like I was playing too differently to when I was away,” 
he said. “Everybody here wants to get better and it is the same with England.”

All five of Saracens’ players who were involved in the grand slam match in 
Paris made an impact againstExeter <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/exeter> 
to end the champions’ stuttering run. Their resources were stretched during the 
Six Nations when they played eight matches without their international 
contingent, but at full strength they are the team to beat.

Semesa Rokoduguni double helps Bath to Premiership win at Gloucester
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/26/gloucester-bath-premiership-match-report>
The brief fall from top place prompted the Saracens chairman, Nigel Wray, to 
suggest that Premiership teams lobby for club and international matches to be 
played at different times in the seasonto avoid losing leading players for long 
periods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/26/saracens-nigel-wray-rugby-calendar>
 and devaluing the league.

“I have not thought about it,” said Farrell. “This season is different because 
of the World Cup, which has seen double the number of league fixtures played 
during the Six Nations. When teams do well their players put their hands up, 
and those are the cards you are dealt.”

Saracens took a 12-0 lead in the first half despite opting to play against the 
strong wind first, tries from Goode and Billy Vunipola leaving Exeter with too 
much to do. “We were very good,” said the club’s director of rugby, Mark 
McCall. “Our carrying, attacking play and intent were outstanding. All our 
England players performed after the high of the grand slam and Owen’s 
performance was exceptional given that he had not played at 10 for so long. It 
says a lot about them.”

Exeter avoided a record Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership> defeat against Saracens with 
Thomas Waldrom’s second try in the final minute and their head coach, Rob 
Baxter, will not be sidetracked by a day on which nothing went right. “I can 
try and make any number of excuses, but Saracens were very good and we have to 
look at the bigger picture and refocus this week. You do not have to fall apart 
as a team after a result like this.”

Saracens Goode; Taylor (Ellery, 73), Bosch, Barritt (capt), Wyles; Farrell 
(Ransom, 72), Wigglesworth (De Kock, 62); M Vunipola (Barrington, 73), Brits 
(Saunders, 73), Du Plessis (Lamositele, 62), Itoje, Kruis, Wray (Hargreaves, 
68), Fraser (Brown, 57), B Vunipola.

Tries Goode, B Vunipola, Farrell, Wray, Wyles. Cons Farrell 3, Goode. Pen 
Farrell.Yellow card Itoje 73.

Exeter Dollman (Bodilly, 70); Woodburn, Slade, Whitten, Turner; Steenson 
(capt; Hooley, 70), Lewis (Chudley, 51); Hepburn (Moon, 51), Cowan-Dickie 
(Taione, 70), Williams (Low, 51), Parling, Welch (Atkins, 70), Ewers, Salvi 
(Waldrom, 72), Waldrom (Horstmann, 70).

Try Waldrom 2. Con Hooley. Pens Steenson 2.

Referee M Carley. Attendance 9,749.
 