
Saracens <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> gave the new England 
head coach, Eddie Jones, reasons for optimism as several Red Rose 
internationals turned in impressive performances in a crushing Champions Cup 
win over Ulster in Belfast.

Champions Cup provides platform for England hopefuls to impress Eddie Jones | 
Robert Kitson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/nov/20/european-champions-cup-bath-northampton-wasps-leicester-eddie-jones-england>
Tries from Chris Wyles, Alex Goode, Duncan Taylor and Billy Vunipola enabled 
the English champions to back up their opening Pool 1triumph over Toulouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/14/saracens-toulouse-european-champions-cup-match-report>
 by humbling their Irish hosts.

Ulster had led 9-0 at one stage thanks to two penalties and a drop goal from 
the fly-half Paddy Jackson, while the home side also played a quarter of the 
game a man to the good after Michael Rhodes and Billy Vunipola were sin-binned. 
But they were ruthlessly dismantled as Billy and brother Mako produced titanic 
displays,Owen Farrell <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/owen-farrell> bossed 
proceedings despite an off night from the tee and Goode exuded class in 
everything he did from full-back. Jones would doubtless have appreciated their 
efforts as Mark McCall’s men made clear their intent to add European glory to 
domestic success.

“It is a big statement. We are very pleased with the bonus point but even more 
pleased with the performance,” said the man of the match, Mako Vunipola. “That 
was a good Ulster side and hopefully that puts us in good stead for the rest of 
the campaign.

“As forwards we love days like this; it was a great team effort against a 
tough pack. We ground them down and we are very pleased. We were not 
comfortable at half-time, we knew we could improve but we came out and put a 
good performance in and picked up the five points.

“We enjoy the challenge of these atmospheres we are tight knit as a group, we 
bring energy to each other, we work hard for each other and we will always take 
a win like that.”

A comfortable away win had hardly looked in the offing during a tough opening 
in which Rhodes was fortunate not to see red for his tackle on an airborne 
Andrew Trimble. Ulster fans still nursing a grievance over the red card Jared 
Payne received for a similar challenge inthe quarter-final between the sides 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/apr/05/ulster-saracens-heineken-cup-match-report>
 two seasons ago, were less than impressed.

Eddie Jones is a workaholic in the mould of Arsène Wenger but a pragmatist too 
| Paul Rees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/nov/20/eddie-jones-arsene-wenger-england>
The home side, with the wind at their back, rode that sense of injustice to 
harry Saracens out of their stride, with Jackson’s boot doing the rest. But the 
game turned the moment Farrell’s bullet pass beat two defenders and allowed 
Goode to send Wyles in at the corner.

Saracens still trailed when Billy Vunipola was binned for a shoulder charge on 
Iain Henderson but, just as the going got tough, the men in black got going. 
Goode’s chip over a snoozing Ulster defence was seized by Taylor to send the 
full-back over before Farrell accelerated down the blind side to give Taylor an 
easy finish. A penalty from the fly-half, who missed 10 points worth of kicks, 
put the result beyond doubt and Billy Vunipola crowned a ruthless display by 
rumbling over from the final play.

“We have made it hard for ourselves,” conceded Les Kiss, Ulster’s director of 
rugby. “The pool is not over. We have a game in hand and we need a positive 
outcome from our home and away games against Toulouse. But Saracens are very 
well placed.”

Ulster: Ludik (Nelson, 73); Trimble, Cave, McCloskey, Gilroy; Jackson 
(Humphreys, 70), Pienaar (P Marshall, 75); Black (McCall, 58), Best, Herbst 
(Lutton, 70), Tuohy, Van der Merwe (Diack, 66), Henderson, Henry (Wilson, 49), 
Williams (Herring, 66).

Pens Jackson 2, Drop goal Jackson Sin-bin Best (80)

Saracens Goode; Ashton, Taylor (Bosch, 70), Barritt (Hodgson, 73), Wyles; 
Farrell, Wigglesworth (De Kock, 76); M Vunipola (Gill 75), Brits (George, 51), 
Du Plessis (Figallo, 54), Kruis, Itoje (Hargreaves, 76), Rhodes (Wray 58), 
Burger, B Vunipola.

Tries Wyles, Goode, Taylor, B Vunipola. Cons Farrell 2 Pen Farrell Sin-bin: 
Rhodes (4), B Vunipola (55)

Referee R Poite (Fr)
 