
For the last 500 years there has been a thriving market for portraits in 
Britain, from Holbein’s surprisingly candid portraits produced at the court of 
Henry VIII, to the graceful society portraits made popular by Thomas 
Gainsborough two centuries later. Today, the existence of galleries dedicated 
entirely to portraiture are perhaps the greatest testament to its enduring and 
universal appeal.

While the primary function of a portrait is to record the physical likeness of 
a sitter, it has long been acknowledged that an accomplished portrait should 
also capture something of a person’s inner spirit. The same can be said for 
self-portraits – a unique sub-set within the genre of portraiture and one that 
plays an important role inRoyal Collection Trust’s latest exhibition, Portrait 
of the Artist 
<https://www.royalcollection.org.uk/collection/themes/exhibitions/portrait-of-the-artist/the-queens-gallery-buckingham-palace>
.

The first autonomous self-portraits were produced in the fifteenth-century, 
although examples of artists incorporating themselves into the margins of 
illuminated manuscripts or inserting their faces into narrative paintings can 
be found earlier. Until the invention of photography, artists had to use 
mirrors to produce self-portraits. As a result, most self-portraits show the 
artist looking out of the picture frame, directly into the eyes of the viewer.

While the faces of some artists have been lost to us forever, other artists 
produced dozens of self-portraits during their lifetime. The most famous of 
these often-called serial-self-portraitists was Rembrandt, who produced 
approximately 80 self-portraits over the course of his career. Never one for 
flattery, Rembrandt’s self-portraits are frequently described as a visual 
diary, the artist recording his ageing features with often painful accuracy.

The sense of comradery (as well as competition) between artists has also 
presented ample opportunity for them to draw, paint or photograph each other. 
In comparison to self-portraits, portraits of artists are usually more intimate 
and unassuming. In c.1627, Rubens painted his friend and former workshop 
assistant, Anthony van Dyck. Unfinished in places, and probably produced from 
life in a single sitting, Rubens presents a uniquely personal portrait of Van 
Dyck whose skills as a portraitist would, within five years, have secured him 
the title of Principal Painter in Ordinary to Charles I.

Have you been affected, or inspired, by a portrait – or a portrait of an 
artist?

How to share your artwork

Share an image of your artwork via GuardianWitness 
<https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&ved=0CC0QFjAA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwitness.guardian.co.uk%2F&ei=aCD6Ub-BOYTY0QXfo4CYCg&usg=AFQjCNExLL0b8-w97kDOG255cFwccvrrJQ&sig2=cqgHLUCzLdan0HyToN2Ggw&bvm=bv.50165853,d.d2k>
, by clicking the blue “contribute” button on this page, or via theAndroid or 
iPhone app <https://witness.theguardian.com/apps>. If you have any problems, 
email us at userhelp@theguardian.com.

We’ll feature some of our favourite submissions on the Guardian’s art and 
design <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign> site. By sending us your 
pictures you: a) acknowledge that you have created the pictures or have 
permission to do so; and b) grant us a non-exclusive, worldwide, free licence 
to publish your pictures as described. Copyright resides with you, and you may 
reuse your pictures however you wish. Read ourfull terms and conditions 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/terms>.

Don’t worry if they don’t appear immediately – everything has to be approved 
before it can be “hung” in our online gallery. Do tell us in the comments if 
there are any improvements we could make to the series.

Royal Collection Trust’s Portrait of the Artist exhibition 
<https://www.royalcollection.org.uk/visit/the-queens-gallery-buckingham-palace?rmsrc=1&_$ja=tsid;72410|cid;455626868|agid;38853200138|tid;kwd-788248334|crid;164514683503|nw;g|rnd;2086021261380518082|dvc;c|adp;1t1&gclid=CIPx3o3IpdECFQ4R0wodY7QBaw>
 is open at the Queen’s Gallery, Buckingham Palace until 17 April 2017.
 