
A young Pakistani woman who was burned to death by her family on Wednesday for 
running away and marrying without their permission had been tricked into 
returning home by her mother’s promise to organise a proper wedding ceremony, 
her husband has said.

Seventeen-year-old Zeenat Rafiq was doused with petrol and set on fire by her 
mother, Perveen, in a neighbourhood of Lahore. The mother reportedly made no 
attempt to hide her crime, shouting to neighbours that she had killed her 
daughter for supposedly dishonouring her family.

Zeenat ran away with and married Hassan Khan last week, angering her Punjabi 
family who were furious that she had married an ethnic Pashtun without 
permission.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fpakistani-woman-burned-daughter-zeenat-rafiq-alive-marriage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1bc213bc3990c1bf81ca0154ec87be3b90391ea9%2F265_553_4350_2610%2F4350.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pakistani%20woman%20burned%20daughter%20alive%20over%20marriage%20dispute&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fpakistani-woman-burned-daughter-zeenat-rafiq-alive-marriage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pakistani%20woman%20burned%20daughter%20alive%20over%20marriage%20dispute&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fpakistani-woman-burned-daughter-zeenat-rafiq-alive-marriage%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1bc213bc3990c1bf81ca0154ec87be3b90391ea9%2F265_553_4350_2610%2F4350.jpg>
 Hassan Khan shows a picture of his wife, Zeenat Rafiq, at his home in Lahore 
on Wednesday. Photograph: KM Chaudary/AP 
In a television interview with Geo News, Khan said his wife had been duped 
into returning home. “After living with me for four days following our 
marriage, her family contacted us and promised they would throw us a proper 
wedding party after eight days,” he said.

“Zeenat was unwilling to go back to her home and told me that she would be 
killed by her family, but later agreed when one of her uncles guaranteed her 
safety.

“After two days, she called me and said that her family had gone back on their 
word and asked me to come to get her, but I told her to wait for the promised 
eight days. Then she was killed.”

Pakistan PM promises tougher stance on 'honour' killings
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/22/pakistan-honour-killings-nawaz-sharif>
Lahore police arrested Zeenat’s mother and said they were looking for her 
brother, who had recently flown in from Dubai.


At their two-bedroom home in a low-income southern neighbourhood of Lahore, 
the family remained defiant.

Perveen’s younger sister Naseem told AFP: “After killing her daughter, Perveen 
went out on the street, took off her shawl and started beating herself on her 
chest, shouting: ‘People! I have killed my daughter for misbehaving and giving 
our family a bad name.’

“My sister declared a long time ago she would not allow her daughter to marry 
a Pashtun,” she said.

The case has attracted the interest of Shahbaz Sharif, the chief minister of 
Punjab. In February Sharif’s brother, the prime minister Nawaz Sharif, pledged 
to close a loophole under Islamic law that allows many perpetrators of 
so-called “honour” killings to go free.

Under current laws family members are allowed to forgive the killer, forcing 
prosecutors to drop even the most watertight case.

It often leads to killers walking free in situations where entire families 
agree that a daughter has brought shame on them.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fpakistani-woman-burned-daughter-zeenat-rafiq-alive-marriage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c96ea19b513f9f2be810100144ec82df1398cf4%2F0_82_4737_2843%2F4737.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pakistani%20woman%20burned%20daughter%20alive%20over%20marriage%20dispute&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fpakistani-woman-burned-daughter-zeenat-rafiq-alive-marriage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pakistani%20woman%20burned%20daughter%20alive%20over%20marriage%20dispute&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fpakistani-woman-burned-daughter-zeenat-rafiq-alive-marriage%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c96ea19b513f9f2be810100144ec82df1398cf4%2F0_82_4737_2843%2F4737.jpg>
 Family members comfort Hassan Khan, the husband of Zeenat Rafiq. Photograph: 
KM Chaudary/AP 
The government has not yet honoured Sharif’s pledge, which was made in the 
run-up to Pakistan’s second-ever Oscar win for a short documentary on “honour” 
killings calledA Girl in the River 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/22/pakistan-honour-killings-nawaz-sharif>
.

Experts say such murders often go unreported. But the death of Zeenat was the 
third to hit the headlines in the past three months.

Last week Maria Sadaqat, a 19-year-old woman, was reportedly lynched and 
burned to death by people in her village near the hill station resort of 
Murree, near Islamabad. She was killed because she had refused to accept the 
proposal of the already married son of the owner of the school where she taught.

In April a 16-year-old girl from another area near the capital was murdered 
for allegedly helping another couple to elope. Police said Ambreen Riasat was 
drugged, suffocated and then put in the back of a van which was set alight.

It is thought that several hundred women are murdered each year in Pakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> by family members who believe 
their honour and standing in the community has been damaged by their daughters.
 