
Twenty-two people face civil and criminal investigations into suspected tax 
evasion following the disclosure of thePanama Papers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/panama-papers>, the chancellor has told MPs.

Philip Hammond also said a further 43 wealthy individuals were under review 
while their links to the offshore files were investigated further. He made the 
comments in a written answer to the House of Commons explaining what had 
happened since the offshore tax files emerged.

The Panama Papers: how the world’s rich and famous hide their money offshore
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/03/the-panama-papers-how-the-worlds-rich-and-famous-hide-their-money-offshore>
In April, David Cameron announced the creation of a cross-agency taskforce to 
analyse all the information available from thePanama Papers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/panama-papers>, a series of articles 
in the Guardian and other international newspapers based on a huge leak of 
documents from the law firm Mossack Fonseca.

Hammond told the house on Tuesday that the taskforce had “added greatly to the 
UK’s understanding of the ever-more complex and contrived structures that are 
being developed to mask offshore tax evasion and economic crime”.


He said some people had approached the tax authorities to settle their affairs 
before action was taken.

Links had been established to eight active Serious Fraud Office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/serious-fraud-office> inquiries, he said, and 
several law enforcement authorities were involved in the wider investigation, 
including the Financial Conduct Authority and the National Crime Agency.


The NCA had identified 26 offshore companies whose beneficial ownership of UK 
property was previously concealed and whose financial activity had been 
identified as “potentially suspicious”. A further two properties and a number 
of companies relevant to an NCA financial sanctions inquiry had also been 
identified. In another joint investigation with the FCA, the NCA had identified 
a number of leads relevant to a major insider-trading operation.

The Guardian’s reporting of the Panama Papers revealed that lawyers and 
accountants in the UK were working with Mossack Fonseca clients. Hammond said 
on Tuesday that the taskforce had identified nine potential “professional 
enablers” of economic crime, all of whom had links with known criminals. The 
taskforce had contacted a further 64 firms to determine their links with 
Mossack Fonseca, and this was expected to establish potential further avenues 
for investigation, he said.


HMRC’s director general for customer compliance, Jennie Granger, said: “The 
net is closing in on tax evasion and economic crime and there are no safe 
havens for hiding money offshore. The vast majority of individuals and 
businesses pay their fair share and it’s on their behalf that the taskforce has 
made so much progress on so many fronts.”

HMRC declined to comment on whether it had obtained the entirety of the Panama 
Papers leak, which totalled more than 11.5m files and 2.5 terabytes of data. 
However,the Danish government paid up to £1m to acquire some or all of the data 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/sep/07/panama-papers-denmark-becomes-first-country-to-buy-leaked-data>
 earlier this year and international tax authorities have been known to share 
information on possible tax abuse in the past.

A HMRC <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/hmrc> spokesperson said: “For 
operational reasons, we do not disclose how we acquire our data. We will 
continue to work with our international partners, and law enforcement agencies, 
to obtain any further relevant information that enables us to crack down on tax 
avoidance, evasion and economic crime.”

Rob Palmer, the campaign leader on money laundering at the anti-corruption 
organisationGlobal Witness <https://www.globalwitness.org/sv/>, said specific 
references to “enablers of economic crime” represented a more aggressive stance 
on criminal finance than had previously been exhibited by the government.

“From our perspective, it’s really important that you go after the pinstripe 
army of bankers, accountants and lawyers that make all of this stuff possible,” 
he said.

 Rebecca Long-Bailey, the shadow chief secretary to the Treasury, said: “The 
fact that the government have sneaked this out in a written statement just 
before recess probably says all you need to know about how seriously they are 
really taking the issue of tackling tax avoidance.

“The Tories are clearly trying to hide that they have been dragging their feet 
on this issue for six years now, and on the same day they have been caught
trying to stop tax havens from being blacklisted by the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/07/treasury-tries-to-thwart-eu-plans-for-tax-haven-blacklist>
, no one will be convinced by their lacklustre attempts at clamping down on 
those that use them.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2Fbiggest-leak-ever-panama-papers-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20biggest%20leak%20ever%20-%20Panama%20Papers%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2Fbiggest-leak-ever-panama-papers-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20biggest%20leak%20ever%20-%20Panama%20Papers%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2Fbiggest-leak-ever-panama-papers-video-explainer&media=>
The biggest leak ever - Panama Papers video explainer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/video/2016/apr/06/biggest-leak-ever-panama-papers-video-explainer> 