
Something is buzzing, so Jivraj Singh unplugs a wire from one box and plugs it 
into another. “Try that?” he says. A note plays, but the buzz can still be 
heard, and so more wires need to be replugged, until all unwanted scratches of 
sound vanish. “We spend around 95% of our time trying to eliminate noises,” 
says Nischay Parekh, sitting behind the synths.

Together, they are Parekh & Singh, a dream-pop duo from the eastern Indian 
city of Kolkata.Ocean <https://itunes.apple.com/in/album/ocean/id1151876503>, 
the pair’s debut album, features none of the stereotypical sitars and tablas 
that dominate India’s music scene. Instead guitarist, vocalist and synth-player 
Parekh and percussionist Singh produce music that sounds distinctly un-Indian, 
as though it could have been produced in any part of the world.

Rehearsals always start like this, the pair tell me, as they set up the 
bedroom-turned-practice-chamber in Singh’s family home in an upmarket Kolkata 
neighbourhood, where abandoned colonial mansions squat among new high rises. 
Listening to their album, released by UK indie labelPeacefrog <http:>, you 
could never pick apart the many layers of instrumental tracks that produce 
their effortlessly crisp, neo-psychedelic sound. But watching them in the flesh 
reveals the feat of assemblage, as guitars, synths, drums and various other 
musical toys and gadgets work together to produce their light, whimsical 
melodies.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dkp_0GThdZDQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dkp_0GThdZDQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dkp_0GThdZDQ&media=>
“We’re putting out 24 tracks of sound at the same time,” says Parekh. “That’s 
12 tracks each. Our music doesn’t sound very electronic, but we use a lot of 
the same tools electronic musicians use. Because it’s only two of us, we have 
to use technology.” Singh steps in: “No, technology uses us.”

Parekh & Singh: the name sounds more like a law firm than a pop band, but it 
suits the pair, who wear brightly coloured tailored suits on stage and in their
Wes Anderson-style music videos <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kp_0GThdZDQ>. 
Similarly, their air of well-behaved schoolboys seems more suited to an office 
than to the booze-fuelled parties of India’s nascent indie music scene.

Parekh, 23, is the performer and dreamer, switching from keyboards to guitars 
and vocals, as they start to rehearse for a couple of gigs. He introduces each 
song with a small story: Ocean’s title track is about navigating difficult 
relationships; Newbury St is about homesickness; and Je Suis Le Pomme Rouge – 
inspired by his unsuccessful attempts to learn French through an app – tells 
the story of the troubadour English king, Richard the Lionheart.

After two semesters at the Berklee College of Music in Boston, Parekh dropped 
out and returned to Kolkata to write and produce his own music. His mother, 
Sumona, lived in America in the 1970s, and fell in love with the music of Frank 
Sinatra, the Beatles and the Mamas & the Papas. When she returned to India, she 
married into a very conservative family, but wanted her son to grow up with the 
worldview she had benefited from. So, when he was a young boy, she would have 
her cassette player on all day, blasting everything from Marvin Gaye to Geri 
Halliwell, singers who had never really been heard in India.

Singh often missed school to spend long weekends away with his musician 
parents, who toured the country performing covers of rock songs. He would sleep 
on stage next to the band’s drummer as his mother belted out the songs. Despite 
this, young Jivraj did not want a career in music. “I always wanted to be a 
documentary-maker and was much more interested in the visual arts, until 
college. Then I started playing the drums and realised it was just natural for 
me to make music.”

Together, Parekh and Singh represent a new type of Indian: well-travelled, 
educated and fashionable, with tastes that have expanded beyond classical folk 
music or the mass appeal Bollywood song-and-dance numbers to include a western 
indie repertoire. But despite the international influence, the dreamlike 
quality of their music and videos is firmly rooted in their hometown of 
Kolkata, a city frozen in time after decades of communist rule, where shops 
close not at the end of the day, but whenever the owners decide they’ve done 
enough to deserve a hot meal and a nap, where strangers stop each other for 
casual roadside conversations.

Their pastel-coloured suits are handmade by local family firm Barkat Ali & 
Sons, who established themselves making uniforms for Indian soldiers during the 
second world war. Their first video, for I Love You Baby, I Love You Doll, was 
shot in an old palace just outside the city. For Parekh, Kolkata was always 
central to his music. On the single Philosophize, he sings: “I’ve got a New 
York state of mind / In Indian standard time.” He says: “I liked living in 
America, and I liked not being in India. But I knew I had to come back if I 
wanted to make music. Because all the music I like, and I listen to, has always 
come from the musicians’ hometowns.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOzrhq-j9feI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOzrhq-j9feI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOzrhq-j9feI&media=>
The pair went to the same school, La Martiniere for Boys, but a six-year age 
gap meant they only met as teenagers, through friends. Now, they barely spend a 
day apart. As they prepare for two concerts, one in Kolkata, the other to an 
audience of thousands in Pune, the two shuttle between each other’s homes, 
packing kit, rehearsing scores, and continually teasing each other.

Although they’ve been making music together for six years, things only really 
took off at the beginning of last year when, after a late-night gig in Kolkata, 
Parekh fired off a round of emails to record companies. “I sent an email with 
an mp3 of our song Hello to eight or nine companies,” he says as we hurtle 
through the city’s narrow, palm-lined streets. “People always tell you that’s 
the one thing you should never do, that it’ll never work, but then two days 
later we got an email back.”

Within weeks, Parekh & Singh had signed a contract and started shooting the 
video for I Love You Baby. With a budget of just $5,000, the shoot required a 
lot of DIY: the pair set about scouting locations, getting new suits tailored, 
and recruiting people to help. “That’s the advantage of working in India,” says 
Parekh. “You can do a lot with a little. In New York or London, shooting a 
video like the one we made on that kind of budget is impossible.”

The video clocked up more than 200,000 views – a lot for an indie band in 
India. Emails started flooding in from such countries as Russia, where the band 
had never expected to find fans. Suddenly, it felt as though they had outgrown 
India, where their music reaches only a small network of young, urban music 
fans.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fparekh-singh-the-pop-princes-at-the-forefront-of-indias-new-wave%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4eb95dd11dd39989068905ff6eee3f4893c1bf6%2F0_26_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Parekh%20%26%20Singh%2C%20the%20pop%20princes%20at%20the%20forefront%20of%20India's%20new%20wave&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fparekh-singh-the-pop-princes-at-the-forefront-of-indias-new-wave%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Parekh%20%26%20Singh%2C%20the%20pop%20princes%20at%20the%20forefront%20of%20India%27s%20new%20wave&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fparekh-singh-the-pop-princes-at-the-forefront-of-indias-new-wave%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4eb95dd11dd39989068905ff6eee3f4893c1bf6%2F0_26_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 ‘I want to play to new crowds, to new cities’ … Parekh & Singh on stage in 
Pune, India. Photograph: Himanshu Rohilla 
At the NH7 weekender festival <https://insider.in/nh7-weekender> in Pune, the 
crowd sways as the sun dips below the horizon. Parekh & Singh’s set includes 
favourites from the first album and a handful of new songs. A ripple of 
excitement spreads through the audience as I Love You Baby, I Love You Doll 
comes on. Afterwards, over a drink, the pair discuss their plan to tour the UK, 
hoping to make some contacts at the festival who can help. They know they still 
have a long way to go to win audiences in the west. “I want to play to new 
crowds, to new cities,” says Parekh. “That’s how you keep the music fresh and 
interesting.”

India's electronic music scene: 10 essential tracks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/apr/10/indias-electronic-music-scene-10-essential-tracks>
India has long been a land of dreamers, but generations of indie musicians – 
Singh’s parents among them – have had to content themselves with playing to 
niche local audiences. However, the emergence of bands such as Parekh & Singh, 
who a decade ago would have struggled to get noticed by a foreign label, is a 
mark of progress – not just for India, but also for the west, which no longer 
seems so fixated on sitars and tablas. “I did take sitar lessons once,” says 
Parekh. “And Jivraj can play the tabla. But we just decided to do something 
different. And so we did.”

• Ocean is out now on Peacefrog Records <http://www.peacefrog.com/home>.
 