
Paris city council has approved the banning of all vehicles from the major road
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/06/paris-mayor-plans-to-pedestrianise-seine-anne-hidalgo>
 running along the right bank of the river Seine in a bitterly contested vote.

Mayor Anne Hidalgo hailed what she called a historic decision that meant the 
“end of the urban motorway inParis <https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris> 
and the reconquest of the Seine”.

The plan, which will be published as an official decree in a matter of weeks, 
will permanently shut to traffic 3.3km of the riverside road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/sep/09/paris-divided-highway-car-free-six-months-pedestrianisation>
 from the tunnel at the Tuileries gardens near the Louvre to the Henri IV 
tunnel near the Bastille.

Before it closed earlier this year for the annual Paris Plage city beach 
project, 43,000 cars a day passed over the stretch of road. It will eventually 
be replaced by gardens, parks, restaurants and cafes.

The city council insists the closure is “definitive”. However, it still needs 
the approval of the police authority, which has the final word on traffic 
matters in the capital.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fparis-council-approves-ban-vehicles-right-bank-seine-road%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F723a0a00f6bc62b0f391344a632ca62378d2bee5%2F0_216_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paris%20mayor%20heralds%20%E2%80%98reconquest%20of%20Seine%E2%80%99%20as%20riverbank%20traffic%20banned&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fparis-council-approves-ban-vehicles-right-bank-seine-road%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paris%20mayor%20heralds%20%E2%80%98reconquest%20of%20Seine%E2%80%99%20as%20riverbank%20traffic%20banned&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fparis-council-approves-ban-vehicles-right-bank-seine-road%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F723a0a00f6bc62b0f391344a632ca62378d2bee5%2F0_216_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 The right bank of the Seine river closed to traffic. Photograph: Charles 
Platiau/Reuters 
Paris’s police prefect, Michel Cadot, told the council his job was to ensure 
the “fluidity” of the city’s traffic. He announced the setting up of a 
“technical committee” to meet next week and then every two months to study the 
knock-on effects on traffic in neighbouring areas and the impact on noise and 
air pollution levels. The committee would report after six months and after a 
year, he said.

Cadot warned the pedestrianisation would have to be reversed if the closure 
caused traffic chaos.

A city hall spokesperson said there was no reason why the road would be 
reopened to vehicles.The left bank road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jul/08/paris-le-berge-street-seine-family-playground>
 along the Seine between the Musée d’Orsay and the Pont de l’Alma was closed to 
traffic in January 2013.

“Of course, we don’t have a crystal ball, but we are convinced that if there 
are traffic jams in the short term, they will evaporate in the long term as 
people change their habits and use other forms of transport,” she said.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fparis-council-approves-ban-vehicles-right-bank-seine-road%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe716ca75e464f6862016f3ef9424cbadfb5c0dc3%2F0_194_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paris%20mayor%20heralds%20%E2%80%98reconquest%20of%20Seine%E2%80%99%20as%20riverbank%20traffic%20banned&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fparis-council-approves-ban-vehicles-right-bank-seine-road%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paris%20mayor%20heralds%20%E2%80%98reconquest%20of%20Seine%E2%80%99%20as%20riverbank%20traffic%20banned&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fparis-council-approves-ban-vehicles-right-bank-seine-road%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe716ca75e464f6862016f3ef9424cbadfb5c0dc3%2F0_194_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Artist’s impression of how the right bank of the Seine will look after it is 
fully pedestrianised. Photograph: Luxigon 
“The mayor is convinced that we will see the same result in terms of less 
traffic and lower pollution as we did with the left bank highway closure, in 
which case there will be no reason for the police prefect to object to it.”

Paris is banning traffic from half the city. Why can’t London have a car-free 
day?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/sep/22/paris-ban-traffic-london-world-car-free-day>
She added: “Hypothetically, it would be possible for the police prefect to 
order the reopening of the highway, but in this case there would have to be 
dialogue between him and the mayor.”

The right bank closure was unanimously approved by all of the Paris council’s 
leftwing parties, including the Greens, on Monday. On the right, members of the 
opposition Les Républicains voted against.

Motorist groups vehemently opposed both left and right bank road closures, 
accusing the city’s socialist administration of a vendetta against drivers.
 