
The streets of Paris <https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris> will be 
transformed this Sunday, with thousands of people on foot and on bikes expected 
to take advantage of a ban on cars that covers almost half of the city centre.

Mayor Anne Hidalgo promoted the first Journée Sans Voiture a year ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/sep/27/all-blue-skies-in-paris-as-city-centre-goes-car-free-for-first-time>
, in response to a rise in air pollution that briefly made the French capital
the most polluted city in the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/23/paris-smog-pollution-emergency-measures-traffic>
. In March, she backed a regularParis Respire <http://www.paris.fr/parisrespire>
 (Paris Breathes) day on the first Sunday of the month, with traffic cleared 
from the eight lanes of the Champs Elysées and a number of surrounding streets, 
and is pushing throughplans to pedestrianise a busy expressway along the Seine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/sep/09/paris-divided-highway-car-free-six-months-pedestrianisation>
. This weekend, the French capital is closing 400 miles of streets to cars in 
an “XXL” version of the event to markWorld Car-Free Day 
<http://www.worldcarfree.net/wcfd/>.

Airparif, an independent air pollution monitor, said that on Paris’s first 
car-free day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/03/pariss-first-attempt-at-car-free-day-brings-big-drop-in-air-and-noise-pollution>
 – which covered around a third of the city – nitrogen dioxide levels dropped 
by up to 40% in some parts. Bruitparif, which measures noise, said sound levels 
fell by half in the centre.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F28%2Fparis-bans-cars-for-the-day-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F28%2F1443433208319%2FKP_502532_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paris%20bans%20cars%20for%20the%20day%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F28%2Fparis-bans-cars-for-the-day-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paris%20bans%20cars%20for%20the%20day%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F28%2Fparis-bans-cars-for-the-day-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F28%2F1443433208319%2FKP_502532_crop_640x480.jpg>
Paris bans cars for the day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2015/sep/28/paris-bans-cars-for-the-day-video>
 in September 2015 
A YouGov poll after Paris’s first car-free day in September last year found a 
majority of Londoners – including regular drivers – would support a similar 
monthly car ban in centralLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>. The 
survey found that 63% of those asked supported a car-free day with motor 
vehicles banned from the central third of the city, with only 24% opposed. A 
smaller majority (58%) were in favour of making the event monthly.


Since his election in May, London’s new mayor Sadiq Khan has been consulting 
on plans to tackle air pollution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/jul/28/how-bold-will-sadiq-khans-air-quality-improvement-programme-be>
 – including an ultra low emissions zone in central London and a toxicity 
surcharge for more polluting vehicles. He has also pledged topedestrianise 
Oxford Street <http://www.sadiq.london/a_greener_cleaner_london>, starting with 
car-free days and weekends along the busy shopping area, although firm plans 
have yet to be agreed. Greenwich, in south-east London, alsolooks set to get 
occasional car-free days 
<http://www.newsshopper.co.uk/news/14628349.Sadiq_Khan_announces_mini_parks_and_car_free_days_in_bid_to_tackle_Greenwich_pollution/>
.


Khan’s predecessor, Boris Johnson, promised to explore holding regular 
car-free days in London after being “blown away” by the success of Jakarta’s 
weekly eventduring a trip to the Indonesian capital in November 2014 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/mayor/boris-johnson-keen-on-car-free-sundays-in-central-london-9893577.html>
 – but nothing came of the idea. Eight miles of central streets are closed for 
a few hours one Sunday a year for the annual Prudential FreeCycle, with the 
event so popular that frequent bottlenecks make it impossible to ride parts of 
the course.


A spokesperson for Khan said: “The mayor is looking into a range of dynamic 
proposals on improving public spaces, including traffic-free days and plans for 
the pedestrianisation of Oxford Street. He is overseeing hard-hitting new 
measures to tackle London’s polluted air, and is supportive of events like 
car-free days that both lower toxic car fumes and encourage pedestrians to get 
out and enjoy their streets more.”


In 2016, though, car-free day coverage in those British cities taking part 
seems to be limited to single streets:Lambeth council is closing Cornwall Road 
<http://www.lambeth.gov.uk/events/car-free-day-0> on Saturday – for a bike 
market, food stalls and roller disco; elsewhere in the UK,Cardiff is closing 
one street 
<http://www.walesonline.co.uk/news/wales-news/cardiff-taking-part-international-car-11901855>
 – Park Place – today.


While some dismiss car-free days as a gimmick, others say they can act as a 
catalyst, allowing residents to see how their city could look without private 
traffic. Many other cities around the world are taking the opportunity to ban 
cars from large parts of the centre. Last weekend sawBrussels hold its 15th 
annual car-free day <http://www.bruxelles.be/artdet.cfm?id=5547>, while 
Copenhagen held its first car-free day since the 1970s 
<http://www.thelocal.dk/20160919/in-photos-copenhagen-holds-car-free-day>.


Mexico City closes 35 miles of city centre streets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/nov/11/viva-la-revolucion-mexico-city-cyclists-fight-right-safety>
 to cars every Sunday, while Bogotá – a pioneer of regular traffic bans with its
weekly Sunday Ciclovía event 
<http://thecityfix.com/blog/ciclovias-mobility-quality-life-latin-america-cities-worldwide-dario-hidalgo/>
 running since 1974 – is holding one of three annualDías Sin Carro 
<https://thecitypaperbogota.com/bogota/bogota-goes-car-free-for-first-dia-sin-carro-of-2016/11671>
 today. Private cars and motorbikes are prohibited in the centre from 5am to 
7.30pm, the largest working-day car ban in the world.


A new New York? Manhattan's oldest neighbourhood goes car-free, kind of …
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/aug/15/new-york-manhattan-car-free-shared-streets-financial-district>
New York closed a swathe of the centre to cars 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/22/nyregion/new-york-today-a-car-free-day.html?_r=0>
 to mark Earth Day in April, and has continued its popular Summer Street 
programme, where Park Avenue is pedestrianised on three Saturdays in August.
Manhattan held a Shared Streets event 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/aug/15/new-york-manhattan-car-free-shared-streets-financial-district>
 this summer, which restricted cars to 5mph over 60 blocks of Financial 
District. Other American cities holding car-free events this weekend include
Philadelphia <https://twitter.com/philly311/status/777903803844661248> and 
Detroit 
<http://www.detroitnews.com/story/business/2016/09/13/open-streets/90312966/>, 
while even car-orientedLos Angeles now regularly runs the biggest car-free 
events <http://www.ciclavia.org/events_history> in the country. 


Other cities are taking longer-term measures to cut motor traffic. Oslo has 
revealed plans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/19/oslo-moves-to-ban-cars-from-city-centre-within-four-years>
 to ban all private vehicles from the centre by 2019,Hamburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/hamburg-answer-to-climate-change>
 is developing agreen network <http://www.hamburg.de/gruenes-netz/> for people 
on foot and bikes that will span 40% of the metropolis, and Madrid intends to 
pedestrianise the urban core and expel cars by 2020.


So is London being left behind? The London Cycling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/cycling> Campaign said it would 
welcome a car-free day in London, but that it would be no match for long-term 
investment in infrastructure.

“The LCC would love to see car free days in London,” a spokesperson said. “We 
know many people want to cycle in our city, but currently feel scared because 
of the danger posed by heavy motor traffic. Car-free days would open up our 
streets so that more Londoners could enjoy the spaces where they live, work and 
play; and travel around the city by bike without fear.

“However, car-free days wouldn’t reduce the actual dangers that cyclists and 
pedestrians face day to day. London needs long-term investment in cycling and 
high-quality cycling infrastructure to make our streets safe for everyday 
journeys by bike and on foot, for people of all ages and abilities.”

Thursday 22 September is World Car-Free Day. Is your city taking part and 
closing streets to cars? If so, tweet your pictures and thoughts to
@guardiancities <https://twitter.com/guardiancities>
 