
It is 8.30am on a weekday rush hour and the Voie Georges-Pompidou along the 
right bank of the Seine, normally one of the busiest highways inParis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris>, is eerily quiet.

Around 43,000 vehicles a day used this expressway, built in 1967, to cross 
central Paris from west to east, but they are nowhere to be seen. Instead, 
teams of workers are there, planning playgrounds, wooden terraces, waterside 
gardens restaurants and rectangular terrains for playing boules.


The drone from traffic on the parallel Quai des Celestins, higher up the river 
bank, suggests traffic there is moving along at a respectable pace – 
confounding those doomsayers who suggested the controversial scheme to 
pedestrianise two miles of city centre highway would bring neighbouring roads 
to a standstill.


While this section of the Seine closes every summer to host the Paris Plages 
<http://www.parisinfo.com/decouvrir-paris/les-grands-rendez-vous/Paris-Plages> 
– in which temporary artificial beaches are created along the right bank of the 
river – this time the expressway has not been reopened.

Instead Paris’s prefect of police – the state representative – this week 
approved the closure of the riverside route for a six-month trial. 
Socialist-run city hall says it intends to keep the highwayclosed to vehicles 
for good 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/06/paris-mayor-plans-to-pedestrianise-seine-anne-hidalgo>
.

The Conseil de Paris, led by Mayor Anne Hidalgo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/15/paris-changed-permanently-mayor-anne-hidalgo>
, who has a comfortable majority, will vote on a proposal for a permanent 
closure on 26 September – but such a move also needs the approval of the 
prefect, who has so far only agreed to a trial period. That trial will 
officially start after the vote is taken.

Opponents, who have organised petitions 
<https://www.change.org/p/paris-rendez-nous-les-berges-de-seine> and threatened 
legal action, say the scheme hits those from the city suburbs whose daily 
journeys in and out of Paris will now take up to 20 minutes longer. They insist 
the closure will do nothing to reduce traffic and thus air and noise pollution, 
but simply push the problem elsewhere.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fparis-divided-highway-car-free-six-months-pedestrianisation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa40d42cf3b0f97ab4d0547e6c746596e44540460%2F0_15_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paris%20divided%3A%20two-mile%20highway%20by%20Seine%20goes%20car-free%20for%20six%20months&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fparis-divided-highway-car-free-six-months-pedestrianisation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paris%20divided%3A%20two-mile%20highway%20by%20Seine%20goes%20car-free%20for%20six%20months&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fparis-divided-highway-car-free-six-months-pedestrianisation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa40d42cf3b0f97ab4d0547e6c746596e44540460%2F0_15_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 A Seine-side holiday: Paris Plages lasts for four weeks during the summer. 
Photograph: Francois Guillot/AFP/Getty Images 
Few issues have so bitterly divided Parisians than the closure of Voie 
Georges-Pompidou. The move, one of the pillars of Hidalgo’s 2014 election 
campaign, has pitted city hall against the regional council, right against 
left, motorists against pedestrians, in increasingly bad tempered exchanges.


In a Huffington Post  
<http://www.huffingtonpost.fr/olivier-blond/oui-a-la-pietonisation-des-berges-_b_11758866.html>
article 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.fr/olivier-blond/oui-a-la-pietonisation-des-berges-_b_11758866.html>
 at the end of August entitled “Yes to the pedestrianisation of the 
riverbanks”, a high-profile group of ecologists, including former government 
ministers, MEP José Bové and photographer Yann Arthus-Bertrand, regretted the 
“aggressive” tone of the debate, “… as is often the case when it concerns cars. 
Remember the violent arguments about the creation of bus lanes and pedestrian 
streets – today mostly appreciated?”

The traffic closure would, they wrote, make Paris “more beautiful, more warm, 
more modern, more green and more human”, and described the use of the riverside 
autoroutes as “anachronistic … The idea of building a motorway right in the 
heart of the city might have seemed a good one in the 60s … but as is often the 
case, yesterday’s solutions are today’s problems.”

A public consultation set up by the city authorities to examine the permanent 
closure of the Voie Georges-Pompidou, which would free up 4.5 hectares of river 
bank space for pedestrians, advised against the closure of the highway in its 
report of 22 August.

The stretch of highway being closed – along which an estimated 2,700 cars pass 
each hour at peak times – runs from the Tuileries tunnel in the first 
arrondissement to the Henri IV tunnel near Bastille in the fourth. The plan 
allows for the highway to be reopened in emergencies.

Three years ago, plans to close a mile-and-a-half stretch of the left bank 
between the Orsay Museum and the Alma Bridge running through the city east to 
west, was also vehemently opposed by motoring groups. The highway closed; life 
went on.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fparis-divided-highway-car-free-six-months-pedestrianisation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b772cc6448ecb7857c34d403b37e9e9a0e44fca%2F0_0_8424_3091%2F8424.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paris%20divided%3A%20two-mile%20highway%20by%20Seine%20goes%20car-free%20for%20six%20months&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fparis-divided-highway-car-free-six-months-pedestrianisation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paris%20divided%3A%20two-mile%20highway%20by%20Seine%20goes%20car-free%20for%20six%20months&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fparis-divided-highway-car-free-six-months-pedestrianisation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b772cc6448ecb7857c34d403b37e9e9a0e44fca%2F0_0_8424_3091%2F8424.jpg>
 How the car-free road could look. Illustration: Luxigon 
Christophe Najdovski, Paris deputy mayor responsible for transport and public 
spaces, and a member of the Ecology Green party, said the new project is all 
about changing attitudes. “The first few weeks will be difficult and then it 
will become normal. As we have seen with this type of project across the whole 
world, including places like New York and Rio, is that when an urban highway is 
transformed or closed, there is an evaporation of traffic. Either people modify 
their route, or they use their car less and take other forms of transport.

“Behaviour will change. Habits will change. And our objective, to reduce 
traffic and thus pollution, will be achieved.”


Najdovski added: “We have done all studies necessary for this project and 
we’re convinced that after six months, a year, everything will be fine and 
nobody will be talking about this any more. That’s what happened with the right 
bank three years ago.”


If Anne Hidalgo wants to ride a bicycle then that’s up to her, but why should 
motorists suffer
Pierre Chasseray 
But Pierre Chasseray of the organisation 40 Millions d’automobilistes 
<http://www.40millionsdautomobilistes.com> (40 Million Motorists), which has 
320,000 members, said Najdovski’s arguments are “utter rubbish”.


“If you close a major road, it’s obvious the cars aren’t just going to 
disappear. Anne Hidalgo isn’t David Copperfield. They’re going to turn up 
elsewhere and there will be traffic jams elsewhere,” Chasseray told the 
Guardian.


“If Anne Hidalgo wants to ride a bicycle then that’s up to her, but why should 
motorists suffer? Let’s make no mistake, her goal is purely electoral and this 
stupid idea will please two or three bobos (bourgeois-bohemians) and upset 10 
million others. She doesn’t care about the people in the banlieues [suburbs] 
because they don’t vote for her.”


He added: “City hall wants to change people’s habits by force, but we’re not a 
dictatorship. Instead of closing the highways, they should find a way for cars 
and pedestrians to coexist.”


The Ile-de-France regional president Valérie Pécresse, of the opposition 
centre-right Les Republicains (LR) party, said the trial should last a year to 
take account of “spikes in pollution” in summer months. She said the 
pedestrianisation project was “seductive” but added: “It all comes down to how 
it’s done.”

“Paris cannot take brutal decision without real consultation and without 
taking into account the impact on the banlieue,” Pecressetold Le Monde 
<http://www.lemonde.fr/entreprises/article/2016/09/08/pietonnisation-des-voies-sur-berge-pecresse-va-creer-un-comite-d-evaluation-regional-independant_4994568_1656994.html>
.

A new New York? Manhattan's oldest neighbourhood goes car-free, kind of …
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/aug/15/new-york-manhattan-car-free-shared-streets-financial-district>
Nathalie Kosciusko-Morizet 
<http://www.lepoint.fr/politique/pietonisation-des-voies-sur-berges-a-paris-lr-va-aller-devant-la-justice-07-09-2016-2066567_20.php>
, who leads the opposition LR group at city hall, declared it was considering 
legal moves to stop the pedestrianisation project.

Announcing the six-month trial closure, Paris’s police prefect, Michel Cadot, 
said he would be watching closely its impact on traffic and pollution, and 
warned the highway would be reopened if it caused “a major traffic problem”. 
Chasseray said he was confident the Voie Georges Pompidou would be reopened 
“for the good of Paris and the banlieues”.

But Najdovski disagrees: “The pedestrianisation of the riverbank was a 
political promise made by a mayor elected by universal suffrage. The riverbanks 
are being pedestrianised and they will remain pedestrianised,” he said.

“Paris is the last great metropole of its kind to reconquer its city centre; 
to recognise that it’s an outdated idea that to get across town you have to 
cross the centre. London has introduced its congestion charge, Madrid had 
pushed traffic out of the centre. In doing this, we are taking Paris into the 
21st century.”


Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> to join the discussion
 