
Paris <https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris> authorities restricted traffic 
in the city for a second day after a “lid of pollution” sealed the capital, 
causing concern over public health.

Photographs showed a grey veil of dirty air trapped over the city, masking the 
horizon and, at times, landmarks such as the Eiffel Tower. Experts said it was 
the longest most intense spike in pollution for at least 10 years and was 
expected to continue for at least another day if not longer.

Bird flu hits French foie gras industry at busiest time of year
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/06/bird-flu-hits-french-foie-gras-industry-at-busiest-time-of-year>
Following a ban on vehicles with odd-number licence plates on Tuesday, it was 
the turn of those with even numbers to be told to leave the car at home on 
Wednesday. To encourage them, public transport in the city and suburbs was free.

The alternate-day vehicle bans have only been introduced four times in the 
last two decades, and never before for two consecutive days.

“Without it the air would be even more polluted. It’s an emergency solution to 
an urgent problem,” Charlotte Songeur ofAirparif, 
<https://twitter.com/Airparif?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw> which measures air quality 
in the French capital, said.

She added: “Even before this, 1.6 million French people were breathing in a 
level of nitrogen dioxide over European recommended levels.”

High levels of pollutant gases and fine lead particles can cause asthma, 
allergies, breathing difficulties and heart diseases 
<http://www.lejdd.fr/JDD-Paris/Voies-sur-berges-a-Paris-le-cri-d-alarme-de-pneumologues-808300>
.

The Paris prefect, Michel Cadot, said the ban would be extended to a third day 
if air quality did not improve.

The spike in pollution was blamed on anticyclonic weather conditions, little 
wind combined with the cold snap keeping the pollution from escaping, and 
people turning up their gas heating or lighting fires.

“As long as the meteorological situation remains the same and emissions remain 
the same, we will not see the end of the pollution spike,” said Cadot.


The level of PM10 lead particles in Paris was higher than the recommended 80 
micrograms per cubic metre several days last week.

 However, because the alternating traffic rule is only introduced after four 
consecutive days of continuous high pollution – and the traffic level dropped 
at the weekend – it was not introduced on Monday, causing criticism of the 
authorities when the levels shot back up again. Air quality controllers also 
noted a jump in nitrogen dioxide levels from last Thursday.

The air quality was said to be bad in other French cities, including Grenoble 
and Lyon.

Sébastien Vray, president of the group Respire <http://www.respire-asso.org/> 
(Breathe), said there were 48,000 premature deaths in France each year due to 
air pollution. “It’s the third biggest cause of death, but politicians only 
react under the pressure of public opinion,” Vray told France TV Info.

“It’s now 40 years that we’ve had health problems linked to air pollution. 
Organisations measuring air quality give the same reports each year ... what 
are we waiting for to bring in technological change? Our carmakers have known 
for the last 40 years they can improve their engines with increasingly 
efficient technology and the state must better inform the public to help them 
change.”

Motorists who ignored the ban aimed at cutting traffic were fined €22 (£19). 

The mayor of Paris, Anne Hidalgo, who has made tackling pollution a priority, 
tweeted <https://twitter.com/Anne_Hidalgo/status/806145739046977536> a 
photograph taken from an aircraft over the capital showing the city covered in 
a grey blanket, with only the top of the Eiffel Tower visible. “Proof of the 
necessity to reduce the place of the car in city centres,” she wrote.
Anne Hidalgo (@Anne_Hidalgo) 
#Paris <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Paris?src=hash> aujourd'hui. La preuve de 
la nécessité de réduire la place de la voiture en centre-ville#pollution 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/pollution?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/R10Tdu4o2Y 
<https://t.co/R10Tdu4o2Y>
 <https://twitter.com/Anne_Hidalgo/status/806145739046977536> December 6, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Anne_Hidalgo/status/806145739046977536>  