
Paris has banned old cars from its streets in a war on air pollution  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/26/champs-elysees-car-bans-month-paris-smog>
that environmentalists hope will also drive dirty vehicles from the centres of 
other European cities.


Air pollution, in large part caused by fine particulate fuel emissions, kills 
48,000 people each year in France, about 400,000 inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and around 3.7 million 
worldwide, data published by France’s public health agency this month showed.

After Vélib’ bikes and Autolib’ cars, Paris adds mopeds to hire fleet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/21/after-velib-bikes-and-autolib-cars-paris-adds-cityscoot-mopeds-to-capitals-hire-fleet>
From Friday, any car registered before 1 January 1997 will be banned from the 
city’s streets from Monday to Friday, 8am to 8pm.

 Some owners protested by parking their vehicles near the National Assembly 
and Champs Elysees avenue to denounce a ban they said would hurt poor people 
most and slash the resale value of their vehicles.

 “I drive 50km per week, I don’t have the means to change vans so I will 
continue using it, I’ll get fined every week and there you go,” said Marc 
Martin, who uses his ageing Peugeot van to deliver picture frames to clients.

 “And if it goes too far, I’ll close my business, people will lose their jobs, 
that’s it. What can I say, not much. This law is pathetic.”

Paris <https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris> mayor Anne Hidalgo said the 
ban could be extended in 2020 to all combustion-engine cars more than nine 
years old.

 After an initial tolerance period, motorists who flout the ban face fines of 
€35 (£32), an amount that is set to increase from the end of the year.

 Upwards of half a million owners in and around Paris will be hit by the ban, 
according to a driver defence group, 40 million d’Automobilistes, which is 
taking legal action to seek financial compensation for drops in the value of 
now-banned vehicles.

 Norway is planning to ban petrol and diesel-fuelled cars from 2025 and 
several cities in Europe are testing various anti-pollution or anti-congestion 
measures based on tolls for city centre access or temporary and selective car 
bans during surges in pollution levels.
 