
Kathryn Hudson, the parliamentary standards commissioner, should end the 
outdated practice of only accepting complaints by formal letter, according to 
MPs unhappy with her approach to investigations.

Andrew Bridgen, a Conservative MP who has made several unsuccessful complaints 
to Hudson, questioned the watchdog’s record and urged her to make it easier for 
people to submit allegations.
“The perception is there appears to be a lack of appetite to properly 
investigate reports of misconduct,” he said. “This is unhealthy. When you look 
recently, one of those investigations absolutely contradicts the finding of a 
court hearingin the case of MP Tim Yeo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/nov/25/tim-yeo-loses-libel-case-sunday-times-tory-mp>
.

“That is not going to give the public confidence. And we certainly need to 
overhaul this arcane practice of all complaints having to be received in 
writing. It is time for them to move into the internet era.”

Hudson’s work is under increasing scrutiny after she criticised a media sting 
thatexposed the willingness of two former foreign secretaries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/21/channel-4-dispatches-malcolm-rifkind-jack-straw-ofcom>
, Jack Straw and Malcolm Rifkind, to be hired by journalists posing as 
lobbyists.

The programme alleged that Straw boasted to undercover journalists that he had 
operated “under the radar” to use his influence and change EU rules on behalf 
of a firm that paid him £60,000 a year, while Rifkind reportedly claimed to be 
able to gain useful access to every British ambassador in the world.

Hudson found in September that the two men had been misrepresented by the 
media and their words distorted, while there wasno breach of the rules on paid 
lobbying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/17/sir-malcolm-rifkind-and-jack-straw-cleared-of-cash-for-access-misconduct>
. The Commons standards committee of MPs, which make the final decision on 
sanctions, were even more critical of the journalism than Hudson, saying their 
colleagues had been unfairly portrayed and damaged.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fdec%2F23%2Fparliamentary-standards-kathryn-hudson-yeo-straw-rifkind%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47988276f655752a499edf37b971a947ce674d90%2F0_0_4153_2494%2F4153.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Parliamentary%20watchdog%20needs%20'overhaul'%20for%20public%20to%20trust%20MPs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fdec%2F23%2Fparliamentary-standards-kathryn-hudson-yeo-straw-rifkind%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Parliamentary%20watchdog%20needs%20%27overhaul%27%20for%20public%20to%20trust%20MPs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fdec%2F23%2Fparliamentary-standards-kathryn-hudson-yeo-straw-rifkind%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47988276f655752a499edf37b971a947ce674d90%2F0_0_4153_2494%2F4153.jpg>
 The Channel 4 investigation into Malcolm Rifkind and Jack Straw was criticised 
by Hudson, but Ofcom found the journalism fair and in the public interest. 
Photograph: AFP/Getty Images 
But Ofcom, the broadcasting regulator, took a different view this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/21/parliamentary-commissioner-faces-questions-over-rifkind-straw-sting>
. It found the journalism of Channel 4 in relation to Rifkind and Straw had 
been fair and the investigation significantly in the public interest.

It comes just weeks after Tim Yeo, a Tory former minister and select committee 
chair, was found by a judge to have given some evidence that was not true or 
honest about his financial interests. As a result, the ex-MP failed in his 
libel claim against the Sunday Times, which had conducted a media sting in 
which heoffered to act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/nov/25/tim-yeo-loses-libel-case-sunday-times-tory-mp>
 as a paid parliamentary advocate who would push for new laws to benefit the 
business of a client for a daily fee of £7,000.

Yeo too had been cleared by Hudson and his fellow MPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/nov/21/tory-mp-environment-cleared-tim-yeo-sunday-times>
 of breaching the parliamentary code of conduct regarding lobbying and second 
jobs.

The two cases that have led Paul Flynn and John Mann, two campaigning Labour 
MPs, to call for an overhaul of the system again, with Flynn worrying that 
parliament is “slipping back into sleaze”. He has called for a judge to take 
charge of Hudson’s role.

It is only recently that Hudson’s record has come under the spotlight. Towards 
the beginning of her tenure, the watchdog’s reports led to the downfall of 
Maria Miller, whoresigned as culture secretary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/apr/09/maria-miller-resigns-as-culture-secretary-over-expenses-row>
 after her findings of an expenses breach under the old regime, and sealed the 
end of the political career of Patrick Mercer, who hadresigned over a lobbying 
scandal following 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/may/01/patrick-mercer-tory-mp-worst-ever-breaches-rules>
 a sting by BBC Panorama and the Daily Telegraph.

One MP, who sat on the standards committee in the last parliament, and worked 
with Hudson, said he found her to have been very thorough and generally put 
members through under intense pressure while they were being investigated.
But he thought her experience of delivering a harsh verdict on Miller had 
perhaps been something of a turning point. Members on the committee had watered 
down her recommendation that Millerrepay £45,000 to a sum of £5,800 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/apr/06/mps-expenses-maria-miller-row-scrutiny>
, while making it clear that they felt she had gone beyond her remit – or 
“riding off into the sunset on a silly adventure”, as one of them put it to the 
Guardian.
The fate of Elizabeth Filkin, one of her predecessors, also casts a long 
shadow over the job of parliamentary commissioner for standards. Filkin, who 
accused Labour former ministers John Reid and Keith Vaz oftrying to frustrate 
her inquiries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2001/nov/26/houseofcommons.politics3>, did not 
reapply for her job in 2001 afterupsetting members of the government and 
prominent Tories 
<http://%20a%20series%20of%20damning%20reports%20upset%20members%20of%20the%20government%20and%20prominent%20tories./>
.

Tim Yeo loses 'cash-for-advocacy' libel case against Sunday Times
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/nov/25/tim-yeo-loses-libel-case-sunday-times-tory-mp>

As well as the Straw, Rifkind and Yeo findings, critics of Hudson point to a 
string of cases that Hudson has declined to examine. These include allegations 
that Tory MP Lucy Allan concocted a death threat from a constituent 
<http://www.shropshirestar.com/news/2015/12/18/telford-mp-lucy-allan-cleared-over-fake-death-threat-claim-as-new-row-erupts/>
, about theconduct of Michelle Thomson 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-scotland-scotland-politics-34487629> who resigned 
the SNP whip over a police investigation into her property lawyer, and comments 
by Sir Gerald Kaufman about “Jewish money” influencing government policy on 
Israel.

These incidents were deemed either to have insufficient evidence to justify an 
inquiry or to be beyond her remit to investigate, which covers only whether an 
MP has broken theguide to the rules relating to the conduct of members 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201516/cmcode/1076/107601.htm>.

Since the beginning of the financial year in April, more than 340 people have 
contacted the commissioner to complain about an MP. But after being given 
advice on whether it might be possible for her to investigate, only 52 of those 
wrote a formal letter of complaint, which needs to be received as a hard copy. 
By October,only three of these had led to inquiries being opened 
<http://www.parliament.uk/mps-lords-and-offices/standards-and-financial-interests/parliamentary-commissioner-for-standards/complaints-and-investigations/complaints-statistics/>
 – or less than 1% of the original grievances logged by telephone, email or 
paper. Over her tenure, about one in 10 formal complaints submitted has 
resulted in a full inquiry.

MPs on the standards committee have previously recommended that she accepts 
complaints by email, in a report that she welcomed, but this would require a 
debate on reform of the system in theHouse of Commons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/houseofcommons>.
Sir Nick Harvey, a former Lib Dem MP, who sat on both the standards committee 
and its predecessor, said people should must realise that the commissioner can 
only act within the boundaries of her job.

“I think while no system is perfect, this works pretty well,” he said. “One 
must remember the commissioner and committee are looking specifically about 
whether there has been a breach of parliament’s rules. Just because they 
conclude there has not been, it doesn’t mean the MP might not be found to 
transgress some other rule or regulation somewhere else. But that’s not a 
matter for the House of Commons.”

However, that is a hard message to convey to members of the public who look to 
the standards commissioner for redress but find she is unable to help.

The reputation of the standards committee, which oversees her work, was 
further undermined in October, when one of itsGeoffrey Cox, Tory MP for 
Torridge and West Devon, had to resign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/19/tory-mp-geoffrey-cox-apology-failing-report-extra-earnings-in-time>
 from the body over allegations he was late to declare payment for legal work, 
including his successful defence of the former premier of the Cayman Islands 
against charges of corruption. He is now himself the subject of an inquiry by 
Hudson.

Cox is one of five MPs still under investigation by the commissioner at the 
moment, two of which have the potential to be particularly contentious. The 
first is the case of Justin Tomlinson, the minister for the disabled, who is 
alleged to havepassed a draft parliamentary report 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-wiltshire-34591534> to an employee of the 
payday loan company Wonga.

Another is the high-profile and emotive case of Alistair Carmichael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jun/02/alistair-carmichael-ethics-code-anti-sturgeon-leak-investigation>
, who has admitted lying about having authorised the leak of a confidential 
memo suggesting Nicola Sturgeon would have preferred David Cameron than Ed 
Milband to be prime minister – an account that has been vehemently denied.


Last night, the commissioner’s office confirmed that she has also begun an 
inquiry into the conduct of Phil Boswell, an SNP member, who wasreported over 
allegations he failed to declare outside interests 
<http://www.scotsman.com/news/politics/snp-mp-phil-boswell-facing-inquiry-over-earnings-1-3974818>
. A spokeswoman for Hudson said she does not comment on criticism of her role.
 