
The parliamentary standards commissioner Kathryn Hudson is facing questions 
for criticising the media sting onSir Malcolm Rifkind 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/malcolmrifkind> and Jack Straw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jackstraw>, after regulator Ofcom found 
the reporting was of significant public interest and did not unfairly represent 
the MPs.

Ofcom <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ofcom> opened an investigation into 
the programme in question, a joint operation between Channel 4 and the Daily 
Telegraph, after Rifkind and Straw werecleared of cash-for-access allegations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/17/sir-malcolm-rifkind-and-jack-straw-cleared-of-cash-for-access-misconduct>
 by Hudson and the standards committee of MPs in September.

The programme used secret filming to allege that the MPs offered their 
political connections to earn money from commercial companies.

After exonerating the MPs of breaching parliamentary standards, Hudson said 
the damage done to the former MPs could have been avoided if Channel 4’s 
Dispatches and the Daily Telegraph had accurately reported the exchanges they 
had filmed.

The House of Commons <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/houseofcommons> 
standards committee was even more critical of the journalism, saying it was 
“very concerned that the matter should have been reported in this fashion”.

But Ofcom <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ofcom> took a different view on 
Monday, saying there was a “significant public interest” in exploring the 
conduct of the MPs and that in the circumstances undercover filming was 
“proportionate and warranted”.

In its 38-page ruling, Ofcom also said that the filming was an “accurate 
representation” of the discussions the MPs held.

Channel 4’s Dispatches cleared over Malcolm Rifkind and Jack Straw sting
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/21/channel-4-dispatches-malcolm-rifkind-jack-straw-ofcom>
It has since emerged that Rifkind was one of a five-person panel 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/sir-malcolm-rifkind-helped-hire-head-of-parliamentary-watchdog-that-cleared-him-over-cash-for-access-10508789.html>
 that helped appoint Hudson to her position three years ago.

Hudson’s judgment in the case was challenged by Paul Flynn, a Labour member of 
the public administration and constitutional affairs committee, who said it was 
the second time the commissioner had been “too permissive” about the conduct of 
MPs.

He said he would be writing to Hudson to raise concerns that the Commons is 
“slipping back into sleaze again” and to seek an explanation of her leniency.

“There is serious doubt about whether the House of Commons and Lords standards 
people have gone soft and are being too lenient...[Former MP] Tim Yeo was given 
a clean bill of health but whenhe sued the Sunday Times he was told he was wrong
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/nov/25/tim-yeo-loses-libel-case-sunday-times-tory-mp>
. When I read the report from the standards committee about Straw and Rifkind, 
I was baffled by it. I did not think the reporting was distorted in any way,” 
Flynn said on Monday.

“If we are to restore trust in parliamentarians, we are not doing very well. 
We cannot be permissive about the behaviour of our own members. There is a case 
to answer and I shall be writing to the standards commsioner because it is very 
worrying..”

Tamasin Cave, campaigner for the Alliance for Lobbying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/lobbying> Transparency, also said the 
standards regime was “not fit for purpose and not doing what the public expect 
of it”. Cave added that David Cameron had failed in his promise to clean up 
politics when it comes to MPs being lobbied by corporate interests.

In the wake of the Straw and Rifkind case, Sir Alistair Graham, former 
chairman of the committee on standards in public life, has also called for the 
entire parliamentary standards regime to be changed to ensure it “genuinely 
represents the broader public interest”.

Rifkind and Straw are cleared, but parliament’s rules remain murky
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/20/malcom-rifkind-jack-straw-parliament-regulation>
Asked about the Ofcom report, a spokeswoman for Hudson said she would not be 
answering any questions about her inquiry into Straw and Rifkind or replying to 
any criticism of her findings.

The Channel 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> programme had 
alleged that Straw boasted to undercover journalists that he had operated 
“under the radar” to use his influence and change EU rules on behalf of a firm 
that paid him £60,000 a year. A recording obtained with a hidden camera shows 
Straw saying: “So normally, if I’m doing a speech or something, it’s £5,000 a 
day, that’s what I charge.”

Rifkind reportedly claimed to be able to gain “useful access” to every British 
ambassador in the world. Journalists recorded him describing himself as 
self-employed, even though he earned a salary of £67,000 as MP for Kensington: 
“I am self-employed – so nobody pays me a salary. I have to earn my income.”

Ofcom ruled that Channel 4 had taken reasonable steps to avoid “unfair and 
unjust” treatment of the MPs, making sure their views were fairly aired.

“There was sufficient balance, by the inclusion of statements by the MPs that 
they were aware of the parliamentary rules and their responsibilities as MPs, 
in the programme such that it did not unfairly represent the MPs as 
‘politicians for hire’,” said Ofcom. “[The programme] allowed viewers to make 
their own minds up as to whether or not they thought the conduct shown fell 
short of public expectations for MPs’ conduct.

“We considered that the programme’s presentation of the statements made by Sir 
Malcolm Rifkind <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/malcolm-rifkind> and Mr 
Straw during the secretly filmed meetings did not give a misleading impression 
of their conduct in a way which was unfair to them,” Ofcom said in its ruling. 
“And the programme-makers took reasonable care to satisfy themselves that 
material facts were not presented, disregarded or omitted in a way that was 
unfair to them. The presentation of the secretly filmed footage was an accurate 
representation of the discussions.”

The programme, which aired on 23 February, and Telegraph articles led Straw to 
suspend himself from the parliamentary Labour party and Rifkind to step down as 
the chairman of parliament’s intelligence and security committee and as an MP.

“We are delighted this important piece of public service journalism has been 
thoroughly vindicated by the independent regulator,” said Daniel Pearl, Channel 
4’s deputy head of news and current affairs and Dispatches editor.

“This was a rigorously detailed investigation which paid scrupulous attention 
to fairness and accuracy at all times. We are pleased that Ofcom has recognised 
that the secretly filmed comments, ‘accurately represented the discussions that 
took place between the MPs and the undercover reporters’.”
 