
Indians have embarked on a process of national soul-searching after 
surveillance footage showed a stream of cars, motorcycles and pedestrians 
ignoring the fatally injured victim of a hit-and-run as he died on aDelhi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/delhi> street – with one passerby even 
stealing the man’s phone.

The victim, identified by Indian media as 36-year-old security guard Matibool, 
was eventually taken to hospital but had died by the time he arrived.

CCTV footage showed him being hit by the small truck at 5.40am on Wednesday as 
he walked along the side of the road in Subhash Nagar, in the city’s west. The 
truck driver stopped and got out of his vehicle but drove away after glancing 
at the man.

He lay in the street for nearly 30 minutes and had his phone robbed by a 
passing rickshaw driver before a friend spotted him and alerted police, who 
took another 40 minutes to arrive.

The driver has reportedly been arrested and the unedited footage has been 
aired by Indian TV networks, sparking widespread anger and reflection among the 
public.

Satyendar Jain, the home minister in the Delhi government, has announced plans 
for a “good samaritan” scheme where people could be financially rewarded for 
taking victims of road accidents to a hospital.

 “It is very unfortunate that no one come to assist him. Government has 
prepared an incentive scheme under which people including drivers of taxi and 
auto, taking road accident victims to hospital will be rewarded,” he said.

Passersby might be reluctant to pick up accident victims for fear of 
attracting suspicion or harassment by police, Jain said, adding: “There is also 
a supreme court directive that such people who help accident victims cannot be 
harassed or questioned. I appeal to people to help them as it is a pious task 
to save someone’s life.”

There was similar outrage after a 2013 incident where footage showed a man 
beingignored by hundreds of drivers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/apr/15/india-shock-crowds-ignore-road-victim>
 as he pleaded for someone to take his wife and infant child to hospital after 
an accident in Jaipur.

The 23-year-old victim of a gang-rape and murder that sparked protests around 
the country <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/dec/19/delhi-bus-gang-rape> 
in December 2012 lay badly injured beside a major road in Delhi for 40 minutes 
before emergency services were called.

India <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> has the highest rate of 
accidents per vehicle in the world with about 150,000 road deaths per year and 
several times more injuries. Road are poorly maintained, traffic rules are 
rarely followed or enforced, and drivers are often untrained.

 