
Patricia Cornelius jokes that her son will make a packet when she is dead. She 
is one of the most awarded playwrights in the country and yet one of the least 
performed by our major theatre companies.

I reckon Patricia Cornelius is writing what the future will consider the great 
Australian plays of our era. People may raid her bottom drawer and rediscover 
her as a major voice of her generation once she’s gone, but I would rather they 
discover her now.

Why is Patricia Cornelius so neglected?


Australian theatre 2016: the 10 most groundbreaking shows by women
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/dec/21/australian-theatre-2016-the-10-most-groundbreaking-shows-by-women>
Sure, she doesn’t do herself any favours by choosing provocative titles for 
her plays – SHIT, SLUT, Savages, for three – but that shouldn’t matter, 
especially when you realise how brilliant and visceral the writing is, and how 
accurately the titles sum up the stories. She doesn’t write plays that are an 
easy evening’s distraction from life, either – quite the opposite. She jumps 
into the centre of some of the most explosive topics more than any writer I 
know – but isn’t that the role of theatre?


Cornelius writes plays that buck gentrified theatre trends. She is not fixated 
on romantic comedy or low-stakes middle-class angst about relationships, 
instead pursuing stories and characters needing a champion. She speaks out when 
few others would.


At a recent dinner for Australian playwrights, Cornelius heckled the federal 
arts minister, Mitch Fifield, demanding he reinstate the funds devastatingly 
cut from the Australia Council 18 months ago. She alone was the voice of 
dissent and as she spoke you could feel the discomfort in the room. She was 
determined, articulate and uncompromising, as she is in her writing.

As a society, would we rather sit in polite, accepting silence than listen to 
dissenting voices? The recent election results in the US and UK, across Europe 
and here in Australia, showed that there are neglected voices and a truth that 
needs to be spoken. But we are living in the era of the echo chamber, a time 
when tribal boundaries are reinforced at every level. The internet has made our 
lives more agreeable but not necessarily better. As a society we can very 
easily avoid discomfort or inconvenient differences, which I believe is making 
us weaker as a collective and more isolated as individuals. We no longer 
practise the art of disagreement.


Over the past two decades we have seen the growing gentrification of our arts 
audiences and organisations. Business modelling has overtaken artistic risk, 
and writers such as Patricia Cornelius have become the collateral damage in a 
war between economics and art. The tradition of funded Australian theatre 
companies has been to explore Australian identity, our voice and our stories, 
but the most recent developments have been focused on exploration of form over 
content, on the isolated vision of the auteur, and the reworking of classics. 
All these trends have further alienated the Australian writer from the 
Australian stage.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fpatricia-cornelius-a-courageous-australian-playwright-neglected%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa34d68ec850d851b00a7ecd47095b9827730491e%2F0_0_800_1202%2F800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Patricia%20Cornelius%20is%20a%20courageous%20Australian%20playwright%20%E2%80%93%20why%20is%20she%20so%20neglected%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fpatricia-cornelius-a-courageous-australian-playwright-neglected%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Patricia%20Cornelius%20is%20a%20courageous%20Australian%20playwright%20%E2%80%93%20why%20is%20she%20so%20neglected%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fpatricia-cornelius-a-courageous-australian-playwright-neglected%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa34d68ec850d851b00a7ecd47095b9827730491e%2F0_0_800_1202%2F800.jpg>
 Patricia Cornelius – the playwright speaks out when few others would. 
Photograph: Supplied 
Cornelius is known for her working-class characters and stories. When I’d 
visit Melbourne in the 1990s, I’d seek out shows that excited me, shows that 
had a moral compass and had something provocative to say. One of the standouts 
of the era was Who’s Afraid of the Working Class?, which Cornelius co-authored 
along with Melissa Reeves, Irene Vela, Andrew Bovell and Christos Tsiolkas.

With its witty title, cross-cultural casting, gender balance and characters 
who reminded us that most Australians come from very working-class roots, this 
show became a touchstone for my own work. A utopian theatre-making vision in a 
dystopian political climate. The 90s felt like a time of transition: the decade 
of prime ministers Keating and Howardas the idealistic hangover of the early 
80s gave way to the mantra “greed is good”. This play shone a light on the 
internal turmoil we were feeling as a country.

The national social shift from predominantly working-class to predominately 
middle-class over the past three decades has led to a mass forgetting of the 
less fortunate, and amnesia when it comes to issues of migration, 
asylum-seeking and poverty. The majority of the country comes from migrant 
stock and yet we lack the empathy and compassion as a nation to change our 
policies. In this environment, it is difficult to hear a voice that reminds us 
of our moral obligations and our lack of understanding, that challenges us to 
change, and forces us to comprehend our complicity in the decisions of our 
leaders. We have promoted the neutrality of an apolitical position rather than 
an active political engagement. In this environment, it is hard to have a 
writer such as Patricia Cornelius.

I can’t help but think that being a woman contributes to the neglect of her 
work. When you see Andrew Bovell and Christos Tsiolkas doing major works in 
theatre and film you’re left wondering, why not Patricia? Are people so 
confronted by a woman who demands action? A woman who tells us where society 
needs to change? By stories of incarceration, or broken people rebuilding a 
life? Or by taboo topics in works that don’t attempt to demonise or judge the 
characters? Is she out of step with the world or is it simply sexism? . 
Cornelius is a champion for the downtrodden, and she deserves the backing of 
more champions.

‘I wanted something to celebrate’: Indigenous playwright tackles tradition in 
The Season
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/dec/14/i-wanted-something-to-celebrate-indigenous-playwright-tackles-tradition-in-the-season>
I worked with Cornelius when she was dramaturg on The Sapphires. Tony Briggs 
had been an actor in Who’s Afraid of the Working Class? and invited her to help 
adapt for the stage the true story of an Aboriginal singing group entertaining 
the troops in Vietnam. Patricia was relentless in trying to excavate the 
purpose of the story – to find the heart, yes, but also to express the 
political complexities inherent in Aboriginal women being involved in the 
Vietnam conflict. It was invigorating and showed that a conscience and a good 
time can co-exist.

The working class, the moral crusades, the marginalised and neglected are not 
in vogue at the moment, nor is the funding environment sympathetic to artists 
such as Patricia Cornelius. But I believe we should not lose these voices or 
squeeze our dissenters into a palatable blandness. Writers such as Patricia 
Cornelius are too important to leave to the whims of the future: we need to 
recognise them now.

• Wesley Enoch will host the discussion Who’s Afraid of Patricia Cornelius? 
<http://www.sydneyfestival.org.au/2017/whos-afraid-of-patricia-cornelius> on 21 
January at Sydney festival. The festival will also hold readings of Patricia 
Cornelius’s playsLOVE <http://www.sydneyfestival.org.au/2017/love> and SLUT 
<http://www.sydneyfestival.org.au/2017/slut> on 20 and 22, January respectively
 