
Patrick Roberts could understand why the Celtic fans reacted angrily following 
theirgoalless draw with Dundee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/02/celtic-dundee-scottish-premiership-match-report>
 – because he has done the same himself – but he is confident he will rise 
above the negativity before Sunday’s Scottish Cup clash with Morton.

The on-loan Manchester City winger’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/01/celtic-manchester-city-colin-kazim-richards-signing>
 first start ended in a crescendo of jeers at Celtic Park on Wednesday after 
the home side saw their lead over Aberdeen at the top of the Scottish 
Premiership cut to four points following a second consecutive draw.

Never mind England in 1966, here's Scotland conquering Europe in 1967
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-agony-and-the-ecstasy/2016/feb/29/scotland-1967-celtic-rangers-dundee-united-european-cup>
“It’s not what you need,” Roberts said. “At any club you don’t like hearing 
boos in the stadium. But you can feel their frustration. We see it on the pitch 
ourselves, we are annoyed ourselves. It was a devastating draw so we have to 
pick ourselves up.”

The 19-year-old believes he can overcome the negativity during the match. 
“Personally it doesn’t affect me, I try to stick to my job and do what I’m 
there to do,” he said. “I get as frustrated as anyone, I’m like a fan on the 
pitch. I get angry at myself and I get angry when we’re not winning. It’s just 
how I am. I’ve been sat in the stands a few times myself watching games and got 
angry with players on the pitch. So I can sense their frustration.”

Roberts may be a teenager but he has already had to cope with the mantle of a 
£11m transfer followinghis big-money move from Fulham to Manchester last summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/19/manchester-city-sign-patrick-roberts-fulham>
. He vowed to thrive in the Parkhead pressure. “I was at Manchester City, it 
was exactly the same there,” said Roberts, who is on loan at Celtic until the 
end of next season.

“It’s the biggest club in Scotland so there is obviously going to be pressure 
to win. You need to win every game. That’s why I came here. I strive for that. 
That’s what defines you as a good footballer.”

Hamilton hold 10-man Celtic after Dedryck Boyata shown red card
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/26/hamilton-celtic-scottish-premiership-match-report>
To that end, Roberts knows a league and cup double is a “must” and he fully 
appreciates there is no room for error againstMorton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/morton>.

“They beat Hibernian the other day 3-0,” he said. “Whoever you are playing 
against you have to have the same mentality, to go and put them to the sword.”

The Morton defender Luca Gasparotto has returned to training after an ankle 
injury and he could feature againstCeltic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> despite not playing in two months.

The on-loan Celtic winger Paul McMullan cannot play against his parent club 
and the Greenock side are also without the injured Conor Pepper (knee), Frank 
McKeown (knee), Alex Samuel (knee) and Peter MacDonald (knee) with Michael 
Tidser a doubt.

The manager, Jim Duffy, said: “We have to be organised and disciplined if we 
are to do anything in this game. A lot has been said about Celtic struggling 
however they are at the top of the highest league in Scotland and we face a 
massive task.” 
 