
A glance at the League Two table and the club in 21st place might suggest a 
misprint. Should that be Brexeter?Exeter City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/exetercityfc>, looking clueless at home 
without a league win, failed for the ninth time on Saturday in a goalless draw 
with Luton, who are fifth. Yet, while chants of “You don’t know what you’re 
doing” may be justified in Westminster, there was no such outburst at St James 
Park.

A closer look at the table shows why. Exeter are only eight points behind 
Wycombe in sixth. Only Plymouth have won more away. Besides, fans have owned 
the club since 2003.

Through the Supporters’ Trust they know their luck. And so does Paul Tisdale, 
in his 11th year as manager. Last week he called Exeter a “bubble in a rotten 
industry” and said that, if he ever went, he would probably leave the game 
altogether.

Football League your thoughts: Derby pile pressure on Norwich’s Alex Neil | 
John Ashdown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog/2016/nov/26/football-league-your-thoughts-derby-norwich-alex-neil>
Football, bloated by greed, has grown too big for its boots, which admittedly 
have become smaller, and lost touch with its roots. Ten Championship clubs 
aspiring to the Premier League are stuck with mostly no-show owners. 
Dictionaries define gooseberry as “an unwanted third person”.

They have yet to cotton on to Chinese gooseberry as an unwanted first person. 
Exeter have some 3,000 owners at home games, not 100% absence and disaffected 
fans.

The week before, 150 made a 700-mile round trip to Carlisle, where two late 
goals denied Exeter a point. Midweek, thanks to their London outpost, 316 saw 
their sixth away win which, as in January, led to the manager’s sacking. Orient 
have Italian ownership.

Luton, one of the first clubs to have fan representation on their board, came 
nonetheless with their ninth manager since Tisdale started at Exeter. They had 
won there, 3-1 in the FA Cup, three weeks earlier.

Their 634 fans on Saturday were greeted by “Thank you for travelling 210 miles 
to support your club today” and directed to the best place to share a drink. 
They had lost their first League match in 10 on Tuesday, 3-1 at home to 
Portsmouth – another club with fan ownership, after unhappy years in mystery 
hands – and Luton’s Nathan Jones promised: “We will be chomping.”

In the event they could not find the right bit, while doing enough to make 
Christy Pym Exeter’s man of the match for a smothering dive at feet, a reaction 
block after brilliant work by Isaac Vassell, nephew of Darius, and a top-left 
tip-away to Alan Sheehan’s free-kick.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fexeter-city-paul-tisdale-luton-town-league-two-focus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ae189da3a11e1c8d6bfa55a6415d82f68ab32b7%2F0_104_2992_1796%2F2992.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paul%20Tisdale%20untouched%20by%20home%20woes%20due%20to%20people%E2%80%99s%20mandate%20in%20Exeter%20%7C%20Jeremy%20Alexander&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fexeter-city-paul-tisdale-luton-town-league-two-focus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paul%20Tisdale%20untouched%20by%20home%20woes%20due%20to%20people%E2%80%99s%20mandate%20in%20Exeter%20%7C%20Jeremy%20Alexander&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fexeter-city-paul-tisdale-luton-town-league-two-focus%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ae189da3a11e1c8d6bfa55a6415d82f68ab32b7%2F0_104_2992_1796%2F2992.jpg>
 Exeter City manager Paul Tisdale. Photograph: ProSports/Rex/Shutterstock 
Exeter had trouble releasing Reuben Reid, the front man in their 4-1-4-1, and 
owed their best shots to Ollie Watkins, one of whose two late blasts rattled 
the bar, Exeter’s 10th such denial of the season. Troy Brown, returning to 
central defence, was immense and there are more to come shortly from injury. 
Their first two substitutes were Matt Oakley, 39 and once of Southampton and 
Leicester, and Ethan Ampadu, 16 and newly Wales Young Player of the Year.

In which regard Tisdale noted the £1.75m they got from Swansea for Matt Grimes 
at 19 by playing him at 17: “It pays for the astroturf we’re putting down at 
the training ground.” This is football in proportion. It may take article 50 to 
get rid of him.

Talking points

• Saturday’s matches undid a remarkable statistic in League Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball>. Nine home wins and 
only one away overturned the division’s majority of away wins. On Saturday 
morning the score was 75 home, 79 away. Plymouth, Portsmouth, Grimsby, 
Cambridge, Stevenage, Morecambe, Notts County and Leyton Orient, besides Luton, 
had won more than they had lost on their travels.

• The tightness at the heart of League Two is all but matched in the two 
divisions above. Bury, one place above the relegation line in League One, are 
only nine points behind Peterborough in the last play-off spot. In the 
Championship Cardiff in the relegation zone are only 11 behind Leeds in the 
third play-off spot. There really are no bankers in the threeFootball League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league> divisions. Witness 
Newcastle’s home defeat by Blackburn following Plymouth’s two when top of 
League Two and Carlisle losing the League’s last unbeaten record to the bottom 
club in the 92, Newport County, a fortnight ago.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fexeter-city-paul-tisdale-luton-town-league-two-focus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5dc315a3e4835e66fdf869269bb051a682c4a84%2F0_0_4473_3074%2F4473.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paul%20Tisdale%20untouched%20by%20home%20woes%20due%20to%20people%E2%80%99s%20mandate%20in%20Exeter%20%7C%20Jeremy%20Alexander&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fexeter-city-paul-tisdale-luton-town-league-two-focus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paul%20Tisdale%20untouched%20by%20home%20woes%20due%20to%20people%E2%80%99s%20mandate%20in%20Exeter%20%7C%20Jeremy%20Alexander&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fexeter-city-paul-tisdale-luton-town-league-two-focus%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5dc315a3e4835e66fdf869269bb051a682c4a84%2F0_0_4473_3074%2F4473.jpg>
 Leeds United’s Chris Wood celebrates scoring their first goal in the 2-1 win 
at Rotherham. Photograph: Paul Burrows/Reuters 
• Fleetwood extended to 20 their run of scoring in every league game this 
season when they drew 2-2 at AFC Wimbledon. This is probably not the record but 
what is?

• Charlton’s new manager, Karl Robinson, appointed in time to take charge of 
Saturday’s home match against Sheffield United, looked at first as if he might 
have chosen this Monday to take charge so he could start away from the 
distraction of pigs on the pitch and other symbols of supporter unrest with the 
ownership. It turns out, though, that the second round of the Cup is played 
next weekend and, far from being away, Charlton are at home again – to MK Dons, 
who have just sacked him. Ten seasons ago Charlton v Sheffield United also 
finished 1-1 but that was in the Premier League, with Alan Pardew as manager, 
and the attendance was 27,111. Robinson is the tenth since him, the ninth since 
the Belgian, Roland Duchâtelet, took over in January 2014. Saturday’s crowd was 
12,580.
 