
Renato Gargiulo is a happy man. As president of the Urbanamente 
<http://www.urbanamente.org/> association, he has been campaigning for months 
to rid cars forever from Via Urbana, a beautiful cobbled street in Rome’s Monti 
district. Themunicipal council <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Municipio_I> that 
represents all 22rioni (districts) within the city’s ancient Aurelian walls 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aurelian_Walls> recently voted to ban parking on 
the street in a move that will effectively, if not officially, pedestrianise 
it. Now Rome’s bicycle-friendly mayor, Ignazio Marino, has until Sunday to 
confirm or reject the move, but with 15 of the 19 municipal councillors voting 
across party lines in favour, it would appear a formality.

For the vast majority of people who live and work in Via Urbana, this is the 
first step in a broader campaign to change the way locals and tourists 
experience the city’s tight, windingvicoli (lanes) – where harrassed 
pedestrians are forced to dart around honking cars and buzzing scooters – and 
drag Rome kicking and screaming into line with the rest of 21st-century Europe.

A few days before the Municipio I’s “yes” vote, these unlikely activists held 
a flash-mob of pedestrians and cyclists, blocking Via Urbana to Rome’s famously 
aggressive scooter riders (who shouldn’t have even been able to ride up the 
street in the first place, as it had been officially closed to traffic for the 
past year while gas pipes were replaced). Gargiulo and his group wanted to make 
sure Via Urbana didn’t return to the chaos that previously reigned, with 
scooters and cars parked everywhere and pedestrians having to weave between 
them and the traffic.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F13%2Fpedestrianisation-rome-italy-car-parking-ban%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F11%2F1426096010307%2Ffac9d3f1-6ed5-4c56-b986-6b6c9bfc85e3-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pedestrianisation%20campaign%20aims%20to%20kick%20Rome's%20car%20habit%2C%20one%20street%20at%20a%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F13%2Fpedestrianisation-rome-italy-car-parking-ban%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pedestrianisation%20campaign%20aims%20to%20kick%20Rome%27s%20car%20habit%2C%20one%20street%20at%20a%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F13%2Fpedestrianisation-rome-italy-car-parking-ban%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F11%2F1426096010307%2Ffac9d3f1-6ed5-4c56-b986-6b6c9bfc85e3-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Campaigners stage a flash-mob protest in Via Urbana. Photograph: Antonio 
Faccilongo 
Now the association, the first of its kind in Rome, is turning its attention 
to the rest of the neighbourhood, starting with Via Leonina, Via Madonna dei 
Monti and Via Panisperna. Could this be the beginning of a cultural shift in 
one of the world’s most car-dependent cities?


“We want Via Urbana to become a model not only for the rest of the rione, but 
for the whole of the centre of Rome,” Gargiulo said.

At the bottom of Via Urbana, flanking the modern Cavour metro station, is 
Piazza della Suburra, the heart of what in ancient times was a grimy, 
desperately poor neighbourhood – Julius Caesar’s old stomping ground. Today the 
area is home to a host of chic boutique shops, cafes and restaurants: a 
carpenter and a bespoke bike shop sit alongside a mosaic studio, which rubs up 
against an organic trattoria.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F13%2Fpedestrianisation-rome-italy-car-parking-ban%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F11%2F1426096230656%2F63c50707-c06e-4eb8-b324-4937db6783ba-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pedestrianisation%20campaign%20aims%20to%20kick%20Rome's%20car%20habit%2C%20one%20street%20at%20a%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F13%2Fpedestrianisation-rome-italy-car-parking-ban%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pedestrianisation%20campaign%20aims%20to%20kick%20Rome%27s%20car%20habit%2C%20one%20street%20at%20a%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F13%2Fpedestrianisation-rome-italy-car-parking-ban%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F11%2F1426096230656%2F63c50707-c06e-4eb8-b324-4937db6783ba-1360x2040.jpeg>
 A campaign poster 
Since the start of the gas pipe works, these local businesses have seen a 
significant bump in trade. “We noticed that with the forced closure of the 
road, revenue has gone up 30% across the street,” said Gargiulo, who is from 
Naples and has lived in Rome for 25 years. “Before, with all the cars that were 
parked and the fear of being hit, people didn’t even see the shops. Now they 
do.”

Gargiulo’s association is an open group comprised, he says, of “about 90% of 
the local shopkeepers, but open to everyone”. In January they took a petition 
with 1,200 signatures (half from Monti residents) to city hall calling for the 
pedestrianisation of the street, and they hope that redevelopment of the area 
will encourage “quality tourism”, making it a place where visitors come to buy 
artisan goods instead of the tat that dominates much of Rome’s 
tourist-dominated centre.


“So many people come to this area looking for something different,” said Elena 
Kihlman <http://www.elenakihlman.com/index.php?lang=en>, a Finnish designer 
with a hand-made fashion and furnishings shop in Via Urbana, and Gargiulo’s 
partner. “If you ask me, people are bored of always seeing the same stuff, 
regardless of what city you’re in.”

The group have some pretty heavyweight support, including the WWF 
<http://www.worldwildlife.org/>, conservation group Italia Nostra 
<http://www.italianostra.org/> and the business association Confcommercio 
<http://www.confcommercio.it/en_GB/english>. Mayor Marino is also a fan of 
pedestrian areas: he has caused serious friction with locals with his bids to 
cut traffic from the nearby Via dei Fori Imperiali and the Tridente area, which 
covers the iconic Piazza Del Popolo and Spanish Steps. The group’s key battle, 
it seems, will be winning over fellow Romans.


Data compiled by the Italian Automobile Club in 2011 revealed that there were 
just over 1.9 million cars on the road in Rome (741 for every 1,000 people),
compared to just over 2.6 million cars registered in London in the same year 
<http://www.tfl.gov.uk/cdn/static/cms/documents/technical-note-12-how-many-cars-are-there-in-london.pdf>
 (310 for every 1,000 people). This is partly cultural, but also due to the 
paucity of public transport infrastructure in Rome: an extensive tram network 
was dismantled in the years leading up to the 1960 Olympics, as car ownership 
exploded, and the city has just three metro lines, one of which is only partly 
finished and won’t reach the historic centre until at least 2020. According to
La Repubblica 
<http://roma.repubblica.it/cronaca/2015/03/03/news/atac_senza_risorse_la_vergogna_dei_depositi_ottocento_bus_rotti_fermi_nelle_rimesse-108602621/>
, 36% of local transport company ATAC’s 2,300 buses are permanently broken down 
in its depots, due to debts of €429m that mean it can’t pay the companies who 
supply spare parts.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F13%2Fpedestrianisation-rome-italy-car-parking-ban%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F11%2F1426096447381%2F6b35f1d9-8e67-4ae1-b891-253a3ef0e22b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pedestrianisation%20campaign%20aims%20to%20kick%20Rome's%20car%20habit%2C%20one%20street%20at%20a%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F13%2Fpedestrianisation-rome-italy-car-parking-ban%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pedestrianisation%20campaign%20aims%20to%20kick%20Rome%27s%20car%20habit%2C%20one%20street%20at%20a%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F13%2Fpedestrianisation-rome-italy-car-parking-ban%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F11%2F1426096447381%2F6b35f1d9-8e67-4ae1-b891-253a3ef0e22b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Designer Elena Kihlman in her fashion shop in Via Urbana. Photograph: Antonio 
Faccilongo 
In such a densely populated city, finding a parking space for all these cars 
is a huge problem, and the authorities are known to turn a blind eye to those 
who double- or even triple-park outside bars and restaurants. This 
laissez-faire attitude suffocates tight streets such as Via Urbana, which is 
flanked on both sides by imposing medieval buildings. Despite the traffic ban, 
cars and scooters still crowd around some of the apartment buildings, and some 
residents have complained of having to call the traffic police just to get in 
or out of their homes.


“The problem is that Rome has a sick dependence on the car,” said Massimiliano 
Tonelli, founder of the controversial blogRoma Fa Schifo 
<http://www.romafaschifo.com/> (“Rome sucks”), which regularly displays its 
distaste for what Romans get up to with their motors. “It’s as if there were a 
Constitution of Rome in which there are human rightsand car rights. Taking that 
culture on is something the authorities need to do.”


According to Tonelli: “There are three cars to every family not because they 
really need them, but because they know that, regardless of the rules, they can 
leave it next to their front door for free. Every street has been turned into a 
car park. Once this is stopped, Romans’ relationship with their cars will 
become a healthier one.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F13%2Fpedestrianisation-rome-italy-car-parking-ban%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F11%2F1426096114306%2F48ba02ae-f09e-4e73-8116-049802417107-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pedestrianisation%20campaign%20aims%20to%20kick%20Rome's%20car%20habit%2C%20one%20street%20at%20a%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F13%2Fpedestrianisation-rome-italy-car-parking-ban%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pedestrianisation%20campaign%20aims%20to%20kick%20Rome%27s%20car%20habit%2C%20one%20street%20at%20a%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F13%2Fpedestrianisation-rome-italy-car-parking-ban%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F11%2F1426096114306%2F48ba02ae-f09e-4e73-8116-049802417107-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Campaigners remonstrate with a scooter rider during the recent flash-mob 
protest. Photograph: Antonio Faccilongo 
Urbanamente bumped up against this obstinate, overbearing attitude during 
their recent flash-mob protest. As the group gathered, a motorcyclist trundled 
up and tried to get by, outraged at the people in the way. After a brief 
shouting match he was allowed to whizz off, making his displeasure at this 
inconvenience plain for all to see, and hear.

The success of this and subsequent campaigns in changing motorists’ attitudes 
will go a long way to determining what kind of city Rome becomes. “Basically, 
the opposition wants to be able to park their car outside their front door, and 
that attitude that needs to change,” said Gargiulo. “The historic centre is a 
Unesco world heritage site: it belongs to everyone.”
 