
George Osborne’s decision to impose a £10,000 tax-free cap on pension 
contributions is deterring well-paid lawyers from becoming judges, the lord 
chief justice has said.


Appearing before the House of Lords constitution committee, Lord Thomas said 
the move was having a very serious effect on judicial recruitment from an 
“immensely prosperous” profession.

The cut in the £40,000-a-year cap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jul/08/chancellor-cuts-tax-relief-earners-150000>
 for those earning more than £150,000 in last July’s budget had significantly 
reduced the financial attractiveness of posts on the bench compared with 
lucrative work in the private sector, he said.


Thomas said there was no doubt that the legal system was having difficulties 
recruiting and retaining judges, and the pension changes, coupled with 
relatively low pay and increasing volumes of work, were acting as “very 
substantial deterrents” to joining the bench.


The disparity in pay between the private and public sectors had been magnified 
in recent years, he said, as London consolidated its placeas the world’s 
pre-eminent legal centre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/mar/22/uk-legal-sector-now-worth-26bn-a-year>
.

“Last year was, I think, the most difficult in that the unintended effect of 
the decision of the chancellor of the exchequer to restrict tax relief on 
pensions to a maximum of £10,000 a year has had a very, very serious effect on 
the judiciary, particularly at the high court level and above, and to circuit 
judges,” Thomas said.


“The result is that a new high court judge will have a pension, at the end of 
the day, that is materially less than a district judge.”

Senior judges are hanging up their wigs. Replacing them won't be cheap | 
Joshua Rozenberg
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/04/judiciary-recruitment-crisis-judicial-appointments-commission>
“We are paid on the basis that we get a salary and we get a pension. But if 
you can’t take the pension because the fiscal effects are so large, you will 
get no compensation for that.


“The effect of the tax changes on the judiciary has been that what has been 
regarded always by people coming to the bench as a very important part of the 
remuneration package has, through fiscal means which I am sure were unintended, 
produced this effect.”


The lord chief justice also said cuts to legal aid were forcing judges to take 
on a more inquisitorial role, particularly in civil caseswhere there are 
unrepresented claimants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/apr/23/legal-aid-cuts-defendants-unrepresented>
.

“It’s impossible to expect the adversarial system to work” when the citizen 
was not equipped to conduct their case and the state would not pay for legal 
aid, he said.

 