
For many weeks in the spring and summer of 1969, the names of Zizi Jeanmaire, 
the Aga Khan and Juan-les-Pins reverberated mellifluously around the British 
and international pop scene. They appeared in the lyrics of the chart-topping
Where Do You Go to (My Lovely) <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L8XQZYIiNgo>, 
written and sung by Peter Sarstedt, who has died aged 75.

Composed in waltz time, bookended by generic French-flavoured accordion 
phrases and with echoes of francophonechansonniers such as Georges Brassens and 
Jacques Brel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/jul/27/jacques-brel-10-of-the-best>
, the song told the story of one Marie Claire, who had risen from the “back 
streets of Naples” to join the Mediterranean jet set. When the similarity of 
this back-story to that ofSophia Loren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/sophia-loren> was pointed out, Sarstedt was 
quick to state: “I really wasn’t thinking of anyone specific.”

He was born in Delhi, one of six children of English expatriates, Albert and 
Coral Sarstedt. Albert was an accountant who managed a tea plantation in the 
Darjeeling region of West Bengal. Following his death in 1954, the family moved 
to south London.

The Sarstedts were a musical family and Peter, his older brother, Richard, and 
younger siblings, Clive and Lorraine, all learned the guitar. This was the era 
of skiffle, and the three brothers joined a group, the Fabulous Five. They 
played at church halls and coffee bars around the Croydon area before 
metamorphosing into a beat group, the Saints, with Richard Sarstedt as the 
featured singer. He was offered a recording contract in 1960, and after a 
change of name toEden Kane <http://www.edenkane.com/>, scored a No 1 hit with 
Well I Ask You <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Dh9zHzx9QE4> the following year.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DL8XQZYIiNgo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DL8XQZYIiNgo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DL8XQZYIiNgo&media=>
 Video: Peter Sarstedt performs Where Do You Go to (My Lovely) on Top of the 
Pops, 1969 
Peter played bass guitar in Eden Kane’s backing group until, in 1965, his 
brother decided to move to Australia. Peter emigrated briefly to Copenhagen, 
where he began to write songs in a contemporary folk vein. Returning to London, 
he began a recording career as Peter Lincoln before reverting to his real name. 
In 1968 he signed to the United Artists label, but his first single,I Am a 
Cathedral <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S7JPbv4rHlI>, was unsuccessful.

He next came up with Where Do You Go to (My Lovely). Sarstedt later explained 
that he was following a trend for meaningful songs of more than three minutes’ 
duration: “I wanted to write a long extended piece because I was working in 
folk clubs and universities.”

When Sarstedt and the producer Ray Singer presented the record company with 
the completed track, the response was unpromising: the song was too long, it 
featured only three instruments, including an accordion, and no drums. 
Eventually, United Artists relented after cutting one verse which included the 
line “your body is firm and inviting”. Within a few weeks of its release, Where 
Do You Go to (My Lovely) had topped the charts and Sarstedt’s bushy hair and 
Zapata moustache were regularly featured on Top of the Pops.

The song stayed at No 1 for four weeks before making way for Marvin Gaye’s I 
Heard It Through the Grapevine. Where Do You Go to (My Lovely) went on to top 
the charts throughout most of Europe as well as Australia and Japan, but its 
cosmopolitanism failed to excite record buyers in the US, where it sold poorly.

Although it won the Ivor Novello award for best song of 1969 (shared with 
Space Oddity byDavid Bowie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/11/obituary-david-bowie>), Where Do 
You Go to (My Lovely) divided listeners at the time and has done ever since, 
with some finding it pretentious, if not preposterous. It inspired parodies by 
Roger McGough, John Otway and the Flight of the Conchords. On the other hand, 
the director Wes Anderson included it on the soundtrack of two films, Hotel 
Chevalier (2007) andThe Darjeeling Limited 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/nov/25/comedy.drama1> (2012), and the 
British groupRight Said Fred <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DBZ9cslyyc0>, 
made a comparatively respectful cover version in 2006. Sarstedt composed a 
follow up for his 1997 album England’s Lane.The Last of the Breed (Lovely 2) 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B29oIr1A7No> described Marie Claire 20 years 
on and living in a London of Claridge’s, Harrods and John Galliano.

The follow-up single, Frozen Orange Juice 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k010JKRtUHc>, was a Top 10 hit later in 1969, 
but further records were not commercially successful, although Sarstedt’s 
compositions continued to find admirers: one reviewer described the song Beirut 
as “an entire novel of Eric Ambler complexities in three minutes”.

From the 1970s until his retirement in 2010 when he was diagnosed with the 
progressive supranuclear palsy that led to his death, Sarstedt recorded more 
than a dozen albums and performed frequently. Among the albums was a 1973 
collaboration with his brothers, Worlds Apart Together. Using the name Robin 
Sarstedt, his younger brother Clive had his own hit record withMy Resistance Is 
Low <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xSrCIsrg30M> in 1976, making the Sarstedts 
the first family with three siblings to achieve separate chart success. For 
some years, Peter Sarstedt was a mainstay of theSolid Silver 60s 
<http://www.flyingmusic.com/our-shows/solid-silver-60s/> touring show alongside 
other veterans of the era.

Sarstedt was twice married and had two children, Anna and Daniel.

• Peter Eardley Sarstedt, singer and songwriter, born 10 December 1941; died 8 
January 2017
 