
Two Philippine senators have said President Rodrigo Duterte’s admission that 
he used topersonally kill suspected criminals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/14/philippines-president-rodrigo-duterte-personally-killed-criminals>
 when mayor of Davao city is grounds for impeachment.

Senator Leila de Lima, Duterte’s foremost domestic critic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/24/philippines-senator-calls-for-duterte-to-face-crimes-against-humanity-inquiry>
, and Senator Richard Gordon, who heads the senate justice committee, said the 
president’s comments provided a legal avenue for his ousting.

Philippines president Rodrigo Duterte says he personally killed criminals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/14/philippines-president-rodrigo-duterte-personally-killed-criminals>
“That is betrayal of public trust and that constitutes high crimes because 
mass murders certainly fall into the category of high crimes. And high crimes 
is a ground for impeachment under the constitution,” de Lima told CNN.

Speaking to reporters, Gordon said: “When he says that, he’s opening himself 
up, so what’s the legal way, then go ahead and impeach him.”

But justice minister Vitaliano Aguirre waved away Duterte’s comments as 
“hyperbole”.

“He always exaggerates just to put his message across,” Aguirre said, adding 
that even if Duterte had killed, he did not necessarily break the law.

“It could be done with a justifiable cause and justified circumstances as a 
public officer in order to arrest but if they resisted. He must have been 
forced,” he said.

Any move to impeach Duterte is unlikely to succeed. Not only does he command 
huge domestic support for his bloody war on drugs, the firebrand nicknamed “the 
Punisher” also has allies in the lower and upper house of congress.

Although only a one-thirds vote in the house of representatives is needed to 
start theprocess of of impeachment 
<http://www.lawphil.net/current/impeachment/phiguide.html>, conviction requires 
a two-thirds vote in the senate.

De Lima, a former justice minister in a previous administration, had led an 
inquiry into the war on drugs, and has been the target of hatred for speaking 
out against Duterte. Allies of the presidentfiled a criminal complaint 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/13/rodrigo-dutertes-allies-press-for-senator-critical-of-drug-war-to-be-charged>
 against her this week.

Senators loyal to Duterte ousted her from the leadership of the inquiry in 
September, alleging she had disrespected the house of representatives – a 
complaint that could result in jail time.

The president’s anti-drug campaign has seen around 5,000 people killed during 
his first five months in office. Alleged drug dealers and drug addicts have 
been shot dead in extrajudicial killings.

This week, Duterte said that during his two decades as mayor of Davao he used 
to “personally” attack suspects “just to show to the guys [police officers] 
that if I can do it, why can’t you?”

Philippines secret death squads: officer claims police teams behind wave of 
killings
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/04/philippines-secret-death-squads-police-officer-teams-behind-killings>
He went on: “I’d go around in Davao with a motorcycle, with a big bike around, 
and I would just patrol the streets, looking for trouble also. I was really 
looking for a confrontation so I could kill.”

On Friday, he was more specific, telling the BBC he shot dead three men 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-38337746?ns_mchannel=social&ns_campaign=bbc_breaking&ns_source=twitter&ns_linkname=news_central>
: “I killed about three of them … I don’t know how many bullets from my gun 
went inside their bodies. It happened and I cannot lie about it.”

Peter Wallace, who organised the business forum at which Duterte spoke on 
Monday, said the earlier statement was the leader’s “usual bravado”.

“He talked as he often does about drugs and killings and criminality. And we 
had expected that he would, but we were there not to listen to that,” Wallace 
told Reuters by phone.

“We were there to talk to him or listen to him about business issues and I was 
pleased that … he moved on to those subjects,” he said.

Since Duterte’s election, police have reported killing 2,086 people in 
anti-drug operations.

More than 3,000 others have been killed in unexplained circumstances, 
according to official figures, which human rights groups blame on 
state-sponsored vigilantism and gangs exploiting an atmosphere of impunity.

Reuters contributed to this report
 