
Philip Hammond <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/philip-hammond> and David 
Davis are to present a united front to businesses on Monday amid concerns that 
a cabinet split is emerging in the government’s approach to negotiating the 
UK’s exit from the European Union.

The chancellor and the Brexit secretary will attempt to reassure businesses 
that they have been working increasingly closely together. The joint event 
follows suggestions of a split over whether the government ought to be willing 
to pay significant sums of money in return for access to the European single 
market.

The foreign secretary, Boris Johnson, dismissed the idea as “pure speculation” 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/politics/2016/dec/04/boris-johnson-plays-down-prospect-of-eu-payments-after-brexit>
, arguing that the UK must regain control of money sent to Brussels, and should 
not agree to more than small contributions.



Government memo demanding end to Brexit leaks is leaked
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/04/government-memo-brexit-leaks-leaked-cabinet-secretary>
His comments came just days after Davis said the government would not rule out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/01/uk-could-pay-eu-for-access-to-single-market-ministers-admit>
 the possibility of financial contributions to secure “the best possible access 
for goods and services”.

The Brexit secretary made the assertion to MPs in the House of Commons, and 
the idea was reinforced later by Hammond and by Downing Street.

Johnson – who was a leader in the Vote Leave campaign, which suggested Brexit 
would result in an extra £350m a week available to be spent on the NHS – tried 
to play down the idea on the BBC’s The Andrew Marr Show.

“That is obviously something that David Davis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/daviddavis> is considering but it doesn’t 
mean a decision has been taken … I am not going to get involved in the minutiae 
of our negotiating position before we trigger article 50,” he said.

He stressed that regardless of Davis’s claim he felt the country must “be able 
to take back control of the money that we currently give to Brussels” after 
Brexit.

He said the UK could pay in for some elements of “European cooperation” in 
future, such as the Erasmus student exchange programme.

But when Marr asked him whether that could include contributions for single 
market access, Johnson replied: “That is a pure – that is speculation.”

He added that any payments ought to be small. “My own view is I see no reason 
why those payments should be large and, as I say, I do see a big opportunity 
for us to take the money that we’re getting back and spend it on other 
priorities.”

Whitehall sources played down the idea of any divide, arguing that all 
ministers agreed that leaving the EU would stop automatic contributions into 
the EU budget. They argued that Johnson, as well as Hammond and Davis, remained 
open-minded on other issues.

Like a football manager, remainers can only see the other team's fouls
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/04/brexit-debate-post-match-interview-football-arsenal-arsene-wenger>
However, the question of payment is more politically difficult for Johnson 
because of the £350m promise, while Davis has taken steps to make clear that he 
“made no such pledge” during the EU referendum.

Whitehall sources were reported in the Sunday Times 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/news/brexit-fades-from-hard-to-soft-to-grey-p3sttjkk6>
 as saying Hammond and Davis had formed a “small clique” in government. 
However, others denied that was the case.

One told the Guardian: “They have been working closely together for some time, 
reassuring businesses that they have heard their concerns and will work to 
ensure that they won’t lose out.” But they denied there was a wider split.

Johnson used a media round to also argue that while he wanted Britain to have 
control over immigration he believed that it was right to persuade voters that 
the desire of workers to come to Britain was a “massive compliment and tribute 
to the UK economy”.

He said Brexit gave the UK the chance to become the leading advocate for 
global free trade and that should be the government’s focus.

“There are pressures around the world, people who want to pull up the 
drawbridge and we have got to fight against them and that is the way to global 
growth,” he said, arguing that 330,000 net migration was “very high”, but not 
appearing to support government policy to reduce it to the tens of thousands.

The foreign secretary also told ITV that international students should be 
taken out of the immigration figures. He said people coming to study was a 
“massive benefit to this country”.

And he addressed controversy over the anonymous suggestion from four 
ambassadors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/30/boris-johnson-backed-free-movement-in-private-talks-ambassadors-say>
 that he had privately told them he supported free movement.

Asked about it by Dermot Murnaghan on Sky News, one of the organisations that 
broke the story, he replied: “With great respect I think your story was a dud, 
it was wrong, it was a load of old baloney.

“That is not your fault, not the journalist – he was offered something 
completely untrue.”

Other ambassadors who were at the event have since claimed that he did not say 
anything controversial, but simply set out his positive views about immigration 
before reiterating that control was required.

It all comes as Theresa May suggested ministers should not be thinking of the 
black and white demands of leave and remain hardliners, but instead try to 
achieve a “grey Brexit”.
 