
The Philippine president has said he would “set aside” a ruling by an 
international arbitration tribunal thatinvalidated Beijing’s claims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/12/philippines-wins-south-china-sea-case-against-china>
 to most of the South China Sea, because he doesn’t want to impose on China.

“In the play of politics, now, I will set aside the arbitral ruling. I will 
not impose anything on China,”Rodrigo Duterte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/rodrigo-duterte> said at a news conference 
on Saturday.

He made the comment when asked if a US thinktank report stating that China 
installed anti-aircraft and anti-missile weapons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/15/images-show-significant-chinese-weapons-systems-in-south-china-sea>
 on its new artificial islands in the disputed waters would affect his 
perception of Beijing. The Philippines claims the reefs, which were turned by 
China into man-made islands.

Duterte, who took office in June, has taken steps to mend relations with China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/20/china-philippines-resume-dialogue-south-china-sea-dispute>
 that grew hostile during the time of his predecessor, Benigno Aquino III, over 
the long-unresolved territorial disputes. The Aquino administration took the 
disputes to international arbitration in a move backed by Washington after 
China seized a disputed shoal in 2012.

He explained his position partly by repeating his threat to remove American 
forces out of thePhilippines <https://www.theguardian.com/world/philippines> 
after the Obama administration criticised his government’s bloody crackdown on 
illegal drugs.

Images show 'significant' Chinese weapons systems in South China Sea
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/15/images-show-significant-chinese-weapons-systems-in-south-china-sea>
“I will demand that they go out of my country. What’s the use of keeping, 
hosting them when they think we are a bunch of criminals?” Duterte asked. “Go, 
go out. If you do not believe in us, why deal with us?”

Foreign secretary Perfecto Yasay Jr said on Friday the Philippines would not 
take any steps against China in response to the report by the Center for 
Strategic and International Studies late on Wednesday that China appears to 
have installed weapons to guard against missile attack on its seven newly 
created islands.

Asked if his department planned to issue any statement or ask China to 
clarify, Yasay said: “We want to make sure that there will be no further 
actions that will heighten the tensions between the two countries, particularly 
in the Scarborough Shoal.”

He was referring to a disputed fishing area off the Philippines’ north-western 
coast where tensions recently eased when the Chinese coastguard allowed 
Filipinos to fish after blocking them from the area since 2012. China’s change 
of tact came after Duterte met his Chinese counterpart, Xi Jinping, in Beijing 
in October.

Yasay told reporters in Singapore, where he and other officials accompanied 
Duterte on a visit: “There is nothing that we can do about that now, whether or 
not it is being done for purposes of further militarising these facilities that 
they have put up.”

“We cannot stop China at this point in time and say ‘Do not put that up.’ We 
will continue to pursue peaceful means at which all of these can be prevented,” 
he said.

His remarks differed from defence secretary Delfin Lorenzana, who expressed 
concerns about the thinktank report and said the government was attempting to 
verify it. “If true, it is a big concern for us and the international community 
who uses theSouth China Sea <https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-china-sea> 
lanes for trade,” Lorenzana said Thursday. “It would mean that the Chinese are 
militarising the area, which is not good.”
 