
Chargers quarterback Philip Rivers has admitted the team’s controversial move 
from San Diego toLos Angeles <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/los-angeles> 
has left him “numb”.

The team announced on Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/12/san-diego-chargers-to-move-to-los-angeles-report>
 it was leaving its home of 56 years to become LA’s second NFL team, after 
public officials in San Diego made it clear they were unwilling to spend 
taxpayers’ money to help finance a new stadium in the city. Owner Dean Spanos 
confirmed the Chargers would be moving in time for the 2017 season.

San Diego refused to be bullied by the NFL and billionaire owners | Les 
Carpenter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/12/san-diego-chargers-los-angeles-move-nfl-owners>
On Friday, Rivers, who has spent more than a decade in San Diego 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/san-diego> and has been a vocal proponent 
of the Chargers remaining there, said the move hadn’t sunk in yet.

The 35-year-old told San Diego radio station KLSD-AM: “I’m a little bit numb 
about it all. It hasn’t really settled in. I want it to be clear that my love 
for San Diego, the time here, the memories we had, the games, the practices, 
everything about it is special and awesome. But at the same time, I have to get 
excited, fired up about going up to a new area and representing our team and 
organization and going and trying to win as many games as we can win. And be 
the same guy that I’ve always been. That’s the only way I know.”

The Chargers will initially play at the 30,000-seater StubHub Center in 
Carson, but will move into the Rams’ new stadium in Inglewood when it’s 
completed in 2019.

Rivers said he hoped “time can make things better” but acknowledged the hurt 
and upset the relocation had caused for many Chargers fans.

“I know it’s not going to ever just be great and San Diego is gonna just say: 
‘Oh, it’s no big deal,’” Rivers said. “I know it’s a big deal. Believe me. I 
know it’s a big deal that it’s come to this. But I’m going to do my part the 
only way I know how. I’m going to give them all I got for the short time I have 
left.”

Spanos told Chargers fans in an open letter that he had moved the team “after 
much deliberation”. San Diego mayor Kevin Faulconer responded by saying that he 
wouldn’t be held to ransom by Spanos, and that the billionaire owner would live 
to regret his decision.

“At the end of the day, the Chargers wanted a lot more taxpayer money than we 
could ever agree to,” Faulconer said at a news conference on Thursday. “We 
could not support a deal that is not in the best interests of San Diego. Dean 
Spanos made a bad decision and he will regret it. San Diego didn’t lose the 
Chargers. The Chargers just lost San Diego.”

NFL playoff predictions: Aaron Rodgers to drag Packers past Cowboys
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/13/nfl-playoff-predictions-aaron-rodgers-packers-cowboys>
Seattle Seahawks coach Pete Carroll described the Chargers’ relocation as an 
“enormous experiment” and an “extraordinary challenge”.


Carroll coached the USC Trojans between 2001 and 2009, and wondered aloud 
whether Los Angeles could handle twoNFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl> 
teams alongside college football’s Trojans and UCLA Bruins.

Carroll said: “I think it’s hard having one, so it’s going to be harder having 
two. I’ve heard some rumors that they’re going to play at the StubHub Center. 
It’s a beautiful stadium, just not very big. It’ll be interesting. It’s going 
to be fascinating to see what happens and I think it’s an extraordinary 
challenge for the people of the area to figure out their allegiance and what 
they’re doing.

“There will be a strong pull, I’m sure, from the southern part down by San 
Diego and all through that. It will be fascinating to see what happens. It’s an 
enormous experiment.”

On Friday, the Chargers made their first big personnel move: hiring Anthony 
Lynn to replace Mike McCoy, who was fired after the Chargers failed to make the 
playoffs. Lynn has reportedly signed a four-year deal.
 