
The vice-president of the Philippine resigned from a cabinet post on Monday, 
citing “major differences in principles and values” with PresidentRodrigo 
Duterte <https://www.theguardian.com/world/rodrigo-duterte> and an unspecified 
plot to remove her from the vice presidency.

Leni Robredo, a human rights lawyer and respected political newcomer, tendered 
her resignation as housing secretary in a letter to the president but will stay 
on in her elected post as vice-president.

In the Philippines <https://www.theguardian.com/world/philippines>, presidents 
and vice-presidents are elected separately and have often come from rival 
political parties, as is the case with Duterte and Robredo.

Philippines' deadly drug war praised by Donald Trump, says Rodrigo Duterte
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/03/philippines-rodrigo-duterte-donald-trump-white-house-invite>
“I will not allow the vice-presidency to be stolen. I will not allow the will 
of the people to be thwarted,” Robredo said in a statement before her 
resignation. “I will continue to serve the Filipino family and fulfil their 
dream for a better life.”

Her departure comes amid a political storm for Duterte over his decision to 
allow theburial of long-dead dictator Ferdinand Marcos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/18/philippine-dictator-ferdinand-marcos-given-controversial-heros-burial>
 in the country’s “heroes’ cemetery” and abloody crackdown against illegal drugs
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/04/philippines-secret-death-squads-police-officer-teams-behind-killings>
 that has alarmed western governments and human rights watchdogs.

Robredo is the second key official to resign from Duterte’s administration in 
less than a week. Maria Serena Diokno quit as head of the government’s 
historical commission on Tuesday in protest at Duterte’s decision to allow 
Marcos’s burial in the hallowed cemetery.

Robredo cited her opposition to the burial, the drug killings, Duterte’s plan 
to reimpose the death penalty and “sexual attacks against women” among the 
issues on which she differed with Duterte, who took office in June.

The last straw, she said, was when she was notified on Saturday by cabinet 
secretary Leoncio Evasco Jr through a text message about the president’s order 
for Robredo “to desist from attending all cabinet meetings”, starting on Monday.

“There is no point for her to attend cabinet meetings if her position is 
always contradictory to the president’s,” Evascotold 
<http://www.rappler.com/nation/154510-palace-rodrigo-duterte-leni-robredo-irreconcilable-differences-hudcc-resignation>
 the local Rappler news portal.

Duterte’s communications secretary, Martin Andanar, said “recent events” had 
“showed the differences between the president and the vice-president as 
becoming irreconcilable and public”.

Duterte’s move, Robredo said, made it impossible for her to do her work. 
“Remaining in your cabinet has become untenable,” Robredo said in a short 
resignation letter sent to Duterte on Monday morning.
Patty Pasion (@pattypasion) 
LOOK: @VPPilipinas <https://twitter.com/VPPilipinas> resignation letter 
@rapplerdotcom <https://twitter.com/rapplerdotcom> pic.twitter.com/etneWlt0Au 
<https://t.co/etneWlt0Au>
 <https://twitter.com/pattypasion/status/805608127194202112> December 5, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/pattypasion/status/805608127194202112> 
The vice president has said the budget for government agencies dealing with 
housing has been cut significantly, her recommended appointments have not been 
acted on and an executive order aiming to make her agency, the Housing and 
Urban Development Coordinating Council, effective has not been signed.

Robredo, 52, did not provide details about the alleged plot to remove her from 
the vice-presidency, but her electoral victory has been questioned by her 
closest rival in the race, former senator Ferdinand Marcos Jr, the son of the 
late dictator.

Marcos Jr lost by a slim margin to Robredo, the widow of a popular politician 
who built a name as an honest, hands-on provincial mayor who wore slippers to 
work and reached out to the poor in the countryside.

Robredo’s husband died in a plane crash in 2012, and she later acceded to 
widespread calls for her to enter politics.

Robredo said she had chosen to ignore warnings “of a plot to steal the 
vice-presidency” and instead tried to focus on her work. “But the events of 
recent days indicate that this plot is now being set into motion,” Robredo 
said, adding that she would continue to support the positive actions of 
Duterte’s administration “and oppose those that are inimical to the people’s 
interest.”

Associated Press contributed to this report
 