
Politics likes nothing more than a cheeky chap. Someone who says it as it is, 
who pokes the po-faced and reminds us what “real people” think. We know 
politics likes this sort of person because it keepspulling them to the surface 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/28/nigel-farage-european-parliament-petty-rant-ukip>
 of our national consciousness, slapping them on the back and handing them a 
microphone.

When I say “politics” and “real people”, I actually mean: blokes. Men who like 
a testosterone-fuelled debate. Such as the ones in Westminster who winkedPhilip 
Davies through to a place on the women and equalities committee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/13/anti-feminist-tory-mp-philip-davies-elected-to-equalities-committee>
. Such as the ones hiding behind warrior avatars who cheered his recent 
attempts to derail a bill on domestic violence with tweets like: “Good luck 
mate, sort ’em out.”

Under the guise of a “real” campaigner for equality, Davies says he wishes to 
combat political correctness (“Such a breath of fresh air!” etc), which “has 
neutered men to such an extent that in many areas, they have completely lost 
their voice”. He plans to take up his place on the women and equalities 
committee “as Ukip took up their seats at the EU parliament” and toremove women 
from the name <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-38313555>.

His appointment has doubtless prompted much punching of the air among his 
other backers, an outfit calling itselfJustice 4 Men and Boys 
<https://j4mb.wordpress.com/> that gives out monthly awards for lying, whiny 
and toxic feminists and posts articles explaining why women lie about rape. 
Davies – who has distanced himself from the group – recently told its conference
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/12/tory-mp-philip-davies-claims-uk-legal-system-favours-women-at-mens-rights-event>
: “Feminist zealots really do want women to have their cake and eat it.”

Anti-feminist Tory MP Philip Davies elected to equalities committee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/13/anti-feminist-tory-mp-philip-davies-elected-to-equalities-committee>
The response of MPs who clearly can’t stand his politics has been restrained. 
After all, some of Davies’ pronouncements are so absurd that they can prompt 
appalled eye-rolling rather than rage. I confess I keep expecting him to fiddle 
with his tie, Oliver Hardy-style, every time he tells us about the latest fine 
mess that feminists have landed us in. But Davies is not a joke. It’s bad 
enough that he’s in parliament, let alone on the women and equalities committee.

When they go low, we go high, you say. No thanks. When they go low, people 
listen. When we go high, people can’t see us. We have to stand toe-to-toe and 
nose-to-nose with this dangerous strand of populism and call it what it is.

Equality for women is under threat more than ever at a time when racism and 
misogyny are routinely put forward as the antidote to “political correctness 
gone mad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/30/political-correctness-how-the-right-invented-phantom-enemy-donald-trump>
”. Giving Davies a committee seat from which to stall progress towards women’s 
equality does not enable us to teach him better or expose his untruths; it 
exposes his views to a bigger audience, and normalises them.We allowed Donald 
Trump to do it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/14/dont-let-donald-trump-become-the-new-normal>
; and so too his Mini-Me, Nigel Farage. Let’s not give another the space to 
grow in his own fertiliser.

The biggest challenge in talking about feminism with non-believers is 
overcoming their inability to see any of the structural barriers in front of 
women. Such asDavies’ belief 
<https://hansard.parliament.uk/commons/2016-12-16/debates/F7A014D2-125B-4D18-A2EC-D92E64276CA4/PreventingAndCombatingViolenceAgainstWomenAndDomesticViolence>
 that any approach to ending violence must be gender neutral because men 
experience violence too – the result of his failure to understand that violence 
against women is both a cause and consequence to gender inequality. We must 
stand up to the approach that points and bellows “it’s not fair” when the chips 
fall where they do because women are handed a lifetime of caring 
responsibilities on which we place no value; because women must settle for 
part-time work on lower wages, and because, together, these inequalities 
license violence against them by men. We must challenge that approach because 
it takes no responsibility for being part of the system that creates any of 
this.

The problems that men face are not going to be solved by someone like Philip 
Davies because he thinks that equality means treating everyone exactly the same 
– the same as we treat straight, white, able-bodied men – and woe betide anyone 
who won’t, or can’t, get in line. (His other suggestions includepaying disabled 
people less 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2011/jun/17/tory-philip-davies-disabled-people-work>
 for the work they do.) LastFriday’s filibuster 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/philip-davies-filibuster-domestic-violence-a7479266.html>
 attempted to derail the ratification of the Istanbul convention to tackle 
violence against women and girls, by cautioning that we shouldn’t focus on the 
two-thirds of victims of domestic violence that “happen to be women”, missing 
the point entirely that it is not happenstance.

Brevity is the soul of wit, Mr Davies, so put a sock in it | Barbara Ellen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/18/brevity-soul-of-wit-mr-davies-put-a-sock-in-it>
The good news is that Davies doesn’t speak for all men. The vast numbers of 
men joining theWomen’s Equality party <http://www.womensequality.org.uk/> 
understand that what’s hurting them is linked to what’s hurting women and that 
fixing both requires understanding our differences. Male dominance in 
relationships causes nothing but stress to both sexes; the next generation 
wants something different – male role models who teach and nurture, fathers who 
are present, families that share care and work. Many young men want this. Many 
older men do too.

Responding to those who seek to divide is a tricky business. Publicity is 
their oxygen. But doing nothing is not an option. Telling the truth is 
important when others seek to spin our circumstances into a mirage of misandry. 
As society tenses and turns on those who are different, the real picture of 
equality between men and women is clear. We need clarity on the picture of 
equality between men and women. Philip Davies’ actions, and today’s 
appointment, work against finding that truth.
 