
The Philippine president, Rodrigo Duterte <http://rodrigo%20duterte/>, has 
continued his anti-US rhetoric by calling for the removal of all foreign troops 
from the Philippines, possibly within two years.

Speaking to an audience of business people at the start of a three-day visit to
Japan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan>, Duterte acknowledged that his 
recent remarks about Manila’s military “separation” from the US had angered 
Washington, but said he was determined to pursue an independent foreign policy.

“I want, maybe in the next two years, my country free of the presence of 
foreign military troops. I want them out,” he added in a reference to US troops 
spread across five bases in thePhilippines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/philippines> as part of a security agreement 
reached with Washington by his predecessor, Benigno Aquino.

“And if I have to revise or abrogate agreements, executive agreements, this 
shall be the last manoeuvre, war games between the United States and the
Philippines <https://www.theguardian.com/world/philippines> military.”

The Guardian view on Asia-Pacific competition: risks and opportunities | 
Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/25/the-guardian-view-on-asia-pacific-competition-risks-and-opportunities>
Hours later, however, his foreign minister, Perfecto Yasay, attempted to 
soothe concerns over the future of the Philippines’ military ties to the US, 
Manila’s long-standing ally.

Speaking to reporters in Tokyo on Wednesday, Yasay said that Manila would 
respect its treaty obligations with Washington. “There is no reason at this 
time to terminate our agreements because our national interests continue to 
converge. We will continue to respect our treaty obligations.”

Duterte conceded that he “may have ruffled the feelings of some but that is 
how it is. We will survive, without the assistance of America, maybe a lesser 
quality of life, but as I said, we will survive.”

His fierce criticism of the US and apparent desire to realign with China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> have caused unease in Japan, which 
under Shinzo Abe, the prime minister, has strengthened security ties with 
Washington and sided with the Philippines over its dispute with Beijing in the
South China Sea <https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-china-sea>.

Duterte, however, assured Japan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> that 
the purpose of his high-profile visit to China last week was strictly limited 
to economic cooperation. “You know I went to China for a visit. And I would 
like to assure you that all there was, was economics. We did not talk about 
arms. We avoided talking about alliances,” he said.

Later, during a joint press conference with Abe, Duterte said the Philippines 
shared Japan’s desire to uphold the rule of law and bring about a peaceful 
settlement to China’s island-building campaign in theSouth China Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-china-sea>.

Japan does not have any territorial claims in the area, but regards China’s 
military build-up as an attempt to establish dominance of shipping routes 
through which about $5 trillion worth of trade passes every year.

Japan is also embroiled in a long-running dispute over the Senkakus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/senkaku-islands>, a group of uninhabited 
islands in the East China Sea that are administered by Japan but also claimed 
by China, where they are known as the Diaoyu.

Describing Japan as “a special friend who is closer than a brother”, Duterte 
said: “Today we have taken steps to ensure that our ties remain vibrant and 
will gain greater strength in the years to come.”
 