
Phil Collins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/29/phil-collins-breakup-ballads-comeback>
 does not wear chunky-knit sweaters and he is sick of his image as the bald and 
wizened millionaire gnome of Soppy Pop. He is at great pains to point out that 
no way is he as nice or as sensible or as ugly as people think he is. In his 
wilder moments, he contemplates marrying his 13-year-old cousin or spitting at 
Kylie and kneeing Jason in the nuts at the Brit Awards ceremony or maybe even 
joiningPop Will Eat Itself 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2005/jan/26/popandrock> as a go-go dancer. 
Probably. Anything to bust his 
cosy-nice-bloke-but-a-bit-of-a-boring-bastard-who-goes-on-and-on-and-on-about-his-boring-divorce-all-the-time 
image.


I mean, here he is in the Juke Box Jury studio and he’s just said that he 
quite likes theSigue Sigue Sputnik  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ff974Ocxl4Q>single. And this gonk with a pair 
of fishnet tights over his face comes up to him and sneeeeeers and says: “God! 
We must have really got it wrong if you like us!”

Phil is flabbergasted! He opens and shuts his mouth like a goldfish with an 
ant’s egg stuck in the windpipe prob.

“What’s wrong with me?” he asks. “I mean if Phil Collins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/phil-collins> likes it, it must be shit – 
right? Eh?”

What’s wrong with Phil is that he was and is the lead singer of Genesis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/sep/03/genesis-10-of-the-best>
 and thus partly responsible forMarillion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2008/sep/11/internet> and Fish and 
student music in general. And let’s not forget that he’s a middle-aged pop star 
who your granny quite likes. What a bastard!

“I really regret the family entertainer bit,” says Phil. A roadie walks past 
carrying a blow-up doll with a battery-operated “vibro-mouth” to stand in 
Phil’s place for the lighting rehearsals.

But Phil, I say, are you as sensible as people make out? Phil admits that he 
is very sensible with the same mixture of bitterness and self-loathing that 
junkie metalheads express when confessing alcoholism or a predilection for 
necrophilia.

“Sometimes I think I’m being too sensible and so I try and stop myself …”

Give me an example of when you’ve been too sensible.

“Um... washing up before you eat the food you’ve just cooked. I think to 
myself – Don’t do this! Fucking idiot! EAT!”

Are you a domestic fascist? Do you beat the children if they don’t wash up 
properly?

“Um, well it’s not quite like that, but I do like a clean kitchen – 
GAAAAAAAAAAAH! – I can’t believe I just said that! – ‘ I do like a clean 
kitchen.’ That sounds terrible, doesn’t it? After I put coal on the fire I 
sweep up the dust so that I don’t tread in it and Lilly doesn’t eat it …”

Suddenly, Phil leaps up. Kicks over his chair and screams. “YEEEEEEAAAAARGH!” 
he yells, hurling an empty Jack Daniels bottle against the wall. The heroin 
punctures on his arms glow a bright red. “Fuck IT! Let me tell you about last 
night, right? Me and my best mate Eric Clapton lured these 14-year-old 
schoolgirls back to his pad and we dressed up in Nazi helmets and ballet gear 
and pranced around to death metal and stuck our heads in a suitcase of 
Colombian coke and then we drank some virgin’s blood and our own urine out of a 
cup fashioned from a baby’s skull and WE DIDN’T WASH UP AFTERWARDS! OK, so we 
did. But we certainly didn’t do the drying. Not properly, anyway...” [NB: 
fantasy sequence – IPC lawyers]

Do you have any annoying little habits?

“Oh, I leave the toilet seat up. We were showing my aunt around the house and 
she said – ‘Oh, toilet seat’s up, daddy’s home!’”

What about this cheeky chirpy Cockney bit. You do play up to that. 

“Well, I don’t know how else to be! This is me, maybe that cheeky chappy is 
me. If you’d have come an hour earlier you’d have heard me raving and ranting 
at the lighting engineers. You know we’re supposed to be rehearsing right now, 
but we got halfway through the show and the lights were a shambles and I just 
blew my top and sent the musicians home.

“Now some people may say, ‘Ooh! That’s not the Phil Collins I know and love!’ 
I mean, I hate to keep dragging up all these incidents where I’ve been nasty 
people, but I’m just a normal person. I don’t see why everybody has to keep 
going, ‘You’re nice! Why are you nice?’ I’m normal! This is what I am!”

Do you torture animals?

“I never torture animals.”

What, never?

“I’m not going to admit to it, anyway.”

Isn’t it a bit daft that you’re a multimillionaire and yet you’ve got this 
“ver lads” image?

“It’s happened so gradually to me that maybe I haven’t had a chance to get big 
headed – I still don’t think I’m really there. You’ve got your Bruces and your 
Michael Jacksons or whatever – they’re the stars. Me – I’m just earning a lot 
of money for what I’m doing and I don’t really understand why.”

Have you ever yearned to be a lithe and tight-trousered, two-fisted, pissed-up 
sex god?

“Um … what are you getting at, exactly?”

A bourbon-addled hell-raiser, a burnt-out, shuddering rock corpse, a screaming 
kamikaze teetering on the very edge of oblivion?”

‘You’re just assuming I don’t do those things. I mean, that’s why I’m 
uncomfortable with that image because I’m perceived as something which maybe 
I’m not.”

MAYBE! What a great word that is. If only we could really peek into the secret 
world of Phil Collins – Rock’n’Roll Casualty … You are perceived as being 
rather more of a sensible chunky sweater than a gold lamé sweatsuit with a 
giant scarlet codpiece?

“Yeah, but there’s nothing about that …”

Yes, there is. You could start by vomiting on me now.

He gives me a strange look.

… Couldn’t you start thrashing dogs on stage or something?

He sighs.

“I mean, I do do stuff in the privacy of my own home, you know, I’ve got a 
side to my life that people don’t know about... (LIKE WHAT!? WHAT DO YOU DO IN 
THE PRIVACY OF YOUR OWN HOME? DO YOU WORSHIP THE DEVIL, YOU BASTARD, DO YOU? DO 
YOU TAKE CRACK AND E AND ACID AND DO YOU STRIP NAKED AND ROLL IN A TROUGH OF 
BAKED BEANS WHILE RENT BOYS TEASE YOUR PUBIC HAIR WITH HEATED ROLLERS? TELL ME 
SO I CAN TELL THE SUN!) … maybe it doesn’t seem, er … (AAAARGH! SPILL THE 
BEANS! LET RIP, PHIL YOU CAN TRUST MEEEEEE!) … you know …” (YOU BASTARD! 
AAAA-AAAAAAAARGH!)

Do you get people ringing your doorbell at midnight asking for their pound of 
flesh?

“People mostly arrive at half past 10 at night – can I have your autograph, Mr 
Collins? They’ve had a bet down the pub. Some weekends, I fancy a bit of 
privacy so I lock the gates …”

Why don’t you hire a lookalike butler to sign autographs for you?

“Nah! I don’t mind it! It’s a small price to pay. I mean, these people are 
taking a big risk that they’ll get turned away, they’ve risked all the possible 
humiliation – they don’t know if I’m going to say – Go on, fuck off! Can’t you 
see fucking late? Fuck off out of my fucking house! I mean, why be an arsehole 
if you don’t have to be?”

And with that, my attempt to smash the image of Phil Collins as a thoroughly 
nice geezer is shot down in flames. Sorry Phil, you’ve blown it.

Is Phil Collins the godfather of popular culture?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/dec/02/phil-collins-godfather-popular-culture>
Yes – I used to smoke pot! 
When Phil tours with Genesis he plays table tennis backstage. Oh yeah – sure 
you do, Phil! And, is it true that the white lines on the table are actually 
lines of COCAINE? And is it true that every time you win a point you get a 
SNORT?

“Heh heh heh!” chuckles Phil, and he doesn’t exactly wink at me, but I get the 
feeling that – nudge nudge wink wink – he’s been around, if you know what I 
mean, squire. But he can’t tell me outright, you see, because then all the mums 
and dads would stop buying his records. I mean, there’s no way that Phil 
Collins is going to tell the NME – “Yes!, I do take drugs! I’ve had more bits 
of whizz up these nostrils thanAxl Rose 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/oct/26/gunsnroses-popandrock1> has had 
brain operations!” – not really.

“Heh heh heh! Lines of coke on the table! That’s not entirely true, but I do 
like the idea! We used to smoke a bit.”

AH HA! GOTCHA! MUCH LOVED ALL-ROUND FAMILY ENTERTAINER PHIL COLLINS ADMITS – I 
WAS A DRUG FIEND!

“I mean, that dead time in between soundcheck and gig, what do you do? You 
can’t really drink a lot. Gone are the days when you had a joint before a gig. 
I think the last time I had a joint before a gig was in LA in 76 or 77. I was 
going – how does this verse start? Heh! It’s a matter of time and place, really 
… anyway … what were we talking about?”

We were discussing cannabis abuse and short-term memory loss.

“Heh heh heh heh!”

I was a stunt double for Graham Poppy’s arsehole
Phil Collins is not so ugly that if you had a dog with a face like his you’d 
comb hair over its eyes and walk it backwards. All right, he’s no Jason 
Donovan, but neither would he make any of the great Ugly Squads of history – 
Leeds Utd circa 1974, the Glitter Band or the Tory cabinet when it included 
Leon Brittan. So it is rather surprising when one realises that 99% of the shit 
that flies in Phil’s direction is thrown at him because he’s not a 
chisel-cheeked bimbo.

“It’s a cheap shot. I mean, Joe Jackson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/15/joe-jackson-got-to-me-body-and-soul>
 – he’s fucking ugly and no one has a go at him about it. Well, y’know, I look 
at him and I think, Well, ifI’m ugly, what the fuck is he? What pisses me off 
more now is with this latest album when my reasons for writing these songs have 
come under fire from people who don’t know me. I asked them to send me all the 
reviews, I thought, you know, maybe this time it’s my time for a bit of 
credibility …”

No way! Phil was pilloried for … But Seriously 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/...But_Seriously> by dickheads who resented the 
fact that at least two of the tracks – Colours and Another Day in Paradise – 
were not the “boohoo my missus has left me” for which Phil is renowned.

“These people have only heard the singles and so they think that everything I 
write is about my divorce – gah!”

Phil takes criticism very seriously. He sat down and wrote out a seven-page 
letter to a local newspaper that slagged him off. Colours is about Nelson 
Mandela.

“People living without their rights / Without their dignity / But how long 
does one man have to shout before he’s allowed to be free …” OK, so it’s not 
the greatest polemic ever written, but does that mean we should take the piss 
out of Phil, with his nice house and his £22m in the bank, for actually daring 
to care?

“The criticism was on the level that I’m a millionaire so therefore I must be 
an arsehole.”

Um, well, millionaires do tend to be arseholes, don’t they?

“Do they? Clapton’s rich, I assume Rutherford and Banks [Genesis] are rich and 
Richard Branson’s rich and I wouldn’t say any of us were arseholes.”

Me? I didn’t say anything. Not a dickybird.

“I mean, I earn a lot because I work a lot. I don’t have time to spend my 
money. I don’t have any expensive vices, I live in a nice house, but I don’t 
live in a huge house. I drive myself, you know, I push a cart around the 
supermarket. Maybe normal wealthy people are arseholes, but I’m not.”

But what about the absurdity of Paul McCartney – worth umpteen zillion quid – 
playing Live Aid? He could have donated twice the money that Live Aid raised 
and still have lived in luxury for the rest of his life. I mean, I am sat here 
opposite a man who is worth £22m! I’m trying to guilt-trip Phil Collins so that 
maybe he’ll give me – a genuine poor person – just one teensy weensy little 
million. He wouldn’t miss it! GIVE ME YOUR MONEY YOU BASTARD!

“Well, it was a matter of doing something or doing nothing,” says Phil, and 
he’s got a point. But the event had its seedy side – like Madonna having the 
backstage area closed off every time she went for a slash so that nobody would 
see her enter or leave the ladies.

“Well, yeah, you can’t fight that sort of thing. On the other side of the 
Atlantic you had that We Are the World thing, which was champagne and caviar 
and it was strange, Americans do things in a different way, but I’m sure that 
Quincy Jones and Diana Ross and George Michael, I’m sure their hearts are in 
the right place – it’s just that the show had this um, ostentatious sheen to it.

“Backstage you could hear these stories of people telling Bill Graham [US 
promoter] <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/07/bill-graham-drigs> – 
you get me on this bill or I’m afraid you’re not going to get my tour – there 
wasn’t that in this country, it’s very easy to be cynical about the whole 
thing. All I know is that I did it for the right reasons and so did a lot of 
other people.” You get paid an insane amount of money just for writing pop 
songs …

“Mmm …” Phil nods.

Isn’t it obscene that you’ve got so much money when people are starving to 
death?

“Well, what do you do? How do your rectify that? Do you say you don’t want any 
of that money? It is ridiculous. I haven’t done anything I don’t want to do in 
my life. The only time I’ve ever had a real job is when Genesis went on two 
weeks’ holiday and I did interior decorating and I hated it. And I’m not a 
religious person, but I thank God I can do something I want to do and get paid 
for it.

“The money is a by-product of what I do, to be honest. I just do the work and 
there’s this guy who just comes along after me with a shovel sticking all this 
money in a sack, y’know? I do it because I enjoy working and I look back and 
there’s a load of money! I mean it’s a kind ofvery nice by-product.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F04%2Fphil-collins-rocks-backpages-nme-interview-1990-steven-wells%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F4%2F1446648426211%2F0951246d-1bb6-48bb-a60f-7f58ea75c3f9-2001x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Phil%20Collins%3A%20'Bruce%20and%20Michael%20Jackson%20are%20the%20stars.%20I%20just%20earn%20a%20lot%20of%20money'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F04%2Fphil-collins-rocks-backpages-nme-interview-1990-steven-wells%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Phil%20Collins%3A%20%27Bruce%20and%20Michael%20Jackson%20are%20the%20stars.%20I%20just%20earn%20a%20lot%20of%20money%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F04%2Fphil-collins-rocks-backpages-nme-interview-1990-steven-wells%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F4%2F1446648426211%2F0951246d-1bb6-48bb-a60f-7f58ea75c3f9-2001x2040.jpeg>
 Phil Collins Photograph: Martyn Goddard/Rex 
You refer to yourself as a drummer – do you really think you’ve got anything 
in common with, say, the drummer of some anarcho-punk band who travels from gig 
to gig in the back of a Transit van living off £30 a week. Could you hold a 
conversation with him?

“Yeah, I think so. I think it’s slightly superficial to think that just 
because I’ve got money …”

It’s not just the money, is it? There’s a massive difference in attitude and 
lifestyle.

“Yeah, but I’ve done all that. I’ve not always driven a BMW. Once I was at 
Heathrow and the Clash were there andTopper Headon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/sep/18/clash-mick-jones-topper-headon> 
– after he’d had a good look round to make sure there was no press around – 
came up to me and he said, ‘Man, I’m so pleased to meet you, you’re one of my 
heroes.’”

TOPPER HEADON – PUNK TRAITOR!

“I mean, the Dead Kennedys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2007/oct/11/owenadams>. I was at 
the Roundhouse and they were all watching Television and one of them came up to 
me and said what a big fan he was.”

It wasn’t Jello Biafra was it? “Dunno, mate. I wouldn’t know one Dead Kennedy 
from another.”

Despite claims made in the NME a few weeks ago, Phil is patently not shitting 
himself at the arrival of Birdland into the charts. Although he admits to their 
allegation that he wasn’t all that keen on punk the first time round – “I was 
your typical outraged musician” – he’s now a big fan of the punk-rock classics.

“I’ve got the Sex Pistols’ records on my jukebox at home, y’know, Anarchy and 
what’s that other one? There’s two of them … Well, anyway, they’re great 
singles, they sound great, they’ve got a lot of energy.”

And to set the record straight, Phil claims he was never a big fan of Yes, 
Pink Floyd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/28/giant-rock-stage-props-go-up-for-auction-pink-floyd-queen>
 or even, would you believe it, Jethro Tull.

“It took me ages before I heard Marillion. I kept on hearing about these 
second-generation Genesis groups –Pallas 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pallas_%28band%29> were another one – and I 
didn’t want to hear them. I wasn’t even that keen on first-generation Genesis 
stuff.”

In 1977, Genesis became so closely identified with a stereotyped 
pseudo-cerebral spotty student audience, frowning and making notes as they 
danced – that the band seriously considered changing their name. What to? 
Severed Head and the Neck Fuckers?

“Nah – the Shits!”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWlFhtRPqrtA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWlFhtRPqrtA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWlFhtRPqrtA&media=>
 Watch the video for Another Day in Paradise 
Spare a copper, guv
The other shock horror how-dare-he controversial track on the album is Another 
Day in Paradise. It’s about the homeless and about how Phil can’t get used to 
living in a country where people beg on the streets and nobody gives a damn. In 
the song, a wealthy man is faced with a homeless person who asks him for the 
price of a sandwich. The bastard turns away and walks off.

“I came out of the studio after recording it and this guy came up to me and 
asked for some money, it was weird. I didn’t know what to do.”

Collins walked off without reaching to his pocket. Life imitating pop. And 
he’s as guilty and as confused as hell about it. When I steer Phil in a 
political direction, the interview starts to break down. Phil thinks long and 
hard before answering. The words drip … out … one … at … a … time. I try to get 
Phil to say something outrageous like “Vote Labour”.

“Well, I remember last time. I don’t think it’s right that you should earn 
£100,000 and then they take £90,000 off you! How dare they!”

What? If it’s taken off you to build hospitals and schools?

“Um …”

Humourless git?
Phil appears on Spitting Image as a tear-squirting hideously ugly wimp whining 
about his divorce.

The next day, Eric Clapton meets the incredibly young, handsome, talented and 
underpaid Simon Bates.

MASTER BATES: Hi! Eric! My main man! Did you see Phil last night?

CLAPPO: Oh yeah! Oooh yeah! He won’t be amused! [NB: Clappo is making a joke.]

The next day Bates goes on air with his world exclusive.

WANKER: Crikey! Phil Collins is extremely upset!

“Of course I wasn’t. I was actually very flattered that they spent all that 
time taking the piss out of me, writing that song and everything.”

The image of Phil as the whining deserted hubby still lingers.

“I wrote all those songs as messages. I felt like giving my wife the cassette 
and saying – listen, right?”

So how were you able to tear your heart out and then see these songs become 
just another record company product?

“Should I be bothered about that? I think it bothered her …”

Consider yourself at home
Outside Madame Tussaud’s rock waxworks a looped tape of Phil says over and 
over:

“Hello. I’m Phil Collins. Most people think of me as a singer who drums. I 
like to think of myself as a drummer who sings.”

But before he was either, professionally at least, Phil was an actor. When his 
voice broke, he was playing the Artful Dodger in the West End stage version of 
the greatest musical ever written in the English language – Oliver. His early 
credits included Junior Points of View, knitwear catalogues (modelling chunky 
jumpers) and a part in the cult drugs filmCalamity the Cow 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Calamity_the_Cow>. You weren’t one of the Double 
Deckers <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Here_Come_the_Double_Deckers>were you?

“Oh no!”

You never auditioned for the Milky Bar kid?

“No, he was a good friend of mine, though.”

Since then Collins has dodgy-cockerneed his way through a bit part on Miami 
Vice and the lead role in Buster. Hollywood has eagerly awaited his arrival. It 
may not have to wait long.

“I was in Houston on tour five years ago, and I read this article that said – 
‘Phil Collins blah blah blah who looks uncannily likeBob Hoskins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/apr/30/bob-hoskins>.’ – OK, fair enough, 
l suppose I do look a little like him. Now a couple of days later, I read 
another article that went – ‘Phil Collins is the Danny DeVito of pop music’ – 
right? I mean that’s a little far out! I mean that’s a little cruel!”

Yeah, poor old Danny!

“Yeah, fuck you too.”

So Phil is at this press conference and a hack asks him what his next film 
project is going to be, and off the top of his head he says: ‘The Three Bears 
starring me, Bob Hoskins and Danny DeVito …’ The pisstake gained a life of its 
own and a script is now being prepared.

If the film ever gets made, Phil, who’s going to play the woman? I suppose you 
and Bob will have to fight it out?

“Well, I dunno, we’d probably try and get Darryl Hannah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/21/darryl-hannah-hollywood-splash-blade-runner-sense8-netflix>
 or …” No, you misunderstand me. She’d be OK for Goldilocks and Danny, being 
the smallest, has to be the baby bear, but who’s going to play mummy bear?

For just a second Phil’s brow is wrinkled in perplexity.

“Oh! I see what you mean! Nah. Hah! It’s not going to be in costume!’

And for the first time in the interview I feel savagely disappointed.

© Steven Wells, 1990
 