
Only the husky dogs, curled up for a snooze, look entirely happy in a 
photograph taken more than a century ago on the Terra Nova, the ship that 
carriedCaptain Robert Falcon Scott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2012/jan/17/south-pole-robert-scott-exploration-centenary>
 on his fatal final attempt to conquer the south pole.

The silvery print, taken by the expedition’s official photographer Herbert 
Ponting, is one of five being sold at auction. Ponting’s magnificent images 
were intended for publicity when the explorers returned victorious. Instead 
they helped to make the story of the expedition – during which Scott and his 
companions died following the bitter discovery that they had been beaten to the 
pole by the NorwegianRoald Amundsen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/from-the-archive-blog/2011/dec/14/archive-1911-amundsen-south-pole>
 – one of the most famous in the annals of polar exploration.

Related: Frozen in time: Scott at the South Pole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2009/feb/23/scott-polar-photography-herbert-ponting>

The photograph of the Siberian ponies in their stable on the ship was taken in 
1911 when it was already clear that bringing them was one of many mistakes in 
planning the mission.

“The ponies were a disaster from the start,” said Matthew Haley, the head of 
books and manuscripts at Bonhams 
<https://www.bonhams.com/departments/PIC-TOP/?keep_login_open=1&redirect_params=flag%3D1%26id%3D23649%26type%3Dsale>
 auctioneers, which will sell the photographs in London on 1 February. “They 
weren’t at all happy when they got out into the ice and snow, but they weren’t 
keen on the ship either – they were kicking out all over the place, breaking 
their legs and having to be shot.”

The man standing by the ponies, with a distant anxious expression in his eyes, 
is Captain Lawrence Oates, who had paid £1,000 of his own money to join the 
expedition. He would become one of the four Scott chose to join him for the 
final march to the pole and died knowing that he was virtually crippled by 
gangrene and frostbite and would therefore slow the remaining three members of 
the group (one, Edgar Evans, had died a month earlier). He walked out of their 
tent into a blizzard on 17 March1912 with the famous remark: “I am just going 
outside and may be some time.”
 Herbert Ponting’s picture of the team beneath the Barne Glacier. Photograph: 
Oliver Williams/Bonhams 
Haley’s favourite of the photographs is the view of the dogs resting beneath 
the Barne Glacier, when hopes were still high for the success of the venture. 
The dead ponies would become food for the dogs, but they too would die during 
the attempt. The expensive motor sledges, on which Scott was counting to do 
much of the heavy hauling, would prove useless long before the animals failed.

The tragic story of the expedition is personal to Haley: his great-great-uncle 
Harry Pennell was among the crew and took over command of the Terra Nova when 
Scott went onshore. He got back to England safely, only to die in 1916 when his 
ship was sunk at theBattle of Jutland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/29/the-battle-of-jutland-the-chilcot-shambles-of-its-day>
.

Ponting returned to New Zealand on Terra Nova before Scott’s march to the 
pole, bringing back film and 1,700 glass plate negatives, which would 
illustrate fundraising lectures when the explorers returned victorious. Instead 
the images became their memorial after Scott and his companions – with letters 
and journals recording their fate – were found in their tent in November 1912, 
only a few miles from a food dump that could have saved their lives.

Ponting organised exhibitions, gave illustrated lectures and produced a film 
of the expedition, The Great White Silence. More than 1,000 of his glass plates 
are in the archives of theScott Polar Research Institute 
<http://www.spri.cam.ac.uk/media/pressreleases/ponting.html> in Cambridge.

The photographs in the sale are valued at up to £4,000 each. One was presented 
by George Simpson, a meteorologist to the expedition, to his old school, which 
had named a house in honour of Scott. The others were printed for Ponting for 
an exhibition in New Zealand in 1925.

 * This article was amended on 18 January 2016. An earlier version said Oates 
was the first to die in the group that Scott chose for the final march to the 
pole.  