
An Indonesian budget airline has fired a pilot suspected of trying to fly a 
plane while he was drunk, and two of its executives are resigning.

Citilink president director Albert Burhan announced on Friday that he and the 
airline’s production director would resign over the incident. Citilink is a 
subsidiary of national flag carrier GarudaIndonesia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/indonesia>.

Australian 'thieves' paraded with signs on Indonesian streets
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/16/australian-thieves-paraded-with-signs-on-indonesian-streets>
 Passengers became suspicious  <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cvxj75D222M>
when they heard slurred words and unclear announcements from the cockpit. Some 
of them left the plane and asked for a replacement of the pilot they believed 
to be either drunk or under drug influence.

Citilink assigned a new pilot to fly the Airbus A320 about an hour behind 
schedule. The flight had 154 passengers but a number reportedly decided to 
cancel.

The flight on Wednesday was heading from Surabaya, Indonesia’s second-largest 
city, to the capital, Jakarta. Aviation is a main mode of travel in the 
sprawling nation of 17,000 islands, and the incident has raised safety concerns.

YouTube footage <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OLb1_1akBh0> showed the pilot 
appeared to stagger through a metal detector at a security checkpoint and 
security guards picked up his belongings that were falling on the floor as he 
seemed out of control.

“The pilot had committed serious violation of standard operation procedure 
that endangered passengers,” Burhan said. “We apologise for the discomfort. I 
have to be responsible for that and therefore I and my production director 
resign.”

The airline previously had dismissed reports that the 32-year-old pilot Tekad 
Purna was drunk, saying initial tests of drug and alcohol were negative.

Director general of Air Transportation Suprasetyo has asked Citilink to make 
sure the pilot underwent a medical check.

Purna is under investigation for possible drunkenness or drug use. Minister of 
Transportation Budi Karya has banned him from flying pending the outcome of the 
investigation. If proven, his license would be revoked.

In December last year, three crew members, a pilot and two flight attendants 
were arrested for allegedly consuming crystal methamphetamine, known locally as 
shabu-shabu, at a hotel.

 