
More than 160,000 people have signed a petition against a decision to hand 
over the running of a popular tourist attraction in St Petersburg from the 
state to the Russian Orthodox church.

Built between 1818 and 1858, St Isaac’s Cathedral was the most important 
cathedral inRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> until the Soviets 
stripped it of its religious trappings in the 1930s and installed an 
anti-religion museum inside. Regular worship resumed after the fall of 
communism, with space reserved inside for educational facilities, exhibitions 
and classical music concerts.

The Unesco world heritage site now attracts more than 3 million visitors 
annually, drawn to its spectacular interior and an observation deck around the 
base of its golden dome that offers the best view of the landmarks and canals 
of Russia’s “Venice of the North”. It also hosts a permanent exhibition on the 
Leningrad blockade in the second world war.


The petition on Change.org 
<https://www.change.org/p/%D0%BD%D0%B5-%D0%B4%D0%BE%D0%BF%D1%83%D1%81%D1%82%D0%B8%D0%BC-%D0%BF%D0%B5%D1%80%D0%B5%D0%B4%D0%B0%D1%87%D1%83-%D0%B8%D1%81%D0%B0%D0%B0%D0%BA%D0%B8%D0%B5%D0%B2%D1%81%D0%BA%D0%BE%D0%B3%D0%BE-%D1%81%D0%BE%D0%B1%D0%BE%D1%80%D0%B0-%D0%B2-%D0%B2%D0%B5%D0%B4%D0%B5%D0%BD%D0%B8%D0%B5-%D1%80%D0%BF%D1%86>
 argues that transferring management of the cathedral from Russia’s state 
museum organisation to the church could result in non-worshippers facing 
restricted access.

On Wednesday police prevented protesters from unfurling banners reading “Not 
the Russian Orthodox church” in front of the cathedral. Another protest is 
planned for Friday evening.

Speaking after a meeting with the head of the Russian Orthodox church this 
week, St Petersburg’s governor, Georgy Poltavchenko, said the state would give 
St Isaac’s to the church to run but that the “cathedral will preserve its 
museum and educational function”. The city said the transfer agreement would 
cover a period of 49 years.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fplan-to-hand-control-of-st-petersburg-cathedral-to-church-sparks-outcry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd6b3ba9ad8f1ec132fba0543d5daa7f67b493f6%2F0_245_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Plan%20to%20hand%20control%20of%20St%20Petersburg%20cathedral%20to%20church%20sparks%20outcry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fplan-to-hand-control-of-st-petersburg-cathedral-to-church-sparks-outcry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Plan%20to%20hand%20control%20of%20St%20Petersburg%20cathedral%20to%20church%20sparks%20outcry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fplan-to-hand-control-of-st-petersburg-cathedral-to-church-sparks-outcry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd6b3ba9ad8f1ec132fba0543d5daa7f67b493f6%2F0_245_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 A view of the interior of the cathedral. Photograph: Alexander Demianchuk/TASS 
City authorities have previously refused requests to hand over the cathedral 
to the church, which has enjoyed increased influence during Vladimir Putin’s 
presidency. The church has received 184 buildings from the state since 2015, TV 
Rain reported on Friday.

Church officials have pledged that tourist activities will continue, but 
opponents of the move doubt that the promises can be kept. Boris Vishnyovsky, a 
city council member, said he would challenge the decision in court.

A statement by the Museums Union of Russia said a handover of control would 
result in the “liquidation of one of the most successful museums” in the 
country.

Nikolai Burov, director of the state museum organisation, told the local 
publication 812 Online that the transfer would lead to the “destruction of the 
museum in its current form as a museum complex” and put employees out of work.

Burov raised concerns that the church would not be able to maintain St 
Isaac’s, which requires near-constant renovations and employs a staff of 393 
people. In 2015 alone, 200 million roubles (£2.7m) was spent on renovations.

Under the church’s control, the cathedral would lose most of its income as it 
would not be allowed to charge an admission fee, according to Vishnyovsky.
 