
Monday

The London International Mime festival <http://mimelondon.com/festival/> 
begins today with a special edition of Gandini Juggling’s brilliant, Pina 
Bausch-inspired show Smashed, at thePeacock theatre 
<http://www.sadlerswells.com/whats-on/2017/gandini-juggling-smashed-special-edition/>
. This House, James Graham’s comedy about Westminster machinations, is well 
worth your time atthe Garrick <http://www.garricktheatre.org/this-house/>, 
London. Michael Frayn’s version of Chekhov’s first play, Wild Honey, is a 
pleasure atHampstead 
<https://www.hampsteadtheatre.com/whats-on/2016/wild-honey/>. It’s your last 
chance atthe Dorfman <https://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/shows/love>, London, 
tonight and tomorrow for Alexander Zeldin’s Love, a story of homelessness. It 
moves toBirmingham Rep  <https://www.birmingham-rep.co.uk/whats-on/love.html>on 
26 January. Tom Jacobson’s The Twentieth Century Way atJermyn Street 
<http://www.jermynstreettheatre.co.uk/show/twentieth-century-way/>, London, 
looks at a period in Los Angeles just before the first world war when actors 
were hired to entrap gay men. The legacies of three conflicts – the first world 
war, second world war and the Vietnam war – are explored in Veterans Day, which 
is revived atthe Finborough 
<http://www.finboroughtheatre.co.uk/productions/2016/veterans-day.php>, London.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ftheatre-top-tickets-london-international-mime-festival-gandini-juggling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe10c176aa231c2b5be8f90c5b7f0fc176605e763%2F0_345_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Plan%20your%20week%E2%80%99s%20theatre%3A%20top%20tickets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ftheatre-top-tickets-london-international-mime-festival-gandini-juggling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Plan%20your%20week%E2%80%99s%20theatre%3A%20top%20tickets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ftheatre-top-tickets-london-international-mime-festival-gandini-juggling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe10c176aa231c2b5be8f90c5b7f0fc176605e763%2F0_345_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
 Alexander Zeldin’s Love is at the Dorfman, London. Photograph: Sarah Lee for 
the Guardian 
Tuesday

Katherine Soper’s Wish List, a devastating look at trying to survive when 
fate, health, the benefits system and zero-hours contracts conspire against 
you, starts at theRoyal Court Upstairs 
<https://royalcourttheatre.com/whats-on/wish-list/>, London. At the Finborough 
<http://www.finboroughtheatre.co.uk/productions/2016/the-trackers-of-oxyrhynchus.php>
 you can catch the first London production in almost 30 years of Tony 
Harrison’s The Trackers of Oxyrhynchus, a reimagining of the ancient Greek 
satyr play. Wild Thing, about the life and death of Oliver Reed, goes intothe 
King’s Head 
<https://kingsheadtheatre.ticketsolve.com/#/shows/873568682/events/128015381>, 
Islington, with a terrific performance from Rob Crouch as the hell-raiser. 
Giles Croft’s staging of Khaled Hosseini’s The Kite Runner, first seen at 
Nottingham Playhouse, is remade forWyndham’s 
<https://tickets.delfontmackintosh.co.uk/index.asp?ShoID=2054>, London. Stuart 
Slade’s BU21, about a group of survivors coming to terms with an attack in 
London, is atTrafalgar Studios <http://www.trafalgar-studios.co.uk/index.html>.

Wednesday

Sally Cookson’s Cinderella: a Fairy Tale remains a joy at the Tobacco Factory 
<https://www.tobaccofactorytheatres.com/shows/cinderella-a-fairytale/>, 
Bristol. AtTheatr Clwyd <https://www.theatrclwyd.com/en/whats-on/in-a-pickle/>, 
Mold, three- to five-year-olds will enjoy Oily Cart’s In a Pickle, inspired by 
The Winter’s Tale. French company Les Antliaclastes bring Here Lies 
Shakespeare, a piece that is described as a cross between a Catholic mass and 
the Muppets, toJacksons Lane 
<https://www.jacksonslane.org.uk/whats-on/here-lies-shakespeare>, London. 
Mathurin Bolze’s circus piece Du Goudron et des Plumes was an astonishment and 
he’s back with Barons Perchés at Platform 
<http://www.arts.ac.uk/csm/whats-on-at-csm/platform-theatre/>, London, a show 
inspired by an Italo Calvino story.

Thursday

Ramin Gray directs Roland Schimmelpfennig’s Winter Solstice, a comedy about 
family betrayals, atthe Orange Tree 
<https://www.orangetreetheatre.co.uk/whats-on/winter-solstice>, Richmond. Danai 
Gurira’s The Convert atthe Gate 
<http://www.gatetheatre.co.uk/events/all-productions/the_convert>, London, 
explores western cultural impositions in 19th-century Rhodesia. The Witches are 
still turning children into mice atWest Yorkshire Playhouse 
<https://www.wyp.org.uk/events/the-witches/>. Mime festival favourites Mossoux 
Bonté are atthe Lilian Baylis 
<http://www.sadlerswells.com/whats-on/2017/compagnie-mossoux-bonte-whispers/>, 
London, with Whispers, a piece about doubt, secrets and ghosts.

Friday and the weekend
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ftheatre-top-tickets-london-international-mime-festival-gandini-juggling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F317c042be93416542777599fc15d28f065d1829c%2F42_123_1954_1172%2F1954.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Plan%20your%20week%E2%80%99s%20theatre%3A%20top%20tickets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ftheatre-top-tickets-london-international-mime-festival-gandini-juggling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Plan%20your%20week%E2%80%99s%20theatre%3A%20top%20tickets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ftheatre-top-tickets-london-international-mime-festival-gandini-juggling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F317c042be93416542777599fc15d28f065d1829c%2F42_123_1954_1172%2F1954.jpg>
 Picnic at Hanging Rock is heading to the Royal Lyceum, Edinburgh. Photograph: 
Pia Johnson 
Burt Bacharach’s and Neil Simon’s 1960s musical Promises, Promises is revived 
atSouthwark Playhouse <http://southwarkplayhouse.co.uk/show/promises-promises/>
. Malthouse Theatre, Melbourne and Black Swan State’s highly acclaimed version 
of Picnic at Hanging Rock comes tothe Royal Lyceum 
<https://lyceum.org.uk/whats-on/production/picnic-at-hanging-rock>, Edinburgh. 
Plasticine Men’s There Shall Be Fireworks, set in a 200-year-old cemetery in 
Kabul, is atthe New Diorama 
<http://www.newdiorama.com/whats-on/there-shall-be-fireworks>, London. You can 
still go to the ball with Cinderella atthe Octagon 
<https://octagonbolton.co.uk/whats-on/theatre/cinderella/>, Bolton. The Push 
festival starts atHome 
<http://homemcr.org/production/the-island-the-sea-the-volunteer-the-refugee/> 
in Manchester with Louise Wallwein’s story of migration, The Island, the Sea, 
the Volunteer and the Refugee. The annualDevoted and Disgruntled  
<http://www.devotedanddisgruntled.com/events/devoted-disgruntled-12/>meeting is 
for anybody interested in theatre, either as a maker or audience member, and 
it’s at the Passenger Shed, Bristol, all over the weekend.
 