
My husband, Mohammed Ramadan 
<http://www.reprieve.org.uk/case-study/mohammed-ramadan/>, is due to be 
executed in Bahrain any day now. Our three young children are distraught. We 
want Theresa May, the British prime minister, to call for Mohammed to be 
releasedwhen she meets Bahraini leaders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/06/theresa-may-announces-joint-effort-on-security-in-gulf>
 today on her Gulf visit. Our criminal justice system has failed him and the 
British government, which supports that system, hasfailed him too 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/16/bahrain-torture-foreign-office-criticised>
.

Bahrain torture ‘ignored’ by UK-funded monitor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/16/bahrain-torture-foreign-office-criticised>
In 2014 Mohammed was arrested at Bahrain’s airport where he worked as a police 
officer. My husband believes in human rights, democracy and transparency. He 
attended peaceful marches inBahrain <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bahrain> 
calling for our government to respect these values. As a state employee, he 
knew that it was risky for him to go to these protests. But he believes in 
reform and so he went anyway.

After Mohammed was taken into custody, our family heard nothing for four days 
– we had no idea where he was, or even if he was alive. Eventually, two weeks 
later, we were allowed to see him, but only with three guards watching us on a 
surveillance camera. As soon as we saw him, it was clear that Mohammed had been 
tortured by the security services.

Mohammed seemed weak and exhausted, and his body was trembling; this suggested 
to us that he had been subjected to extreme torture. But no one would tell us 
the reasons for his arrest or the charges against him.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Ftheresa-may-save-mohammed-ramadan-execution-bahrain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a1ccef805339de725621f37db3b4cf127ba8fc6%2F35_137_3416_2050%2F3416.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Please%2C%20Theresa%20May%2C%20save%20my%20husband%20from%20death%20in%20Bahrain%20%7C%20Zainab%20Ebrahim&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Ftheresa-may-save-mohammed-ramadan-execution-bahrain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Please%2C%20Theresa%20May%2C%20save%20my%20husband%20from%20death%20in%20Bahrain%20%7C%20Zainab%20Ebrahim&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Ftheresa-may-save-mohammed-ramadan-execution-bahrain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a1ccef805339de725621f37db3b4cf127ba8fc6%2F35_137_3416_2050%2F3416.jpg>
 Theresa May meets Prince Salman bin Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa, the Crown Prince 
of Bahrain, in Manama on Monday. Photograph: Reuters 
Later, he told us what they had done to him. They had detained him, naked and 
humiliated, in a freezing cold cell. They had beaten him. They had forced him 
to stand for days on end. They had electrocuted him. They had sexually 
assaulted him. They had made him listen to the screams of other prisoners being 
tortured. They had threatened to rape me and other members of our family in 
front of him.

Eventually, Mohammed and his co-defendants signed false 'confessions' to make 
the torture stop

Their aim was to punish Mohammed for his participation in the pro-democracy 
protests by getting him to confess to a crime he did not commit. Eventually, 
Mohammed and his co-defendants signed false “confessions” to make the torture 
stop. Mohammed was not allowed to see or speak to his lawyer until after his 
trial had started. He was convicted on the basis of his forced confession, even 
though he had recanted it. This “evidence” – which would immediately be thrown 
out of any court in Britain – is the reason that my beloved husband and the 
father of my children is facing imminent execution.

Shortly after my husband’s arrest, I submitted a complaint about his 
mistreatment to my country’s UK-trained ombudsman, who is meant to investigate 
such allegations. An international human rights organisation submitted a 
torture complaint, too. But the ombudsman conducted no investigation for more 
than two years, even as Mohammed was sentenced to death.

Then this year, following intense pressure on the UK Foreign Office by human 
rights groups such asReprieve <http://www.reprieve.org.uk/> and the Bahrain 
Institute for Rights and Democracy <http://birdbh.org/>, the ombudsman agreed 
to open a new investigation. I’ve been told that this investigation is now 
closed, but I know very little about its outcome. Furthermore, the Foreign 
Office has not yet called for his release.

Britain lobbied UN to whitewash Bahrain police abuses
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/21/britain-lobbied-un-bahrain-human-rights-abuses>
Sadly, my husband is not alone. In the past two years judges have handed down 
eight death sentences, including my husband’s. Many of these people have been 
convicted on the basis of confessions extracted through torture. The Bahrain 
government regularly strips its political opponents of their citizenship and 
sentences peaceful human rights activists to decades in prison.

Throughout this time, the UK government has championed Bahrain’s supposed 
human rights reforms, spending millions coaching a torture watchdog, training 
hundreds of guards at the death-row jail where he is held, andsecretly 
assisting Bahrain’s police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/aug/29/british-police-criticised-for-lack-of-transparency-in-bahrain-training-deal>
, who continue to torture peaceful protesters.

The only result of all of this that I have seen is that my husband remains in 
prison, facing execution for a crime he didn’t commit – while the people who 
tortured him still walk free.
 