
Home Park will constitute a “welcome to the real world” for Jürgen Klopp and 
Liverpool, according to thePlymouth Argyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/plymouthargyle> manager, Derek Adams. For 
the League Two club and their 8,600 followers from Devon, Anfield was fantasy. 
This was no bona fide upset or compelling cup tie but the exuberant 
celebrations that commenced in the away end shortly before the final whistle 
told otherwise. Plymouth had their day, and they still have a chance.

Klopp had no regrets over ringing the changes for the FA Cup third round but 
even with a full complement – and Liverpool ended the tie with a forward line 
of Divock Origi, Roberto Firmino, Daniel Sturridge and Adam Lallana – it would 
have been difficult to pick a hole in a 10-man Plymouth rearguard that produced 
what Adams claimed was “probably one of the best defensive performances Anfield 
has seen”. The rueful smile on the Liverpool manager’s face as he shook Adams’s 
hand at full-time said it all.Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> dominated the ball but could 
find no way through.

The Dozen: the weekend's best FA Cup photos
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gallery/2017/jan/08/the-dozen-the-weekends-best-fa-cup-photos>
Only Manchester United had kept a clean sheet at Anfield this season prior to 
Plymouth’s visit and now a team with designs on the Premier League title and 
the EFL Cup final must travel to the south coast for a replay on 17 or 18 
January. It was one of those days for Klopp, one of those dour stalemates that 
can arise between clubs of contrasting resources.

Moments before kick-off the entire Plymouth team walked towards the Anfield 
Road end to applaud the away fans who had made the early-morning, 300-mile 
journey north. They never ventured much further for the next 45 minutes as 
Liverpool dominated totally against opponents who may be riding high in League 
Two but whose over-riding ambition was a goalless draw. It made for a hugely 
satisfying result for the stubborn visitors and their vociferous support but 
also a grim spectacle.

Klopp made 10 changes to the Liverpool team that drew at Sunderland last Monday
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/02/sunderland-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
 and in the process fielded the youngest starting XI in the club’s history, 
with a forward line comprising Ben Woodburn, Ovie Ejaria and Sheyi Ojo bringing 
the average age to 21 years and 296 days. All three impressed – particularly 
the 17-year-old Woodburn with his awareness, movement and touch – and all saw 
plenty of the ball in a first half that resembled a training ground exercise of 
attack versus defence.

Liverpool’s problem was that it was a defence containing 10 green shirts, each 
prepared to throw itself in the way of every cross, shot and attempted through 
ball. Sonny Bradley typified their commitment with a commanding display in 
central defence but took the spoiling tactics too far with a series of pinches 
on the ear, armpit and side of Emre Can. The Germany international had every 
right to bring his complaints to the match officials.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fliverpool-plymouth-argyle-fa-cup-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fadb6c87d1e84236ab13587f9ee8b9450a8e0ff42%2F0_114_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Plymouth%20hold%20out%20against%20Klopp%E2%80%99s%20young%20Liverpool%20to%20earn%20FA%20Cup%20replay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fliverpool-plymouth-argyle-fa-cup-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Plymouth%20hold%20out%20against%20Klopp%E2%80%99s%20young%20Liverpool%20to%20earn%20FA%20Cup%20replay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fliverpool-plymouth-argyle-fa-cup-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fadb6c87d1e84236ab13587f9ee8b9450a8e0ff42%2F0_114_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Derek Adams’s Plymouth side, second in League Two, held firm against Jürgen 
Klopp’s youthful Liverpool. Photograph: Martin Rickett/PA 
The rearguard action succeeded to the extent the goalkeeper Luke McCormick had 
more touches than any other Plymouth player in the first half but also no 
serious save to make. Ojo should have worked him more, or indeed scored, with a 
free header from close range after Can’s blocked free-kick was sent back into 
the penalty area, but the winger’s effort was tame and straight into 
McCormick’s grasp. Origi did beat the keeper with a low finish from six yards 
but only after being penalised for a pull on Gary Miller.

Plymouth’s defensive ploy may not have been entirely by design, as a slightly 
more adventurous second-half display suggested. Liverpool were simply so much 
quicker both to and on the ball than Adams’s players, ensuring the visitors’ 
midfield were easily caught in possession or closed down on the few occasions 
they did venture forward. The men in green showed greater urgency and ambition 
in the second half but their cause was not helped by the loss of striker 
Paul-Arnold Garita and right-back Miller, the latter to what appeared serious 
injury, in rapid succession. Miller was given oxygen as he was carried off with 
a suspected broken ankle and to a sporting ovation from the Anfield crowd.

Yet they continued to dig in and resist. The finest compliment to Plymouth’s 
performance was the introduction of Sturridge, Firmino and Lallana from the 
substitutes’ bench as Klopp sought to avoid an unwanted replay. The crosses 
rained in from right and left, Sturridge twice went close with low, rasping 
shots and McCormick gratefully pounced on the ball when Trent 
Alexander-Arnold’s free-kick deflected off Connor Smith during six minutes of 
stoppage time.

Plymouth had their moments to relieve the pressure too but Jake Jervis shot 
well wide of Loris Karius’s goal with substitute Craig Tanner well-placed 
inside and a free-kick from an inviting position was wasted. Not that the 
massed ranks from Devon had any cause for complaint when the final whistle 
sounded. Job done. All to play for at Home Park.
 