
Italian and British police are urgently investigating whether they caught the 
wrong person in a much-hyped anti-smuggling operation said to havenetted one of 
the world’s most-wanted people smugglers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jun/08/alleged-people-smuggling-kingpin-is-extradited-to-italy>
.


Investigators in both countries announced with great fanfare on Wednesday 
morning that they had seized Medhanie Yehdego Mered, a 35-year-old Eritrean 
whom an Italian prosecutor called “the boss of one of the most important 
criminal groups operating in central Africa and Libya”.

Britain’s National Crime Agency (NCA), which was involved in the 
investigation, hailed the capture of “one of the world’s most-wanted people 
smugglers”, following his extradition on Wednesday to Italy from Sudan, where 
he had been arrested.

But just hours later both Italy and Britain were looking into whether the 
Sudanese had sent them the wrong man, after three close friends of the detainee 
alleged to the Guardian that he was the victim of mistaken identity.

They said the man sent to Italy was in fact Medhanie Tesfamariam Berhe, known 
to some friends by his ancestral name of Kidane, a 29-year-old refugee arrested 
in a street in Khartoum late last month.

He shared a first name with the wanted man, but he had never been to Libya, 
where Mered was supposed to have centred his operations, and had nothing to do 
with people smuggling, the three men claimed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fpolice-investigating-if-wrong-man-caught-in-anti-smuggling-operation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0c3b8f9faed90632f676564667d3a0076706291%2F0_28_864_518%2F864.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Police%20investigating%20if%20wrong%20man%20caught%20in%20anti-smuggling%20operation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fpolice-investigating-if-wrong-man-caught-in-anti-smuggling-operation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Police%20investigating%20if%20wrong%20man%20caught%20in%20anti-smuggling%20operation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fpolice-investigating-if-wrong-man-caught-in-anti-smuggling-operation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0c3b8f9faed90632f676564667d3a0076706291%2F0_28_864_518%2F864.jpg>
 A picture supplied by a friend of Medhanie TesfamariamBerhe’s, showing Berhe 
on the left. 
Photographs of Berhe, they pointed out, did not resemble those of Mered.

Fshaye Tasfai, a 42-year-old Eritrean exile now living in Sicily, and Berhe’s 
cousin, said he had grown up with Kidane in Asmara, the Eritrean capital. “It’s 
the wrong guy,” said Tasfai. “It’s incredible – he’s not a human trafficker. 
He’s from my family. He lived in my father’s house. He left Eritrea in 2014, 
and then went to Khartoum about a year ago. He lived with my brothers and 
sisters in Khartoum. He didn’t have a job so we use to send him money.”

Tasfai’s account was corroborated to the Guardian by one of Berhe’s flatmates 
in Khartoum. “He’s my best friend,” one said. “He’s innocent.”

His flatmate said Berhe was arrested in the street in late May before being 
taken home for his room to be searched. Then he disappeared for several days 
before re-appearing – inexplicably – in Rome on Wednesday.

“They’ve definitely got the wrong guy,” said a third friend, who lived in the 
same area. “He’s not a human trafficker, he’s just a simple refugee. We used to 
drink tea together.”

Meron Estefanos, a Sweden-based Eritrean broadcaster well known in the 
Eritrean diaspora, was the first to raise the alarm. “I have almost 400 people 
writing to me saying: I know this guy, he grew up with me,” she said. “This is 
the wrong person.”

The Italian and British authorities said they were looking into the claims on 
Wednesday night, though neither would publicly admit to any mistakes.

An NCA spokesperson said: “We have noted your report. This is a complex 
multi-partner operation and it is too soon to speculate about these claims. The 
NCA is confident in its intelligence-gathering process.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fmered-medhanie-general-people-smuggling-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Who%20is%20Medhanie%20Yehdego%20Mered%2C%20'the%20General'%3F%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20profile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fmered-medhanie-general-people-smuggling-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Who%20is%20Medhanie%20Yehdego%20Mered%2C%20%27the%20General%27%3F%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20profile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fmered-medhanie-general-people-smuggling-video-explainer&media=>
Who is Medhanie Yehdego Mered, ‘the General’? – video profile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/video/2016/jun/08/mered-medhanie-general-people-smuggling-video-explainer>
If it is the wrong man, the news will come as blow to European investigators, 
who hoped they had finally snared one of their most-wanted suspects. More than 
320,000 people reached Italy from Libya in 2014 and 2015, including over 70,000 
Eritreans. By his account, Mered – the smuggler who allegedly still remains at 
large – had a hand in roughly 4% of this market.

“He admitted to smuggling 13,000 people,” said Estefanos, who interviewed the 
real Mered by telephone as part of her research into the treatment of Eritrean 
refugees in north Africa. “I have never seen any [Eritrean smuggler] become as 
big as him so quickly.”

In his interview with Estefanos, Mered suggested that he did not have a 
practical role in the transportation of migrants either across the 
Mediterranean, or through the Sahara. Instead he said he acted more as a 
middleman, working under the protection of Libyan and Sudanese officials to 
whom he supplied a constant flow of passengers. They then organised the 
logistics of moving people across seas and deserts, in exchange for a large cut 
of his profits.

“The smugglers are fixers,” said Estefanos. “Medhanie [Mered] told me he’s 
never set foot on the shore.”

Guardian interviews with Eritrean refugees suggest Sudanese drivers carry 
Eritreans to the Libyan border, where they are crammed into trucks driven by 
Libyan smugglers and taken on a hellish journey to north-eastern Libya. Many 
die of thirst en route, or are sometimes abandoned in the desert to die, in a 
trek that is often described as worse than even the sea crossing.

Once in north-east Libya, refugees are often held for ransom, and frequently 
tortured – until relatives send money via the smugglers’ accomplices in Europe, 
the Gulf and north America. Once a ransom is paid, refugees are judged to have 
settled their debts for the desert journey, and driven westwards to towns near 
Tripoli – where they are often ransomed again as advance payment for the 
Mediterranean journey.

Italian wiretaps suggest that the real Mered played a role in the procurement 
of ransom payments from the Eritrean diaspora. They also record him explaining 
how he bribes Libyan police to release migrants held within detention centres – 
migrants he would then hold for ransom until their relatives paid him back for 
their release.

All this made him “one of the four most important human smugglers in Africa 
and Libya,” prosecutor Calogero Ferrara insisted to the Guardian.

But despite his allegedly prominent role, Libyan smugglers previously 
interviewed by the Guardian have been dismissive about the importance of 
sub-Saharan smugglers within their networks, and questioned how much impact 
foreigners would have in a country where migrants are treated as second-class 
citizens.

“The Africans collect people for us, and they get their commission,” said 
Ahmed, a Libyan smuggler interviewed in 2015. “But it’s much less than the 
Libyans. Whatever you give them, they will do it.”

Reitano, a smuggling expert at the Global Initiative Against Transnational 
Organised Crime, doubted that the real Mered was as essential a player as he 
has been presented.

“It is unlikely he played such a strategic role in a Libyan network, and I 
always thought his role may have been overblown by Italian law enforcement keen 
to be seen to have an impact,” said Reitano.

In a separate development on Wednesday, a UN inquiry concluded that Eritrea’s 
government is committing crimes against humanity “in a widespread and 
systematic manner”, including murder, rape, torture, slavery, and 
disappearances.

Mike Smith, chair of the inquiry, said: “Eritrea is an authoritarian state. 
There is no independent judiciary, no national assembly and there are no other 
democratic institutions in Eritrea. This has created a governance and rule of 
law vacuum, resulting in a climate of impunity for crimes against humanity to 
be perpetrated over a quarter of a century. These crimes are still occurring 
today.”

In a dig at whitewashed reporting by western diplomats and visiting 
correspondents, the report states: “The facade of calm and normality that is 
apparent to the occasional visitor to the country, and others confined to 
sections of the capital, belies the consistent patterns of serious human rights 
violations.”

• This article was amended on 9 June. Earlier versions used Berhe’s ancestral 
name, Medhanie Tesfamariam Kidane. Also, he is 29, not 27, as originally 
reported.

 