
The former Labour deputy prime minister John Prescott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/johnprescott> has attacked the buy-up of 
almost two-thirds of the UK’s tallest residential building by foreign investors 
as deplorable.

Lord Prescott was joined by a senior Conservative, London’s mayoral leadership 
and Labour’s front bench in voicing serious concerns about the Tower, after the 
Guardian revealed that the 50-storey block of 214 luxury apartments by the 
river Thames at Vauxhallwas more than 60% owned by foreign buyers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/24/revealed-foreign-buyers-own-two-thirds-of-tower-st-george-wharf-london>
.

'Tower for the toffs': UK's tallest skyscraper and playground of the rich
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/24/st-george-wharf-tower-london-luxury-pads-emblematic-housing-crisis>
Owners of properties in the high rise include a billionaire Russian oligarch, 
the chairman of a defunct Nigerian bank and a Kyrgyz vodka tycoon. A quarter of 
the flats are held by companies in secretive offshore tax havens and several 
owners said their neighbours spent little time in their homes, which sold for 
£2.2m on average.

The revelations about the Tower are likely to be seized on by campaigners and 
politicians as the starkest example yet of the housing crisis gripping the 
capital, in which new homes are sold abroad as investments and left largely 
empty while fewer and fewer young people can afford to buy or rent in the city.

The shadow housing minister, John Healey, said the building had become “a 
symbol of the housing crisis” that “fuels people’s anger and sense of 
injustice”. Conservative MP Bob Blackman, who sits on the House of Commons 
communities select committee that scrutinises housing policy, said the 
ownership of the five-storey penthouse by an oligarch who had not yet lived 
there was ridiculous.

Blackman said it might now be time to consider a policy demanding buyers of UK 
properties commit to living in the UK for more than 90 days a year.

At London’s City Hall, the mayor, Sadiq Khan’s new housing chief, deputy mayor 
James Murray, said the Tower was “another example of where the previous mayor 
failed to get to grips with London’s housing crisis, adding: “Sadiq Khan was 
elected on a mandate that Londoners should have ‘first dibs’ on more of the 
homes built in the capital.”

The Guardian view on housing in London: bricks and mortals | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/24/the-guardian-view-on-housing-in-london-bricks-and-mortals>
Prescott controversially granted building consent in 2005 against the wishes 
of the local council and the planning inspector. This week, his decision was 
attacked as “an appalling mistake” by the former Tory cabinet minister Lord 
Baker, who predicted in 2005: “In that great tower, there will be no social 
affordable housing. It is all for the alphas.It is all for the toffs.” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/24/st-george-wharf-tower-london-luxury-pads-emblematic-housing-crisis>

Prescott said: “I was hoping that we were providing housing for housing. We 
didn’t envisage that it would be given over to people investing inLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>. I had no power to stop it on the 
grounds of who was going to occupy it.”

Ken Livingstone, who also backed the scheme when he was mayor of London, said 
he had no idea so many foreign buyers would be seeking to deposit money in 
London property.


He described the international buy-up as appalling. “I was very keen to get 
foreign investment into London, but that was in terms of constructing 
developments and creating new jobs, not flogging them off to people who just 
keep them there in case there is a coup and they have to flee,” he said.

“If I was mayor now, I would put compulsory purchase orders on empty homes. 
Either you live in it or sell it. The more empty properties there are, the more 
it hypes up the overall house price level.”

But representatives of the property industry defended the scheme and insisted 
there was a vital need for international investment.

“Upfront foreign investment is key to bringing forward a lot of these 
developments,” said Steve Turner, spokesman for the Home Builders Federation. 
“Their investment ultimately leads to an increase in overall housing supply, 
including affordable homes. There is affordable housing in this development, 
but it is just in this particular tower that there isn’t. The foreign funding 
for this tower will directly lead to the developer’s ability to provide 
affordable housing.”

A spokesman for the developer, St George, said it was wrong to focus only on 
the makeup of the Tower’s ownership. “St George has a wide range of homes under 
construction in London, in nine developments providing 9,300 homes, with 2,403 
of these being affordable to buy or rent,” he said.

“The whole of the St George Wharf site was developed at considerable risk and 
after it lay empty for decades. St George committed to construction of the 
Tower in the recession, after the banking crash, when other sites across London 
were being mothballed. The Tower was an important signpost to the development 
of Nine Elms from Vauxhall, with the widerNine Elms development 
<http://nineelmslondon.com/> due to create 25,000 permanent jobs over the next 
10 years.”
Ghost tower 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/05/tower/giv-12515QixJkGSEKQ1X/> 