
Three weeks ago, around a quarter of the American population elected a 
demagogue with no prior experience in public service to the presidency. In the 
eyes of many of his supporters, this lack of preparation was not a liability, 
but a strength.Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> 
had run as a candidate whose primary qualification was that he was not “a 
politician”. Depicting yourself as a “maverick” or an “outsider” crusading 
against a corrupt Washington establishment is the oldest trick in American 
politics – but Trump took things further. He broke countless unspoken rules 
regarding what public figures can or cannot do and say.

Every demagogue needs an enemy. Trump’s was the ruling elite, and his charge 
was that they were not only failing to solve the greatest problems facing 
Americans, they were trying to stop anyone from even talking about those 
problems. “The special interests, the arrogant media, and the political 
insiders, don’t want me to talk about the crime that is happening in our 
country,” Trump said in onelate September speech 
<https://www.donaldjtrump.com/press-releases/follow-the-money1>. “They want me 
to just go along with the same failed policies that have caused so much 
needless suffering.”

Trump claimed that Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton were willing to let 
ordinary Americans suffer because their first priority was political 
correctness. “They have put political correctness above common sense, above 
your safety, and above all else,” Trump declared after a Muslim gunman killed 
49 people at a gay nightclub in Orlando. “I refuse to be politically correct.” 
What liberals might have seen as language changing to reflect an increasingly 
diverse society – in which citizens attempt to avoid giving needless offence to 
one another – Trump saw a conspiracy.

Throughout an erratic campaign, Trump consistently blasted political 
correctness, blaming it for an extraordinary range of ills and using the phrase 
to deflect any and every criticism. During the first debate of the Republican 
primaries, Fox News host Megyn Kelly asked Trump how he would answer the charge 
that he was “part of the war on women”.

“You’ve called women you don’t like ‘fat pigs,’ ‘dogs,’ ‘slobs,’ and 
‘disgusting animals’,” Kelly pointed out. “You once told a contestant on 
Celebrity Apprentice it would be a pretty picture to see her on her knees …”

“I think the big problem this country has is being politically correct,” Trump 
answered, to audience applause. “I’ve been challenged by so many people, I 
don’t frankly have time for total political correctness. And to be honest with 
you, this country doesn’t have time either.”

Trump used the same defence when critics raised questions about his statements 
on immigration. In June 2015, after Trump referred to Mexicans as “rapists”, 
NBC, the network that aired his reality show The Apprentice, announced that it 
wasending its relationship with him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/29/donald-trump-dropped-nbc-mexico>
. Trump’s team retorted that, “NBC is weak, and like everybody else is trying 
to be politically correct.”

In August 2016, after saying that the US district judge Gonzalo Curiel of San 
Diego wasunfit to preside over the lawsuit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/judge-accused-by-trump-of-bias-to-hold-university-case-pre-trial-hearing>
 against Trump Universities because he was Mexican American and therefore 
likely to be biased against him,Trump told CBS News 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/05/donald-trump-muslim-judges-face-the-nation>
 that this was “common sense”. He continued: “We have to stop being so 
politically correct in this country.” During the second presidential debate, 
Trump answered a question about his proposed “ban on Muslims” by stating: “We 
could be very politically correct <>, but whether we like it or not, there is a 
problem.”

Trump and his followers never defined 'political correctness”, or specified 
who was enforcing it. They did not have to

Every time Trump said something “outrageous” commentators suggested he had 
finally crossed a line and that his campaign was now doomed. But time and 
again, Trump supporters made it clear that they liked him because he wasn’t 
afraid to say what he thought. Fans praised theway Trump talked much more often 
than they mentioned his policy proposals. He tells it like it is, they said. He 
speaks his mind. He is not politically correct.

Trump and his followers never defined “political correctness”, or specified 
who was enforcing it. They did not have to. The phrase conjured powerful forces 
determined to suppress inconvenient truths by policing language.

Political correctness: how the right invented a phantom enemy – podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/audio/2016/dec/19/political-correctness-how-the-right-invented-a-phantom-enemy-podcast>
There is an obvious contradiction involved in complaining at length, to an 
audience of hundreds of millions of people, that you are being silenced. But 
this idea – that there is a set of powerful, unnamed actors, who are trying to 
control everything you do, right down to the words you use – is trending 
globally right now. Britain’s rightwing tabloids issue frequent denunciations 
of “political correctness gone mad” and rail against the smug hypocrisy of the 
“metropolitan elite”. In Germany, conservative journalists and politicians are 
making similar complaints: after the assaults on women in Cologne last New 
Year’s Eve, for instance, the chief of police Rainer Wendt said that leftists 
pressuring officers to bepolitisch korrekt had prevented them from doing their 
jobs. In France, Marine Le Pen of the Front National has condemned more 
traditional conservatives as “paralysed by their fear of confronting political 
correctness 
<http://www.lefigaro.fr/politique/2016/09/03/01002-20160903ARTFIG00078-marine-le-pen-se-voit-comme-une-exception-de-la-presidentielle.php>
”.

Trump’s incessant repetition of the phrase has led many writers since the 
election to argue that the secret to his victory was a backlash against 
excessive “political correctness”. Some have argued that Hillary Clinton failed 
because she was too invested in that close relative of political correctness, 
“identity politics”. But upon closer examination, “political correctness” 
becomes an impossibly slippery concept. The term is what Ancient Greek 
rhetoricians would have called an “exonym”: a term for another group, which 
signals that the speaker does not belong to it. Nobody ever describes 
themselves as “politically correct”. The phrase is only ever an accusation.

If you say that something is technically correct, you are suggesting that it 
is wrong – the adverb before “correct” implies a “but”. However, to say that a 
statement ispolitically correct hints at something more insidious. Namely, that 
the speaker is acting in bad faith. He or she has ulterior motives, and is 
hiding the truth in order to advance an agenda or to signal moral superiority. 
To say that someone is being “politically correct” discredits them twice. 
First, they are wrong. Second, and more damningly, they know it.

If you go looking for the origins of the phrase, it becomes clear that there 
is no neat history of political correctness. There have only been campaigns
against something called “political correctness”. For 25 years, invoking this 
vague and ever-shifting enemy has been a favourite tactic of the right. 
Opposition to political correctness has proved itself a highly effective form 
of crypto-politics. It transforms the political landscape by acting as if it is 
not political at all. Trump is the deftest practitioner of this strategy yet.

Most Americans had never heard the phrase “politically correct” before 1990, 
when a wave of stories began to appear in newspapers and magazines. One of the 
first and most influential was published in October 1990 by the New York Times 
reporter Richard Bernstein, who warned – under the headline “The Rising 
Hegemony of the Politically Correct 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1990/10/28/weekinreview/ideas-trends-the-rising-hegemony-of-the-politically-correct.html?pagewanted=all>
” – that the country’s universities were threatened by “a growing intolerance, 
a closing of debate, a pressure to conform”.

Bernstein had recently returned from Berkeley, where he had been reporting on 
student activism. He wrote that there was an “unofficial ideology of the 
university”, according to which “a cluster of opinions about race, ecology, 
feminism, culture and foreign policy defines a kind of ‘correct’ attitude 
toward the problems of the world”. For instance, “Biodegradable garbage bags 
get the PC seal of approval. Exxon does not.”

Bernstein’s alarming dispatch in America’s paper of record set off a chain 
reaction, as one mainstream publication after another rushed to denounce this 
new trend. The following month, the Wall Street Journal columnist Dorothy 
Rabinowitz decried the “brave new world of ideological zealotry” at American 
universities. In December, the cover of Newsweek – with a circulation of more 
than 3 million – featured the headline “THOUGHT POLICE” and yet another ominous 
warning: “There’s a ‘politically correct’ way to talk about race, sex and 
ideas. Is this the New Enlightenment – or the New McCarthyism?” A similar story 
graced the cover ofNew York magazine in January 1991 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=PukCAAAAMBAJ&printsec=frontcover&dq=New+York+Magazine+-+21+Jan+1991&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwiOhuSn_s3QAhXsDsAKHQmGAY4Q6AEIGzAA#v=onepage&q&f=false>
 – inside, the magazine proclaimed that “The New Fascists” were taking over 
universities. In April, Time magazine reported on “a new intolerance” that was 
on the rise across campuses nationwide.

If you search ProQuest, a digital database of US magazines and newspapers, you 
find that the phrase “politically correct” rarely appeared before 1990. That 
year, it turned up more than 700 times. In 1991, there are more than 2,500 
instances. In 1992, it appeared more than 2,800 times. Like Indiana Jones 
movies, these pieces called up enemies from a melange of old wars: they 
compared the “thought police” spreading terror on university campuses to 
fascists, Stalinists, McCarthyites, “Hitler Youth”, Christian fundamentalists, 
Maoists and Marxists.

Many of these articles recycled the same stories of campus controversies from 
a handful of elite universities, often exaggerated or stripped of context. The 
New York magazine cover story opened with an account of a Harvard history 
professor, Stephan Thernstrom, being attacked by overzealous students who felt 
he had been racially insensitive: “Whenever he walked through the campus that 
spring, down Harvard’s brick paths, under the arched gates, past the fluttering 
elms, he found it hard not to imagine the pointing fingers, the whispers. 
Racist. There goesthe racist. It was hellish, this persecution.”

In an interview that appeared soon afterwards in The Nation, Thernstrom said 
the harassment described in the New York article had never happened. There had 
been one editorial in the Harvard Crimson student newspaper criticising his 
decision to read extensively from the diaries of plantation owners in his 
lectures. But the description of his harried state was pure “artistic licence”. 
No matter: the image of college students conducting witch hunts stuck. When 
Richard Bernstein published a book based on his New York Times reporting on 
political correctness, he called it Dictatorship of Virtue: Multiculturalism 
and the Battle for America’s Future – a title alluding to the Jacobins of the 
French Revolution. In the book he compared American college campuses to France 
during the Reign of Terror, during which tens of thousands of people were 
executed within months.

None of the stories that introduced the menace of political correctness could 
pinpoint where or when it had begun. Nor were they very precise when they 
explained the origins of the phrase itself. Journalists frequently mentioned 
the Soviets – Bernstein observed that the phrase “smacks of Stalinist 
orthodoxy”– but there is no exact equivalent in Russian. (The closest would be “
ideinost”, which translates as “ideological correctness”. But that word has 
nothing to do with disadvantaged people or minorities.) The intellectual 
historian LD Burnett has found scattered examples of doctrines or people being 
described as “politically correct” in American communist publications from the 
1930s – usually, she says, in a tone of mockery.

The phrase came into more widespread use in American leftist circles in the 
1960s and 1970s – most likely as an ironic borrowing from Mao, who delivered a 
famous speech in 1957 that was translated into English with the title “On the 
Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People”.

Until the late 1980s, 'political correctness' was used exclusively within the 
left, and almost always ironically

Ruth Perry, a literature professor at MIT who was active in the feminist and 
civil rights movements, says that many radicals were reading the Little Red 
Book in the late 1960s and 1970s, and surmises that her friends may have picked 
up the adjective “correct” there. But they didn’t use it in the way Mao did. 
“Politically correct” became a kind of in-joke among American leftists – 
something you called a fellow leftist when you thought he or she was being 
self-righteous. “The term was always used ironically,” Perry says, “always 
calling attention to possible dogmatism.”

In 1970, the African-American author and activist Toni Cade Bambara, used the 
phrase in an essay about strains on gender relations within her community. No 
matter how “politically correct” her male friends thought they were being, she 
wrote many of them were failing to recognise the plight of black women.

Until the late 1980s, “political correctness” was used exclusively within the 
left, and almost always ironically as a critique of excessive orthodoxy. In 
fact, some of the first people to organise against “political correctness” were 
a group of feminists who called themselves the Lesbian Sex Mafia. In 1982, they 
held a “Speakout on Politically Incorrect Sex” at a theatre in New York’s East 
Village – a rally against fellow feminists who had condemned pornography and 
BDSM. Over 400 women attended, many of them wearing leather and collars, 
brandishing nipple clamps and dildos. The writer and activist Mirtha 
Quintanales summed up the mood when she told the audience, “We need to have 
dialogues about S&M issues, not about what is ‘politically correct, politically 
incorrect’.”

By the end of the 1980s, Jeff Chang, the journalist and hip-hop critic, who 
has written extensively on race and social justice, recalls that the activists 
he knew then in the Bay Area used the phrase “in a jokey way – a way for one 
sectarian to dismiss another sectarian’s line”.

But soon enough, the term was rebranded by the right, who turned its meaning 
inside out. All of a sudden, instead of being a phrase that leftists used to 
check dogmatic tendencies within their movement, “political correctness” became 
a talking point for neoconservatives. They said that PC constituted a leftwing 
political programme that was seizing control of American universities and 
cultural institutions – and they were determined to stop it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fpolitical-correctness-how-the-right-invented-phantom-enemy-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c3afb6b11d6671dbf99d019b93911a503f93239%2F0_0_2470_1998%2F2470.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Political%20correctness%3A%20how%20the%20right%20invented%20a%20phantom%20enemy%20%7C%20Moira%20Weigel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fpolitical-correctness-how-the-right-invented-phantom-enemy-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Political%20correctness%3A%20how%20the%20right%20invented%20a%20phantom%20enemy%20%7C%20Moira%20Weigel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fpolitical-correctness-how-the-right-invented-phantom-enemy-donald-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c3afb6b11d6671dbf99d019b93911a503f93239%2F0_0_2470_1998%2F2470.jpg>
The right had been waging a campaign against liberal academics for more than a 
decade. Starting in the mid-1970s, a handful of conservative donors had funded 
the creation of dozens of new thinktanks and “training institutes” offering 
programmes in everything from “leadership” to broadcast journalism to 
direct-mail fundraising. They had endowed fellowships for conservative graduate 
students, postdoctoral positions and professorships at prestigious 
universities. Their stated goal was to challenge what they saw as the dominance 
of liberalism and attack left-leaning tendencies within the academy.

Starting in the late 1980s, this well-funded conservative movement entered the 
mainstream with a series of improbable bestsellers that took aim at American 
higher education. The first, by the University of Chicago philosophy professor 
Allan Bloom, came out in 1987. For hundreds of pages, The Closing of the 
American Mind argued that colleges were embracing a shallow “cultural 
relativism” and abandoning long-established disciplines and standards in an 
attempt to appear liberal and to pander to their students. It sold more than 
500,000 copies and inspired numerous imitations.

In April 1990, Roger Kimball, an editor at the conservative journal, The New 
Criterion, published Tenured Radicals: How Politics Has Corrupted our Higher 
Education. Like Bloom, Kimball argued that an “assault on the canon” was taking 
place and that a “politics of victimhood” had paralysed universities. As 
evidence, he cited the existence of departments such as African American 
studies and women’s studies. He scornfully quoted the titles of papers he had 
heard at academic conferences, such as “Jane Austen and the Masturbating Girl” 
or “The Lesbian Phallus: Does Heterosexuality Exist?”

In June 1991, the young Dinesh D’Souza followed Bloom and Kimball with 
Illiberal Education: the Politics of Race and Sex on Campus. Whereas Bloom had 
bemoaned the rise of relativism and Kimball had attacked what he called 
“liberal fascism”, and what he considered frivolous lines of scholarly inquiry, 
D’Souza argued that admissions policies that took race into consideration were 
producing a “new segregation on campus” and “an attack on academic standards”. 
The Atlantic printed a 12,000 word excerpt as its June cover story. To coincide 
with the release, Forbes ran another article by D’Souza with the title: 
“Visigoths in Tweed.”

These books did not emphasise the phrase “political correctness”, and only 
D’Souza used the phrase directly. But all three came to be regularly cited in 
the flood of anti-PC articles that appeared in venues such as the New York 
Times and Newsweek. When they did, the authors were cited as neutral 
authorities. Countless articles uncritically repeated their arguments.

In some respects, these books and articles were responding to genuine changes 
taking place within academia. It is true that scholars had become increasingly 
sceptical about whether it was possible to talk about timeless, universal 
truths that lay beyond language and representation. European theorists who 
became influential in US humanities departments during the 1970s and 1980s 
argued that individual experience was shaped by systems of which the individual 
might not be aware – and particularly by language. Michel Foucault, for 
instance, argued that all knowledge expressed historically specific forms of 
power. Jacques Derrida, a frequent target of conservative critics, practised 
what he called “deconstruction”, rereading the classics of philosophy in order 
to show that even the most seemingly innocent and straightforward categories 
were riven with internal contradictions. The value of ideals such as “humanity” 
or “liberty” could not be taken for granted.

It was also true that many universities were creating new “studies 
departments”, which interrogated the experiences, and emphasised the cultural 
contributions of groups that had previously been excluded from the academy and 
from the canon: queer people, people of colour and women. This was not so 
strange. These departments reflected new social realities. The demographics of 
college students were changing, because the demographics of the United States 
were changing. By 1990, only two-thirds of Americans under 18 were white. In 
California, the freshman classes at many public universities were “majority 
minority”, or more than 50% non-white. Changes to undergraduate curriculums 
reflected changes in the student population.

The responses that the conservative bestsellers offered to the changes they 
described were disproportionate and often misleading. For instance, Bloom 
complained at length about the “militancy” of African American students at 
Cornell University, where he had taught in the 1960s. He never mentioned what 
students demanding the creation of African American studies were responding to: 
the biggest protest at Cornell took place in 1969after a cross burning on campus
 
<http://www.news.cornell.edu/stories/2009/04/campus-takeover-symbolized-era-change>
, an open KKK threat. (An arsonist burned down the Africana Studies Center, 
founded in response to these protests, in 1970.)

More than any particular obfuscation or omission, the most misleading aspect 
of these books was the way they claimed that only their adversaries were 
“political”. Bloom, Kimball, and D’Souza claimed that they wanted to “preserve 
the humanistic tradition”, as if their academic foes were vandalising a canon 
that had been enshrined since time immemorial. But canons and curriculums have 
always been in flux; even in white Anglo-America there has never been any one 
stable tradition. Moby Dick was dismissed as Herman Melville’s worst book until 
the mid-1920s. Many universities had only begun offering literature courses in 
“living” languages a decade or so before that.

In truth, these crusaders against political correctness were every bit as 
political as their opponents. As Jane Mayer documents in her book, Dark Money: 
the Hidden History of the Billionaires Behind the Rise of the Radical Right, 
Bloom and D’Souza were funded by networks of conservative donors – particularly 
the Koch, Olin and Scaife families – who had spent the 1980s building 
programmes that they hoped would create a new “counter-intelligentsia”. (The 
New Criterion, where Kimball worked, was also funded by the Olin and Scaife 
Foundations.) In his 1978 book A Time for Truth, William Simon, the president 
of the Olin Foundation, had called on conservatives to fund intellectuals who 
shared their views: “They must be given grants, grants, and more grants in 
exchange for books, books, and more books.”

These skirmishes over syllabuses were part of a broader political programme – 
and they became instrumental to forging a new alliance for conservative 
politics in America, between white working-class voters and small business 
owners, and politicians with corporate agendas that held very little benefit 
for those people.

By making fun of professors who spoke in language that most people considered 
incomprehensible (“The Lesbian Phallus”), wealthy Ivy League graduates could 
pose as anti-elite. By mocking courses on writers such as Alice Walker and Toni 
Morrison, they made a racial appeal to white people who felt as if they were 
losing their country. As the 1990s wore on, because multiculturalism was 
associated with globalisation – the force that was taking away so many jobs 
traditionally held by white working-class people – attacking it allowed 
conservatives to displace responsibility for the hardship that many of their 
constituents were facing. It was not the slashing of social services, lowered 
taxes, union busting or outsourcing that was the cause of their problems. It 
was those foreign “others”.

PC was a useful invention for the Republican right because it helped the 
movement to drive a wedge between working-class people and the Democrats who 
claimed to speak for them. “Political correctness” became a term used to drum 
into the public imagination the idea that there was a deep divide between the 
“ordinary people” and the “liberal elite”, who sought to control the speech and 
thoughts of regular folk. Opposition to political correctness also became a way 
to rebrand racism in ways that were politically acceptable in the 
post-civil-rights era.

Soon, Republican politicians were echoing on the national stage the message 
that had been product-tested in the academy. In May 1991, President George HW 
Bush gave a commencement speech at the University of Michigan. In it, he 
identified political correctness as a major danger to America. “Ironically, on 
the 200th anniversary of our Bill of Rights, we find free speech under assault 
throughout the United States,” Bush said. “The notion of political correctness 
has ignited controversy across the land,” but, he warned, “In their own 
Orwellian way, crusades that demand correct behaviour crush diversity in the 
name of diversity.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fpolitical-correctness-how-the-right-invented-phantom-enemy-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc811297302f3d931dff62f9137865a6a05f45cb2%2F0_0_1502_1569%2F1502.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Political%20correctness%3A%20how%20the%20right%20invented%20a%20phantom%20enemy%20%7C%20Moira%20Weigel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fpolitical-correctness-how-the-right-invented-phantom-enemy-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Political%20correctness%3A%20how%20the%20right%20invented%20a%20phantom%20enemy%20%7C%20Moira%20Weigel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fpolitical-correctness-how-the-right-invented-phantom-enemy-donald-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc811297302f3d931dff62f9137865a6a05f45cb2%2F0_0_1502_1569%2F1502.jpg>
 Illustration: Nathalie Lees 
After 2001, debates about political correctness faded from public view, 
replaced by arguments about Islam and terrorism. But in the final years of the 
Obama presidency, political correctness made a comeback. Or rather, 
anti-political-correctness did.

As Black Lives Matter and movements against sexual violence gained strength, a 
spate of thinkpieces attacked the participants in these movements, criticising 
and trivialising them by saying that they were obsessed with policing speech. 
Once again, the conversation initially focused on universities, but the 
buzzwords were new. Rather than “difference” and “multiculturalism”, Americans 
in 2012 and 2013 started hearing about “trigger warnings”, “safe spaces”, 
“microaggressions”, “privilege” and “cultural appropriation”.

This time, students received more scorn than professors. If the first round of 
anti-political-correctness evoked the spectres of totalitarian regimes, the 
more recent revival has appealed to the commonplace that millennials are 
spoiled narcissists, who want to prevent anyone expressing opinions that they 
happen to find offensive.

In January 2015, the writer Jonathan Chait published one of the first new, 
high-profile anti-PC thinkpieces in New York magazine. “Not a Very PC Thing to 
Say 
<http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2015/01/not-a-very-pc-thing-to-say.html>” 
followed the blueprint provided by the anti-PC thinkpieces that the New York 
Times, Newsweek, and indeed New York magazine had published in the early 1990s. 
Like the New York article from 1991, it began with an anecdote set on campus 
that supposedly demonstrated that political correctness had run amok, and then 
extrapolated from this incident to a broad generalisation. In 1991, John Taylor 
wrote: “The new fundamentalism has concocted a rationale for dismissing all 
dissent.” In 2015, Jonathan Chait claimed that there were once again “angry 
mobs out to crush opposing ideas”.

Chait warned that the dangers of PC had become greater than ever before. 
Political correctness was no longer confined to universities – now, he argued, 
it had taken over social media and thus “attained an influence over mainstream 
journalism and commentary beyond that of the old”. (As evidence of the 
“hegemonic” influence enjoyed by unnamed actors on the left, Chait cited two 
female journalists saying that they had been criticised by leftists on Twitter.)

Chait’s article launched a spate of replies about campus and social media “cry 
bullies”. On the cover of their September 2015 issue, the Atlantic published an 
article by Jonathan Haidt and Greg Lukianoff. The title, “The Coddling Of the 
American Mind 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2015/09/the-coddling-of-the-american-mind/399356/>
”, nodded to the godfather of anti-PC, Allan Bloom. (Lukianoff is the head of 
the Foundation for Individual Rights in Education, another organisation funded 
by the Olin and Scaife families.) “In the name of emotional wellbeing, college 
students are increasingly demanding protection from words and ideas they don’t 
like,” the article announced. It was shared over 500,000 times.

The climate of digital journalism and social media sharing enabled the 
anti-political-correctness stories to spread

These pieces committed many of the same fallacies that their predecessors from 
the 1990s had. They cherry-picked anecdotes and caricatured the subjects of 
their criticism. They complained that other people were creating and enforcing 
speech codes, while at the same time attempting to enforce their own speech 
codes. Their writers designated themselves the arbiters of what conversations 
or political demands deserved to be taken seriously, and which did not. They 
contradicted themselves in the same way: their authors continually complained, 
in highly visible publications, that they were being silenced.

The climate of digital journalism and social media sharing enabled the 
anti-political-correctness (and anti-anti-political correctness) stories to 
spread even further and faster than they had in the 1990s. Anti-PC and 
anti-anti-PC stories come cheap: because they concern identity, they are 
something that any writer can have a take on, based on his or her experiences, 
whether or not he or she has the time or resources to report. They are also 
perfect clickbait. They inspire outrage, or outrage at the outrage of others.

Meanwhile, a strange convergence was taking place. While Chait and his fellow 
liberals decried political correctness, Donald Trump and his followers were 
doing the same thing. Chait said that leftists were “perverting liberalism” and 
appointed himself the defender of a liberal centre; Trump said that liberal 
media had the system “rigged”.

The anti-PC liberals were so focused on leftists on Twitter that for months 
they gravely underestimated the seriousness of the real threat to liberal 
discourse. It was not coming from women, people of colour, or queer people 
organising for their civil rights, on campus or elsewhere. It was coming from 
@realdonaldtrump, neo-Nazis, and far-right websites such as Breitbart.

The original critics of PC were academics or shadow-academics, Ivy League 
graduates who went around in bow ties quoting Plato and Matthew Arnold. It is 
hard to imagine Trump quoting Plato or Matthew Arnold, much less carping about 
the titles of conference papers by literature academics. During his campaign, 
the network of donors who funded decades of anti-PC activity – the Kochs, the 
Olins, the Scaifes – shunned Trump, citing concerns about the populist promises 
he was making. Trump came from a different milieu: not Yale or the University 
of Chicago, but reality television. And he was picking different fights, 
targeting the media and political establishment, rather than academia.

As a candidate, Trump inaugurated a new phase of anti-political-correctness. 
What was remarkable was just how many different ways Trump deployed this tactic 
to his advantage, both exploiting the tried-and-tested methods of the early 
1990s and adding his own innovations.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20America%20elected%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20America%20elected%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video&media=>
Why America elected Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/11/how-donald-trump-became-president-video>
First, by talking incessantly about political correctness, Trump established 
the myth that he had dishonest and powerful enemies who wanted to prevent him 
from taking on the difficult challenges facing the nation. By claiming that he 
was being silenced, he created a drama in which he could play the hero. The 
notion that Trump was both persecutedand heroic was crucial to his emotional 
appeal. It allowed people who were struggling economically or angry about the 
way society was changing to see themselves in him, battling against a rigged 
system that made them feel powerless and devalued. At the same time, Trump’s 
swagger promised that they were strong and entitled to glory. They were great 
and would be great again.

Second, Trump did not simply criticise the idea of political correctness – he 
actually said and did the kind of outrageous things that PC culture supposedly 
prohibited. The first wave of conservative critics of political correctness 
claimed they were defending the status quo, but Trump’s mission was to destroy 
it. In 1991, when George HW Bush warned that political correctness was a threat 
to free speech, he did not choose to exercise his free speech rights by 
publicly mocking a man with a disability or characterising Mexican immigrants 
as rapists. Trump did. Having elevated the powers of PC to mythic status, the 
draft-dodging billionaire, son of a slumlord, taunted the parents of a fallen 
soldier and claimed that his cruelty and malice was, in fact, courage.

This willingness to be more outrageous than any previous candidate ensured 
non-stop media coverage, which in turn helped Trump attract supporters who 
agreed with what he was saying. We should not underestimate how many Trump 
supporters held views that were sexist, racist, xenophobic and Islamophobic, 
and were thrilled to feel that he had given them permission to say so. It’s an 
old trick: the powerful encourage the less powerful to vent their rage against 
those who might have been their allies, and to delude themselves into thinking 
that they have been liberated. It costs the powerful nothing; it pays frightful 
dividends.

Trump drew upon a classic element of anti-political-correctness by implying 
that while his opponents were operating according to a political agenda, he 
simply wanted to do what was sensible. He made numerous controversial policy 
proposals: deporting millions of undocumented immigrants, banning Muslims from 
entering the US, introducing stop-and-frisk policies that have been ruled 
unconstitutional. But by responding to critics with the accusation that they 
were simply being politically correct, Trump attempted to place these proposals 
beyond the realm of politics altogether. Something political is something that 
reasonable people might disagree about. By using the adjective as a put-down, 
Trump pretended that he was acting on truths so obvious that they lay beyond 
dispute. “That’s just common sense.”

The most alarming part of this approach is what it implies about Trump’s 
attitude to politics more broadly. His contempt for political correctness looks 
a lot like contempt for politics itself. He does not talk about diplomacy; he 
talks about “deals”. Debate and disagreement are central to politics, yet Trump 
has made clear that he has no time for these distractions. To play the 
anti-political-correctness card in response to a legitimate question about 
policy is to shut down discussion in much the same way that opponents of 
political correctness have long accused liberals and leftists of doing. It is a 
way of sidestepping debate by declaring that the topic is so trivial or so 
contrary to common sense that it is pointless to discuss it. The impulse is 
authoritarian. And by presenting himself as the champion of common sense, Trump 
gives himself permission to bypass politics altogether.

Now that he is president-elect, it is unclear whether Trump meant many of the 
things he said during his campaign. But, so far, he is fulfilling his pledge to 
fight political correctness. Last week, he told the New York Times that he was 
trying to build an administration filled with the “best people”, though “Not 
necessarily people that will be the most politically correct people, because 
that hasn’t been working.”

Trump has also continued to cry PC in response to criticism. When an 
interviewer fromPolitico 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/11/trump-christie-transition-231390> asked 
a Trump transition team member why Trump was appointing so many lobbyists and 
political insiders, despite having pledged to “drain the swamp” of them, the 
source said that “one of the most refreshing parts of … the whole Trump style 
is that he does not care about political correctness.” Apparently it would have 
been politically correct to hold him to his campaign promises.

As Trump prepares to enter the White House, many pundits have concluded that 
“political correctness” fuelled the populist backlash sweeping Europe and the 
US. The leaders of that backlash may say so. But the truth is the opposite: 
those leaders understood the power that anti-political-correctness has to rally 
a class of voters, largely white, who are disaffected with the status quo and 
resentful of shifting cultural and social norms. They were not reacting to the 
tyranny of political correctness, nor were they returning America to a previous 
phase of its history. They were not taking anything back. They were wielding 
anti-political-correctness as a weapon, using it to forge a new political 
landscape and a frightening future.

The opponents of political correctness always said they were crusaders against 
authoritarianism. In fact, anti-PC has paved the way for the populist 
authoritarianism now spreading everywhere. Trump is anti-political correctness 
gone mad.

 * Main illustration: Nathalie Lees

Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread 
<https://twitter.com/@gdnlongread>, or sign up to the long read weekly email 
here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/jul/20/sign-up-to-the-long-read-email>.
 