
The pursuit of urban exploration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/feb/17/rooftoppers-urban-explorers-risk-photographs-skyscrapers-bradley-garrett>
 has always been dangerous, but – largely as a result of theoneupmanship 
generated by social media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/18/urban-explorers-arrest-social-media-base-jumper-free-running-parkour>
 – the risks taken by today’s young breed of explorers are reaching new and 
terrifying extremes. They are not just descending into sewers butclimbing 
ever-taller towers <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-35864379>, risking 
their livesin train and tube tunnels 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3420854/Dark-dangerous-illegal-Urban-explorer-known-Dark-Cyanide-risks-life-photographing-New-York-subway-tunnels-dead-night.html>
, and indulging inphotogenic stunts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2014/feb/13/shanghai-tower-climb-in-pictures>
 in an effort to win instant internet fame.

“The community has changed drastically,” says Bradley Garrett 
<http://www.bradleygarrett.com/>, author of Explore Everything: Place-hacking 
the City 
<http://urban-geography.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2011/02/Fraser-2014-Review-of-Garrett.pdf>
. “A lot of these kids are putting themselves at greater risk to gain 
credibility on social media channels. There have been an increased number of 
deaths in the urbex community worldwide in the past few years, and that’s gone 
hand-in-hand with the increased desire to publish these exploits on social 
media.”


The US-born Garrett, a geographer at Southampton University, is the most 
prominent writer on the subject; Explore Everything, which drew on a four-year 
study of urbex and was published in 2013, could be said to have put this 
strange, cultish pastime on the map. He penetrated the world of urban 
exploration – which is an odd combination of the secretive and the brash – and 
set about understanding what motivates urban explorers, old and new.

Guardian virtual reality guide 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/article-embeds/vr-richlink/embed.html> 
“Exploring the city gives you a chance to understand it in a different way,” 
Garrett tells me. “You are able to see the abandoned buildings, the 
infrastructural systems, the construction sites, all the things that comprise 
the city. There’s an addictive quality to it, because once you start going into 
these spaces and understanding the city in a different way, it’s very hard to 
fall back into normal rhythms.”

Garrett talks about the “personal sense of empowerment” urban exploration 
provides. “There’s a very particular kind of agency that comes from using the 
body to get into spaces that you’re not supposed to access,” he says, “and that 
translates very easily into a kind of politics.”

This breaking into closed-off spaces isn’t an explicitly political act – there 
is usually no attempt to change anything specific – but in an over-regulated, 
over-securitised world, it feels like a way of kicking against the system.


It’s also fraught with difficulty and danger. In 2012, Garrett and several 
fellow explorers were arrested and charged with conspiracy to commit criminal 
damage. “They didn’t have any evidence that we had committed any criminal 
damage, so they charged us with a thought crime,” he says. The case dragged on 
for two years, and he was eventuallygiven a conditional discharge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/may/22/oxford-university-academic-shard-jail-place-hacker-garrett>
 and ordered to pay costs of £2,000.


“When I reflect on the whole process,” he says now, “I realise that the trauma 
we were subjected to was actually the point. What the British Transport police 
wanted to do was stop me from publishing photos [of the sites visited] and stop 
me from writing about this thing, because what we did undermined their 
narrative of security.” Garrett had demonstrated that the secret, impenetrable 
world was not so secret or impenetrable after all.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Furbex-politics-thrills-social-media-new-breed-urban-explorer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b0fe084fecdc84195530e49e032f7da7ca3c515%2F0_55_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Politics%2C%20thrills%20or%20social%20media%3A%20what%20drives%20the%20new%20breed%20of%20urban%20explorer%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Furbex-politics-thrills-social-media-new-breed-urban-explorer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Politics%2C%20thrills%20or%20social%20media%3A%20what%20drives%20the%20new%20breed%20of%20urban%20explorer%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Furbex-politics-thrills-social-media-new-breed-urban-explorer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b0fe084fecdc84195530e49e032f7da7ca3c515%2F0_55_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
 Bradley Garrett at the top of Battersea Power Station in London. Photograph: 
Winch 
Garrett reckons there are around 100 active urban explorers in London, perhaps 
a few thousand in the UK, and tens of thousands across the world, concentrated 
in major cities and often communicating with explorers elsewhere. They share 
information and photographs on urban exploration websites such as28 Days Later 
<http://www.28dayslater.co.uk>, and even stage events such as the International 
Drain Meet <http://www.placehacking.co.uk/tag/idm/>, where “drainers” (the 
popular term for committed sewer explorers) congregate.

Garrett admits urban explorers are mostly men, but claims it is more diverse 
than mountain climbing or scuba diving. He dislikes what he calls the growing 
“commodification” of the activity, with explorers building up a profile by 
performing some stunt in a hard-to-access location, thereby attracting sponsors 
for their next undertaking. “Every attempt at radical expression becomes 
appropriated,” he says regretfully.


Jed Craine, a 27-year-old Londoner who says he has been an urban explorer 
since his early teens, gives me a somewhat less politicised view. He grew up 
near a closed Victorian asylum in south London, and used to enjoy sneaking in 
with his mates. As he got older, he added layers of planning to every operation.


Craine goes out in a small group, and puts great emphasis on the research that 
real “infiltration” requires. He explores high-rise construction sites, utility 
tunnels, Crossrail and new tunnel-boring projects such as the Lee Tunnel 
supersewer. He clearly sees theThames Tideway supersewer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/24/london-super-sewer-to-cost-less-than-expected-says-ofwat>
 as another target rich in possibility once construction starts.

What he enjoys most, he says, is circumventing security. “It’s the challenge 
of getting in that really interests me. It doesn’t even have to be that 
interesting a space once you’re in there.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Furbex-politics-thrills-social-media-new-breed-urban-explorer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f053af47e7c3ca5bb9c87c3967981e56c24d87c%2F0_0_2500_1107%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Politics%2C%20thrills%20or%20social%20media%3A%20what%20drives%20the%20new%20breed%20of%20urban%20explorer%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Furbex-politics-thrills-social-media-new-breed-urban-explorer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Politics%2C%20thrills%20or%20social%20media%3A%20what%20drives%20the%20new%20breed%20of%20urban%20explorer%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Furbex-politics-thrills-social-media-new-breed-urban-explorer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f053af47e7c3ca5bb9c87c3967981e56c24d87c%2F0_0_2500_1107%2F2500.jpg>
 There are around 100 active urban explorers in London, and tens of thousands 
across the world. Photograph: Matthew Adams/PA 
Craine is sceptical about the political dimension Garrett claims for urban 
exploration. “I mainly do it because it’s fun,” he says. “It’s no more 
politically motivated than any other hobby, except that the people who engage 
in it are more willing to break the law.”

In any case, he says, it is possible to see many of these locations on private 
tours – that is the whole idea ofOpen House <http://www.openhouselondon.org.uk/>
, to give the public access to the usually inaccessible – but the urban 
explorer wants access on his own terms. If he or she does get access, they may 
well want to keep it to themselves.


Climbing on to London's rooftops helps you make sense of the city – watching 
it twist and turn year by year

“There are places people have accessed but they’ve never posted the 
photographs online, “ Craine says, “not only because the legal repercussions 
could be severe, but also because if anyone else knows those places are 
accessible that could heat the place up. Very few people are really trying to 
publicise these places.”

Craine goes exploring at least one night a week. He says construction sites 
are usually easy, but other locations are very tricky and need a lot of 
reconnaissance – and perhaps a few failed attempts – before you work out how to 
get in. He doesn’t like to go out in a group of more than three: any more would 
be too visible, too unwieldy.

Like Garrett, he is wary of the “new generation of kids” who explore in order 
to post pictures on Instagram and build up their online celebrity. “I don’t 
think they’re bothered about the challenge of getting into these places, or 
take an interest in the history of who built this tunnel and why. For them 
it’s: ‘Go in there, get this picture and leave.’ They just want to rack up 
likes and followers. Increasingly it’s more about the image, while the 
experience takes a back seat.”

‘I became a bit of a junkie for it’

One evening I meet another young explorer, Gregory Grealing, who offers to 
take me on an exploration – a nice easy one since I’m new to the game. 
Grealing, in his early 20s, tells me he started as a graffiti artist, got to 
hear about people “painting” (the term he prefers to my throwaway “doing”) 
graffiti in abandoned mental hospitals, and joined them.

“It was exactly the kind of atmosphere I was looking for, and I became a bit 
of a junkie for it,” he says. “It was like stepping into the past: certain 
places you found had everything left in them, as if somebody had just walked 
out of that door one day and left everything behind.

“I’ve been on tours across Belgium and other places to see old castles and 
manor houses where people have left all of their belongings behind, including 
paintings, chandeliers, jewellery – even their letters, which you can rummage 
through to piece together people’s lives. But this fleeting chance won’t be 
there forever; some hooligan will find their way in and steal everything, or 
set it on fire.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Furbex-politics-thrills-social-media-new-breed-urban-explorer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F011e9907b9ef7e1835296ccb89ca0502b53ee854%2F0_133_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Politics%2C%20thrills%20or%20social%20media%3A%20what%20drives%20the%20new%20breed%20of%20urban%20explorer%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Furbex-politics-thrills-social-media-new-breed-urban-explorer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Politics%2C%20thrills%20or%20social%20media%3A%20what%20drives%20the%20new%20breed%20of%20urban%20explorer%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Furbex-politics-thrills-social-media-new-breed-urban-explorer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F011e9907b9ef7e1835296ccb89ca0502b53ee854%2F0_133_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 An urban explorer inside the abandoned Shougang Steel Plant on the outskirts 
of Beijjing. Photograph: James Wasserman for the Guardian 
I ask him where he stands on whether urban exploration can be interpreted as a 
political act. “The majority of people taking part in mainstream urban 
exploration are thrill-seeking,” he says. “There are people around the world 
doing it for the right reasons – uncovering fantastic history and gems that 
haven’t been seen before – but a lot of it is quite lazy tourism. Somebody 
finds a place, and then everybody else rushes after it with their big lenses 
and tripods, photographs the crap out of it and rushes home to their computer 
to badly post-process the images on Photoshop.Urban exploration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/urban-exploration> tourism is quite 
tedious.” He makes it sound like competitive birdspotting.

Grealing has had his own run-ins with the law – he asks me not to reveal 
exactly why – ending up with a conditional discharge and £1,000 in costs after 
one particularly spectacular incident. These days he is concentrating on 
getting on to roofs – he is especially interested in locations used by pirate 
radio stations – and that is where he intends to take me.


We go to a tower block in central London where he has been before. He produces 
a skeleton key to get into the building – he says fire services have access to 
master keys, and that it’s relatively easy to obtain copies of them – and we 
take the lift to the top. There, the only obstacle is a skylight.

We quietly unhook the ladder that will lead us to it (we must avoid disturbing 
the people in the flats on this floor) and climb up. Once again Grealing has a 
key to unlock the skylight, and we are quickly out on to the roof, which is 
flat and uncluttered. There are cobwebs on the lock of the skylight, suggesting 
we are the first people up here in a while. I worry that when we get back, the 
ladder will have been removed and we’ll be stuck here for the night – but he 
tells me not to fret.

This rooftop offers gorgeous views all over London. The sun is starting to 
set, and Grealing extols the beauty of the scene – overlooking one of London’s 
main arteries, which is soon aglow with the lights of rush-hour traffic.

What lies beneath? My day as a 'flusher' in the London sewers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/nov/10/what-lies-beneath-day-flusher-london-sewers-stephen-moss>
“I love this view,” he says. “I like the geometry of this street, the 
twinkling lights and the chance to see some of the old terraced housing which 
has been obscured by more modern buildings. You can look across to north London 
and see the hills. It’s all laid out before your eyes, almost as if you could 
pick up the buildings. It’s a one-of-a-kind view.”


Grealing says a vantage point such as this makes you rethink the way different 
parts of the city fit together. “Climbing on to rooftops like this is a way of 
feeling your way around London, making sense of it all – watching it twist and 
turn year by year.”


Somehow, though, I can’t quite share his epiphany. I still worry that someone 
will close the skylight behind us, or that the roof will give way under my 
weight and I’ll end up in a crumpled heap half-a-dozen floors below.

I am relieved when, after an hour or so, we retrace our steps, lock the 
skylight, put the ladder back and take the stairs down to the street. I think I 
may have too little courage for urban exploration. Or perhaps too much sense.


Bradley Garrett is accurately identified, but pseudonyms have been used for 
the other two urban explorers interviewed as they do not wish to make their 
identities known.To experience the Guardian’s virtual reality exploration of 
London’s Victorian sewers, guided by Bradley, go totheguardian.com/vr 
<http://www.guardian.com/vr>
 