
At a press conference in the Élysée Palace, in 1971, President Georges 
Pompidou was so properly turned out that the soles of his shoes were polished. 
The hairy young crew who had just won the competition to design the arts centre 
that would carry his name, beating 680 others, were not.Richard Rogers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/richard-rogers> wore a railwayman’s 
blue denim suit and a flower power shirt,Renzo Piano 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/renzo-piano> a hippiefied combination 
of beard and tweeds and their partner John Young a sweatshirt that (memories 
would vary) may have had Mickey Mouse on it. Only Ted Happold, of the engineers 
Ove Arup, wore a suit and tie. “You are the capitalist,” the president told him.

This tableau captured the grand bargain between radical architecture and 
establishment politics that generated the famous building that would follow, 
the Pompidou Centre, sometimes called the Beaubourg, whose 40th birthday is 
about to be trumpeted with 50 exhibitions and 15 concerts and performances in 
40 different cities – an André Breton show in Lille, for example, and an Alain 
Buffard dance piece in Nimes. And with the passage of time it only stands out 
more. It has claims to be the most significant single building since the war. 
It is both a late blossoming of the 1960s and a precursor of the city-boosting 
“iconic” architecture of the decades since. It is a palace for a media-soaked 
age, as bright in its reds and blues as colour TV and colour supplements.

Putting this spaceship in the middle of Paris was a bit mad but an honest 
gesture. It was brave but also a bit impolite
Renzo Piano 
In 1968, three years before the memorable press conference, the Paris streets 
in which the centre now stands had been ripped up by protesting students. 
Pompidou became president the following year – a conservative with a mission to 
restore order, who also planned a series of transformative building projects 
for Paris. Among them was a proposal for a centre of contemporary arts – not 
just a museum or a gallery, but also a library and a centre for music. His 
motives would have included a wish to tame the city with a sophisticated form 
of bread and circuses. As Piano now says: “After 1968, he had to do something, 
to show something.”

Piano says that he and Rogers, in their early 30s, were by the standards of 
their slow-maturing profession “teenagers, young boys”. “When you are that 
young, you are innocent. What you do is what you feel.” Their proposals “were 
an exercise in freedom, not guided by any desire to win or compromise”. What 
was exceptional was that “a powerful political man like Pompidou” should run an 
open competition that could be won by such a team. “It was a really brave idea. 
The point was to make people like us do something like that.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fpompidou-centre-40-years-old-review-richard-rogers-renzo-piano%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5433f5c99f4350355d16d6bec331df8a95dd72c9%2F0_0_2480_1846%2F2480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pompidou%20Centre%3A%20a%2070s%20French%20radical%20that%E2%80%99s%20never%20gone%20out%20of%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fpompidou-centre-40-years-old-review-richard-rogers-renzo-piano%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pompidou%20Centre%3A%20a%2070s%20French%20radical%20that%E2%80%99s%20never%20gone%20out%20of%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fpompidou-centre-40-years-old-review-richard-rogers-renzo-piano%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5433f5c99f4350355d16d6bec331df8a95dd72c9%2F0_0_2480_1846%2F2480.jpg>
 Renzo Piano, left, and Richard Rogers in 1977. Photograph: Jacques Minassian 
They “stood on the shoulders”, as Rogers says, of architects such as Archigram 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2002/feb/14/arts.arts> and Cedric Price 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2005/jun/29/art>, who over the 
previous decade had conceived visions, largely unbuilt, of a kind of 
architecture that would use technology to change and move, and would embrace 
the gaudy glamour of film and advertising. For the Beaubourg competition, 
Piano, Rogers and their colleagues imagined a big frame with pipes and 
structure on the outside to leave the interior unencumbered and adaptable. 
Parts of the building could be clipped and unclipped in response to future 
needs. Its floors would move up and down. Huge electronic screens would 
interact with crowds in a piazza outside and escalators in glass tubes would 
transport people towards the sky. “CAROLINE,” ran a message on a screen in one 
of the drawings, “GO TO KANSAS CITY IMMEDIATELY YOUR FRIEND LINDA HAS BEEN 
BUSTED”.

There were lawsuits against us and all sorts of rules and regulations. There 
were many, many crises
Richard Rogers 
It wasn’t supposed to be a monument but an event, a happening. Piano now also 
describes it as “not a building but a town where you find everything – lunch, 
great art, a library, great music”. The point was, as Rogers puts it, that 
“culture should be fun”. “After decades of museums being dusty, boring and 
inaccessible,” says Piano, “someone had to run away, to do something different, 
have a sense of participation. Someone had to express that rebellion. Putting 
this spaceship in the middle of Paris was a bit mad but an honest gesture. It 
was brave but also a bit impolite, for sure.”

It nearly didn’t happen, first because Rogers wrote what Piano calls “a 
beautiful little memo”, arguing that they shouldn’t enter a competition for 
what he thought would be “a rhetorical gesture of grandeur”.

“We were very democratic people and discussed it,” says Piano, but the 
composition of the competition jury changed their mind. It included the 
designer Jean Prouvé, a man more concerned with things like low-cost housing 
than monument building, so “we saw that it might also be about ethics, people, 
society. We were young but we were not stupid. We saw some sign of a possible 
miracle.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fpompidou-centre-40-years-old-review-richard-rogers-renzo-piano%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F715c47c24a871cce51cf5b1295e6794fa2079231%2F0_0_5150_3434%2F5150.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pompidou%20Centre%3A%20a%2070s%20French%20radical%20that%E2%80%99s%20never%20gone%20out%20of%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fpompidou-centre-40-years-old-review-richard-rogers-renzo-piano%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pompidou%20Centre%3A%20a%2070s%20French%20radical%20that%E2%80%99s%20never%20gone%20out%20of%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fpompidou-centre-40-years-old-review-richard-rogers-renzo-piano%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F715c47c24a871cce51cf5b1295e6794fa2079231%2F0_0_5150_3434%2F5150.jpg>
 Photograph: Peet Simard/Getty Images 
He ascribes their victory to various factors: that they proposed a piazza, for 
example, rather than covering the whole site with building. Also, that “there 
was a clarity in our proposal, in someone saying with a degree of rebellion, 
‘Hang on, what is culture?’ It changes continuously, every 25 years, so we want 
a flexible space.” Faced with 681 entries, he guesses, “you might get confused, 
then say, ‘Oh shit, this one is not stupid’”. He believes that there was 
“something in the air”, that their ideas caught the spirit of the time. He also 
thinks that “the stars, the planets, the satellites were all found in the right 
position”.

Having won, they embarked on the exhilarating process of getting the dreams 
built, which, despite the guidance of the large, established firm of Arup, was 
also, says Rogers, “the most difficult thing I have ever done. There were 
lawsuits against us and all sorts of rules and regulations. There were many, 
many crises.”

Pompidou died before completion and his successor, Giscard d’Estaing, after 
contemplating cancelling the project, slashed the budgets. Not all the original 
ideas survived the process. The information screens were dropped. The floors 
didn’t move. Fire regulations caused transparent walls to be made opaque and 
elegant bits of structure to be swaddled in protective material.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fpompidou-centre-40-years-old-review-richard-rogers-renzo-piano%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7aff81d4747076e05486d22883ddad9ca6597346%2F0_0_7360_4912%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pompidou%20Centre%3A%20a%2070s%20French%20radical%20that%E2%80%99s%20never%20gone%20out%20of%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fpompidou-centre-40-years-old-review-richard-rogers-renzo-piano%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pompidou%20Centre%3A%20a%2070s%20French%20radical%20that%E2%80%99s%20never%20gone%20out%20of%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fpompidou-centre-40-years-old-review-richard-rogers-renzo-piano%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7aff81d4747076e05486d22883ddad9ca6597346%2F0_0_7360_4912%2F7360.jpg>
 One of the gallery spaces today. Photograph: Manuel Braun 
Up to and including its opening on 31 January 1977, the Pompidou received the 
critical response traditional for buildings that go on to be much-loved 
landmarks: theGuardian’s art critic wanted this “hideous” object covered with 
Virginia creeper. “Paris has its own monster,” saidLe Figaro, “just like Loch 
Ness.” In its defence Rogers pointed to the hostility the Eiffel Tower provoked 
when it was new. “Making change is not easy” says Piano.

But it was a popular success. Crowds and impromptu street entertainers 
gathered in the piazza. Visitor numbers were five times predictions. The 
escalators were a hit. Because of the uniform roof heights of most of Paris’s 
buildings, and the fact that the Pompidou Centre rises above its neighbours, 
sweeping views unfolded as you rode to the top. It enabled citizens to take 
possession of their city. “It was necessary,” believes Piano, to create a 
building of this type at this time, “and because it was necessary it became 
accepted.”

Sadly, since the Pompidou reopened in 2000 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/587445.stm>, after a two-year refit, 
the escalators are no longer free to enter, which diminishes their role in 
making the centre into a popular fun palace and connecting its life with that 
of the city. The art inside now feels more remote from that of the street, but 
the Pompidou remains successful for the same reasons as when it was first 
built. It’s partly the energy, joy and bravado palpable in its construction, 
which you don’t have to be an expert in architecture to sense. It’s partly the 
simple, somewhat traditional but effective relationship of building to public 
space – a palace in front of a piazza, like something from renaissance Italy. 
Mostly, it’s the surprising and mutually enriching combination of the two. A 
radical building in a radical urban plan, or a conventional building in a 
conventional one, would not be as powerful.

It helps that it is visibly inhabited – not just a bizarre object but one 
around which you can imagine yourself moving

At the same time, it’s a building with flaws and contradictions, whose 
theoretical rhetoric doesn’t stand too much scrutiny. Exposing the pipes and 
ducts on the outside doesn’t actually make it easier to maintain and alter but 
multiplies by a large factor the amount of surface exposed to the weather. The 
idea of clipping elements on and off has proved largely a fantasy. Much of the 
detailing is beautifully considered, which is nice, but runs counter to the 
ethos of spontaneity.

Logic and consistency are not what the building is about. Piano later admitted 
that it would have been cheaper and more efficient to have put a row of columns 
down the centre of the building. There would have been no need for enormous 
trusses and little impact on the design ideals, except that, in Piano’s view, a 
concession on this point would have put the building on a slippery slope 
whereby a series of pragmatic decisions would have diluted its spirit to the 
point where there was nothing left.

Much of the Pompidou’s appeal is about how it looks, which is not to say it 
doesn’t change anything. If Paris now had no such building, it would suffer 
more from the ossification that, in truth, is one of its weaknesses. The city 
would be more of a museum piece. And it is in this way, as a magically 
transformative cultural building, both popular and progressive looking, with 
the power to boost a city or change its image, that the Pompidou has been most 
influential.

This is a lot about the relation of building to mass media, with which the 
architects were fascinated from the start. If the unrealised big screens were 
to have generated an interaction of people and information of a kind now made 
commonplace by smartphones, the main impact was more direct. Simply by being a 
large memorable, striking thing, it makes itself known to audiences who haven’t 
seen it in the flesh. It helps that it is visibly inhabited – not just a 
bizarre object but one around which you can imagine yourself moving.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fpompidou-centre-40-years-old-review-richard-rogers-renzo-piano%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3176eb943ccfe0183ca7675a945339ad175f849e%2F0_3_4392_3453%2F4392.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pompidou%20Centre%3A%20a%2070s%20French%20radical%20that%E2%80%99s%20never%20gone%20out%20of%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fpompidou-centre-40-years-old-review-richard-rogers-renzo-piano%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pompidou%20Centre%3A%20a%2070s%20French%20radical%20that%E2%80%99s%20never%20gone%20out%20of%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fpompidou-centre-40-years-old-review-richard-rogers-renzo-piano%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3176eb943ccfe0183ca7675a945339ad175f849e%2F0_3_4392_3453%2F4392.jpg>
 The Pompidou seen from across the city. Photograph: © Centre Pompidou 
The Pompidou’s descendants include the grands projets – the Pyramid in the 
centre of the Louvre, the Grande Arche at La Défense – that later French 
presidents built in Paris and ambitious mayors built in French cities. Then the 
Guggenheim in Bilbao and the very many would-be icons, from brilliant to 
catastrophic, that followed. Many of the architects and engineers involved went 
on to have eminent and influential careers. Renzo Piano andRichard Rogers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/richard-rogers>, going their separate 
ways, would give the world airports, skyscrapers, parliaments, art galleries.

At its best, the Pompidou concept is about celebrating the life of cities and 
bringing energy to their centre – and in the 1970s, through a combination of 
flight to the suburbs and destructive planning, traditional cities seemed 
endangered and in need of such support. It works through bold and optimistic 
architecture and direct devices, like the escalators and the plaza.

At its worst, it leans too heavily on too vague notions of “progressive” and 
“creative” design. The same rhetoric, applied to the Millennium Dome or some of 
the commercial projects that Piano and Rogers now design, can be less 
convincing. The Eiffel Tower argument, that posterity will vindicate anything 
new and startling, gets wheeled out to justify almost anything. It gets 
forgotten that there is intelligence in the Pompidou design, in the way it 
responds to a historic city, for example, as well as spectacle and novelty.

Piano is confident about the building’s future. “We believe that the life of 
this building will be 2,000 years so we don’t care so much about 40 years. The 
Colosseum is still there so I don’t see why it won’t be still there.”

His Paris office is round the corner from the centre, so he sees it almost 
every day that he is in the city. He visits it frequently. “I am the Quasimodo 
of Beaubourg,” he says. “Every single bolt of the building, I have a sense of 
why it’s there. And when I see it now I wonder how they could ever have allowed 
us to do something like that.”
 