
Refreshed by the labour of the climb, my legs nonetheless argue for respite on 
the crest of the hill. And, just as it does on the map, the dewpond appears a 
little way below me as a neat circle of blue reflecting a flawless sky on a day 
of hard frost.

The pond is at the very top of the downs 
<http://www.walkingbritain.co.uk/walk-2063-description>. On one side is 
flint-spewing earth, which in summer is covered in a yellow cowl of rapeseed. 
And on the other is grazing pasture capping the concentric earthen rings of the
iron age fort 
<http://geobrit.uk/348007705-ladle-hill-iron-age-fort-archaeological-site-hampshire-su478568#.WGPbvTaLTAw>
 that stands sentinel on the hill’s northern ridge. The lightest of winds 
twitches the smears of wool caught on wire barbs. Up here ‘There is no life 
higher than the grasstops / Or the hearts of sheep…’, as Sylvia Plath wrote of 
the West Yorkshire moors inWuthering Heights 
<http://genius.com/Sylvia-plath-wuthering-heights-annotated>, her poem of 
exquisite introspection.

Away from roads, the winter river slinks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/26/away-from-roads-winter-river-slinks-lincolnshire-welland>
This is the only unfrozen water for what must be a kilometre in each direction 
and during hard frosts like this one the dewpond – a Victorian creation of 
crushed and puddled chalk made for watering livestock – becomes a magnet to the 
wildlife of the surrounding downland.

I see a raven at its edge, blackest of blacks against the frosted grass as it 
stoops to drink. Just a few metres further around the perimeter, a chattering 
bevy ofgoldfinch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/grrlscientist/2012/apr/13/9> moves 
erratically between the branches of the hawthorn and the water. During past 
frosts and heavy snow, I’ve seen roe deer emerge from the nearby line of ash 
and oak to seek water and to drink with all the nervous hesitancy of a savannah 
gazelle. Chuckling partridge come here too, and during the thaw I saw the sleek 
and neat pads of a fox etched in the muddy edges.

The raven has had its fill and I have had my rest. It shifts its weight to 
dance forward over its own reflection and push upwards into the air. It flies a 
corkscrew pattern around the pond and away to the north. As it does, a red kite 
crosses its path and scratches its image across the mirrored water, scattering 
the last of the goldfinch.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>
 