
Junaid Jamshed, a legendary figure in Pakistani pop music, was among the 48 
people killed when a plane crashed into a hillside north of Islamabad, the 
latest episode in the country’s long history of aviation disasters.

The small turboprop ATR 42 operated by Pakistan International Airlines (PIA) 
was travelling from the mountainous region of Chitral on Wednesday when it 
crashed near the town of Havelian.

It was not clear what caused the crash, which happened on a fine day far from 
the high peaks of the Hindu Kush mountain range where Chitral is located.

However, one civil aviation official said the pilot made a distress call and 
reported engine failure, and witnesses said the plane plummeted out of the sky.

Photographs and videos taken by locals showed a blasted hillside covered with 
flames and debris scattered over a wide area.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fpakistan-plane-crashes-flight-pk661%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F582b117bc8225a01457b7bbc16b4148fc14518bc%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pop%20star%20Junaid%20Jamshed%20among%2048%20killed%20in%20Pakistan%20plane%20crash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fpakistan-plane-crashes-flight-pk661%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pop%20star%20Junaid%20Jamshed%20among%2048%20killed%20in%20Pakistan%20plane%20crash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fpakistan-plane-crashes-flight-pk661%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F582b117bc8225a01457b7bbc16b4148fc14518bc%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
 Junaid Jamshed, a pop star turned evangelical Muslim cleric and fashion 
designer, was on board the plane. Photograph: Twitter 
Officials were quick to declare there was no chance of any survivors. “All of 
the bodies are burned beyond recognition,” said Taj Muhammad Khan, a government 
official.

Kurshid Tanoli, a police official in Havelian, said recovery work was hampered 
by a fire at the crash site and the hilly terrain. “The nearest village to the 
site is Batolani and is deep in the hills,” he said. “Vehicles and ambulances 
can only go to Batolani and then it is a 30-minute walk.”

Helicopters and about 500 troops were dispatched to the scene and the army 
later announced that 40 bodies had been recovered and sent to the nearby town 
of Abbottabad, where some were due to undergo DNA testing to identify them.

A manifest for flight PK661, obtained by local media, showed that in addition 
to five crew and a ground engineer there were 42 passengers on board, including 
Jamshed, a pop star turned evangelical Muslim cleric and fashion designer, who 
ran a successful chain of boutiques across Pakistan.

Social media tributes flooded in for Jamshed, who rose to fame in the 1980s 
and 1990s as part of the group Vital Signs, whose songs are still popular today.

Jamshed later abandoned his music career after becoming a follower of the 
Tableeghi Jamaat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2009/sep/08/religion-islam-tablighi-jamaat>
, a highly conservative, proselytising Islamic movement. Quaid-e-Azam, manager 
of the Hindukush Heights hotel in Chitral, said Jamshed had been in the town as 
part of a 15-day preaching tour.

Shortly before his death Jamshed posted pictures on social media of his trip 
to Chitral, a picturesque valley popular with tourists, which he described as 
“heaven on Earth”.

In 2014 Jamshed was accused of blasphemy, an extremely serious allegation in 
Pakistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan>, and fled to the UK after 
issuing an apology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/04/pakistani-preacher-junaid-jamshed-blasphemy-accusations>
.
Pakistan crash map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/12/pakistan_plane_crash/giv-15726nvWzIYSkKNYn/>
Also on board, according to the manifest, was Osama Warraich, the senior 
civilian bureaucrat for Chitral, who was travelling to Islamabad with his wife 
and son.

PIA said three foreigners were on board: two Austrians and one Chinese citizen.

Pakistan’s last major air disaster was in 2015 when a military helicopter 
crashed in a remote northern valley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/08/pakistan-helicopter-crashes-on-school-foreign-diplomats-among-dead>
, killing eight people including the Norwegian, Philippine and Indonesian 
ambassadors and the wives of Malaysian and Indonesian envoys.

The country’s deadliest crash was in 2010, when an Airbus A321 operated by the 
private airline Airblue flying from Karachicrashed into hills outside Islamabad 
while preparing to land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jul/28/plane-crashes-pakistan-karachi-islamabad>
, killing all 152 people on board.

The deadliest accident involving PIA occurred in 1992 when an Airbus A300 
crashed into a cloud-covered hillside after descending too early on approach to 
the Nepalese capital Kathmandu, killing 167 people.

Although PIA has been crash-free for 10 years, a 2014 analysis by US 
statistician Nate Silver based on data from 1985 to 2014 found the airline had 
a consistently high number of what he termed “near-misses” – an indicator of 
risk.

The government has vowed to privatise PIA, the national carrier, which has 
been losing money.










 