
Pope Francis <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pope-francis> is facing an 
extraordinary challenge to his authority from an ancient Catholic order that is 
refusing to cooperate with a Vatican investigation into the sacking of a top 
official over the distribution of tens of thousands of condoms.

The controversy has been simmering for weeks, but the Knights of Malta’s 
rejection of the investigation – an unprecedented act in recent times – has now 
escalated the matter.

The conservative order said in a statement 
<https://www.orderofmalta.int/2017/01/10/statement-grand-magistry/> it intended 
to protect its sovereignty from official oversight and its members had the 
legal right not to cooperate with the Vatican investigation, which was approved 
by Pope Francis late last year, and is being led by the Vatican’s second most 
senior official, the secretary of state, Pietro Parolin.

The fight is increasingly being seen not just as a battle over the 
investigation, but as a sign of the increasing anger and disobedience by some 
Catholic traditionalists who are opposed to Francis’s papacy because they view 
him as too progressive on issues involving social doctrine.


“It is not just the fact that they are defying the pope’s authority, but they 
are doing so using language that is disrespectful and confrontational,” said 
Austen Ivereigh, who has written a biography of the pope. “It is as bad as it 
looks.”

At the heart of the case lies the firing of the Maltese Order’s grand 
chancellor, Albrecht von Boeselager, who was suspended on 8 December after he 
refused to resign after allegations that thousands of condoms were distributed 
inMyanmar <https://www.theguardian.com/world/myanmar> by its charitable arm 
under his watch.

The Catholic church bans the use of contraception and Boeselager has said he 
stopped the practice when he learned about it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fknights-of-malta-condom-scandal-stretches-from-myanmar-to-the-vatican%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe677eb292741c8ab1b6ac38b7971db97873c03bb%2F0_154_4992_2994%2F4992.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pope%20Francis's%20authority%20challenged%20by%20Knights%20of%20Malta%20over%20condom%20row&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fknights-of-malta-condom-scandal-stretches-from-myanmar-to-the-vatican%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pope%20Francis%27s%20authority%20challenged%20by%20Knights%20of%20Malta%20over%20condom%20row&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fknights-of-malta-condom-scandal-stretches-from-myanmar-to-the-vatican%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe677eb292741c8ab1b6ac38b7971db97873c03bb%2F0_154_4992_2994%2F4992.jpg>
 Albrecht von Boeselager. Photograph: Alessandra Tarantino/AP 
The pope appointed a special commission to investigate the matter on 22 
December, prompting an outcry from the order, which was founded in the 11th 
century in Jerusalem as the Knights Hospitaller. It came amid tension between 
Francis and the Vatican’s top diplomat to Malta, the conservative US cardinal 
Raymond Burke, and reflected concern in the Holy See that Boeselager may have 
wrongly been told that the pope had blessed his firing.

Burke, who is known in particular for his views on so-called sexual morality, 
is one of four cardinals who challenged Francis last September when he asked 
the pope to submit yes or no answers to a series of questions about his call 
for priests to show “discernment” in their treatment of Catholics, such as 
divorcees, who live outside the church’s rules.

The papal exhortation – called Amoris laetitia (Joy of Love) – was seen by 
some traditional Catholics as being too lax because it suggested some divorced 
and remarried couples could be offered holy communion.

“Burke is becoming a real thorn in the side of the pope. I suspect he is 
driving this [firing of Boeselager] and it is part of his obsession with sexual 
morality, as if this is the decisive feature of what it means to be Catholic 
and faithful to Jesus Christ when in fact scriptures say very little on these 
matters,” said Robert Mickens, a veteran Rome-basedVatican 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vatican> journalist.

Ivereigh said the dispute was exposing deep differences between Francis’s 
Vatican and the Maltese order.

“You are dealing here with a very profound culture clash within the Catholic 
church. Burke and the Knights of Malta represent in many ways everything that 
the church of the second Vatican council and Francis have been seeking to get 
away from,” he said.

The Order of Malta is known for its extreme adherence to tradition, including 
in the importance of respecting its own hierarchy. It employs many trappings of 
a sovereign state, issuing its own stamps, passports and licence plates and 
holding diplomatic relations with 106 states, the Vatican included.

Its origins lie in the establishment of an 11th-century hospital in Jerusalem 
that cared for pilgrims of all faiths, and it now has 13,500 members and 
100,000 staff and volunteers who provide healthcare in hospitals and clinics 
around the world.





 