
Hillary Clinton’s chief campaign strategist said a national “obsession” with 
campaign forecasters like Nate Silver and New York Times’ Upshot blog had 
deeply worried the Democratic presidential campaign in the final weeks of the 
election, and could have hurt voter turnout.

Why were the election polls so wrong? How Donald Trump defied predictions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-exit-polls-data-us-election>
Speaking at a conference held at New York University’s Florence campus, La 
Pietra, Joel Benenson, a pollster and consultant who also worked on Barack 
Obama’s successful campaigns in 2008 and 2012, said a number of factors 
contributed to Clinton’s stunning defeat last week, including actions by FBI 
director James Comey.

But he singled out the relatively new phenomenon of reporting on elections not 
just by examining national and state polls, but by forecasting probability of a 
candidate winning by looking at aggregates of polls and other factors.

Clinton’s odds of winning the election on the Upshot, the New York Times 
forecasting model, were 85% on election day and only began to plummet as 
results came in late in the night.

“[There was] a lot of the coverage and obsession with Nate Silver and 
FiveThirtyEight and the Upshot focusing on the probability of a win,” Benenson 
said.

“And I think when we have people talking about whether there is a 93% 
probability that Hillary is going to win [or not], as opposed to her being up 
2% in the polls … it’s a real concern. Because you don’t want people to think 
an election is over.”

Benenson was one of several election officials and political pundits to speak 
on a panel about the US election results.

“[Forecasting] is not news,” he continued, “it is not journalism and it is not 
news, and yet journalism is now obsessed with it because it is cheap news. It’s 
like, ‘Oh, I can throw out polls.’ They don’t even discriminate [which polls 
they choose].

“That is a terrible thing inside a campaign, for people to think that that 
election was won. Hated inside a campaign.

“There is a difference between people thinking Hillary is three points ahead 
in the polls, and someone who they think is a god of probability forecasting, 
saying there is a 94% chance she is winning. Maybe they say, ‘I will have 
another drink at the bar and not vote.’”

Benenson also pointed to a lack of trust in American institutions, which he 
blamed on the fallout of the economic crisis, and said Trump’s role as a 
“quintessential outsider” helped the incoming Republican president.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20America%20elected%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20America%20elected%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video&media=>
Why America elected Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/11/how-donald-trump-became-president-video>
Other factors claimed as reasons for Clinton’s defeat include an alleged 
failure by the campaign to ensure the support of Hispanic voters. Javier 
Palomarez, president and chief executive of the US Hispanic Chamber of Commerce 
(USHCC),told the Guardian on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/12/latino-leader-attacks-clinton-campaign-hispanic-vote>
 that after Trump built his campaign on hardline immigration policies, “we 
thought this election cycle would be different”.

“Unfortunately,” Palomarez said, “Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> was advised once again by 
Beltway advisers who knew it all, had the models and the projections, but who 
called it wrong.”

Latino leader attacks Clinton campaign for taking Hispanic vote for granted
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/12/latino-leader-attacks-clinton-campaign-hispanic-vote>
Benenson echoed Clinton, who reportedly told donors in a private conversation 
that she blamed actions by Comey for her defeat, by pointing a finger at the 
FBI director, sayingComey’s decision to announce the discovery of new alleged 
evidence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/30/democratic-senators-fbi-director-comey-clinton-emails-letter>
 in the FBI’s investigation of Clinton’s use of a private email server 11 days 
before the election “did have an effect”.


Benenson said voters who were on the fence about Clinton and contemplating 
support of third-party candidates, including Green party candidate Jill Stein, 
had begun coalescing around Clinton in the last weeks of the election, until 
the Comey letter went public.

“We always had a group that were Trump defectors and a group that were Clinton 
defectors,” Benenson said.

First, Trump’s defectors began to come back around to the Republican 
candidate, he said. “And then our defectors started to come home until that 
Friday, and once that Friday hit, we saw them [go back] to the third-party 
candidates,” Benenson said.

Comey sent a second letter two days before the election, saying no new 
evidence of wrongdoing had been found.

Benenson said the trend of voters switching allegiance after Comey’s first 
letter was “significant” in Florida and in Wisconsin, where Stein garnered 
strong support among liberals andwhere Clinton lost by one point 
<http://www.vox.com/policy-and-politics/2016/11/11/13576798/jill-stein-third-party-donald-trump-win>
.
 