
A Chinese man who travelled to Madagascar in search of answers to the 
disappearance of his mother onMalaysia Airlines flight MH370 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia-airlines-flight-mh370> has found a 
possible piece of debris from the plane during a search of the country’s 
beaches.

Jiang Hui, 44, is one of seven relatives who flew to the Indian Ocean island 
on Saturday to raise awareness of the debris that has been washing up on its 
beaches in ever-increasing amounts and conduct preliminary searches.

​The man on a solo mission to find ​the wreckage o​f​ flight MH370
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/26/the-man-on-a-solo-mission-to-find-the-wreckage-of-flight-mh370>
He found a small white and sand-coloured piece of board in a rocky cove at the 
end of Riake beach on north-eastern Île Sainte-Marie, where a significant 
amount of the debris thought to be from MH370 has already been discovered. “I 
felt excited but at the same time it was saddening,” he said. “It is a small 
piece and will not really be able to show what happened to the plane but I hope 
so much that the authorities of Malaysia, China and Australia will try to find 
more so they can find out.”

The piece has been handed to an official from the Malaysian investigation, said
Blaine Gibson, a Seattle lawyer who has found 16 pieces 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/26/the-man-on-a-solo-mission-to-find-the-wreckage-of-flight-mh370>
of debris thought to be from the plane in Mozambique and Madagascar.

Following Jiang’s discovery, Gibson said he had stumbled upon a larger object 
in the same area. He said both pieces appeared to be from the cabin of a large 
airliner.

“[The find] just shows how important it is that these beaches are checked 
daily, and that local people keep their eyes open,” Gibson said. “It also shows 
how important this visit by the families is for raising awareness.”


Jiang lost his 73-year-old mother, Jiang Cuiyun, on the flight and has been 
prominent in the relatives’ campaign amid a lack of openness – and seemingly of 
action – from theMalaysian-led official inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/29/mh370-malaysia-officially-ends-search-for-missing-plane>
.

Relatives of those who were on MH370, which disappeared while flying to 
Beijing on 8 March 2014, have criticised the Malaysian investigation for 
failing to collect debris found on Madagascar six months ago. Malaysia is now 
sending investigators toMadagascar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/madagascar> but insists the timing is a 
coincidence.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fpossible-mh370-debris-found-by-relative-of-disappeared-passenger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F398e2732317b50cf8e7e1268a4096f6ec5c77123%2F0_46_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Possible%20MH370%20debris%20found%20by%20relative%20of%20disappeared%20passenger&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fpossible-mh370-debris-found-by-relative-of-disappeared-passenger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Possible%20MH370%20debris%20found%20by%20relative%20of%20disappeared%20passenger&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fpossible-mh370-debris-found-by-relative-of-disappeared-passenger%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F398e2732317b50cf8e7e1268a4096f6ec5c77123%2F0_46_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Relatives of some of the passengers on MH370 who are searching for debris from 
the plane in Madagascar. Photograph: Stringer/Reuters 
Jiang spoke briefly at a press conference held in the capital, Antananarivo, 
on Sunday as the relatives began their search. “In order to look for my mum, I 
have come here but my English is poor,” he said, before switching to Chinese to 
appeal for help in finding more evidence of the plane.

Grace Nathan, spokeswoman for the Voice370 campaign group, said the discovery 
of debris potentially from the plane brought “mixed feelings” for the whole 
group.
What happened to MH370 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=16ce3f4a-6672-4dc3-83fb-97c07bc10cab>
“First time a piece was found by one of us. Such mixed feelings now for all of 
us – pain, sadness, confusion, hope,” she wrote on a Facebook page where the 
relatives share updates with others bereaved by the incident.

It is thought unlikely the small fragment found by Jiang would ever be 
definitively linked to MH370, but Gibson said it was washed up on the same part 
of the beach where he found items including a seat back – complete with coat 
hook and frame for an in-flight television screen.

The find comes after the families divided into three groups to visit the 
stretches of coastline where current and wind analysis has predictedmost debris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/15/malaysia-confirms-debris-near-tanzania-missing-mh370-plane>
 could wash up.

In Nosy Be, Tamatave and Île Sainte-Marie, they have met local officials, 
tourism and fishery associations as well as journalists to raise awareness 
about the need to pick up and hand in potential debris.

One local boat owner lent his vessel for free to Nathan and her father so they 
could search offshore islands. Homemade fliers she printed showing what the 
debris looked like and how it should be preserved have run out and had to be 
reprinted.

Ghislain Wattrelos, a French national who lost his wife and two teenage 
children, said the relatives had been moved by the outpouring of public 
sympathy.

“It was the right move to come,” he said. “We have had a very nice response 
from everyone, we have been very well-received.”
 