
The Wales No 8 Taulupe Faletau made his comeback after more than 10 weeks out 
with a medial knee ligament injury asBath earned a scrappy 16-9 victory over 
their winless neighboursBristol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/03/bristol-suspend-andy-robinson-appoint-mark-tainton>
. Faletau was taken off after 55 minutes in an unspectacular return but the 
Welsh management will be relieved that he can be considered to faceSouth Africa 
in Cardiff next weekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/18/wales-jamie-roberts-japan-autumn-internationals>
.

Bath’s seventh win in eight games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/29/rob-baxter-exeter-bath-premiership>
 put them top of the table – for 24 hours at least – but their mix-and-match 
line-up could conjure only one try, scored by the wing Jack Wilson in the first 
half. In front of a record attendance at the Rec of 14,241, Bath spent almost 
all the first 20 minutes tackling and only once had possession inside the 
Bristol 10-metre line.

From Tonga to Twickenham: Mako and Billy Vunipola’s incredible journey | Andy 
Bull
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/16/tonga-twickenham-billy-mako-vunipola-england-saracens>
In the 27th minute Wilson supported the flanker Tom Ellis to score under the 
posts after Matt Banahan had drawn several defenders. Tom Homer converted.

A smart break by Rhodri Williams from the base of the scrum gave Bristol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bristolrugby> hope but Bath began to crank 
up the pressure with their ball carriers and Homer’s third penalty extended the 
lead to 16-9.

Bristol were reduced to 14 men after 64 minutes when Jason Woodward fell the 
wrong side of a ruck on his own line after Faletau’s replacement, Zach Mercer, 
almost made the line.Bath <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bath> could not 
make the extra man count, however, and it was Bristol who finished the 
stronger, forcing a line-out in the corner. Agonisingly, Will Hurrell spilt a 
pass after half-a-dozen phases and they had to be content with a losing bonus 
point.

Rugby union autumn internationals: what to look forward to this weekend
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/18/rugby-union-autumn-internationals-england-fiji-ireland-all-blacks>
Bath are a point ahead of Saracens, who travel to Sale on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/20/the-breakdown-saracens-premiership-european-champions-cup-toulon-rugby>
, and two points in front of Wasps, who play Gloucester at Kingsholm on 
Saturday.

At Kingston Park a 77th-minute try by the former Newcastle scrum-half Will 
Chudley completed a hugely satisfying night forExeter with a bonus-point 32-19 
victory, only their thirdPremiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership> win of the season.

The England internationals Ollie Devoto and Thomas Waldrom and winger James 
Short plundered the other tries for the fired-up Chiefs while the fly-half 
Gareth Steenson weighed in with 12 points – three conversions and two penalties 
– as last season’s beaten Premiership finalists regained a measure of their 
mojo at the expense of a much-improved Newcastle side.Newcastle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/newcastlefalcons> were roared on by their 
biggest home crowd of the season, 8,061, but, despite tries from the hooker 
Scott Lawson and full-back Alex Tait, failed to claim the consolation of a 
losing bonus point.

Stephen Myler kicked six penalties as Northampton inflicted an 18-17 defeat on 
Worcester in a poor game at Sixways. The outside-half was successful with six 
out of seven kicks, with severe ill-discipline costing the home side, who for 
much of the game were the more creative side. They scored two tries through 
Dean Hammond and Bryce Heem with Jamie Shillcock converting both and adding a 
penalty.

Shillcock had a chance to steal the win with the last kick of the game but his 
penalty from halfway faded wide.
 