
On a day that amply demonstrated the ludicrousness of playing a full 
Premiership <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership> programme on 
international weekends, with squads decimated by call-ups,Wasps overhauled Bath 
to go second in the  table.

A late penalty from the Harlequins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/harlequinsru> replacement fly-half Tim Swiel 
condemned the west countrymen to a 21-20 defeat at the Stoop, while Wasps held 
off a late, albeit inevitably futile, fightback fromSale to win 34-24. They 
remain four points behindSaracens at the summit as the double-winners beat 
Gloucester 24-20 in a match one suspects they might have won more comfortably 
with a full squad available.

Premiership round-up: Manu Tuilagi returns as Leicester hang on at Bristol
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/25/leicester-bristol-tuilagi-northampton-newcastle>
Swiel sent the long-range winning kick swirling over five minutes from time to 
sendBath <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bath> to only their second league 
defeat this season, after Nathan Catt’s try had put the visitors in front. Kane 
Palmer-Newport and Tim Visser exchanged tries before the break, while the 
scrum-half Karl Dickson scored on the hour for Harlequins shortly before Catt 
went over.

With England’s Eddie Jones watching on and perhaps with his back-row injury 
worries in mind, Quins’ Jack Clifford put in a mighty defensive shift.

Meanwhile at the Ricoh Arena, Ashley Johnson celebrated a move back from 
hooker to flanker with two tries as Wasps looked to put the disappointment of 
last weekend’s shock defeat toGloucester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gloucesterrugby> behind them. Rob Miller 
also scored two in two minutes after the full-back’s fellow former Sale Shark 
Danny Cipriani had opened the scoring with a wonderful try on the counter.

“Ash was outstanding today,” said Dai Young, the Wasps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-wasps> director of rugby. “He’s a 
real club man and is happy to play in either position. As a flanker, he 
obviously has a much freer role but his statistics are remarkably the same 
whichever position he plays.

“I always felt we were in control but it wasn’t fantastic. Although we were 
good in patches, I’m disappointed that we gave away so many points in the 
second half.Sale <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/salesharks> were a dogged 
team but the introduction of our replacements caused us to become disjointed.”

Bryn Evans scored his and Sale’s second try with 14 minutes to play and 11 
later Mike Haley, the promising full-back, darted through a gap to give the 
Salford side vain hope of a losing bonus point. It would have been, in truth, 
barely deserved.

Brad Barritt is perhaps further from Jones’s eye for an international recall 
but he impressed hisSaracens <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> 
coach, Mark McCall, with a rare try amid a strong performance, in a Saracens’ 
win sealed by Alex Lozowski’s 15 points from the tee.

“It was a really tough, close game which could have gone either way,” McCall 
said. “I guess at this time of year, these kind of games, it’s just about 
getting the result and we were fortunate enough to get that result. We weren’t 
perfect, far from it, but I do think we showed resilience at crucial times and 
bounced back from a few pretty poor scores.

“That first 60 seconds of defence was pretty awful. I thought Brad Barritt was 
a clear man of the match. Some of his tackling was out of this world.”

Ben Morgan and Billy Burns scored early tries for Gloucester before the 
champions hit back through Barritt and Mike Ellery.
 