
Bristol remain without a Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership> win this season after a strong 
second-half performance from theLeicester pack secured the visitors a 21-16 
victory at Ashton Gate.

The Tigers were far from convincing but they just did enough to send the home 
side to a ninth consecutive league defeat.

Adam Thompstone and Ellis Genge scored tries for Leicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers>, with Freddie Burns kicking 
three penalties and a conversion.

Rob Hawkins scored a try for Bristol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bristolrugby> which Adrian Jarvis converted, 
with Billy Searle kicking two penalties and Jarvis one.

Tom Wood feels the new England buzz and plans to put Argentina under pump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/25/tom-wood-england-argentina-eddie-jones>
With the score 6-6 after Searle and Burns traded penalties the Bristol lock 
Ian Evans was yellow-carded for Leicester to take advantage and score the first 
try of the game. A well-judged cross-kick from Burns led to Thompstone leaping 
above Jordan Williams to collect and score. Burns missed the conversion but his 
side still led 11-6 at the interval.

Evans returned from the sin-bin but Leicester continued to dominate the 
opening exchanges of the second half, with their pack taking control of the 
match. A succession of forward drives enabled Genge to force his way over from 
close range with a conversion from Burns giving his side a healthy 12-point 
advantage.

It immediately got worse for Bristol from the restart when Jason Woodward was 
adjudged to have impeded Graham Kitchener in the air and the centre was 
yellow-carded.

With 20 minutes remaining, Leicester brought on Manu Tuilagi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/14/leicester-manu-tuilagi-groin-injury>
 but they suffered a blow when their replacement Lachlan McCaffrey was 
sin-binned. Bristol capitalised when Hawkins scored a close-range try but 
McCaffrey’s return ensured the Tigers held on for victory despite a late 
penalty from Jarvis which earned his side a bonus point.

At Franklin’s Gardens Newcastle snatched a 22-16 victory against Northampton 
thanks to a late 80-metre interception try from Niki Goneva.

The home side, who suffered their third home Premiership defeat of the 
campaign, had to play the second half with 14 men afterKieran Brookes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/31/kieran-brookes-england-squad> 
was sent off for a dangerous shoulder into the head of Scott Lawson at a ruck. 
Yet Northampton were still leading 16-15 with a try from Christian Day and 11 
points from Stephen Myler before Goneva got his fingertips to a pass on his 22, 
juggled the ball and surged to the line, avoiding Ben Foden’s last-ditch effort 
along the way.

With 13 players on international duty for Northampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints>, Newcastle knew they had 
a chance of a rare win at the Gardens and it took only four minutes for them to 
score the first try. Joel Hodgson sent a cut-out pass to Goneva before taking 
the wing’s offload and diving over in the corner.

Rugby union autumn internationals: 10 things to look forward to this weekend
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/25/rugby-union-autumn-internationals-what-to-look-forward-to-this-weekend>
Hodgson added a penalty just before the game was thrown into controversy with 
Brookes’ sending off in the 39th minute. The referee, Andrew Jackson, watched 
the replays on the big screen before deciding the Northampton player had used 
his shoulder dangerously as he flew at Lawson’s head in a ruck. The red card 
seemed to fire up the home side, who scored their first try four minutes after 
the restart. From a five-metre lineout the pack drove to the line and after 
watching the replays the TMO ruled Day had grounded the ball. Myler converted 
to put Northampton 10-8 in front.

Despite losing Brookes and having to put Burrell in the back row the home side 
still won a penalty at a scrum and Myler extended the lead to five points. From 
a scrum Newcastle’s Opeti Fonua charged to the line and, after he was stopped, 
Will Witty squirmed over and Hodgson converted to put the visitors 15-13 ahead. 
A Myler penalty gave Saints the lead again but, with five minutes to go, Goneva 
won the match forNewcastle <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/newcastlefalcons>.

The Northampton director of rugby, Jim Mallinder, had no complaints about the 
referee’s decision to send off Brookes, saying: “I’ve looked at it a few times 
and what happened was that someone put their head into the ruck, they came in 
and caused that first offence, Kieran Brookes took exception to that and their 
players took exception to Kieran Brookes.

“What you can’t do is retaliate. You can’t strike anybody near the head and 
the referee had no option.”
 