
Lubaina Himid was just four months old when her father died. It was 1954 and 
her Blackpool-born mother decided to leave their home in Zanzibar and head back 
to Britain, where she brought her daughter up as a Londoner. Himid would not 
return to the place of her birth for 43 years.

So for much of her early career, Himid painted a kind of homeland of the 
imagination. Her theatrical, large-scale works were populated by sturdy, 
redoubtable women and characterised by scorching, oven-baked colours. “I think 
I was always trying to paint Zanzibar somehow,” says Himid, now an energetic 
woman in her early 60s. “I was always trying to live it in my head.”

What stopped her going back? Money, of course, and her lack of Swahili. But 
there was something else: “Fear, in some senses. When we left, my father had 
just died and that turmoil and the fear of it never really left me.” She 
finally summoned up the courage to make the trip with her friend, the artist
Maud Sulter <http://www.streetlevelphotoworks.org/event/maud_sulter_passion>, 
in 1997. “When I went, it was easy of course – because I was home, bizarrely.”

The paintings she made immediately after that trip stand apart from her other 
work. Abstract, in watery plaster pinks and crow’s egg blues, they are stained 
with dripmarks as if their whole surface has been weeping. “They are absolutely 
covered with tears, these paintings,” she says. “When I went, I spent a lot of 
time regretting not having gone back sooner.”

Painted as diptychs the size of the cotton kangas worn in east Africa, the 
Zanzibar paintings wrap around two sides of Navigation Charts, Himid’s
forthcoming retrospective 
<http://www.spikeisland.org.uk/events/exhibitions/lubaina-himid-2017/> at Spike 
Island in Bristol. It is one of two substantial shows of her work this spring, 
the other being atModern Art Oxford 
<https://www.modernartoxford.org.uk/event/lubaina-himid-invisible-strategies/>. 
Both coincide withThe Place Is Here 
<http://www.nottinghamcontemporary.org/art/place-here>, an expansive 
exploration of the work of black British artists and thinkers during the 1980s, 
which takes place at Nottingham Contemporary.
 Thatcher and Reagan flirt in Himid’s A Fashionable Marriage, 1986. 
Photograph: M Birchall/Teo Lashley/The artist and Hollybush Gardens 
Himid was a dynamic figure in the London scene during that decade, curating a 
trio of influential exhibitions by black women, as well as showing her own 
work. The V&A hasa fabulous portrait of her by Maud Sulter 
<http://collections.vam.ac.uk/item/O82945/urania-portrait-of-lubaina-himid-photograph-sulter-maud/>
 from the time. Himid is dressed as an African Urania, the muse of astronomy. 
She looks knowing, sweet-faced yet also stern.

Since moving to Preston in the 1990s to pursue an academic career, Himid has 
amassed an archive of documents relating to black visual artists from the 80s 
to the present day. Some will be at Nottingham alongside A Fashionable 
Marriage, a work she made in 1986. Echoing a scene fromHogarth’s Marriage à la 
Mode 
<https://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/paintings/william-hogarth-marriage-a-la-mode-1-the-marriage-settlement>
, the satirical work is a tableau of outsized cut-out figures dressed with 
paint and collage. Hogarth’s reclining countess and her buffoonish lover have 
become Margaret Thatcher and Ronald Reagan, flirting, with a torpedo firing 
from the president’s crotch.

“What a time to be opening these shows,” says Himid. “It is bizarre. Donald 
Trump and Theresa May – who would have thought that, all these years later, it 
would be that same kind of relationship with an American clown again?”
 Swallow Hard: The Lancaster Dinner Service (detail), 2007. Photograph: 
courtesy the artist & Hollybush Gardens 
While she rarely confines herself to a tautly stretched canvas, Himid is very 
much a painter. But why this medium when so many of her contemporaries used 
photography or video to give their art punch? “I wasn’t really making work to 
confront a white audience,” she says, extolling the inviting qualities of 
paint. “I was making work so that other black people could come to exhibitions 
and be in a room with a load of black women and think, ‘Oh, this is just like 
me on a Saturday night or me at a wedding.’ I was trying to make places and 
spaces where we could see ourselves, but also where we could be seen.”

The main space of Spike Island is populated with 100 large-than-life cutout 
figures, from the 2004 work Naming the Money. There are dancers, drummers, 
artists, mapmakers, potters, players of the viola da gamba, dog trainers, 
cobblers, toy-makers and herbalists, all dressed in brightly coloured 
approximations of early modern dress. They were, says Himid, inspired by the 
slave servants of the European upper classes.

“In La Rochelle many decades ago,” says Himid, “I saw paintings of slave 
servants who were gifts from the king of Spain to the king of France. Each 
figure had a sash across his front saying his name and what he was good at.” 
For her updated version, Himid has named these status symbols, first with their 
birth name, and secondly with a generic name allotted to servants in their 
position – all the dog trainers are called Sam, for example, and the 
ceramicists Sally.

“You’d dress these people in the finest clothes you could because it was all 
about signifying wealth in Europe at that time. That was their purpose. They 
weren’t like American slaves: they were working for nothing, but not in fields 
or doing hard labour.”

A work from the same period, Cotton.com, imagines a dialogue between cotton 
workers in Lancashire and slaves in the cotton fields of South Carolina. “They 
were living desperate lives, all those Lancashire cotton workers. But every day 
they were receiving material picked by this other set of people in desperate 
working conditions. And it was the same few people exploiting all the workers.”
 ‘I was trying to make places and spaces where we could see ourselves’ … Le 
Rodeur: Exchange, 2016. Photograph: courtesy the artist & Hollybush Gardens 
It wasn’t until she was nearly in her 60s that Himid was picked up by a savvy 
commercial gallery in London. While she has not stopped working and exhibiting 
in three decades, the involvement of Hollybush Gardens marked a turning point 
in her career. The recent interest in artists who have worked collectively – 
and who created pieces intended to be seen rather than, perhaps, to sell – 
suggests that a reappraisal of the politicised art of the 80s is under way. 
These shows do seem to have become, albeit coincidentally, part of a broader 
examination of the political and cultural cocktail of the 80s, as well as a way 
of using it to reflect on the present moment.

“Sometimes these incredibly rightwing, oppressive governments can galvanise 
thinking,” says Himid, “and bring together actual people doing actual things.” 
She points out how much has changed, and at the same time how little. “On the 
one hand, the 1980s is all shoulderpads and loads of money. And on the other, 
it’s miners’ strikes and strong politics. You often get things like that going 
together, so I don’t give up hope.”

• Lubaina Himid: Navigation Charts is at Spike Island, Bristol 
<http://www.spikeisland.org.uk/events/exhibitions/lubaina-himid-2017/>, 20 
January-26 March. Invisible Strategies is atModern Art Oxford 
<https://www.modernartoxford.org.uk/event/lubaina-himid-invisible-strategies/>, 
21 January-30 April. The Place Is Here is atNottingham Contemporary 
<http://www.nottinghamcontemporary.org/art/place-here>, 4 February-30 April.
 