
Valencia's fans whistled and booed, waved hankies, pointed fingers and made 
for the exit, shaking their heads in disgust as they wound down Mestalla's 
crumbling concrete walkways and into Manolo's bar with its football lampshades, 
busted tellies, and ropey sausages. All of which would be perfectly normal 
(after all, if there's anythingvalencianos love more than blowing off their 
fingers, it's complaining about their team) but for one thing: it was only just 
after half past nine and there was still an hour to go against hated rivals 
Real Madrid.

And yet, like witnesses to Anne Widdecombe flashing an ankle, the chés had 
seen more than enough already.Valencia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/valencia> were four - yes, four - down 
and rather than the home team staging a dramatic comeback, Madrid looked set to 
score 10.

Before the match, Madrid manager Bernd Schuster told journalists he would 
"love a job like yours where you get paid for insulting people, despite not 
having a clue what you're talking about." Well, what else do you expect from a 
Romanian tosspot? He also insisted that, far from being a bit rubbish and 
getting lucky late in games, Madrid were like Roger Federer, "toying" with the 
opposition: "tie-break, tie-break, 7-6, 7-6, then suddenly, bam! 6-1." He was 
so nearly right, too, with Madrid stopping fractionally short of a tennis 
score. Not the 40-love so dear to Robinho but 5-1, with two from Ruud van 
Nistelrooy and one each from Raúl, Robinho and Sergio Ramos, Marca's headline 
this morning declaring "Real Federer enamours everyone" alongside a picture of 
Robinho trying to get off with Raúl.

But if Madrid were superb - with Guti outrageously good, Raúl exceptional, 
Ramos stupidly impressive again, and even Fernando Gago looking half-decent - 
Valencia were shocking, absolutely awful, truly, deeply dreadful. Iván Helguera 
proved that not only is Madrid's policy of banning former players from facing 
them an act of cheating cowardice, it's also pretty dumb. Playmaker David 
Silva, ludicrously played in a deep role, spent the whole game hacking wildly 
while David Albelda, strangely, didn't. Miguel was absent at right back, 
Fernando Morientes was anonymous and ... well, they were all rubbish, only 
Joaquín emerging with any credit whatsoever.

Valencia were one-down after 40 seconds, four down on 37 minutes. Small wonder 
that the few fans left were sat fidgeting in silence, that the injured David 
Villa, Carlos Marchena, Rubén Baraja and Santi Cañizares had their heads in 
their hands up in the stands, or that the Youmus ultras turned their backs on 
the pitch. Over in the director's box, Valencia president Juan Soler couldn't 
have looked more uncomfortable if Alfredo Di Stéfano had released a 
particularly nasty fart.

It couldn't have happened to a more deserving bloke. With his potbelly, 
rubbish tache, flabby jowls, shabby suits, jumped-up lack of class and 
marvellous ability to run a club with disastrous and comic consequences, Soler 
is Spanish football's very own Brian Potter. And you couldn't help but grin a 
big grin of schadenfreude: watching him sadly surveying the wreckage last night 
was like watching Richard Branson swinging from the tangled wires of his hot 
air balloon after another half-arsed attempt to circle the globe -Good! Serves 
you right, you smug git!

And it serves him right because Soler was the man who sacked Quique Sánchez 
Flores on Sunday night with Valencia in fourth place, just four points off 
leaders Madrid. Because he sent one of his flunkys into Quique's post-match 
press conference to announce that the board was discussing his future, with the 
coach still sitting there. Because he confirmed the sacking on the club's 
website at 4.23am just three days before Madrid's visit, but decided that 
sporting director Miguel-Ángel Ruiz should explain the decision publicly - even 
though Ruiz played no part in the sacking. Because he reckoned that sacking 
Quique was the way to beat Madrid and that the man to come in as caretaker 
manager was Oscar Ruben Fernández, a 33-year-old youth-team coach who's never 
been above the third division. Because he gave a shortlist of new, permanent 
coaches with nothing in common except fame - perfect men to protect him.

Now, there were reasons to sack Quique. The fans had been singing "Quique, go 
now!" for weeks, Valencia's football had been desperately dull, and the coach 
failed to get the best out of an exceptional squad. He had also lost the 
players. They backed him in the civil war with sporting director Amadeo Carboni 
last season and eventually Carboni was sacked, but Quique's victory was hollow: 
in return for the sacking, he swallowed the dismissal of three of his backroom 
team, revealing his weakness and convincing the players he had changed sides. 
When he came back after the summer and tried to play the hardman, they turned 
against him and Soler stabbed him in the back. No wonder when he cleared the 
scarves and eyeliner from his desk, Quique admitted: "I have lost a job but 
regained a life."

But fans also whistled Rafa Benítez and Hector Cúper while Valencia were 
enjoying the most successful period in their history. Privately Valencia's 
veterans believe the club failed to sign anyone who would really improve the 
starting XI, and although a tendency not just to hit the self-destruction 
button but to batter it into submission has long existed at Valencia - where no 
coach has lasted four years since Di Stéfano between 1970 and 1974 - to 
describe Soler as a pretty bad president would be like calling Noel Edmonds 
slightly irritating.

Ronald Koeman will be the fifth coach Soler has had since taking over in 
October 2004, when Valencia were statistically the continent's third-best club, 
having won two league titles and been to two European Cup finals in four years. 
Since then, Valencia's debt has risen from 120m to 260m, there have been five 
sporting directors, a handful of director generals, three different medical 
chiefs and no trophies. Sacking Quique is all well and good, Juan, but maybe 
it's time you got rid of the man really responsible: yourself.

Results: Valencia 1 - 5 Real Madrid, Atlético 4 - 3 Sevilla, Betis 0 - 3 
Osasuna, Almería 0 - 1 Zaragoza, Getafe 2 - 0 Athletic, Deportivo 1 - 1 
Mallorca, Villarreal 3 - 0 Levante, Recreativo 0 - 0 Racing
Tonight: Espanyol v Murcia, Barcelona v Valladolid
 