
The Prince of Wales has warned that the rise of populist extremism and 
intolerance towards other faiths risks repeating the “horrors” of theHolocaust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/holocaust>.

Speaking on BBC Radio 4’s religious Thought for the Day 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b085b73l> slot, the prince delivered an 
outspoken attack against religious hatred and pleaded for a welcoming attitude 
to those fleeing persecution.


He said: “We are now seeing the rise of many populist groups across the world 
that are increasingly aggressive to those who adhere to a minority faith. All 
of this has deeply disturbing echoes of the dark days of the 1930s.

“My parents’ generation fought and died in a battle against intolerance, 
monstrous extremism and inhuman attempts to exterminate the Jewish population 
of Europe.”

The prince did not mention any politicians by name, but his address will be 
seen by some as a veiled reference to theelection of Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/19/electoral-college-votes-donald-trump-electors>
 in the US, therise of the far right in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/01/the-ruthlessly-effective-rebranding-of-europes-new-far-right>
, and increasingly hostile attitudes to refugees in the UK.

“That nearly 70 years later we should still be seeing such evil persecution is 
to me beyond all belief,” he said. “We owe it to those who suffered and died so 
horribly not to repeat the horrors of the past.”
BBC Radio 4 Today (@BBCr4today) 
"Whichever religious path we follow, the destination is the same: to value and 
respect the other person" - The Prince of Wales' TFTDpic.twitter.com/qUIeWar7cC 
<https://t.co/qUIeWar7cC>
 <https://twitter.com/BBCr4today/status/811842809401659392> December 22, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/BBCr4today/status/811842809401659392> 
Prince Charles <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/prince-charles> said religious 
hatred was on the increase, leading to a rise in refugees fleeing persecution.

“According to the United Nations, 5.8 million more people abandoned their 
homes in 2015 than the year before, bringing the annual total to a staggering 
65.3 million. That is almost equivalent to the entire population of the United 
Kingdom,” he said.

“The suffering doesn’t end when they arrive seeking refuge in a foreign land.”

The prince urged listeners this Christmas to remember “how the story of the 
Nativity unfolds with the fleeing of the holy family to escape violent 
persecution”.

He added: “We might also remember that when the prophet Muhammad migrated from 
Mecca to Medina, he did so because he too was seeking the freedom for himself 
and his followers to worship.”

Queen and Prince Philip delay Christmas travel plans after falling ill
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/21/queen-prince-philip-delay-christmas-travel-plans-falling-ill>
The prince recalled meeting a Jesuit priest from Syria. “He told me of mass 
kidnappings in parts of Syria and Iraq, and how he feared that Christians would 
be driven en masse out of lands described in the Bible,” he said. “He thought 
it quite possible there would be no Christians in Iraq within five years.”

He continued: “The scale of religious persecution around the world is not 
widely appreciated. Nor is it limited to Christians in the troubled regions of 
the Middle East.” He then cited a recent report that found an increase in 
attacks on minority faiths.

The Labour MEP Claude Moraes, chair of the European parliament’s civil 
liberties, justice and home affairs committee, welcomed the prince’s 
intervention.

He said it was “obvious” which politicians the prince was referring to, “but 
for protocol reasons he can’t say”. Moraes told the Guardian: “It was a good 
intervention I think when the right and rightwing UK newspapers dominate the 
anti-refugee, intolerance, and anti-EU protectionist narrative.”


The prince was invited to speak as part of BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Radio 4’s religious programming. It was 
the third time the heir to the throne had given the address. He first broadcast 
in the Thought for the Day slot on the anniversary of VE Day in 1995, and did 
so again in January 2000 to mark the new millennium.

He pre-recorded his message on Monday at his official London home, Clarence 
House, before it was announced that the Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh had
delayed plans to travel to Norfolk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/21/queen-prince-philip-delay-christmas-travel-plans-falling-ill>
 for Christmas, because of illness. The prince did not mention the health of 
his parents.
 