
Prince’s estate is worth about $200m (£160m) , a new court filing suggests.

It’s the first time a specific estimate has emerged publicly from court 
proceedings following Prince’s death in April. Since he left no known will, the 
rock superstar’s sister and five half-siblings are in line to inherit equal 
shares of the estate after taxes. By comparison, David Bowie’s estate was worth 
about $100m when he died in January, according to his will.

Prince estate releases first song from Paisley Park vaults, Moonbeam Levels
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/23/prince-estate-releases-first-song-from-paisley-park-vaults-moonbeam-levels-prince4ever>
Shortly after Prince’s death, when officials were beginning to place a value 
on his musical catalogue, unreleased music, the Paisley Park studio complex and 
other assets, one lawyer for the company overseeing the estate, Bremer Trust, 
said it could be worth somewhere between $100m and $300m.

Attorneys have avoided giving specific figures in public since then, but based 
on a court filing made public this week, Bremer Trust puts the value of the 
estate at about $200m, the Associated Press has calculated.

That figure is based on a memo that mentioned the company’s fee as $90,000 per 
month. That’s $1.08m per year. Bremer Trust uses a fee schedule based on the 
value of an estate, and the sliding percentage drops to 0.5% for any assets 
over $10m. The AP calculated that that annual fee works out to an estate worth 
$200m.

Two estate law experts not connected with the Prince 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/prince> case who reviewed the documents 
agreed with that conclusion.

Prince's estate sues Jay Z's Tidal over streaming rights to the pop star's 
music
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/16/prince-estate-sues-tidal-music-access-jay-z>
It’s possible the value will rise or fall. The final total won’t be determined 
until after more appraisals and taxing authorities decide what they think the 
estate is worth. Because of the looming tax bill, Bremer Trust may be 
lowballing the estate’s estimated value, Minneapolis estate law attorney Susan 
Link said.

Bremer Trust’s lead attorney on the estate, Laura Halferty, did not 
immediately respond to messages seeking comment. Halferty’s signature is on the 
memo that disclosed the $90,000 fee. Figures on the estate’s value and Bremer’s 
fee were redacted from earlier case documents.

The estates of some other dead rock superstars continue to generate big bucks. 
Forbes magazine’s annual list of top-earning dead celebrities for 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/12/michael-jackson-dead-celebrity-earnings-prince-david-bowie>
 showed Michael Jackson’s estate collected $825m, Elvis Presley’s earned $27m 
and Bowie’s took in $10.5m.

Prince’s estate took in $25m and sold more albums than any other dead musician 
to earn the No 5 spot on the list.

Even so, the taxman inevitably cometh, and Link says the estate will be 
“writing a cheque for a whole lot of money”. Prince’s estate has until 21 
January to file federal and state estate tax returns. It can get a six-month 
extension, but still must pay the estimated tax of about half the estate’s 
value, although it may be able to pay just 10% then and spread the rest out for 
10 years, Link said.
 