
A Scotland Yard investigation into an allegation that an undercover police 
officer set fire to a high street department store while infiltrating animal 
rights campaigners could be completed by July.

Since April last year, the Metropolitan police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/metropolitan-police> have been investigating a 
claim that the undercover officer, Bob Lambert,planted an incendiary device in 
Debenhams in Harrow, London in July 1987 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/20/met-opens-inquiry-after-claims-undercover-officer-set-fire-to-shop>
, causing £340,000 of damage.

A court has heard that police estimate that their investigation could be 
concluded by the middle of this year.

Lambert, who used the identity of a dead child while he masqueraded as a 
radical campaigner for five years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/feb/21/anatomy-of-betrayal-undercover-police>
, has consistently denied the claim that he planted the device.

The allegation had been made in parliament in 2012 by Green MP Caroline Lucas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/carolinelucas> (see here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/jun/13/police> and here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/jun/13/police-spies-animal-rights>).

She aired the claim that Lambert had taken part 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/undercover-with-paul-lewis-and-rob-evans/2012/jun/25/undercover-police-arson-debenhams-bob-lambert>
 in a plot with two animal rights campaigners to set fire to three branches of
Debenhams <https://www.theguardian.com/business/debenhams> in a protest against 
the sale of fur.

The two campaigners, Geoff Sheppard and Andrew Clarke, were jailed for four 
years and three years respectively for their roles in the arson attacks.

Lucas told MPs that Sheppard had alleged that Lambert had planted the device 
perhaps in “a move designed to bolster Lambert’s credibility and reinforce the 
impression of a genuine and dedicated activist.” (The transcript of her speech 
is here) 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201213/cmhansrd/cm120613/halltext/120613h0001.htm#12061355000002>
.

In a previous statement, Lambert has said that the aim of his covert 
deployment had been to “identify and prosecute members of the Animal Liberation 
Front who were then engaged in widespread incendiary and explosive device 
campaigns against vivisectors, the meat and fur trades.” He said he succeeded 
in getting Clarke and Sheppard arrested and imprisoned.

He has said: “It was necessary to create the false impression that I was a 
committed animal rights extremist to gain intelligence so as to disrupt serious 
criminal conspiracies. However, I did not commit serious crime such as planting 
an incendiary device at the [Debenhams] Harrow store.”

After Lucas aired the claim about Lambert in 2012, Clarke and Sheppard 
launched an appeal against their convictions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/mar/07/activists-appeal-convictions-involvement-police-spy>
.

 How the Guardian reported the trial of Geoff Sheppard and Andrew Clarke in 
June 1988. Photograph: The Guardian 
At a preliminary hearing regarding their appeal, the high court heard that the 
Met team scrutinising the claim estimates that its investigation could end by 
July.

The lord chief justice, Lord Thomas of Cwmgiedd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/-three-judges-mps-vote-brexit-article-50-high-court>
, who presided over the hearing at the end of November, said a decision on how 
the appeal would proceed would be made after July.

The Metropolitan Police has disclosed some details of the investigation, 
codenamed Operation Sparkler, following afreedom of information 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/freedomofinformation> request by the 
Guardian.

Five officers have worked on the investigation which - according to the latest 
estimate - has cost £252,000.

The team had interviewed seven individuals as witnesses or potential witnesses 
and seized one exhibit. The Met added that no-one has been arrested or 
interviewed under caution during the investigation.

The team had consulted prosecutors four times - in May, August, September and 
October last year.

The investigation is headed by an officer in the Met’s Directorate of 
Professional Standards 
<http://news.met.police.uk/news/re-investigation-into-the-planting-of-incendiary-device-160817?utm_campaign=send_list&utm_medium=email&utm_source=sendgrid>
, the division responsible for examining allegations of misconduct by police 
officers.

Lambert fathered a child with an activist, Jacqu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/oct/23/police-compensation-payout-woman-undercover-officer>
i, while he was undercover in the 1980s and then abandoned them when his covert 
mission finished. For background on Lambert, seehere  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/dec/23/bob-lambert-ex-undercover-officer-quits-st-andrews-london-metropolitan>
andhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/undercover-with-paul-lewis-and-rob-evans/2015/jan/06/university-under-pressure-to-sack-controversial-former-undercover-spy-bob-lambert>
.

• If you would like to pass on information in confidence, you can send a 
message via the Guardian’s SecureDrop service (see howhere 
<https://securedrop.theguardian.com/>).
 