
It wasn’t meant to be like this.

Hillary Clinton was supposed to be president. The Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> were supposed to be competitive 
in the Senate and the House.

In that scenario, Bernie Sanders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/bernie-sanders>, the democratic socialist 
senator from Vermont, might have been in effect sidelined as Democrats hunkered 
down for four years of a steady, if unspectacular, continuation of Barack 
Obama’s centrist agenda.

But instead, Donald Trump won the election – with an anti-establishment 
message that bore some similarities to Sanders’ own government-outsider 
election bid – and Sanders has found himself promoted from anti-establishment 
outsider to the Democrats’ leadership bench.

Bernie Sanders meets Spike Lee: ‘Where do we go? Where is the hope?’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/26/bernie-sanders-spike-lee-conversation-donald-trump-us-politics>
Indeed, some Sanders progressives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/17/bernie-sanders-rally-democrats-capitol-hill-trans-pacific-partnership>
 now see Trump’s victory as a validation of the populist agenda Sanders 
championed during his campaign.

“Progressives are used to punching up, but here we find ourselves in a real 
position of credibility and power,” said Raul Grijalva of Arizona, a co-chair 
of the Congressional Progressive caucus.

As the party seeks to rebuild in 2017, caucus members believe the election of 
the DNC chair is an early test of whether Democrats will embrace economic 
populism.

Sanders’ first priority is to elect Keith Ellison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/12/democrats-dnc-party-chair-progressives-ellison-dean-omalley>
, the progressive congressman from Minnesota, as DNC chair. Ellison, who is 
seen as the frontrunner, is being challenged by thelabor secretary, Tom Perez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/15/thomas-perez-democratic-national-committee-dnc-chair-bid>
, who enters with support from allies of Clinton and the Obama administration.

“Right now we are fighting for the chair of the DNC and it is truly emblematic 
of the division within the Democrats,” said RoseAnn DeMoro, executive director 
of the National Nurses United, which endorsed Sanders during the primary. “If 
the Democratic party rejects the Sanders base, it will be at their extreme 
peril.”

On a tactical level, all eyes are on 2018 and how to elect progressives to 
seats at the local, state and national level.

“We have to do in 2018 what the Tea Party did in 2010,” said Dan Cantor, the 
founder and executive director of the Working Families party.

Though Sanders has become synonymous with the progressive movement, activists 
say 2017 won’t hinge on voters feeling the Bern. It will be about empowering 
the next generation ofprogressive leaders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/20/donald-trump-protests-economy-opposition>
.

“We need younger voters to get engaged and to lead, and not just in political 
office. We need young shop stewards and young activists, too,” said Larry 
Cohen, the former president of the Communications Workers of America and the 
head of Our Revolution. “We older people need to move over and encourage these 
young people to rise up. That’s where the energy is. That’s where our future 
is.”

Moumita Ahmed is among those young activists working to capitalize on the 
gains Sanders made in 2016.

She is one of the organizers of the million millennials march, which will take 
place in Washington the Saturday after the inauguration, and she said Sanders 
had an important role to play in telling his supporters how they can get 
involved in grassroots activism.

“He’s the one with the platform. He’s the one who’s going to get media 
attention,” Ahmed said.

“So he really needs to let people know what the grassroots is doing – so that 
we can absorb people’s energy.

“Because there’s so many people who are out there right now who don’t know 
what to do, but they’re ready to do something. So Bernie can sort of focus 
everyone.”

Charles Lenchner, co-founder of People for Bernie, an independent group which 
campaigned for Sanders during the Democratic primary, said Sanders was already 
showing a willingness to fill that role.


“Just look at him,” Lencher said. 

“He’s like the Energizer bunny. He’s running around every single day. There’s 
press releases, there’s town halls, there’s livestreams.”

Sanders held one of those town halls in Kenosha, Wisconsin 
<http://www.vox.com/policy-and-politics/2016/12/13/13933116/bernie-sanders-chris-hayes>
, on 13 December. Hemanaged to find common ground 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/bernie-sanders-town-hall_us_5850445de4b0bd9c3dff2d91>
 with Trump supporters in the audience on the ills of trade deals like the 
North American Free Trade Agreement and on the failure of establishment 
politics.

Alongside public appearances, Sanders also set up the “Our Revolution” 
organization, which aims to harness the energy that the Vermont senator’s 
presidential bid created.

In the November election, Our Revolution threw its support behind progressive 
candidates, encouraging people who had supported Sanders to fundraise and 
door-knock for local politicians.

Bernie Sanders rallies supporters with call for new direction in Democratic 
party
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/17/bernie-sanders-rally-democrats-capitol-hill-trans-pacific-partnership>
Our Revolution’s website has a list of ballot initiatives 
<https://ourrevolution.com/ballot-initiatives/> that activists can support and 
a calendar of events that people can attend.

But Lenchner said progressives should be wary of relying solely on Sanders to 
lead a grassroots movement.

“His job is to be a legislator and hold the right positions and to message on 
the issues. But then it’s up to us in the movement to do with that what we 
will,” Lenchner said.

“Our job is much more at the level of our own communities, our own 
constituencies, our own organizations.


“Our job is to create the wave that is going to push back against Trump and 
his allies in elections.”
 