
Initially, I didn’t plan to attend the Women’s March 
<https://www.womensmarch.com/> on Washington, slated for the day after the 
inauguration.

Though a long-time feminist activist and a passionate proponent of nonviolent 
resistance, I had a long list of reasons I didn’t want to protest on 21 
January. At first, I blamed the aftershocks of the terror I felt after 
realizing that a significant amount of voters willfully chose to affirm hateful 
rhetoric, xenophobia, corruption and sexually predatory behavior.

Then, I reasoned that my concerns about the march’s shaky inception 
<http://fusion.net/story/369581/million-women-march-protest-appropriation/>, 
initial lack of diverse leadership and a permit were not only a hindrance, but 
a potential deal breaker.

My mom had other ideas.

She called on a recent Monday at sunrise. “Get ready for a trip to Washington, 
DC. We’re going to that women’s march,” she said. Mom was a seasoned activist 
who marched with Dr Martin Luther King in 1963, survived theOrangeburg Massacre 
<https://www.democracynow.org/2015/6/25/from_the_vault_amy_goodman_on> and 
participated in lunch counter sit-ins during segregation. “The election results 
illustrate how far we need to go. Let’s get to work.”

She’s right. Although the arc of change may be long, I’ve witnessed first-hand 
how amplifying shared values can build momentum, shift culture and even 
influence policy over time. Carrying the banner leading2004’s million-person 
March for Women’s Lives 
<http://content.time.com/time/specials/packages/article/0,28804,2088114_2087975_2087969,00.html>
 was my own rite of passage.

Eclipsed only by the exhilaration of marrying my soulmate, the march was one 
of the greatest days of my life. Even though I participated in activism with 
family and friends since childhood, working as Planned Parenthood’s national 
youth organizer for the event defined my trajectory for over a decade. Most 
importantly, the 2004 march taught me that my voice was powerful and that 
exercising my hard-won right to free expression and assembly was a birthright 
my ancestors fought and died for.


That’s why, even though another march to protest similar issues 12 years later 
may make it look like we haven’t made progress, that isn’t the case. We’re 
playing a much longer game. As Coretta Scott King said when she spoke years ago 
at my college: “Struggle is a never-ending process. Freedom is never really 
won, you earn it and win it in every generation.”

Every time I hear speculation that Trump’s administration will be like the 
second Bush administration on steroids, I remember that I participated in the 
formation of a broad coalition of gender justice and civil liberties 
organizations that mobilized over a million people to oppose attacks on 
reproductive healthcare and equal rights during a hostile political and 
cultural climate.


And in the years following that 2004 march, emergency contraception became 
legal over the counter, more reproductive health and rights organizations 
integrated intersectional frameworks (with admittedly more work to do), and the 
Affordable Care Act expanded access to preventative care and contraceptive 
coverage with no copay. Moreover, we’ve had a pro-choice president for the past 
eight years, and a trailblazing popular vote winner who famously proclaimed 
that “women’s rights are human rights”.

And all this happened just in my lifetime. Our foremothers – and my own mother 
– have been working for decades to set up our recent triumphs. Journalist Ida B 
Wells insisted on marchingwith her state 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/she-the-people/wp/2013/03/03/despite-the-tremendous-risk-african-american-women-marched-for-suffrage-too/?utm_term=.e6212c4d6699>
 in the 1913 Women’s Suffrage Parade, despite the Congressional Women’s Unit’s 
request that black women march in a segregated group.

Joining the likes of Wells is everyone from the women-led Rosenstrasse Protest 
<http://forward.com/sisterhood/356125/why-one-holocaust-survivors-granddaughter-rejects-proposed-muslim-registry/>
 in 1940s Berlin to theanti-lynching movement 
<https://www.thenation.com/article/its-time-21st-century-anti-lynching-movement/>
 that set the stage for the Civil Rights Movement, to the movement for black 
lives founded by three black women, to the demonstration at Standing Rock. 
History has repeatedly shown that dissent through direct action matters – 
especially for those of us non-billionaires who lack the highest levels of 
political and financial influence.

Marching won’t guarantee instantaneous change. But history has shown us that 
power is taken, never given, so resistance is critical if we don’t want our 
freedom eroded.

My ancestors left us roadmaps for this fight. That why I’ll be descending on 
the Capitol with thousands of women and our allies on 21 January. The march’s 
leadership has becomemore diverse 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/women-march-on-washington-organizers_us_58407ee8e4b017f37fe388d1>
, and they recently secured a permit which would theoretically provide more 
safety and access for marchers who are disproportionately targeted by law 
enforcement.

I’ll be standing for equality, and adding my voice to the chorus calling for 
accountability, confronting power imbalances and abuse and condemning hate.


Most of all, I hope the reverberation of our voices and those of the people 
marching in 107 cities <http://womensmarchonamerica.org/> worldwide will 
inspire bystanders to own their power and rise with us. It’s time to earn our 
generation’s freedom.
 