
Paris Saint-Germain <https://www.theguardian.com/football/parisstgermain> have 
parted company with their manager Laurent Blanc.

Blanc, 50, failed to guide PSG past the quarter-final of the Champions League 
last season and has paid the price, despite much success inLigue 1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ligue1football>. The former France coach 
won three league titles, and domestic trebles in the past two years, having 
been appointed three years ago.

PSG have reached the Champions League quarter-final stage in each of the last 
four seasons and were eliminated each time. Blanc signed a two-year contract 
extension in February but the Qatari-owned club confirmed his departure on 
Monday, withSevilla’s Unai Emery linked with the post 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/12/unai-emery-laurent-blanc-paris-saint-germain-sevilla>
.

Eden Hazard: ‘PSG not part of my plans because I feel good at Chelsea’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/05/eden-hazard-psg-chelsea-contract-manager-antonio-conte>
A statement read: “In a respectful atmosphere, negotiations were completed on 
27 June. An agreement, by common accord, preserves the interests of both 
parties. Assistant coach Jean-Louis Gasset and head fitness trainer Philippe 
Lambert also leave the club as part of the agreement.

“As the club decides to head in a new direction for the management of the 
first team, it wishes to thank Laurent Blanc and expresses its gratitude for 
the work accomplished over the last three years by Laurent and his staff. 
During his three years at the club, Laurent Blanc won 11 trophies, including 
two national quadruples, and left a significant mark on the great history of 
Paris Saint-Germain.”

The PSG chief executive, Nasser Al-Khelaifi, added: “As we embark on a new 
chapter in the development of the club, I would like to thank Laurent Blanc for 
everything he has achieved over the last three years, both in terms of the 
playing style and results. I wish him the best for his future challenges.”
 