
A senior Conservative MP has described the continuing cover-up of Britain’s 
complicity in the kidnapping and torture of detainees in the “war on terror” – 
and of who authorised it – as a shocking scandal that must be resolved without 
further delay.

Andrew Tyrie, the chair of the all-party parliamentary group on extraordinary 
rendition, made clear that an answer to the key question – who knew about the 
secret operations – was getting closer.

Tyrie, also chair of the Commons liaison committee of senior backbenchers and 
the Commons Treasury committee, was responding on Wednesday tothe Guardian’s 
disclosure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/31/revealed-britain-rendition-policy-rift-between-spy-agencies-mi6-mi5>
 that the former head of MI5 was incensed when she discovered the role played 
by MI6 in abductions that led to suspected extremists being tortured.

Blair government's rendition policy led to rift between UK spy agencies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/31/revealed-britain-rendition-policy-rift-between-spy-agencies-mi6-mi5>
Lady Eliza Manningham-Buller was so angry that she threw out a number of her 
sister agency’s staff and banned them from working at MI5’s headquarters at 
Thames House in London.

She wrote to Tony Blair <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair>, then 
the prime minister, to complain about the conduct of MI6 officers, saying their 
actions had threatened Britain’s intelligence gathering and may have 
compromised the security and safety of MI5 officers and their informants.

Her letter was discovered by investigators examining whether British 
intelligence officers should face criminal charges over the rendition of the 
exiled Libyan opposition leader Abdul Hakim Belhaj.

“This letter strongly suggests Tony Blair, the former head of MI6 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/mi6> Sir Richard Dearlove, and Eliza 
Manningham-Buller, the head of MI5, all knew that secret agents were engaged in 
the rendering, and possibly subsequent maltreatment, of prisoners,” Tyrie told 
the Guardian. “It is now essential to establish who authorised this rendition. 
The chances of it not having been authorised would appear low. Were it 
unauthorised it would be criminal.”

Section 7 of the 1994 Intelligence Services Act protects MI6 officers from 
prosecution for actions anywhere in the world that would otherwise be illegal. 
They would be protected as long as their actions were authorised in writing by 
the foreign secretary, who is the minister responsible for MI6. At the time the 
office was held byJack Straw <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jackstraw>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fmi5-chief-right-to-be-disgusted-over-mi6-role-rendition-blair%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc2444972ba2d3d19a6bee7afdebb2c351f11c87%2F0_122_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Public%20need%20answers%20in%20'shocking'%20MI6%20rendition%20scandal%2C%20says%20senior%20Tory&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fmi5-chief-right-to-be-disgusted-over-mi6-role-rendition-blair%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Public%20need%20answers%20in%20%27shocking%27%20MI6%20rendition%20scandal%2C%20says%20senior%20Tory&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fmi5-chief-right-to-be-disgusted-over-mi6-role-rendition-blair%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc2444972ba2d3d19a6bee7afdebb2c351f11c87%2F0_122_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Eliza Manningham-Buller. Photograph: D Dudley/Pacific/Barcroft 
Tyrie told the Guardian: “It is a scandal and shocking that, after nearly a 
decade of demanding answers, the public still don’t know the scope and limits 
of the UK’s complicity in kidnap and torture. Public confidence in the security 
services has been eroded as a consequence. We need them. It is now essential 
that the prime minister ensures that the ISC [parliament’s intelligence and 
security committee] are able to get to the bottom of this, and without delay. 
Only by doing so can a line be drawn under this sorry episode.”

Tyrie clashed with David Cameron at a meeting of the liaison committee in 
January, arguing that the ISC should have more effective powers to scrutinise 
the security and intelligence agencies.

Separately, a leading human rights group said Manningham-Buller was “right to 
be disgusted” over MI6’s involvement insecret rendition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/may/22/us-extraordinary-rendition-programme>
 – the seizure and interrogation of suspected extremists.

Cori Crider, a lawyer at the international human rights organisation Reprieve, 
said: “You know MI6 under Blair’s government were running amok when their role 
in CIA kidnap operations turned even the stomachs ofMI5 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/mi5>. Yet now, according to this report, 
officials are exercising mass tactical amnesia over who signed off the most 
appalling abuses in the ‘war on terror’. The notion that ‘the CPS [Crown 
Prosecution Service] cannot bring a charge against a government policy’ of 
torture is obviously wrong.”

Crider added: “Lady Manningham-Buller was right to be disgusted. The rendition 
of the Belhaj and al-Saadi families toLibya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya> wasn’t just illegal – it broke every 
value Britons hold dear. It’s a damning assessment when even the hard-nosed 
head of MI5 could see that delivering a pregnant woman and four children to 
Gaddafi’s dungeons was wrong, pointless, and made Britain less safe. There 
clearly is a case to answer here, and Reprieve aren’t the only ones who think 
so. We eagerly anticipate the long-delayed decision of the CPS.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fmi5-chief-right-to-be-disgusted-over-mi6-role-rendition-blair%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F149c4a392ba3d409f72945615a4cb0150fae6d3a%2F0_40_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Public%20need%20answers%20in%20'shocking'%20MI6%20rendition%20scandal%2C%20says%20senior%20Tory&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fmi5-chief-right-to-be-disgusted-over-mi6-role-rendition-blair%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Public%20need%20answers%20in%20%27shocking%27%20MI6%20rendition%20scandal%2C%20says%20senior%20Tory&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fmi5-chief-right-to-be-disgusted-over-mi6-role-rendition-blair%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F149c4a392ba3d409f72945615a4cb0150fae6d3a%2F0_40_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 Reprieve’s Cori Crider. Photograph: Pablo Porciuncula/AFP/Getty Images 
A spokesperson for Leigh Day, Belhaj’s lawyers, said: “These revelations are 
extraordinary, we hope that the CPS does take the decision to prosecute those 
allegedly responsible for illegal acts of rendition. The courts can then 
determine the full extent of the role played by the British government, and its 
security services, in sending our client Abdul Hakim Belhaj, along with his 
pregnant wife, back to Libya to be imprisoned and brutally tortured.”

Though government sources in the UK and US claim Blair and Straw knew about 
the rendition, both men have denied wrongdoing, saying they either did not know 
of the MI6 operation or had no recollection of it.

Manningham-Buller’s letter caused a serious and prolonged breakdown of trust 
between Britain’s domestic and foreign spy agencies provoked by the Blair 
government’s support for rendition.

Belhaj, a critic of the former Libyan dictator Muammar Gaddafi, was seized in 
Bangkok in March 2004 in a joint UK-US operation and handed over to the CIA. He 
alleges the CIA tortured him and injected him with “truth serum” before flying 
him and his family to Tripoli to be interrogated.

Scotland Yard has concluded its investigation into the alleged involvement of 
intelligence officers and officials in Libyan rendition operations and an 
announcement about whether or not to prosecute is imminent.

Whitehall sources have told the Guardian that police and prosecutors have been 
reviewing the issue for months. They say investigators have been frustrated by 
potentially key witnesses saying they were unable to recall who had authorised 
British involvement in the rendition programme, who else knew about it, and who 
knew the precise details of the Belhaj abduction.

When the Libyan renditions came to light, Straw said: “No foreign secretary 
can know all the details of what its intelligence agencies are doing at any one 
time.” He has been interviewed by the police but only as a potential witness.

Government officials, insisting on anonymity, said MI6 was following 
“ministerially authorised government policy”. Blair said he did not have “any 
recollection at all” of the Belhaj rendition.


 