
Last week, the literary world gasped when one of the largest publishers in the 
United States, Simon & Schuster,rewarded America’s most infamous internet 
troll, Milo Yiannopoulos, with a $250,000 book deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2017/jan/03/milo-yiannopoulos-250000-book-deal-fury-leslie-jones-simon-schuster-breitbart-alt-right>
. But we probably should have seen it coming. After all, 2016 taught us that 
ridiculing women, people of colour, Muslims and members of the LGBTQ community 
can make someone immensely popular.

Leslie Jones accuses Simon & Schuster over Milo Yiannopoulos book deal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2017/jan/03/milo-yiannopoulos-250000-book-deal-fury-leslie-jones-simon-schuster-breitbart-alt-right>
For Simon & Schuster, it can also be immensely profitable. During 
Yiannopoulos’s tenure at Breitbart – where he’s told gay people to “get back in 
the closet 
<http://www.breitbart.com/big-government/2015/06/17/gay-rights-have-made-us-dumber-its-time-to-get-back-in-the-closet/>
” and women to “log off 
<http://www.breitbart.com/milo/2016/07/05/solution-online-harassment-simple-women-log-off/>
” the internet – he has amassed more than 1 million followers on Facebook.
Threshold Editions <http://www.thresholdeditions.com/>, the Simon & Schuster 
imprint dedicated to “innovative ideas of contemporary conservatism”, has a hit 
on its hands.

But Yiannapoulos is not a conservative intellectual leader with a political 
agenda. He’s a clickbait grifter who has made a name for himself spewing hate 
speech. As the editor-in-chief of a small literary review, I wanted Simon & 
Schuster to know that broadcasting his rhetoric would have real-world 
consequences. So I made a decision that has nothing to do with political 
ideology and everything to do with human rights and decency: theChicago Review 
of Books <http://chireviewofbooks.com> will not cover a single Simon & Schuster 
book in 2017.

According to thousands of Twitter and Facebook users, our stance is equivalent 
to censorship, fascism and book-burning. By choosing not to review Simon & 
Schuster books for a year, they claim we’re contradicting both the first 
amendment and our own mission to cover “diverse voices”. In response, they’ve 
photoshopped my head onto a Nazi soldier, posted my photo with the caption 
“WARNING! This man was just accused of molesting young children!” and expressed 
their hope that the next wave ofChicago shootings 
<http://abc7chicago.com/news/6-killed-55-wounded-in-chicago-shootings-over-new-years-weekend/1682336/>
 might “take out” some of our editors.

But we aren’t infringing upon Yiannopoulos’s or Simon & Schuster’s free 
speech. Yiannopoulos has the constitutional right to say whatever he wants. He
can call Leslie Jones 
<http://www.vox.com/2016/7/20/12226070/milo-yiannopoulus-twitter-ban-explained> 
a “black dude” who is “barely literate”. He can call Melissa McCarthy, Kristen 
Wiig and Kate McKinnon “fat” and “ugly”. He cancall transgender people 
“mentally ill” 
<http://www.delawareonline.com/story/news/2016/10/27/ud-uproar-over-anti-transgender-speaker/92842788/>
 and “retarded,” and mock a transgender student during a speech at her own 
school.

And of course, Simon & Schuster has every right to increase Yiannopoulos’s 
platform by publishing his book. However, free speech doesn’t protect anyone 
from repercussions in a free market. The literary community – and society at 
large – has the freedom to respond in kind. That’s why the UK division of Simon 
& Schuster has decidednot to publish Yiannopoulos’s book 
<http://www.thebookseller.com/news/ss-uk-will-not-publish-milo-yiannopoulous-457066>
. It’s why some professionals, such as author Danielle Henderson and audiobook 
producer Emmett Plant, are reconsidering their relationships with the publisher.

Some writers, editors and publicists have pointed out that our decision isn’t 
fair to hundreds of other Simon & Schuster authors who had nothing to do with 
the publisher’s decision to sign Yiannopoulos. I agree. It’s unfair. Simon & 
Schuster will publish some wonderful books in 2017 through imprints I admire, 
such as 37 Ink, Salaam Reads and Touchstone. But I strongly believe the 
literary community must hold the publisher accountable.

Why? Because rhetoric like his – which targets racial, religious and cultural 
minorities – invites discrimination. It arguably encourages people such asOmar 
Mateen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/18/orlando-nightlcub-shooting-pulse-florida-attack-timeline>
 andDylann Roof 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/12/charleston-shooting-trial-dylann-roof-list-black-churches>
 to think of entire groups of people as less than human. And in his2012 book 
The Harm in Hate Speech 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/06/24/books/review/the-harm-in-hate-speech-by-jeremy-waldron.html>
, legal philosopher Jeremy Waldron writes that hate speech sends a clear 
message to its victims: “Don’t be fooled into thinking you are welcome here.”

In a statement, Simon & Schuster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/30/milo-yiannopoulos-book-deal-simon-schuster-dangerous-outcry>
 assured readers they “do not and never have condoned discrimination or hate 
speech in any form”. But how is handing a purveyor of hate speech a $250,000 
megaphone not condoning his rhetoric? And as an editor and book critic, how is 
giving Simon & Schuster free publicity not condoning their decision?

After the Chicago Review of Books attracted so much attention for our stance, 
and writers more talented than me asked us to reconsider, I lost sleep. But on 
Saturday, when the biographer of a lesbian artist criticised Simon & Schuster, 
Yiannopoulos responded: “There is only one place for lesbians: porn 
<https://www.facebook.com/plugins/comment_embed.php?href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.facebook.com%2Fmyiannopoulos%2Fposts%2F812443175560246%3Fcomment_id%3D812445818893315%26reply_comment_id%3D812464515558112&include_parent=false>
.”

I remain convinced that to protect the victims of discrimination from its 
traumatic and sometimes deadly consequences, the literary community must stand 
against anyone – author or publisher – who peddles hate speech for profit.
 