
The manager of a record shop in Nottingham who displayed in his window the new 
bestselling LP record by the Sex Pistols, which displays on its sleeve the 
title Never Mind the Bollocks, Here's the Sex Pistols has been charged with 
offences under the 1889 Indecent Advertisement Act.

Managers of record shops in Notting Hill and Marble Arch, London, have been 
charged with contravening the Indecent Advertisement section of the 1824 
Vagrancy Act for displaying the sleeve. Another shop, Small Wonder records in 
Walthamstow, east London, has had a visit from the police and has covered up 
the offending word.

Both the managers charged in London are at shops owned by Virgin Records, the 
company which produces the Sex Pistols' recordings. The two men, David Martin 
and Johnny Fewings, refused to take down the record displays after being warned 
by police, according to a record company spokesman.

Al Clarke, press officer for Virgin Records, said: "The LP was released 11 
days ago. It brought in Â£250,000 before it was even released and went straight 
to number one in the charts."

Melody Maker, the musical paper, had covered up the word "bollocks" in an 
advertisement, and two national newspapers had printed the word as a series of 
asterisks. John Mortimer QC was to represent the company in all three cases.

The Independent Television Companies' Association (ITCA) and the Association 
of Independent Radio Contractors (AIRC), the trade associations which examine 
advertising for commercial television and radio have banned advertisements for 
the record.

The BBC said last night that it had banned none of the tracks, but a spokesman 
for Capital Radio said that it had been advised by the Independent Broadcasting 
Authority not to play four of the tracks - Bodies, New York, Seventeen and 
Submission. The IBA said later that the ultimate decision was for individual 
companies.

The word "bollocks" appears in the supplement to the complete Oxford English 
Dictionary, where its meaning is defined as testicles. The dictionary says that 
the first recorded use of the word was in 1744 in The School of Venus by D 
Thomas who wrote: "You can now without blushing call prick, stones, bollocks, 
c--t, arse (sic) and the like names." However, a detailed Shakespearian 
knowledge may be needed to appreciate the full implications of the record's 
title. For in Henry V, Act Two, Scene Two, thuggish Pistol says: "I do retort 
the solus in thy bowels. For I can take, and Pistol's cock is up, and flashing 
fire will follow."
 