
Queensland’s largest operating solar farm has plugged into the national 
electricity grid and is set to generate enough power for almost 10,000 
households by the end of 2016.

The Barcaldine remote community solar farm, in the state’s central west 
outback, connected to the national electricity market on Wednesday, more than a 
month ahead of schedule.

The early delivery of the 20 megawatt plant, one of the first in the country 
to be funded by the Australian RenewableEnergy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> Agency, was evidence of the 
growing speed and proficiency of big solar developers, said Arena’s chief 
executive, Ivor Frischknecht.

It is to be followed by a dozen new large-scale solar farms to be built across 
Australia by the end of 2017, which would ramp up national solar capacity to 
enough power for 150,000 average homes.

Those plants – six in Queensland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland>, five in New South 
Wales and one in Western Australia – would be the fruits of an Arena funding 
program expected to “unlock almost $1bn in commercial investment and boost 
regional economies”, Frischknecht said.

The Barcaldine plant developer, Elecnor – one of a number of Spanish companies 
invested in Australian solar – is a transnational corporation with interests 
from gas and rail to aerospace. Elecnor was backed by $22.8m in funding 
commitments by Arena and $20m in loans from the federal government’s “green 
bank”, the Clean Energy Finance Corporation.

Australia's biggest CBD solar power project open to public investment
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/15/australias-biggest-cbd-solar-power-project-open-to-public-investment>
Barcaldine’s mayor, Rob Chandler said the project, which features 78,000 solar 
panels, had “enthusiastic supporters” in a local community that saw “the great 
benefits it can bring to outback communities like ours”.

“If it’s one thing we have a lot of it’s sun so it’s great to see it being 
harnessed to power the electricity grid.”

Frischknecht said: “As well as generating clean energy, the project is 
demonstrating how project developers can monetise network benefits and 
ultimately how solar farms can improve network efficiency and reliability at 
the edge of the grid.”

Elecnor’s business developer manager, Manuel Lopez-Velez, said the Barcaldine 
solar farm would generate about 57,000 megawatt hours a year, “an energy 
consumption equivalent to approximately 9,800 households”.

Arena has committed $1.1bn in funding to developers of more than 270 renewable 
energy projects, who are expected to at least match that investment.

Cloud-tracking cameras to tackle dips in solar power output
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/09/cloud-tracking-cameras-to-tackle-dips-in-solar-power-output>
This includes $20m to Origin Energy’s 107 megawatt Darling Downs solar farm at 
Dalby, set to be Australia’s largest operating plant by the end of next year.

Another project, Genex Power’s 50 megawatt Kidson solar farm west of 
Townsville, will be built on an old goldmine site.

The largely coal-fired national electricity market 
<https://www.aemo.com.au/Electricity/National-Electricity-Market-NEM> – which 
excludes WA and the Northern Territory – has a total generating capacity of 
45,000 megawatts, supplying 200m megawatt hours a year to about 9m customers.

The energy sector is Australia’s largest source of carbon pollution, making up 
35.4% of total emissions 
<http://www.environment.gov.au/system/files/resources/248188d2-376e-4831-af8b-e995fd585fb0/files/national-inventory-economic-sector-2014.pdf>
 (186m tonnes of CO2) in 2014.
 