Jimi Hendrix died on 18 September 1970. During his lifetime he released three 
studio albums. How many Hendrix studio albums have emerged since his death?  
None  Five  12 We can’t even keep count of the number of posthumous live albums 
and compilations.  19 Dee Dee Ramone would have turned 54 this week. Under what 
name did he attempt to start a career as a rapper in the 1980s?  Dee Dee King 
His album Standing in the Spotlight is “one of the worst recordings of all 
time” according to AllMusic.  Da Sick Brudda  MC Ramone  Bassman 53rd and 3rd 
Kylie Minogue entered the charts this week in 1990 with Better the Devil You 
Know. What did producer Pete Waterman say the song was about?  An encouragement 
to Kylie to worship Lucifer instead of Angra Mainyu.  A warning to McVities 
that chocolate rich tea biscuits would never catch on.  A metaphor for UK 
politics, telling Tory MPs not to move against John Major.  A suggestion to 
Kylie that she should stop cavorting with Michael Hutchence.Stock, Aitken and 
Waterman thought she should stick with Jason Donovan. This week in 1970, a 
Florida court acquitted Doors singer Jim Morrison of lewd and lascivious 
behaviour, but did convict him of another offence. What had he done to find 
himself facing charges?  Mimed sexual intercourse with a police officer while 
tripping.  Exposed his penis onstage. He denied doing so, but died before his 
appeal could be heard.  Painted the word “knob” on his forehead before a TV 
appearance.  Distributed pornographic magazines in a retirement community. The 
BBC aired the first edition of The Old Grey Whistle Test this week in 1971. 
Which esteemed Guardian writer was its first presenter?  Polly Toynbee  Sir 
Simon Jenkins  Aditya Chakrabortty  Richard Williams Richard also sang on Give 
Peace a Chance and produced Television’s first demos. Happy 65th birthday David 
Coverdale out of Whitesnake and Deep Purple! How many people, aside from 
Coverdale, have served as members of Whitesnake down the years?  Six  25  39 
Coverdale seemed surprised when given this information by the Guardian last 
year.  56 And happy 34th birthday to Billie Piper! Everyone knows her first No 
1 was Because We Want To, but what was her third and final UK No 1 called?  
Girlfriend  Day and Night It also reached No 62 in Switzerland, pop fans.  
Honey to the Bee  Reek of Putrefaction This time last year, Justin Bieber was 
No 1 in the singles chart. But which unlikely record reached a peak of No 6 in 
the physical sales chart?  Champion Versions by the Beta Band It had been 
repressed by the Rhino reissues label.  One Fing ‘n’ Anuvver by Chas and Dave  
Metal Box by PiL  A Salt With a Deadly Pepa by Salt-N-Pepa Rod Stewart was No 1 
this week in 1975 with Sailing. The following year it was used extensively in a 
BBC television series documenting what?  The sailing exploits of Sir Francis 
Chichester aboard the Gipsy Moth  The history of the America's Cup  The story 
of the Battle of Trafalgar  The working lives of the crew of the aircraft 
carrier HMS Ark RoyalThe 10-part series was called Sailor. How many armed 
police did it take to arrest the Charlatans on arrival in New York this week in 
1995?  Two  Six  24 The group had been accused of trying to disrupt the plane’s 
flight path, being drunk, spitting and fiddling with the in-flight 
entertainment.  53  You got…  Challenge your friends Submit answers  