
After the deaths of David Bowie and Prince, a slightly depressing theory 
started to gain traction. It suggested that their departures represented not 
only the passing of two uniquely talented artists, but also of an entire era: 
the era of pop. Nobody now could hope to have the kind of impact that Bowie or 
Prince did, because pop music was no longer the great driving force of youth 
culture. For decades, it had been, in the writer Jon Savage’s lovely phrase, 
“the teenage news”, the primary means by which everything from fashion to 
politics had been mediated to a mass audience. Now, that role was played by 
social media. It didn’t mean that people weren’t making great albums or selling 
millions of singles or doing groundbreaking, thrilling things, but that people 
cared less about it: pop was no longer driving the conversation in the way it 
once had.

Then, two days after Prince died, Beyoncé released Lemonade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/24/beyonce-lemonade-review-a-woman-not-to-be-messed-with>
. It was, by anyone’s standards, a hugely accomplished and timely album: on a 
musical level, it demonstrated her mastery of pretty much every genre to which 
she chose to turn her hand, from country to hard rock to high-drama balladry 
built out of abstract electronica. Moreover, its release genuinely felt like an 
event. Lemonade’s 45-minute meditation on infidelity, race and female 
empowerment – and its accompanying film – provoked reams of newsprint, umpteen 
blogs, endless comment and argument on social media. You didn’t have to 
believe, as some people seemed to, that Lemonade wasn’t so much an R&B album as 
a latterday cross between The Female Eunuch and Malcolm X Speaks to realise 
that, with its release, pop music was – at least temporarily – driving the 
conversation once more.

You couldn’t wish for a more potent example of R&B’s ongoing imperiousness, 
although there were plenty of others in 2016. It was a year in which more 
artists responded to the miserable chain of police brutality that sparked the 
Black Lives Matter movement; the sense of albums driven by a desire to speak 
out, to use the platform to say something, was unmistakable. It was a year 
marked by the genre’s biggest artists pushing at the boundaries of public 
expectation, fromRihanna’s sprawling, exploratory and opaque Anti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/28/rihanna-anti-album-review-brave-bold-and-confused>
 to the frequently drumless drift ofFrank Ocean’s Blonde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/25/frank-ocean-blonde-review-a-baffling-and-brilliant-five-star-triumph>
 toJohn Legend’s troubled, off-kilter Darkness and Light 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/01/john-legend-darkness-and-light-review>
. You were struck by the sense of artists fired up with the sense of 
possibility, who saw their success as a means to an end, rather than something 
to be clung on to at all costs.

It was the same story slightly further out of the limelight. Dawn Richard put 
out the third album in her “Heart trilogy” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/17/dawn-richard-r-and-b-dance-music-danity-kane>
, Redemption. Like its predecessors Goldheart and Blackheart, it offered a 
dazzling, genre-busting array of styles: it is hard to think of anyone else in 
pop who has managed the transition from reality-show star to critically 
revered, musically adventurous auteur with such deftness, but in truth it is 
hard to think of anyone else who has managed it.

Five years after their first single, the LA trio King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/feb/11/king-rnb-pop-new-album-we-are-king>
 self-released their debut album, We Are King, a flawless, hypnotic melding of 
smooth 80s soul and weightless ambience. Vocalist/rapper/producer Anderson 
.Paak’s Malibu saw him graduate from Dr Dre protege to something approaching 
mainstream success in his own right, via a warm-but-tough meld of everything 
from Doobie Brothers-ish yacht rock to trap to 90s hip‑hop. In the UK, there was
Nao’s All We Know 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/31/nao-for-all-we-know-review-debut>
 andLaura Mvula’s The Dreaming Room 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/16/laura-mvula-dreaming-room-cd-review>
, the latter an astonishingly inventive and idiosyncratic work that barely 
qualifies as R&B at all: it made the listener boggle that Mvula had ever been 
touted as the new Adele.

There’s an argument that this state of affairs is exactly as it should be. 
Ever since the term rhythm and blues was coined, 75 years ago, the genre has 
been way out ahead, with the rest of popular music operating under the sway of 
its innovations. Consider the impact of Arthur Crudup, Wynonie Harris et al on 
Elvis Presley; the Beatles and the Rolling Stones’ covers of Motown and Chess; 
the lush Philly soul orchestrations that begat the omnivorous genre of disco; 
the way thatDrake <https://www.theguardian.com/music/drake> and the Weeknd’s 
solipsistic melancholy has become the default emotional preset of the charts in 
2016, a year in which you couldn’t move for singles moaning about being drunk, 
on drugs, in nightclubs, at parties or with friends.

Even so, we seem to be in the middle of a golden age of R&B. You probably have 
to look back to the early 70s to find an era when it was quite this potent, 
driven, engaged and groundbreaking.
 