
Russian artist Pyotr Pavlensky, famous for radical performances denouncing 
state power 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2015/nov/09/pyotr-pavlensky-is-setting-russias-evil-history-ablaze>
 that have landed him in jail in the past, has fled to France, where he will 
seek asylum.


In an interview in Paris, the artist who memorably once nailed his scrotum to 
Red Square 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/nov/11/artist-nails-testicles-red-square-pyotr-pavlensky>
, said he fled Russia after he and his partner Oksana Shalygina were accused of 
sexual assault – allegations he denies.

The couple arrived in the French capital on Saturday with their two children. 
“We intend to seek asylum inFrance <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>,” 
said the 32-year-old performer, who was detained and questioned for nine hours 
last month over the assault claims.

Artist nails his scrotum to the ground in Red Square
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/nov/11/artist-nails-testicles-red-square-pyotr-pavlensky>
“If we had stayed in Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, Oksana 
and I would have been sent to a prison camp for up to 10 years,” he said. 
Pavlensky has gained a reputation for challenging Russian restrictions on 
political freedoms in radical, often painful performances that have won 
international acclaim.

“My art is political,” the gaunt-looking artist said, denouncing “individuals 
being treated by the state like cattle”.

While best known for his 2013 Red Square performance entitled “Fixation”, he 
alsosewed his lips together to protest against the jailing of members of the 
punk group Pussy Riot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/28/petr-pavlensky-artist-scrotum-red-square-interrogator>
. He has also wrapped himself in barbed wireand chopped off part of his ear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/20/russian-artist-cuts-off-earlobe-protest-forced-psychiatric-treatment-dissidents>
.

In November 2015, he doused the doors of the FSB – the successor to the Cold 
War-era KGB, or secret police – in petrol and set them on fire, in a 
performance called “Threat”. He spent seven months in jail awaiting trial for 
damaging the door of the infamous Lubyanka building before being eventually 
freed in June.

Pyotr Pavlensky is setting Russia's evil history ablaze
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2015/nov/09/pyotr-pavlensky-is-setting-russias-evil-history-ablaze>
Russian media reported the allegation of sexual assault was made by a young 
Moscow actress at a theatre known for its politically-themed plays, Teatr.doc. 
Pavlensky did not say whether there had been a sexual encounter.

In a statement published by Ukraine’s Hromadske channel, he insisted “there 
was no violence” against the woman, whom he accused of being an “informer”.

“I do not know the motivations of the person who made this false statement but 
it is very useful to the authorities who can use this case to exclude us from 
our sphere of action,” he said, referring to himself and his 37-year-old 
partner, who works at a publishing company.

“A system of informing and reporting on others is re-emerging in Russia, 
showing that totalitarianism is setting in again,” he said. Russian 
authorities, he said, sought to control “all spheres of public and private 
life”.

Pavlensky said he and Shalygin were detained at Moscow airport on 14 December 
on their return from a trip to Warsaw and questioned under article 132 of the 
penal code dealing with sexual violence.

Russian artist cuts off earlobe in protest at use of forced psychiatry on 
dissidents
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/20/russian-artist-cuts-off-earlobe-protest-forced-psychiatric-treatment-dissidents>
“It’s one of the worst in the Russian penal code because you can convict 
someone on the basis of a single statement,” he said in the interview at a 
Russian bookstore in Paris.

The pair was released after the questioning and told they had “more or less 
two possibilities: either go to a prison camp for 10 years... or leave Russia”, 
he said. They left the country the following day, travelling west through 
Belarus and Ukraine on their way to France.

Pavlensky, who spent a month last year in a notorious psychiatric hospital 
undergoing state-ordered tests of his sanity that found him sound of mind, said 
he encountered no difficulty leaving Russia. “We left because I have no 
intention of being the regime’s sacrificial lamb,” he said.
 