
Thumbing through the newspaper previews for Roma’s match against Milan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/acmilan>, one might have come away with 
the impression that Italy was preparing not for a football match but rather an 
assault on King’s Landing. Like the put-upon peasants in Game of Thrones, 
columnists yearned for a less oppressive form of leadership. It was time, as La 
Repubblica put it, for the “One, True, Anti-Juve” to emerge.

In the standings, there was nothing to choose between these two pretenders to 
theSerie A <https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> throne. Joint 
second on 32 points, they each trailed Juventus by seven. But the Milan 
manager, Vincenzo Montella, was quick to assert that Roma – on the basis of 
money spent, experience and stated ambitions – should be considered as 
favourites – and his opposite number concurred.

Torino fail to scale the mountain as Juventus tower above derby rivals | Paolo 
Bandini
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/12/torino-juventus-derby-serie-a-talking-points>
“He is right when he says that Roma <https://www.theguardian.com/football/roma>
 were built to win [now] and Milan weren’t,” Luciano Spalletti said. “That 
means I am doing normal things, while he is achieving extraordinary ones.”

For all the media hyperbole, the tone of this pre-game back-and-forth was 
warm. It might not always have been so. Spalletti was the man who curtailed 
Montella’s time as a player with Roma, effectively blocking the striker’s path 
into the team when he started to deploy Francesco Totti as a false nine.

“I deserved more but I’ve forgiven him,” Montella reflected, before going on 
to stress how much he had learned about management from his former boss. 
Spalletti received such comments with a smile, observing: “It’s easier to 
understand your parents when you become a parent yourself.”

If Montella, in that analogy, is still a young father, then perhaps it was 
fitting that he should show up in Rome with the most youthful side seen in the 
Italian top flight this season. The average age of Milan’s starting XI on 
Monday nightwas only 23 years and 343 days old 
<https://twitter.com/OptaPaolo/status/808409618456178688>.

Yet, these players hardly appeared overawed. Montella had set his team up to 
mirror Roma and through the first hour a midfield composed of Manuel Locatelli 
(18 years old), Mario Pasalic (21) and Andrea Bertolacci (25) more than held 
their own against Radja Nainggolan, Daniele De Rossi and Kevin Strootman.

That the latter player was involved at all was a sore point for some. 
Strootman had initially been given a two-game suspension afterhe helped to 
instigate a sideline scuffle during his team’s win over Lazio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/04/lazio-roma-serie-a-match-report>
, first splashing water over Danilo Cataldi and then collapsing meekly to the 
ground when the latter reacted by grabbing at his collar.

The Dutchman’s punishment, however, was overturned, with the sporting court of 
appeals concluding that they could not prove he had intentionally exaggerated 
his tumble. The throwing of water had been witnessed by officials at the time 
and punished with a yellow card. If the court’s judgment represented a correct 
application of the letter of the law, then many would agree that the law is an 
ass.

Either way, Strootman’s presence was not enough to elevate his team on Monday. 
He, just like his midfield team-mates, became bogged down in a stodgy game in 
which both teams struggled to impose themselves.

Roma sorely missed the pace and directness of the injured Mohamed Salah, just 
as they had in theDerby della Capitale, and their only two real chances of the 
first half owed everything to the hard work of Edin Dzeko. A player transformed 
this season, the Bosnian made the most of his few touches – seeing one shot 
well saved by Gianluigi Donnarumma after he beat his man cutting in from the 
right, then flashing another wide by a hair after muscling his way into 
position to reach a long ball behind two defenders.

In between those two opportunities, Milan missed a penalty. Only Wojciech 
Szczesny can know what prompted him to plunge into the legs of Gianluca 
Lapadula at a moment when Federico Fazio already seemed to be tracking the 
attacker’s run into the box effectively. But the keeper made amends by saving a 
tame effort from M’Baye Niang – the second time that the Frenchman has failed 
to convert from the spot in as many games.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fradja-nainggolan-strikes-to-give-roma-the-edge-as-juventuss-closest-challengers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a789c2b916f621eccb835b27a8529579eef5989%2F0_0_3072_2047%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Radja%20Nainggolan%20strikes%20to%20give%20Roma%20the%20edge%20as%20Juventus's%20closest%20challengers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fradja-nainggolan-strikes-to-give-roma-the-edge-as-juventuss-closest-challengers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Radja%20Nainggolan%20strikes%20to%20give%20Roma%20the%20edge%20as%20Juventus%27s%20closest%20challengers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fradja-nainggolan-strikes-to-give-roma-the-edge-as-juventuss-closest-challengers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a789c2b916f621eccb835b27a8529579eef5989%2F0_0_3072_2047%2F3072.jpg>
 Wojciech Szczesny saves M’Baye Niang’s penalty. Photograph: Angelo Carconi/EPA 
An injury to Bruno Peres just before the interval nudged Spalletti into an 
attacking shift as he brought on Stephan El Shaarawy to replace the wing-back. 
But there was no sense of inevitability to the goal with which Roma eventually 
broke the deadlock.

Nainggolan brought down a team-mate’s headed clearance beautifully in the 62nd 
minute before surging away from Locatelli and curling a shot beyond Donnarumma 
from the edge of the D. It was a goal out of nowhere – an isolated piece of 
brilliance to punish a rare moment of inattention from the Milan defence. It 
was enough to settle this game.

On balance, Roma had played better – and certainly once they had secured the 
lead they gave no sign of allowing Milan back into the game. They could draw 
encouragement, also, from their resilience. For the second match in succession, 
they had taken three points off a key rival, despite not performing to their 
full potential.

Whether or not that is enough to make them title contenders is another 
question. Roma’s home form, certainly, looks imposing – they have won 11 
straight at the Stadio Olimpico dating back to last season – but on Saturday 
they must take on Juventus in Turin.

After all the hype of the last week, Tuesday’s papers seemed rather more 
subdued. Although some lauded Roma as a threat to the Old Lady’s crown, others 
were circumspect. Gazzetta dello Sport may have captured the moment best with a 
headline that asked: “Does an anti-Juve really exist?”
 