
The success of their song Black Beatles 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4Hq-zs9qs5A> means that rap duo Rae Sremmurd’s 
story will be forever linked to the viral#MannequinChallenge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/15/mannequin-challenge-rae-sremmurd-black-beatles>
 phenomenon. However, the young brothers from Tupelo, Mississippi have more in 
their arsenal than the average internet-propelled star. Anyone here looking 
purely to revisit the highs they experienced by standing still for Twitter last 
December won’t fail to notice similar hook-filled singles like Throw Some Mo 
and No Type, both of which get huge responses tonight.

Playing the first of two London shows on their European tour, brothers Swae 
Lee and Slim Jxmmi don’t get off to the best of starts as they arrive on stage 
an hour later than the advertised time of 9pm. It’s perhaps a touch ironic, 
then, that they begin withStart a Party 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UiAujAOzePk> and its key lyric: “This is how 
you start a party right.”

Things soon pick up though, and Rae Sremmurd are as bright on stage as the 
huge LED screen flashing cartoon depictions of their faces behind them. Jxmmi, 
the older of the two at 25, deposits his chain with a bodyguard three times his 
width and promptly launches himself into the front row head first. His brother, 
younger by a year, looks on through his sunglasses and brushes his dreadlocks 
away from the tinted lenses. The hypnotic, looping hook of haters-be-gone anthem
No Flex Zone <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=p2cQSPRTdhg> kicks in and huge 
emoji biceps hit the screen.

Of the two brothers, Lee boasts the most charisma. He’s the one delivering the 
nagging hooks on tonight’s big hitters like Come Get Her and the joyous Swang. 
The latter is a highlight from the group’s2016 album Sremmlife II 
<http://pitchfork.com/reviews/albums/22020-sremmlife-2/> which is also 
plundered later on for a playful rendition of By Chance. At one point Lee 
bounces across the stage in his skinny jeans, picks up a pineapple inexplicably 
left side of stage, smashes it on the floor and throws half into the crowd. The 
other half is then squeezed above his head as he drinks the juice for a mid-gig 
refresher.

Related: Mannequin challenge, Rae Sremmurd and the meme-powered viral hit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/15/mannequin-challenge-rae-sremmurd-black-beatles>

Unsurprisingly for an act that blew up off a hashtag, Rae Sremmurd know how to 
play to social media. During an exuberantBlasé 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TzXz-xLB1-0>, the pair pluck phones out of 
audience members hands and record videos for Instagram and Snapchat. A wall of 
fans’ phones catching their own 10-second clips goes up too when south London 
crew Section Boyz jump on stage to perform their songsLock Arff 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nISWPU50HLc> and #Worst. 

Rae Sremmurd then close with two songs that capture their party-hard outlook. 
Look Alive <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rPZtXYaY4do> boasts a melodic and 
dramatic hook that could easily belong to an arena-sized emo band and sends 
Jxmmi twisting, fist-pumping, flexing and headbanging across the stage like a 
wind-up toy gone loose. A#MannequinChallenge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/08/mannequin-challenge-meme-internet-fatigue-quiet>
 inevitably follows as the bubbling synths of Black Beatles begin. Swae Lee 
explains the rules (“Every fucker freeze up”) before spelling out his 
millennial lovecry when he croons: “She says she loves me / I think she’s 
trolling.” It’s the perfect end to experiencing Rae Sremmurd live – a pair of 
real crowdpleasers nobody can stand still for.

 * At O2 ABC Glasgow on 19 January 
<https://www.academymusicgroup.com/o2abcglasgow/events/886288/rae-sremmurd-tickets>
. Box office: 0844 477 1000.Then touring <http://www.raesremmurd.com/europe>.
 