
Sussex hip-hop bluesman Rag’n’Bone Man has been named the Brits critics choice 
winner for 2017. The award is often seen as a guarantee of future success, 
having previously been won by the likes ofAdele 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/26/adele-headline-saturday-glastonbury-2016-review>
,Florence + the Machine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/dec/20/florence-welch-it-was-intense-cathartic-living-with-these-songs-for-long-time>
, Sam Smith and James Bay, among others – though the 2016 winner,Jack Garratt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/04/jack-garratt-bite-cats-spare-time-no>
, underachieved by those standards.

Unsurprisingly, the singer pronounced himself pleased with the award. “I 
thought they had made a mistake. I was up against two pop giants. It’s bloody 
brilliant! I’m crazy happy. Proper massive grin.”

What’s unusual about Rag’n’Bone Man – real name Rory Graham – is that he’s 
hardly the ingenue new talent awards normally celebrate. Now 31, he has been 
making music in one form or another since his teens, and became a full-time 
musician after signing a publishing deal with Warner Chappell in 2013.

Though billed as an EP, his 2014 release Wolves is long enough – just short of 
half an hour – to count as an album, and after it was rereleased following his 
signing to Sony, it grazed the charts in several European countries.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DL3wKzyIN1yk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DL3wKzyIN1yk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DL3wKzyIN1yk&media=>
 Video:watch Rag’n’Bone Man perform Human 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L3wKzyIN1yk> 
In summer 2016, he released the single Human 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L3wKzyIN1yk>, co-written with Jamie Hartman, 
which became a major hit across Europe, topping the charts in Austria, Belgium, 
Germany, Hungary, Slovakia and Switzerland and reaching No 11 in the UK. His 
debut album, also called Human, follows in February 2017.

He is a winning and unusual live performer, too – sometimes appearing with the 
rapper Stig of the Dump, with whom he combines on a modernised version of the 
standard House of the Rising Sun <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MvstK9GPJcE>. 
He will be appearing on Jools Holland’s annual Hootenanny on BBC2 on new year’s 
eve.

Rag’n’Bone man defeated pop acts Dua Lipa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/19/dua-lipa-review-promising-dark-pop-brighton>
 andAnne-Marie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/07/spotlight-on-anne-marie-rudimental-karate>
 to win the award. His style is unusual, in that it combines modern production 
with what sounds like the voice of a weathered blues singer from the deep 
south. The addition of Hartman as a co-writer, however, shows his move to Sony 
is moving him away from the more underground scene he used to be part of, and 
towards the mainstream. Hartman, who had chart success with the group Ben’s 
Brother, is also an award-winning songwriter for others, contributing work to 
Kylie Minogue, Birdy, James Bay and Anastacia among many others.
 