
Kanye West, as usual, nailed the fashion zeitgeist. In the week when West 
declared himself to be $53m in deb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/15/kanye-west-53m-debt-mark-zuckerberg-larry-page-martin-shkreli>
t, New York fashion week jettisoned its familiar high-rolling, 
wealth-signalling aesthetic in favour of utilitarian layering, dialled-down 
eveningwear, grunge and deconstruction and utility. Off the catwalk, unusually 
low temperatures put a brake on the peacock tendencies of the audience, and saw 
beanies and boots dominate the front row.


But when Ralph Lauren’s turn on the catwalk comes around, the good times still 
roll. Ralph does not do gritty. The brand sells a lifestyle of comfortable, 
discreet affluence that will never lose its appeal to consumers, even (or 
especially) when it is more fantasy than aspiration. The entrance to the 
catwalk venue was dominated by a floral arrangement the size of a tree, a white 
urn filled with hundreds and hundreds of perfect red roses. As a mission 
statement celebrating the enduring power of traditional aesthetic values, it 
said it all.


The show opened with Karlie Kloss, the all-American supermodel who has her own 
brand of cookies, wearing a taupe cashmere cardigan over a matching silk blouse 
and elegant wide-legged flannel trousers. The look set the tone for a seductive 
series of 21 daywear outfits that never strayed from the Ralph Lauren rulebook.

This was an English country house wardrobe, as ordered brand new by a 
fabulously rich American socialite. There were herringbone culottes and plaid 
wool skirts, brought up to date by being worn with a fine polo neck sweater 
under a shoulder-robed cardigan. The colour palette was narrow and subtle – 
from heather to chestnut brown to the dark green of a lawn in shade – the 
shades of nature in autumn drizzle, with nothing so vulgar as a pop of colour 
to be seen. Bluestocking touches, like lace-up crocodile brogues, were offset 
with the Amelia Earhart romance of sheepskin flying jackets.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fralph-lauren-new-york-fashion-week-autum-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F25be13a05780b2022636b0eedb8223ffefe1363c%2F0_112_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ralph%20Lauren%20ignores%20the%20fashion%20zeitgeist%20and%20lets%20the%20good%20times%20roll&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fralph-lauren-new-york-fashion-week-autum-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ralph%20Lauren%20ignores%20the%20fashion%20zeitgeist%20and%20lets%20the%20good%20times%20roll&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fralph-lauren-new-york-fashion-week-autum-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F25be13a05780b2022636b0eedb8223ffefe1363c%2F0_112_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Ralph Lauren acknowledges audience applause after his fall 2016 collection 
catwalk show at New York fashion week. Photograph: Richard Drew/AP 
This was a brand message rather than a fashion message. Ralph Lauren, who is 
76, last yearstepped down as CEO 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/oct/02/its-not-about-fabric-its-about-dreams-how-ralph-lauren-created-an-empire>
 of his company, replaced byStefan Larsson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/sep/29/ralph-lauren-steps-down-ceo-stefan-larsson-old-navy>
, previously of H&M and Old Navy. Larsson’s strategy for the company, which 
recently published a disappointing set of financial results, is to continue to 
expand the more affordable Polo brand, which now offers womenswear as well as 
mensand is set to open a large London flagship this summer. With Polo tasked 
with bringing in cash as the youthful, trend-sensitive line, the function of 
Ralph Lauren Collection clothes shown on the catwalk is to reinforce central 
brand values.


In contrast to the sleek daywear offering, eveningwear was uneven. Tight 
metallic jeans and rock band frontman brocade fell well outside of patrician 
elegance for moneyed middle age but did not convince as clothes for youth. But 
sculpted evening gowns in matte black, scarlet or amethyst velvet were 
Oscar-night perfect, with the clean simplicity of American glamour at its best.

One last quintessential Ralph Lauren look came when the man himself took his 
bow, wearing his signature cowboy boots with jeans, a shirt and a 
leather-elbowed wool blazer over a suede waistcoat.
 