
Ally McCoist <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ally-mccoist> admitted his 
Rangers team were "miles short" of the required standard during their goalless 
home draw with Stirling â€“ but claimed he was not concerned that they were 
limping towards the Irn-Bru Third Division title. Rangers had kicked off with 
the possibility of celebrating the championship by the evening but were booed 
off the park after failing to put Albion under any sustained pressure.

McCoist, who week claimed Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> deserved to jump to the second 
tier of Scottish football if the league is reconstructed after they win the 
title, said: "We just have to get over the line. We have to win the title, 
which is what we set out to do at the start of the year, and then we have to 
get a team that will win the next title, albeit we don't know what title it 
will be."

The visitors, who have now taken five points from their four matches with 
Rangers this season, came closest to earning victory when Jordan White had a 
header cleared off the line.

As it turned out, even three points would not have been enough for Rangers to 
win the title given that their closest rivals, Queen's Park, had their match at 
Annan Athletic postponed, and McCoist's men will now have to wait until their 
trip to Montrose Saturday for the opportunity to secure the title.

"It was not a good game at all," said McCoist. "If we are going to take a 
positive, which I always will look for as well, we have had a couple of clean 
sheets. But in terms of creating chances and taking chances, we are miles short 
of where we want to be."

Rangers have won two of their past five league matches but McCoist cited his 
lack of options, which were further reduced this week when the club suspended 
Francisco Sandaza amid a probe into his comments during a prank phone call.

Ian Black was banned following his red card last week while Andy Little is on 
Northern Ireland duty.

McCoist, who had 18-year-old Andy Murdoch on the bench, said of his team's 
form: "I told you at the start of the season we need players. We had seven or 
eight players out. That will tell you where we are.

"I will probably go down in history as the only Rangers manager that has ever 
struggled to fill a bench. We spent yesterday morning looking at our kids, our 
youth players.

"Not because they deserved an opportunity, but because we needed to fill a 
jersey. I'm not sure too many Rangers managers have had that problem. But that 
is where we are."

The Stirling manager, Greig McDonald, was delighted to see his players prove 
they could at least match Rangers on football terms after feeling they received 
an unfair reputation following their controversial 2-0 defeat at Ibrox in 
December.

"We got some bad headlines last time, that we weren't happy with at all, 
because we got four or five bookings in the first 15 minutes," he said.

"You have got to take that with a pinch of salt on the basis we are 
part-timers playing in front of 50,000 people against a full-time team. There 
are going to be mistimed tackles and the referee decided to book us early doors.

"People said we were trying to kick Rangers off the park which I hoped we 
showed today is not our style at all. We like to get the ball down and play.

"I'm delighted the players have shown that because they have got ability. We 
are not the hammer-throwers that people painted the SFL players out to be."
 