
The Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> chief executive, 
Charles Green, has been issued with a notice of complaint by the Scottish 
Football Association.

Green was charged for alleged comments made regarding the integrity of the 
commission, chaired by Lord Nimmo Smith, which will investigate the Ibrox 
club's use of Employee Benefit Trusts (EBTs).

The three-man panel was set up by the Scottish Premier League to discover if 
Rangers had broken any rules in using the EBTs during the tenure of the former 
owner, Sir David Murray, from 2000 to 2011.

Green refused to recognise or co-operate with the commission, set to meet on 
13 November, and was reported as saying: "That's what we're going to spend our 
time doing, not turning up at supposedly independent hearings where the SPL 
appoint the jury, set the outcome, and set the punishment before we have the 
trial."

Green has been charged with breaching disciplinary rule 66 by allegedly 
"Bringing the game into disrepute by calling into question the integrity of the 
Commission, chaired by Lord Nimmo Smith and appointed by the Scottish Premier 
League Limited ("SPL") to examine alleged breaches of the SPL's Rules regarding 
the use by Rangers PLC and Rangers FC of Employee Benefit Trusts to pay 
players, by suggesting in a media interview that the outcome and sanction of 
said Commission had been pre-determined by the SPL."

He has also been charged with "Not acting in the best interests of football by 
calling into question the integrity of the Commission, chaired by Lord Nimmo 
Smith and appointed by the Scottish Premier League Limited ("SPL") to examine 
alleged breaches of the SPL's Rules regarding the use by Rangers PLC and 
Rangers FC of Employee Benefit Trusts to pay players, by suggesting in a media 
interview that the outcome and sanction of said Commission had been 
pre-determined by the SPL", a breach of disciplinary rule 71.

Green has until Monday 24 September to respond to the notice of complaint, 
with a hearing scheduled in principle for Thursday 4 October.
 