
The scale of the crisis engulfing Scottish football is such that it would be 
bold to assert the new season will actually get under way as scheduled. Lost in 
the melee of the never-ending and routinely toxicRangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> affair is the imminent scrap 
between Dundee and Dunfermline over who will replace the fallen Glasgow giants 
in the Scottish Premier League, which could become a legal battle.

There have been various culpable parties in Rangers' slump into liquidation, 
the overwhelming majority of them having had a previous connection to the Ibrox 
club. Last week Malcolm Murray, the new chairman, issued an extensive apology 
on behalf of Rangers for a string of damaging events. There is no doubt 
Rangers' previous attempts to shift blame for their troubles has been 
detrimental to their hopes of garnering external support.

What also cannot be disputed is that those in charge of some Scottish Football 
League clubs are guilty of no wrongdoing whatsoever in this sorry saga. Yet it 
is towards these clubs that focus, pressure and in some cases intimidation will 
shift at the end of this week. It should not concern Peterhead, Forfar Athletic 
or Albion Rovers what league Rangers will begin the new campaign in but because 
of weak leadership higher up Scottish football that is the reality.

The Scottish Premier League's decision on Wednesday to reject an application 
from a newco Rangers to be included among the elite represented a rare 
modern-day case of supporters influencing boardroom policy. Fans had made clear 
their vehement objection to Rangers being readmitted to the SPL, leaving their 
chairmen with a terrible dilemma. They decided that offending, and possibly 
losing, their own customers was not worth risking just to retain the commercial 
clout of Rangers â€“ that is, Sky's influence in the SPL's TV income. Sky seek 
four Old Firm games per season as part of their agreed but as yet unsigned 
extension to an SPL agreement.

Amid page after page of emotive language, the upshot is that those in the SFL 
are in the unenviable position of voting on whether or not Rangers should start 
at the bottom of their setup, Division Three, or be parachuted into the First 
Division.

The latter option is touted as preferable to SPL clubs and their broadcasting 
partners, whose own silence on the topic is one of countless disappointing 
issues. Sky would object to the claim that they can dictate terms to Scottish 
clubs, but with so many of them in a perilous financial position, it is a fair 
inference.

The odds are just in favour of Rangers appearing in the tier immediately below 
the elite, however a deal can be cut to achieve that. It appears a simple case 
of calling Ally McCoist's bluff now that the Rangers manager has said the Third 
Division may be the most reasonable stage to restart Ibrox life. Cue panic from 
some of those further up Scottish football's food chain.

Unsurprisingly, there are anomalies and ironies within this tale. It seems 
curious that so many teams should make noises about financial Armageddon for 
their business without Rangers or TV money. Given the recently compact, 
competitive nature of the SPL outside the Glasgow clubs, it would only be 
sensible if the others had a worst-case financial plan in the event of 
suffering relegation and failing to instantly return to the top flight. If the 
upshot of such a scenario would be pushing clubs towards the brink of closure 
then bad management has occurred somewhere along the line. The former manager 
of Rangers, Walter Smith, said Scottish football would benefit without the 
Ibrox club, which he wanted to play in a European league.

It must also be remembered that the SPL showed little regard for the rest of 
Scottish football when breaking away to form their own self-interested clique 
in 1998. The SPL's failure to operate a reasonable promotion and relegation 
system has blunted competition and damaged footballing standards lower down the 
scale; some will raise a smile, then, given that the top clubs now need support 
from those they have done precious little to engage with previously.

The collective inability to settle on Rangers' fate has only illustrated a 
lack of suitable governance within the Scottish game. Not one body has taken 
responsibility. Should financial meltdown have happened to a smaller club, its 
fate would have been settled long ago.

It would be folly to ignore the commercial issues and pressures attached to 
the affair. Yet a fine opportunity for much-needed restructuring, 
redistribution of wealth and attracting people back to matches is in serious 
danger of being passed up as Rangers' carcass is picked over. This includes 
those who have no interest whatsoever in the long-term health of Scottish 
football but want Rangers battered around the head simply for reasons of spite.

Stewart Regan, the Scottish FA's chief executive, was criticised after 
bizarrely stating there could be "civil unrest" if Scottish society proceeded 
without Rangers. There has been no such bother. Restless night after restless 
night for those in charge of Scottish football clubs? Another matter entirely.
 