
The increasingly bitter relationship between Sports Direct and Rangers FC took 
yet another dive on Monday as the football club launched legal proceedings 
against the retailer, its founderMike Ashley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/mike-ashley> and four of the club’s former 
executives.

The civil case lists Rangers’ former chief executives Charles Green and Derek 
Llambias, former director Imran Ahmad, and former finance director Brian 
Stockbridge as “defenders” alongside the sportswear chain and its billionaire 
boss.

It is not known what the latest action concerns but it comes against the 
backdrop of aseries of legal fights between Rangers and Sports Direct 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/18/rangers-announce-termination-retail-merchandise-deal-sports-direct>
.

Ashley owns 8.92% of Rangers and 55% of Sports Direct, which has a 
merchandising joint venture with the club that has made the Scottish 
Championship winnersabout 4p from every pound 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/03/sports-direct-abandons-legal-case-against-rangers>
 spent in its Ibrox store.

Ahmad – who is currently believed to be overseas – and Stockbridge were 
appointed to Green’s board when the Yorkshire businessman took charge of 
Rangers bypurchasing the club’s assets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/jul/11/rangers-charles-green-players-contracts>
 and business after it went into liquidation in the summer of 2012.


Green stepped down as chief executive in 2013, while Ahmad served between June 
2012 and April of the following year. Stockbridge resigned from his post in 
January 2014.

Llambias, a close ally of Ashley, was appointed to the Rangers board in 
November of 2014 and became chief executive a month later 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/dec/19/derek-llambias-rangers-chief-executive-officer-mike-ashley>
, but was ousted in 2015 when a consortium led by the current chairman, Dave 
King, took over the club.


The latest claim has been brought at the court of session in Edinburgh and was 
announced in the legal notices section of the Times on Monday.

It stated: “If Imran Ahmad wishes to challenge the jurisdiction of the court 
or to defend the action, he should contact the Deputy Principal Clerk of 
Session, Edinburgh, EH1 1RQ immediately and in any event by not later than 21 
days from the date of publication of this advertisement.”

Spokespeople for Sports Direct, Ashley, Llambias and Green did not respond to 
invitations to comment. Stockbridge did not respond to efforts to contact him, 
while Ahmad’s exact whereabouts is not known.
 