
The Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> newco chief 
executive, Charles Green, hopes to secure membership of the Scottish Football 
Association within 24 hours.

Green believes he has reached broad agreement with the SFA and Scottish 
Football League but has still to sort issues out with the Scottish Premier 
League.

Green's Sevco Scotland company need to secure the transfer of Rangers' 
membership in order to relaunch the Ibrox club on the pitch during Sunday's 
scheduled Ramsdens Cup first-round match with Brechin at Glebe Park.

Sevco will have to accept a 12-month transfer embargo handed to Rangers in 
April but their manager, Ally McCoist, will be able to sign players for his 
upcoming Third Division campaign until the ban kicks in at the end of the 
current transfer window.

Green told Rangers TV: "We are making good progress. I spoke to the chief 
executive of the SFA, Stewart Regan, this morning and that went very well.

"I have also just spoken to [SPL chief executive] Neil Doncaster and I will be 
meeting both of them later today.

"I'm really hopeful now that within the next 24 hours we can have this thing 
signed and sealed and Alastair can start loading his players on a team coach to 
go up and try to win a match on Sunday. Most of the things are now clear to all 
parties.

"As far as I am concerned now we have no outstanding issues with the SFA. It's 
now purely process and documentation.

"We have no issues with the football league and just some minor points to 
resolve with the SPL and I'm hopeful we can to that today."

Discussions have been ongoing between Sevco and the three football 
authorities, as well as Rangers' administrators, since the newco club were 
consigned to the Third Division.

The SFA previously announced that Sevco had accepted the delayed transfer ban 
and, although the club called that statement premature, McCoist is expected to 
have five weeks to add to his squad before being unable to sign another player 
until January 2014.

The former Hearts pair Craig Beattie and Ian Black could be the first to 
arrive after both trained at Murray Park on Tuesday.

The former Celtic striker Beattie joined in with the first team while Black 
worked with the physio as he continues his recovery from hernia surgery.

Other contentious points between the parties involved in membership 
discussions include television contracts with the SPL bidding for the SFL 
rights in an attempt to safeguard their own broadcasting deals.

McCoist has also hit out at the possibility of Rangers being stripped of SPL 
titles as part of an ongoing investigation into alleged undisclosed payments to 
players since the competition began in 1998.

Green has reiterated that he has no intention of selling a majority stake in 
the club to anyone after Brian Kennedy announced he had made a Â£5.6m bid for a 
51% shareholding.

Green said: "It's really frustrating. It seems every two weeks we get someone 
who is going to make an offer for the club. Yesterday it was Brian, last week 
it was Bomber Brown a couple of weeks before that it was Walter [Smith] and 
it's just a big distraction. I'm sure it's just as disruptive for the fans as 
well."
 