
In August 2014, Nadia Murad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/oct/27/yazidi-women-who-escaped-isis-win-sakharov-prize-human-rights-nadia-murad-lamiya-aji-ashar>
 was a 21-year-old Yazidi student living in Kocho, northern Iraq, when Islamic 
State (Isis) fighters seized the town. They rounded up all the Yazidis, and 
reportedly killed 312 men in an hour. But what then happened to Murad and her 
sisters – among thousands of women captured and taken by the extremists – was 
to cause her to long for her own death.

Taken to Mosul, Murad was held for three days before she and other female 
prisoners were “distributed” to Isis fighters. She was trapped, and she was 
raped; repeatedly, consistently, constantly. After an escape attempt, she was 
recaptured, beaten and subjected to a gang rape by six men as “punishment”. In a
speech she has since made to the UN 
<http://webtv.un.org/watch/nadia-murad-basee-taha-isil-victim-on-trafficking-of-persons-in-situations-of-conflict-security-council-7585th-meeting/4665835954001>
, Murad revealed: “They continued to commit crimes to my body until I became 
unconscious.”

It was genocide with a template. We must seek justice for the Yazidi people
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/aug/04/genocide-yazidi-isis-murderers-tried>
Other women committed suicide in captivity; Murad herself wished her captors 
would just kill her. Three unimaginable months passed but then Murad made an 
extraordinary escape. She managed to flee as far Germany, where she was 
provided safe asylum in Stuttgart. Her advocacy for Isis’s victims has since 
seen her made a UN Goodwill Ambassador, speaking out against the furtherest 
extremities of horror that she, a real human being, has survived. “We were not 
worth the value of animals,”she told a recent audience in Cairo. 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/middle-east/isis-forced-us-to-pray-then-raped-us-yazidi-survivor-nadia-murad-describes-life-as-a-sex-slave-in-a6792676.html>
 “They raped girls in groups. They did what a mind could not imagine.”

Her experience, of course, is one of the horrific hallmarks of Isis, whose 
narcissisticseizure of religious text  
<https://www.rt.com/news/190468-muslim-scholars-islamic-state/>fuels 
self-justifying pretexts for committing personal atrocities. They have 
kidnapped thousands of women and girls like Murad, and they have dedicated 
infrastructure for the enslavement and trafficking of their prisoners.

Investigations have uncovered 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2015/04/14/iraq-isis-escapees-describe-systematic-rape>
 networks of warehouses where women are held, inspected, marketed and shipped 
along, fleets of buses used to transport them, bureaucratic records of the sale 
and purchase of women. The New York Times and Human Rights Watch have 
documented their record of sexual violence, their crimes against the Yazidi 
have been exposed by the UN, and the group themselves have even published 
“doctrine” that codifies and celebrates their cruel use of sexual slavery.

And yet, while UN resolutions are very clear that sexual violence within armed 
conflict is a war crime, there exists grey spaces in domestic laws that may 
allow Isis perpetrators impunity for their organised sexual violence. Of the 
30,000Isis recruits from 89 countries 
<http://www.rferl.org/a/foreign-fighters-syria-iraq-is-isis-isil-infographic/26584940.html>
, 100 are estimated to be Australian, and urging the Australian government to 
commit to the prosecution of sexual violence as war crime is a campaign that 
local human rights activist Susan Hutchinson has taken to Canberra this week.

“Gendered crimes are often being perpetrated outside the jurisdiction of 
institutions willing and able to bring the perpetrators to justice,” Hutchinson 
explains. “In 2014, Angelina Jolie and William Hague launched thePreventing 
Sexual Violence Initiative 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/policies/sexual-violence-in-conflict>with 
projects to aid in the documentation and investigation of sexual violence in 
conflict, but despite advances at the International Criminal Court, these 
crimes are often still overlooked.”

Hutchinson’s Prosecute, Don’t Perpetrate 
<https://prosecutedontperpetrate.com/2016/11/22/canberrampaddress/> campaign 
has a simple ask: that Australia heed its obligations under UN resolutions to 
“investigate and prosecute sexual violence perpetrated as war crimes, crimes 
against humanity and genocide by Australians who travelled to Iraq and Syria to 
fight with Da’esh”.

What sort of justice do survivors of sexual war crimes want? | Erica Hall
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/12/justice-survivors-sexual-war-crimes-violence-in-conflict>
“If countries prosecuted their own nationals for these crimes we would finally 
go some way to achieving justice for the victims and ending impunity for sexual 
violence in conflict,” Hutchinson explains.

There’s precedent for Australia to follow: in France, Germany, and the United 
Kingdom, war crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity are explicitly 
outlawed in domestic legislation, and similar laws in Finland and Sweden have 
been used toprosecute Finnish 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/25/world/europe/finland-iraq-refugees-isis.html?_r=2>
 andSwedish nationals 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/huff-wires/20151214/eu-sweden-terror-crimes/> 
engaged in Isis abuses.

In an Australia finally moved to confront violence against women within its 
own community, our awareness of gendered violence must also extend beyond our 
own borders and inspire activism against the violence happening to women and 
girls around the world, and – right now – at the hands of Isis.

Today marks the international commencement of the annual “16 Days of Activism 
Against Gender Violence” 
<http://www.unwomen.org/en/what-we-do/ending-violence-against-women/take-action/16-days-of-activism>
 campaign, and it’s a timely occasion to commit to the end of impunity for 
sexual violence in armed conflict, to develop a political will to investigate 
war crimes against women and to prosecute them.

We owe it to Nadia Murad, her fellow survivors and those who did not survive. 
We owe it to every human woman, whose body and life is at stake.
 