
Prosecutors at The Hague war crimes tribunal have called for a life sentence 
to be imposed on the Bosnian Serb military commander,Ratko Mladić 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ratko-mladic>, for genocide and crimes 
against humanity committed by his forces in the 1992-95 Bosnian war.

Any lesser penalty would be “an insult to the victims, living and dead, and an 
affront to justice” said Alan Tieger, closing the prosecution’s case on 
Wednesday at the end of a trial that has taken more than four and a half years 
at theinternational criminal tribunal for the former Yugoslavia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/international-tribunal-for-the-former-yugoslavia>
 (ICTY).

Mladić, now aged 74, listened to the prosecutors’ closing arguments 
impassively, watching as they showed videos of him from the war, striding 
through captured towns, issuing orders to his soldiers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fratko-mladic-must-get-life-sentence-say-war-crimes-prosecutors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2e4bcd561ba603f6007a52bdd4f23311a791e4d%2F0_38_1383_830%2F1383.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ratko%20Mladi%C4%87%20must%20get%20life%20sentence%2C%20say%20war%20crimes%20prosecutors&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fratko-mladic-must-get-life-sentence-say-war-crimes-prosecutors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ratko%20Mladi%C4%87%20must%20get%20life%20sentence%2C%20say%20war%20crimes%20prosecutors&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fratko-mladic-must-get-life-sentence-say-war-crimes-prosecutors%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2e4bcd561ba603f6007a52bdd4f23311a791e4d%2F0_38_1383_830%2F1383.jpg>
 Ratko Mladić at the international criminal tribunal for the former Yugoslavia 
in The Hague, December 2016. Photograph: AP 
He was a senior officer in the Yugoslav army in 1991 when the socialist 
federation fell apart. He commanded Bosnian Serb forces that cut the country in 
two when Bosnia declared its independence the next year and remained in command 
through the more than three years of war, in which 100,000 people died.

14 years a fugitive: the hunt for Ratko Mladic, the Butcher of Bosnia | Julian 
Borger
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/21/14-years-fugitive-hunt-for-ratko-mladic-butcher-of-bosnia>
Mladić is accused of war crimes, crimes against humanity and two counts of 
genocide. One is for the siege ofSarajevo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/ng-interactive/2015/dec/14/sarajevo-portrait-city-20-years-bosnian-war-dayton>
, where his troops ringed the city for 46 months, the longest siege in modern 
history, subjecting its residents to relentless shelling and sniping.

“The time has come for Ratko Mladić to be held accountable for each of his 
victims and all the communities he destroyed,” Tieger said. “Nobody can even 
imagine the depth of suffering for which Mladić is responsible,” he added.

In their three-day closing statement, prosecutors played a recording of an 
intercepted radio conversation in May 1992 with one of his officers, in which 
Mladić ordered artillery fire on two Sarajevo districts “because not many Serbs 
live there”.

“Let’s drive them out of their minds, so they cannot sleep,” he is heard 
saying.

 One of the prosecution lawyers, Adam Weber, told the tribunal that Mladić’s 
“personal approval … was necessary” for Serb forces to shell the city using a 
specially modified bomb that was hurled into central Sarajevo in the later 
stages of the war.

The second genocide count was for the slaughter of more than 7,000 Muslim men 
and boys from the town ofSrebrenica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/srebrenica-massacre>. Most of them were 
taken away in buses after the supposedly UN-protected enclave fell to Mladić’s 
troops, lined up and shot, with their bodies dumped in mass graves.

“There’s too much pain, there’s too much for any of us to truly comprehend the 
nature and scope of the shared misery of the women and survivors of the 
Srebrenica community,” said Peter McCloskey, a prosecution lawyer. “We can, 
however, strike back, as mandated by the security council with the creation of 
this tribunal to expose the horrific crimes of this war and try those most 
responsible for them.”

McCloskey added: “We have identified the key men responsible for it. We have 
Mladić in the dock answering for his crimes.”

Bosnia​'s bitter, flawed peace deal​,​ 20 years on
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2015/nov/10/bosnia-bitter-flawed-peace-deal-dayton-agreement-20-years-on>
Mladić has pleaded innocent to the charges and his defence counsel will make 
its closing statements between 9 and 13 December. A verdict is expected next 
year.


The Mladić trial is one of the last cases to be heard by the ICTY, which was 
set up in 1993. The Bosnian Serb political leader,Radovan Karadžić 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/radovankaradzic>, is to appeal his 40-year 
sentence, which wasissued by the court in March this year. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/24/radovan-karadzic-criminally-responsible-for-genocide-at-srebenica>
 The failure to impose life imprisonment, despite the fact that Karadžić was 
found guilty of genocide for the Srebrenica massacre,sparked fury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/24/radovan-karadzic-hague-tribunal-sentence-survivors-victims-reaction>
 among Bosnian survivors.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fratko-mladic-must-get-life-sentence-say-war-crimes-prosecutors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d0c66850b77a95abc8a3b6f1aac53cbff37421c%2F0_177_2200_1320%2F2200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ratko%20Mladi%C4%87%20must%20get%20life%20sentence%2C%20say%20war%20crimes%20prosecutors&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fratko-mladic-must-get-life-sentence-say-war-crimes-prosecutors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ratko%20Mladi%C4%87%20must%20get%20life%20sentence%2C%20say%20war%20crimes%20prosecutors&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fratko-mladic-must-get-life-sentence-say-war-crimes-prosecutors%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d0c66850b77a95abc8a3b6f1aac53cbff37421c%2F0_177_2200_1320%2F2200.jpg>
 Ratko Mladić and Radovan Karadžić in April 1995. Photograph: Ranko 
Cukovic/Reuters 
Refik Hodzic, a survivor from Prijedor, and now communications director for the
International Centre for Transitional Justice <https://www.ictj.org/>, said the 
ICTY trials had not succeeded in preventing a wave of revisionism and denial in 
the Serb-controlled half of Bosnia, where some of the convicted war criminals 
are hailed as heroes.

 The proceedings in The Hague, he said, “presented the reality of the roles 
played by Mladic and other cogs in that machine, which has undertaken this 
dirty work. “

 “One could clearly see from the evidence presented that Mladić, Karadžić and 
others from the Serb leadership of the time were not mythical characters – 
neither monsters, as the Bosniak victim narrative paints them, nor heroes and 
“fathers of the nation” as they are presented by the dominant Serb politic – 
but banal, self-centred opportunists drunk on the unchecked power to command 
lives and deaths of hundreds of thousands of people.”
 