
Long before the winners were announced for the big tip lists for 2017, there 
was a sense that something had to change. Over the last few years, the Brits 
critics’ choice award has served up a procession of none-more-bland solo stars 
(Jack Garratt, James Bay, Tom Odell) while the BBC’s Sound of poll was becoming 
equally tiring (Years & Years, Sam Smith). These artists would sell by the 
bucket-load, of that there was no doubt, but were they really representative of 
the diversity and energy of modern UK pop? There was talk of voting panel 
shake-ups, but in the case of the Brits it doesn’t seem to have quite worked 
out – this year’scritics’ choice winner is Rag’n’Bone Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/08/ragnbone-man-wins-2017-brits-critics-choice-award>
, a white soul singer whose deep delta blues voice jars somewhat with the fact 
he’s from East Sussex.


The BBC’s Music Sound of 2017 winner, however, seems to be a break with such 
predictability. Rag’n’Bone Man’s seeming coronation wasblocked by 22-year-old 
Ray BLK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2017/jan/06/ray-blk-winner-bbc-music-sound-of-2017-rap-soul>
, a singer from south London whose voice couldn’t be more authentic: she sings 
about chicken shops and “caffs not a cafe” on the streets of Lewisham, teenage 
pregnancies and benefits. Her rasping soul voice has been compared to that of 
Lauryn Hill – and she shares Hill’s fondness for reminiscing about youthful 
golden days. But you can also hear the likes of Amy Winehouse in BLK’s music – 
the London slang, the cheeky wit, the ability to nab US soul influences without 
being subsumed by them.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4V3iyojYJ38&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4V3iyojYJ38>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4V3iyojYJ38&media=>
Like many of those on this year’s list, BLK is adept at merging street 
credibility with pop nous. Her 2016 mini-album, Durt, smooths over most rough 
edges with melody: the fact 5050 steals the chorus line from the Cardigans’ 
Lovefool seems ample evidence that this is not challenging music. But we are a 
world away from the Brit school production line here – Durt features guest 
spots from Stormzy and Wretch 32, and grime’s sparse production style is 
evident in places. She grew up with no formal musical background, instead 
learning the trade from MTV Base and the music of Missy Elliott and Notorious 
BIG. Unsurprisingly, given those influences, personality is key in BLK’s music, 
the sense that the music is about a person’s life rather than just a vehicle 
for a palatable voice –Baby Girlz <https://soundcloud.com/rayblk/baby-girlz> 
paints a scene where “baby girl’s got a baby girl” and “baby’s boy don’t give a 
fuck”; the ambivalent hometown portraitMy Hood 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BLhQ_a-DHxk> talks about gangsters and 
concrete flowers, yet you leave fully aware of the pride she takes in where 
she’s from.


Ray BLK might have won the BBC Music Sound of 2017, but happily she was no 
anomaly on the longlist. The typically milquetoast entrants (Maggie Smith, the 
Japanese House) were more than outnumbered by Stefflon Don, AJ Tracey, Anderson 
.Paak, Nadia Rose and Dave. Even Cabbage, one of the few indie choices on the 
list, are a chaotic bunch of scruffs who recently caused a stir byblasting the 
Sun for picking them as one of their tips for 2017 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/newsbeat/article/38496358/cabbage-attack-the-sun-after-being-tipped-for-success>
. Of course, UK pop music has been in a healthy state for some time, and nobody 
should need an industry list to tell them that. But with the inevitable 
exposure and opportunities such awards bring, it’s reassuring to know that the 
tipping industry is finally catching up with the times.
 