
This being their maiden season in the German top flight, it is nigh on 
impossible to profile RB Leipzig without focusing ontheir controversial journey 
to the Bundesliga summit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/08/why-rb-leipzig-has-become-the-most-hated-club-in-german-football>
. Previously a fifth-tier team from the east German region of Saxony called SSV 
Markranstädt, the club’s licence was bought in 2009 by the Austrian energy 
drink manufacturer Red Bull, who promptly rebranded their acquisition by 
changing their name, crest and kit before beginning their quick ascent through 
the divisions.

Despite being unable to call themselves Red Bull Leipzig due to DFB 
regulations (the RB “officially” stands for “RasenBallsport”, which means “lawn 
sports”), they are unequivocally part of a stable of sports franchises that 
includes their Austrian feeder club FC Red Bull Salzburg, Red Bull Brasil, Red 
Bull Ghana, New York Red Bulls and Formula One’s Red Bull Racing. Constructs do 
not get more artificial, so it is little surprise they have become the most 
hated football club in Germany.

RB Leipzig extend Bundesliga lead to six points by beating Freiburg
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/25/rb-leipzig-freiburg-bundesliga-match-report>
In 2011, Red Bull’s owner, Dietrich Mateschitz, spoke of his intention to get 
RB Leipzig into theBundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> within three to five 
years and an investment of €100m in their transfer kitty helped grease the 
wheels. “We also want to get into the Champions League and be successful there, 
which is something you can only achieve with a club that plays in one of the 
top leagues,” said Mateschitz, whose team are firmly on course to meet that 
particular target sooner rather than later. Fans of rival sides have made no 
secret of their contempt for a team who, while technically not breaking “50+1” 
rule in the statutes of the German league that gives members of football clubs 
a say in the running of their club, certainly flies in the face of the rule’s 
spirit.

There have been numerous protests against them. In their first Bundesliga home 
game,a 1-0 victory over Borussia Dortmund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/12/rb-leipzig-fans-borussia-dortmund-bundesliga>
, their opponents’ hardcore fans passed up the opportunity to visit Die Roten 
Bullen’s 43,000-capacity Red Bull Arena and instead stayed at home to support 
their club’s under-23s in a fourth division match. Before a recent match at 
Bayer Leverkusen’s BayArena home fans threw paint at the Leipzig team bus, 
while the second division side Dynamo Dresden were fined £54,000 afterone of 
their fans launched a bull’s head towards the pitch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/08/dynamo-dresden-fined-fans-severed-bulls-head-pitch-red-bull-leipzig>
 during a cup match in August.

For all their detractors, this garish and rather tacky vehicle for the Red 
Bull group give every indication they are in the Bundesliga for the long haul 
and look set to become a European footballing force. They are not without their 
supporters, not least those east German locals who have been starved of any 
kind of success since VfB Leipzig were relegated in 1994 and have warmly 
embraced their new club in its infancy. Indeed, a look beyond the club’s lack 
of soul, complete absence of tradition and hideous bovine branding suggests 
there is much to admire.

For all their wealth, RB Leipzig’s policy is one of focusing on youth, 
nurturing young players by giving them valuable game time that might not be 
available elsewhere before selling them on for a profit when they hit their 
prime. Their current squad has an average age of just 23 and includes their 
joint record signing, the Scottish winger Oliver Burke who they snapped up from 
Nottingham Forest for £13m during the summer. Burke’s decisionto eschew a move 
to one of several Premier League also-rans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/04/oliver-burke-england-scotland-rb-leipzig-nottingham-forest>
in favour of relocating to Saxony raised eyebrows in England, butin a recent 
interview 
<http://thesetpieces.com/interviews/oliver-burke-exclusive-ive-shown-ive-come-fantastic-club/>
 with football website thesetpieces.com the 19-year-old declared himself 
delighted with his move.

Oliver Burke: ‘England tried a cheeky one but no way! I love playing for 
Scotland – goosebumps’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/04/oliver-burke-england-scotland-rb-leipzig-nottingham-forest>
“I’ve really shown that I’ve come to a fantastic club,” he said after the 2-1 
win over Bayer Leverkusen that sent his team to the top of the league, a 
position they reinforced withFriday’s 4-1 win at Freiburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/25/rb-leipzig-freiburg-bundesliga-match-report>
. “I don’t really need to say much – look at where we are. It’s been very 
positive. Every day I’m learning something new and I can only get better at 
this club. I have the right people around me and I am still at a young age.”

It’s difficult to disagree that RB Leipzig’s sporting director Ralf Rangnick 
and manager Ralph Hasenhüttl are the right people. A former manager of 
Stuttgart, Hannover 96, Hoffenheim and Schalke, Rangnick is an innovative 
tactician renowned as the brains behind the frenetic pressing game that has 
since become the hallmark of German coaches such as Liverpool’s Jürgen Klopp 
and his successor at Borussia Dortmund, Thomas Tuchel.

Rangnick steered RB Leipzig 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/red-bull-leipzig> into the Bundesliga 
last season before moving upstairs and handing the reins to Hasenhüttl. 
Nicknamed the “Alpine Klopp”, the Austrian Hasenhüttl is quite the showman but 
his touchline histrionics belie a shrewd football brain and reputation as a 
master motivator of hungry young players. Big names are conspicuous by their 
absence from his squad: despite their enviable wealth, Leipzig’s biggest 
signings before their first Bundesliga season were the callow Burke, the 
21-year-old midfielder Naby Keita from Red Bull Salzburg and the 20-year-old 
striker Timo Werner from Stuttgart. Raw talents with plenty to prove and, 
perhaps more importantly, malleable and open minds.

Aged 49, Hasenhüttl has a history of over-achievement at small teams such as 
Unterhaching and Aalen in Germany’s lower leagues, but it was at Ingolstadt 
where he rose to national prominence. In his first season he saved the Bavarian 
club from relegation to Germany’s third division before securing their first 
ever promotion to the Bundesliga in 2015. Having steered his energetic, 
swashbuckling RB Leipzig side to the top of Bundesliga within five months of 
taking charge, he claims they will be difficult to dislodge. “If we keep 
playing this way and continue to do what we work on and if we can maintain this 
hunger, then we are going to be hard to beat,’’ he said last week. “Our only 
objective is to find solutions to get us through the challenges we face each 
day. Nobody has gifted us our league position. Everybody here believes in what 
we are doing.’’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Frb-leipzig-bundesliga-ralph-hasenhuttl%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40ef9d53eb6b6a8e7378a5f92a7e7acd2bc1b9ff%2F0_148_4480_2688%2F4480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=RB%20Leipzig%20spread%20their%20wings%20to%20become%20Bundesliga%20force%20for%20the%20long%20haul%20%7C%20Barry%20Glendenning&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Frb-leipzig-bundesliga-ralph-hasenhuttl%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=RB%20Leipzig%20spread%20their%20wings%20to%20become%20Bundesliga%20force%20for%20the%20long%20haul%20%7C%20Barry%20Glendenning&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Frb-leipzig-bundesliga-ralph-hasenhuttl%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40ef9d53eb6b6a8e7378a5f92a7e7acd2bc1b9ff%2F0_148_4480_2688%2F4480.jpg>
 RB Leipzig, succeeding in an otherwise barren football hinterland that was in 
dire need of a top-flight team. Photograph: John Macdougall/AFP/Getty Images 
On and off the pitch, Leipzig are well equipped to deal with any of the 
aforementioned challenges. Defensively stout, they have conceded 10 goals in 12 
matches so far this season, while their energetic pressing and lightning fast 
counterattacking play is grist to the mill of ambitious young players and 
enthusiastic supporters who appear to adore their inspirational manager. Their 
bespoke training facilities are state of the art and they have invested €35m 
(£30m) in an academy which their head of youth development, Frieder Schrof, 
last year claimed would “be setting the standards when it comes to training 
facilities, education levels and accommodation”.

RB Leipzig are by no means the first nouveau riche arrivistes to 
ostentatiously buy their way to the top and are far from unique even in 
Germany, where Wolfsburg, Bayer Leverkusen and Hoffenheim enjoy similar 
corporate backing.

Located in an otherwise barren football hinterland that was in dire need of a 
top-flight football team, they have been welcomed by the locals in their 
catchment area. For all the envious, bitter and often justified carping of 
their many detractors, it is probably only a matter of time before they are 
grudgingly accepted on a more widespread scale.
 