
According to the latest surveys 
<http://www.ndtv.com/india-news/over-4-lakh-beggars-in-india-west-bengal-tops-the-list-among-states-1207034>
, there are now more than 400,000 beggars in India, of which around 46% are 
female. Bangladesh’s capital Dhaka alone isthought to contain 40,000 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-south-asia-15119854>.

For other cities, however, begging is a much more recent, if growing, 
phenomenon – and often a controversial one. While the reasons for this global 
rise are complex, the responses to the issue vary both in their severity and 
their success rates.

In the US, the National Law Center on Homelessness and Poverty 
<https://www.nlchp.org/> views begging as “a very basic form of speech, asking 
your fellow human beings for help when you’re in a desperate situation ... It 
deserves, as much as any other speech, to be protected.” Yetits study 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=0ahUKEwiR2L-69pbQAhWE1RoKHSAjA_wQFggbMAA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.nlchp.org%2Fdocuments%2FNo_Safe_Place&usg=AFQjCNHszQHfugDJ0TWMfWX4RjeqdHqFMA&sig2=EGohP01iUj25F4agf0maOA&bvm=bv.137904068,d.d2s>
 of 187 US cities last year found that 76% prohibit begging in specific public 
places, while 24% impose city-wide bans.


Nigeria's crackdown on begging raises fears over human rights violations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/29/nigeria-crackdown-begging-raises-fears-over-human-rights-violations>
Some cities focus on dissuading people from giving money to those who beg. The 
prevailing wisdom: if you want to help, you’re better doing it by giving money 
to a relevant charity.


In England earlier this year, for example, Southampton city council ran a 
“begging you for lasting change” postercampaign 
<https://www.southampton.gov.uk/news/article.aspx?id=tcm:63-383214>, which 
urged people to give to charities not individuals. But in September, the 
Advertising Standards Authority had toreprimand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/28/anti-begging-posters-banned-nottingham-city-council>
 Nottingham city council for a summer poster campaign that suggested people who 
beg are “disingenuous and undeserving”.

Rosie Brighouse, legal officer at the human rights charity Liberty 
<https://www.liberty-human-rights.org.uk/who-we-are>, says most of the evidence 
on the circumstances of people who beg is anecdotal, and that the issue 
requires more thorough research.

“Some people seem to think they should have a right not to be approached by 
people on the street,” she says. “But others who think a public space is a 
public space believe people should be able to approach each other for help. 
It’s hard to avoid the conclusion that campaigns against begging are about 
social cleansing and cleaning up streets, just so they look better.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fhow-should-cities-deal-with-street-begging-homelessness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F438541558cbbee69a7fbb9c0b1ad8c27c2ea4f1f%2F53_0_3122_1873%2F3122.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reach%20out%2C%20raise%20money%20or%20remove%3A%20how%20should%20cities%20deal%20with%20street%20begging%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fhow-should-cities-deal-with-street-begging-homelessness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reach%20out%2C%20raise%20money%20or%20remove%3A%20how%20should%20cities%20deal%20with%20street%20begging%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fhow-should-cities-deal-with-street-begging-homelessness%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F438541558cbbee69a7fbb9c0b1ad8c27c2ea4f1f%2F53_0_3122_1873%2F3122.jpg>
 Three of Nottingham City Council’s posters urging people not to give money to 
beggars. Photograph: Advertising Standards Authority/PA 
In some cities, the “battle against begging” is being taken to forcible 
extremes. The Nigerian senate, for example, isconsidering a bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/29/nigeria-crackdown-begging-raises-fears-over-human-rights-violations>
 that would ban the “menace of street begging” in cities all over the country – 
following the Lagos state government’s move toround up 413 beggars 
<http://www.pmnewsnigeria.com/2016/07/26/lagos-evacuates-413-beggars-deports-31-others-to-niger/>
 from the city’s streets in July, 31 of whom were subsequently deported to 
neighbouring Niger.

Elsewhere, more moderate measures are being attempted. Belfast 
<http://www.belfasttelegraph.co.uk/news/northern-ireland/begging-free-zone-call-as-belfast-busker-makes-170-a-day-34932982.html>
 is the latest city to consider introducing begging-free zones, while New 
Zealand’s capitalWellington 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=0ahUKEwiXn7Dm9pbQAhXGnBoKHUbYAvYQFggbMAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwellington.govt.nz%2F~%2Fmedia%2Fyour-council%2Fnews%2Ffiles%2F2016%2F2016-04-13-begging-report-to-scrc.pdf%3Fla%3Den&usg=AFQjCNF8FLZpA-hXTEFcZ-NpORvb1XAozg&sig2=hkjjiSLOgrKgZ0g7wrz7_g&bvm=bv.137904068,d.d2s>
 has opted to “tolerate begging as part of the cityscape”, and is exploring 
options that include education for beggars on street etiquette, giving vouchers 
instead of money, and requiring beggars to have permits.

In the US, pressure on law-makers to rid city centres of begging, or 
“panhandling”, often comes from their “business improvement districts”. So New 
York mayor Bill de Blasiosigned a bill 
<http://www.nbcnewyork.com/news/local/Costumed-Characters-Get-Painted-into-Boxes-in-Times-Square-383847391.html>
 to restrict “pushy” panhandling in Times Square to designated “activity zones”.
Oklahoma City 
<http://kfor.com/2016/04/05/new-panhandling-ordinance-passes-in-oklahoma-city/> 
has extended its exclusion zones so that panhandling is now prohibited within 
50 feet of cafes, restaurants, school bus stops, elementary schools, ATMs and 
public restrooms.

In the cities of West Palm Beach and San Rafael, city-centre metres accept 
credit cards and cash donations as an alternative to giving to people who beg 
on their streets, while in the UK, councillors in Newcastle upon Tyne recently 
suggested a giant city-centre collection box in the shape of aGreggs pasty 
<http://www.chroniclelive.co.uk/news/north-east-news/could-giant-collection-box-shaped-11926138>
 (a local fast-food) to encourage people to donate money to local charities.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fhow-should-cities-deal-with-street-begging-homelessness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F250f9aa628355f7e9a221cef4c52962406cad912%2F0_76_3958_2375%2F3958.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reach%20out%2C%20raise%20money%20or%20remove%3A%20how%20should%20cities%20deal%20with%20street%20begging%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fhow-should-cities-deal-with-street-begging-homelessness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reach%20out%2C%20raise%20money%20or%20remove%3A%20how%20should%20cities%20deal%20with%20street%20begging%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fhow-should-cities-deal-with-street-begging-homelessness%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F250f9aa628355f7e9a221cef4c52962406cad912%2F0_76_3958_2375%2F3958.jpg>
 Plans to ban begging directly in Wellington, New Zealand have been abandoned 
after the city saw little evidence of it working elsewhere. Photograph: Peter 
Parks/AFP/Getty Images 
Across the UK, the anti-begging weapon of choice has become the public space 
protection order 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/sep/08/pspos-new-control-orders-public-spaces-asbos-freedoms>
 (PSPO), introduced under the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 
2014. Cities across the country have adopted it in various ways, from targeting 
aggressive begging and remaining in a public toilet without reasonable excuse, 
to “nuisance street entertainment” and even pigeon feeding.


In terms of begging, a PSPO will often mean that anyone making a verbal, 
non-verbal or written request – including the placing of hats or containers – 
for money will be asked to leave the area and not return for 24 hours by a 
police or community support officer. Failure to comply can result in a fine of 
up to £1,000.

Human rights campaigners argue that cities, by using PSPOs, are criminalising 
people rather than addressing the reasons that force them to beg.

Thames Reach, a London charity that works with homeless and vulnerable people 
in the capital,estimates 
<http://www.thamesreach.org.uk/news-and-views/campaigns/giving-to-beggars/faq/> 
80% of people begging do so to support a drug habit. When the Metropolitan 
police drug-tested people arrested for begging, more than 70% tested positive 
for class-A drugs.

According to Liberty, cities and their police forces should use existing 
powers under the 194-year-old Vagrancy Act, which allow courts to direct people 
who beg to addiction or homelessness support services. “A PSPO can only result 
in a fine,” says Brighouse. “It’s a very blunt and highly inappropriate 
instrument for tackling begging.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fhow-should-cities-deal-with-street-begging-homelessness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd03713bb0dc46d02be771c7f81c199f870e85740%2F0_148_5357_3215%2F5357.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reach%20out%2C%20raise%20money%20or%20remove%3A%20how%20should%20cities%20deal%20with%20street%20begging%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fhow-should-cities-deal-with-street-begging-homelessness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reach%20out%2C%20raise%20money%20or%20remove%3A%20how%20should%20cities%20deal%20with%20street%20begging%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fhow-should-cities-deal-with-street-begging-homelessness%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd03713bb0dc46d02be771c7f81c199f870e85740%2F0_148_5357_3215%2F5357.jpg>
 After being picked up from street corners in Albuquerque, New Mexico, a crew 
of panhandlers prepares to clear tumbleweed. Photograph: Alamy 
Some cities, including Liverpool 
<http://www.liverpoolconfidential.co.uk/news-and-comment/plans-to-fine-liverpool-beggars-1000-scrapped>
 and Wellington, have abandoned plans to ban begging directly, concluding that 
there is little evidence of it working. In the Indian city of Kolkata, 
meanwhile, the state food and supplies department isworking on a plan 
<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/kolkata/pavement-dwellers-to-get-food-free-of-cost/articleshow/55262162.cms>
 to provide free rice and wheat to the city’s 4,000 street dwellers.

PSPOs: the new control orders threatening our public spaces
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/sep/08/pspos-new-control-orders-public-spaces-asbos-freedoms>
Other progressive cities are seeking more sustainable solutions, attempting to 
address the underlying causes and injustices that force many to beg. In
Albuquerque 
<https://www.cabq.gov/mayor/priorities-initiatives/initiatives/theres-a-better-way>
, New Mexico, for example, paid work is offered to people who beg. Under Mayor 
Richard Berry’s There’s a Better Way programme, a van is dispatched around the 
city daily to pick up panhandlers who are interested in working, paying them $9 
an hour to pick litter or weed flowerbeds. At the end of their shift, people 
are offered overnight shelter.

Dhaka’s city’s leaders are trying to learn lessons from a rehabilitation 
programme <http://print.thefinancialexpress-bd.com/2014/11/30/68592> in the 
north-west of Bangladesh, in Nilphamari district, where nearly 1,000 beggars 
are being trained to farm goats, run tailoring shops and other small businesses.

In Dhaka, they’ve tried quick fixes before and know they don’t work. The 
beggars who werecleared from the city’s streets 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2011/WORLD/asiapcf/01/26/bangladesh.hawkers/> before 
the cricket World Cup in 2011 came back as soon as the competition ended. City 
bans, it seems, are no more a long-term solution to a panhandler’s plight than 
a begging bowl of small change.

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 