
Here is this week’s playlist – songs picked by a reader from your suggestions 
afterlast week’s callout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/29/readers-recommend-share-your-most-startling-songs>
. Thanks for them all. Read more about how our weekly Readers Recommend series 
works at the end of the piece.

There’s apparently an ancient Japanese poem that goes: “The ears of men are 
deaf to the voices of crickets” and, like crickets, musicians sometimes produce 
odd or chirruping noises that, perhaps, seem strange and startling on first 
hearing. So below is my selection of “cricket songs” from last week’s 
recommendations, and I’ve thrown in a few googlies.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPL3Yv36aUktyQQYLdWDvQa2JFveywN6LlZ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPL3Yv36aUktyQQYLdWDvQa2JFveywN6LlZ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPL3Yv36aUktyQQYLdWDvQa2JFveywN6LlZ&media=>
 The YouTube playlist. 
We start in a Rubber Room 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q5eP2W3fLu4&index=1&list=PL3Yv36aUktyQQYLdWDvQa2JFveywN6LlZ>
, which sounds kind of fun, unless you have hiccups, of course, or, likePorter 
Wagoner, are held there against your will. One of country music’s more 
disturbing moments.

Bouncy in a different way is Indians in Moscow’s Naughty Miranda 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nHUWOt3HsL8&index=2&list=PL3Yv36aUktyQQYLdWDvQa2JFveywN6LlZ>
, who not only kills her father but wants to eat him too. All to a cheery 
sounding indie beat, naturally. Amazingly, considering the subject matter, it 
was quite the hit in the indie charts. Different times.

Next comes a song which, it turns out, is the most played song on my iPod, my 
namesakePere Ubu’s early magnum opus, Final Solution 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mSD_R5FkjVM&index=3&list=PL3Yv36aUktyQQYLdWDvQa2JFveywN6LlZ>
, which has an astounding sound considering its age. It’s from 1975 (though was 
released in 1976), yet remains a timeless classic. The use of the synths is, I 
think, particularly out there.


Pere Ubu’s David Thomas: 'Self-expression is evil … I don't care about your 
feelings'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/23/pere-ubu-david-thomas-music-interview>
Barnes and Barnes are an American comedy duo; their Fish Heads 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cn73Wtem0No&index=4&list=PL3Yv36aUktyQQYLdWDvQa2JFveywN6LlZ>
 is a song to, well, fish heads. A homespun little ditty. Sometimes less is 
more, especially, to my mind, where fish heads are concerned.

Almost the exact opposite, the Cardiacs’ R.E.S. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gNdnOTvGbJQ&index=5&list=PL3Yv36aUktyQQYLdWDvQa2JFveywN6LlZ>
 is an art-punk Bohemian Rhapsody seen through a very distorting mirror. A 
great 1980s video accompanies this one. They came from Kingston (upon Thames, 
not Jamaica) and I think only a dull 1970s suburb could have produced such 
startling music and imagery.

In postwar Germany many musicians struggled to produce “new” music with no 
taint of past events. One such group of miscreants wasAmon Duul II. In 
Archangel Thunderbird 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_pcla5zyZfA&index=6&list=PL3Yv36aUktyQQYLdWDvQa2JFveywN6LlZ>
, the guitar riff is thunderous and the vocals odd, strangled and perhaps a 
blueprint for our next artist...

Dear old John Lydon and Public Image Ltd! Yes, he’s still going strong and, in 
Double Trouble 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=99BQNRU8BMI&index=7&list=PL3Yv36aUktyQQYLdWDvQa2JFveywN6LlZ>
, recorded in 2015, moaning about his wife getting on the case about a broken 
lavatory! I wonder if his toilet door has a lock marked “Engaged” and “Pretty 
vacant”?

Orange Lemon’s Dreams of Santa Anna (Extended Club Mix) 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZPr9PtxxZHI&index=8&list=PL3Yv36aUktyQQYLdWDvQa2JFveywN6LlZ>
 – a Todd Terry production – is the sound of something stirring in the city, 
with new technology being used to create new sounds from older sources. A 
musical revolution was taking place and most of us didn’t even notice. Those 
that did are, probably, still dancing somewhere.

It must be tough finding a bowl for your cornflakes in Aanayampatti S Ganesan
’s house. Still, saves on the washing up. His use of domestic articles for 
music takes me back to the days of my youth and Mum’s aluminium saucepans, used 
as an improvised drum kit. Fromthe nominations 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/90203681> I’ve gone for 
the short pieceBilahari Tolijanma 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LtgASiEMSHk&index=9&list=PL3Yv36aUktyQQYLdWDvQa2JFveywN6LlZ>
. Watch as the audience go wild.


Chinese artist Dadawa caused something of a stir with her 1995 Sister Drum 
album, as it contained elements of Tibetan music, such as in this piece,The 
Turning Scripture 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=51c4SgLHRWU&index=10&list=PL3Yv36aUktyQQYLdWDvQa2JFveywN6LlZ>
, which has a touch of the old throat singing in the mix.

No round-up of startlement would be complete without Diamanda Galás’s Vena 
Cava 1 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S1HEBq-Nm34&index=11&list=PL3Yv36aUktyQQYLdWDvQa2JFveywN6LlZ>
. This one deals with dementia brought on by Aids, so don’t expect easy 
listening. Do expect something unique and unsettling. It’s probably best not to 
play this one to the children at bedtime.

So there they are. I hope you find something to enjoy and startle here – I 
certainly did.


Note: not all songs appear on the Spotify playlist because some are 
unavailable on the service.

New theme: how to join in

The new theme will be announced at 8pm (GMT) on Thursday 5 January. You have 
until 11pm on Monday 9 Januaryto submit nominations.

Here’s a reminder of some of the guidelines for RR:

 * If you have a good theme idea, or if you’d like to volunteer to compile a 
playlist from readers’ suggestions and write a blog about it, please email
matthew.holmes@theguardian.com <mailto:matthew.holmes@theguardian.com>.

 * There is a wealth of data on RR, including the songs that are “zedded”, at 
theMarconium <http://www.rrindex.com/index.htm>. It also tells you the meaning 
of “zedded”, “donds” and otherstrange words used by RR regulars 
<http://www.rrindex.com/glossary.htm>.

 * Many RR regulars also congregate at the ’Spill blog 
<http://thespillblog.co.uk/>.  