
A tricky topic hoping to unearth some gold from your record libraries this 
week – for more on what we’re looking for, read on ...


Vinyl destination: who is actually buying records?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/12/vinyl-destination-who-is-actually-buying-records>
RR regular Paul Hayes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/sep/11/readers-recommend-misanthropic-songs-results>
 (who posts in the comments asFuel 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2428097>) will select from your 
recommendations and produce the playlist, to be published on 12 January. He 
says:


I’m looking for songs specifically  released as 12” singles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/jun/14/blue-monday-biggest-selling-single>
 as well as remixes, extended versions, special disco versions, dub versions, 
and so on and on an’onnnn!

I want versions that make a bad song good and a good song something 
extraordinary.

Here is a list of all songs previously picked 
<http://www.rrindex.com/azsong.htm> and therefore ineligible for the series. 
Our guru adds: “I’ll allow remixes of songs that have previously been listed 
for other themes in the RR series – if they are sufficiently different.”

You have until 11pm on Monday 16 January to post your nomination and make your 
justification.

If you want to volunteer to compile a playlist from readers’ suggestions – and 
potentially blog about the process/selection for the Guardian – please email 
matthew.holmes@theguardian.com with the subject line “RR guru”, or make 
yourself known in the comments.

Here’s a reminder of the guidelines for RR:

 * Tell us why it’s a worthy contender. 
 * Quote lyrics if helpful, but for copyright reasons no more than a third of 
a song’s words. If sharing links, make sure there is appropriate copyright 
permission.

 * Listen to others people’s suggestions and add yours to a collaborative 
Spotify playlist. 
 * If you have a good theme <http://www.rrindex.com/aztopic.htm>, or if you’d 
like to volunteer to compile a playlist from readers’ suggestions, please email
matthew.holmes@theguardian.com <mailto:matthew.holmes@theguardian.com> 
 * There’s a wealth of data on RR, including the songs that are “zedded”, at 
theMarconium <http://www.rrindex.com/glossary.htm>. It also tells you the 
meaning of “zedded” (picked for a previous playlist so ineligible), “donds” and 
other strange words used by RR regulars. 
 * Many RR regulars also congregate at the ’Spill blog 
<http://thespillblog.co.uk/>.  