
Here is this week’s playlist – tunes picked by a reader from your suggestions 
afterlast week’s callout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/27/readers-recommend-share-your-songs-about-the-american-west>
. Thanks for them all. Read more about how our weekly readers recommend series 
works at the end of the piece.

What “the west” is depends on where you’re standing. For America’s original 
colonisers, the west was the east: they were said to have came from Siberia 
around 20,000 years ago and surprisingly quickly took over the entire land 
mass. Over the next few centuries, stuff happened ... eventually the smallpox 
European explorers brought with them travelled faster than they could, and 
their explorations uncovered mostly empty towns and villages.

But we begin with Louie Gonnie, an artist who, in memory of those Native 
Americans who survived,describes his descendancy as from the Zuni people 
<http://www.canyonrecords.com/shop/index.php?app=cms&ns=display&ref=AP_LouieGonnie>
, and his4 Peyote Songs <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QLvYp0vNEGY>. 

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPL3Yv36aUktyRVhABwR9Kwz0ZzFAG7mqZW&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPL3Yv36aUktyRVhABwR9Kwz0ZzFAG7mqZW>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPL3Yv36aUktyRVhABwR9Kwz0ZzFAG7mqZW&media=>
 The YouTube list. 
The prairie in western folk song Home on the Range 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jDV6rD7UCg8> has become an almost mythical 
place, defined by a song which has shifted its relevance with each singer who 
has recorded it (this version is byNeil Young, but there are dozens). But its 
lyrics seem to encapsulate a dream, and maybe each singer is describing their 
own dream, their imagination of a perfect America, a perfectly possible one in 
which nature lives peacefully alongside prosperous man.

After the mythology, the fantasy; a myth within a myth. Here is a Wild West 
that never existed then any more than Roy Rodgers’ dude ranch outfits. However, 
a hyper-energetic, thigh-slapping, buckskin-clad tomboyDoris Day is a perfectly 
acceptable image. Unconsciously sexy – yeah right – she sings and dances 
brilliantly, with a level of comedic timing and naughty posturing that few 
could aspire to inThe Deadwood Stage 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x_xmujSyxkU>, from Calamity Jane.

In Jimmie Rodgers’ Blue Yodel No. 1 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qEIBmGZxAhg>, up next, we have one of the most 
influential figures in western music. Between the late 1920s and early 1930s he 
recorded incessantly, literally dozens of songs. Tuberculosis won in the end, 
at the young age of 35, which is a kind of irony considering he relied on a 
powerful vocal style that could project over some strongarm guitar playing

Shenandoah <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9gtJkeXAMt0> is a river in the 
eastern states of Virginia and West Virginia, but in thisPaul Robeson song the 
protagonist is working on the Missouri river, west of the Mississippi, while 
dreaming of home. The song has a long and profound history, apparently most 
likely referring to early fur trappers using the river road to bring their 
collections back to what passed for civilisation. They were often away for 
years – in this case, seven.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Freaders-recommend-playlist-your-songs-about-the-american-west%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc033de9453d903e4a0ce058a5d11cfb531d91929%2F0_0_2048_854%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers%20recommend%20playlist%3A%20your%20songs%20about%20the%20American%20west&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Freaders-recommend-playlist-your-songs-about-the-american-west%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%20recommend%20playlist%3A%20your%20songs%20about%20the%20American%20west&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Freaders-recommend-playlist-your-songs-about-the-american-west%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc033de9453d903e4a0ce058a5d11cfb531d91929%2F0_0_2048_854%2F2048.jpg>
 Trapper country. Photograph: Evere/REX/Shutterstock/Everett/Rex/Shutterstock 
Whilst on the subject of trappers, they weren’t all as pretty as Robert 
Redford inJeremiah Johnson <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0068762/>. The one in 
theEdgar Broughton Band’s Old Gopher 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4RjKP5-frfs>, from Kansas, had “Blood on the 
table and skins on the door / and last week’s hunting all over the floor.” He 
was “Crazy as a stallion choking on a lariat line.” Though seemingly happy 
enough drinking raw red rum and making raw red wine.


Most likely based on traditional European songs such as The Wild Hunt, Ghost 
Riders in the Sky <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Mynzbmrtp9I> (Johnny Cash) 
is a song that America, if not the world, has taken to its heart. We think of 
the cowboy as simply herding cattle, or sitting by his campfire, doing a fairly 
straightforward job. But there must have been some frightening times; the 
vagaries of the weather, wild animals, and the dark lonely nights when the 
shifting shadows conjured up images a man doesn’t want to think about.

Bobby Troup wanted to be a songwriter, so he drove across America to 
California to stake his claim. Once there he checked off on a map all of the 
towns he and his wife had driven through on their 10-day journey. Before he 
knew it, he’d written a standard –Route 66 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tg2EbJy-9dc>. Though originally recorded by 
the King Cole Trio, that version wasn’t nominated, so we’re going to have to 
settle forChuck Berry.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Freaders-recommend-playlist-your-songs-about-the-american-west%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9911c4e0a032282977565806a8967dd410bbe10f%2F0_0_2352_1583%2F2352.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers%20recommend%20playlist%3A%20your%20songs%20about%20the%20American%20west&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Freaders-recommend-playlist-your-songs-about-the-american-west%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%20recommend%20playlist%3A%20your%20songs%20about%20the%20American%20west&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Freaders-recommend-playlist-your-songs-about-the-american-west%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9911c4e0a032282977565806a8967dd410bbe10f%2F0_0_2352_1583%2F2352.jpg>
 Composer Ennio Morricone in 2001. Photograph: Yui Mok/PA 
Lee Van Cleef’s snake eyes, Eli Wallach’s toothy, grinning trickster, and 
Clint Eastwood looking like he’s gripping a pineapple in the wrong place. What 
more could you ask? A great soundtrack, perhaps? You got it. Somehow melding 
western, Mexican and native musical elements into a cohesive whole,Ennio 
Morricone’s theme to The Good, The Bad and the Ugly 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h1PfrmCGFnk> is a memorable, original piece of 
music that is, once heard, never forgotten.

In their various incarnations I’ve counted 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Flying_Burrito_Brothers#Band_Members> 53 
band members so far, but the originalFlying Burrito Brothers lineup were among 
those whoinvented country rock. Check the album cover with Gram Parsons 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sleepless_Nights_%28Gram_Parsons_album%29> in his
Nudie suit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2004/feb/28/popandrock.gramparsons>. That’s 
class. And so is this song –Sin City 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K_LY8XPS6Ys> – about climbing high above Las 
Vegas, but getting nearer to Satan than God. Redemption does not arrive in a 
green mohair suit. Unfortunately for Parsons, the Nudie suit didn’t count for 
much either.

In Vegas there are no clocks, no windows; we’re stuck here. We’ll miss our 
train. Home doesn’t exist any more. Only the spinning wheel, the blackjack 
shoe, the Blackpool lights, the grifters, the whores and the doors to the hotel 
rooms up in the clouds where room service has more than one meaning. This is 
the flash of the desert city, in sound and word, happily evocative of a new and 
singular experience, giving the sense of soaring above it all, looking down and 
smiling sympathetically at human folly. This isHeaven or Las Vegas 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j65v7OqlW6I>, by the Cocteau Twins.


Where have we ended up? Environmental disasters, ecological breakdown. 
Anything of any value ripped out of the ground at any expense as long as there 
is profit to be made by people who don’t have to live in the waste, detritus 
and pollution. A farmer looks upon his land knowing he could prosper and feed 
his children as long as the corporations leave him be.This is My Prairie 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AhAB6Wj0pGw> (Corb Lund)? Fat chance.

Note: not all songs appear on the Spotify playlist because some are 
unavailable on the service. One song (Doris Day) has now been restored after 
initially being omitted due to an editing error.


New theme: how to join in

The new theme will be announced at 8pm (GMT) on Thursday 3 November. You have 
until 11pm on 7 Novemberto submit nominations.

Here’s a reminder of some of the guidelines for RR:

 * If you have a good theme idea, or if you’d like to volunteer to compile a 
playlist from readers’ suggestions and write a blog about it, please email
matthew.holmes@theguardian.com <mailto:matthew.holmes@theguardian.com>.

 * There is a wealth of data on RR, including the songs that are “zedded”, at 
theMarconium <http://www.rrindex.com/index.htm>. It also tells you the meaning 
of “zedded”, “donds” and otherstrange words used by RR regulars 
<http://www.rrindex.com/glossary.htm>.

 * Many RR regulars also congregate at the ’Spill blog 
<http://thespillblog.co.uk/>.
 