
Here is this week’s playlist – songs picked by reader Marco den Ouden (who 
runs theMarconium <http://rrindex.com/> website) from your suggestions after 
last week’s callout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/17/readers-recommend-share-your-songs-with-the-accordion>
. Read more about how our weekly readers recommend series works at the end of 
the piece.

Iron is the most abundant element in the Earth’s crust. Not surprisingly then, 
it has been used as an industrial metal since ancient times. But pure iron is a 
soft metal ... in practice, it is almost always mixed with carbon to produce 
steel.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPLdIPAbocW5kfvSummjXUFdH2Fr9Bwu5es&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPLdIPAbocW5kfvSummjXUFdH2Fr9Bwu5es>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPLdIPAbocW5kfvSummjXUFdH2Fr9Bwu5es&media=>
 The YouTube playlist. 
Although knife-like implements date back at least 2.5m years, it wasn’t until 
the bronze age that knives were forged from metal, and mass production of 
swords to equip armies started in the 13th century BC.Tenpole Tudor sing this 
weapon’s praises and begin our playlist withSwords of a Thousand Men 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?list=PLdIPAbocW5kfvSummjXUFdH2Fr9Bwu5es&v=5AywIL5_eYM>
: “Hoorah, Hoorah, Hoorah, Yea!”

Bronze horseshoes have been dated from 400BC and the first ones incorporating 
iron date from ancient Rome. It was apparently when a blacksmith became 
archbishop of Canterbury in the 10th century that they acquired cultural 
significance as talismans of good luck.Caracol’s Horseshoe Woman 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?list=PLdIPAbocW5kfvSummjXUFdH2Fr9Bwu5es&v=Y9tg3fWirTk>
 personifies that.


Steel production was commercialised with the invention of the Bessemer process 
in the 1850s and further developed with the open-hearth furnace in the 1860s – 
leading directly to the second industrial revolution. The development of steel 
rails spurred the growth of the modern railroad; in those early days, track was 
laid by hand and the prowess of steel-driving men such asJohn Henry 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EACaiHXDbrQ> was celebrated in song. Several 
versions of this classic were suggested. I liked the one byHarry Belafonte. 

 The romance of the rail had locomotives fondly called “iron horses” and 
singers such asArlo Guthrie have eulogised rail in song: “The sons of Pullman 
porters and the sons of engineers ride their fathers’ magic carpets made of 
steel” is from Guthrie’sCity of New Orleans 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?list=PLdIPAbocW5kfvSummjXUFdH2Fr9Bwu5es&v=TvMS_ykiLiQ>
.

Modern steel production also brought the production of modern guns. A band 
appropriately called theSteeldrivers ask whether this weapon really deserves 
its sobriquet ofPeacemaker 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?list=PLdIPAbocW5kfvSummjXUFdH2Fr9Bwu5es&v=_svN06pFMB4>
. Sung from the point of view of the gun, it laments that “I coulda’ been a 
hammer or a railroad spike. I coulda’ been a train rollin’ through the night.” 
But until the “lion lays down with the lamb, I’m a cool 3lbs of cold blue 
steel. I shoot even deader than the way I feel.”


Indeed, as long as there are those like Blondie’s gang plotting the heist of 
an armoured car (“25 tons of hardened steel”), guns remain a necessity to keep 
the peace.The Hardest Part 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?list=PLdIPAbocW5kfvSummjXUFdH2Fr9Bwu5es&v=vEjCDriXwnI>
 of their plan is figuring out how to get to the “big man of steel behind the 
steering wheel”.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Freaders-recommend-your-songs-about-iron-and-steel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97104be0d8e00278088cfe8cbe465111599f696e%2F0_0_1752_2610%2F1752.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers%20recommend%20playlist%3A%20your%20songs%20about%20iron%20and%20steel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Freaders-recommend-your-songs-about-iron-and-steel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%20recommend%20playlist%3A%20your%20songs%20about%20iron%20and%20steel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Freaders-recommend-your-songs-about-iron-and-steel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97104be0d8e00278088cfe8cbe465111599f696e%2F0_0_1752_2610%2F1752.jpg>
 A steely eyed Debbie Harry of Blondie. Photograph: Images Press/Getty Images 
The skyscraper was another revolution propelled by modern steel production. In 
New York, the men of the high steel were a special breed. InSteel Monkey 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?list=PLdIPAbocW5kfvSummjXUFdH2Fr9Bwu5es&v=G6-Jy133XLI>
,Jethro Tull sings the praises of these fearless men.

With the advent of the second world war, men went off to fight and women were 
needed to work in the factories, building ships and planes. They were 
celebrated in song and film as the iconicRosie the Riveter 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?list=PLdIPAbocW5kfvSummjXUFdH2Fr9Bwu5es&v=9CQ0M0wx00s>
. TheFour Vagabonds sing this tribute to the feminist icon.


After the war, a Swiss engineer revolutionised the production process. Instead 
of blowing air through pig iron to create steel, he blew pure oxygen. This 
simple change reduced capital costs and smelting time, increasing labour 
productivity by a factor of 1,000. And the industrial prowess of Asia grew as 
China rose from insignificant player to producing over half of all the steel 
made today.



So even as worldwide production tripled in the last 50 years, these changes 
led to a drastic decline in the west. In the following decades, there were 
dozens of songs written on the subject, often referencing the staggering 
decline in employment rates in the industry – and plenty were nominated. They 
includeBig Country’s Steeltown 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?list=PLdIPAbocW5kfvSummjXUFdH2Fr9Bwu5es&v=vTkGSI7nZFg>
,Mischief Brew’s Jobs in Steeltown 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?list=PLdIPAbocW5kfvSummjXUFdH2Fr9Bwu5es&v=I7AEDawn8RM>
 andBruce Springsteen’s history of Youngstown 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?list=PLdIPAbocW5kfvSummjXUFdH2Fr9Bwu5es&v=Smddcs5n0H0>
, Ohio, one of the towns hardest hit by the steel employment crisis.

The most disturbing song about this era is undoubtedly Pete Atkin’s story of a 
skilled machinist who, discarded after 40 years, maintains his dignity: “The 
hands on his chest flared more brightly than his name for a Technicolor second 
as he rolled into the flame.” Suicide by blast furnace. TheCarnations on the 
Roof 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?list=PLdIPAbocW5kfvSummjXUFdH2Fr9Bwu5es&v=72NY5bP5xHM>
 are the flowers on the roof of the car that leads his funeral procession.

But rather than end on such a downer, let’s note that iron and steel have been 
and remain symbols of toughness and strength in popular lore. The iron man 
triathlon ; the man of steel; the iron man. We close with an upbeat reggae 
number fromBob Marley, who is on the run but vows to be tough as Iron like a 
Lion in Zion 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?list=PLdIPAbocW5kfvSummjXUFdH2Fr9Bwu5es&v=tBWFofJSm-c>
.

Note: not all songs appear on the Spotify playlist because some are 
unavailable on the service.

New theme: how to join in

The new theme will be announced at 8pm (GMT) on Thursday 1 December. You have 
until 11pm on 5 Decemberto submit nominations.

Here’s a reminder of some of the guidelines for RR:

 * If you have a good theme idea, or if you’d like to volunteer to compile a 
playlist from readers’ suggestions and write a blog about it, please email
matthew.holmes@theguardian.com <mailto:matthew.holmes@theguardian.com>.

 * There is a wealth of data on RR, including the songs that are “zedded”, at 
theMarconium <http://www.rrindex.com/index.htm>. It also tells you the meaning 
of “zedded”, “donds” and otherstrange words used by RR regulars 
<http://www.rrindex.com/glossary.htm>.

 * Many RR regulars also congregate at the ’Spill blog 
<http://thespillblog.co.uk/>.  