
Left or right? Here’s one way to go – get the butler to pass the bong 
properly, if you don’t mind.The Mighty Diamonds, the Jamaican Beach Boys, 
outline the rules andPass the Kouchie.

Bill Bailey? It’s about time he got a listing with his Kraftwerk Hokey Cokey. 
Funny and musical, he’s the best since Neil Innes.

XTC are next, with a Complicated Game about choosing left or right. Richard 
Branson had a hand in this somewhere – he paid off their mortgages so they 
could carry on doing what we love.


Shirley Ellis takes me back to Alexander Pope Street in Liverpool with The 
Clapping Song. All our streets were named after writers, don’t you know. That’s 
because the girls were playing two, three, four balls. Tucked their skirts in 
their knickers chanting: “Three, six, nine, the goose drank wine.” So much more 
dextrous with left and right than us boys, who were too busy kicking balls and 
punching each other.

Elvis Presley really had something once upon a time. He was young, handsome, 
had his teeth fixed, dyed his blonde hair to be like Roy Orbison, with Scotty 
Moore on guitar, and made great country rock records. Nice turn on –I’m Left, 
You’re Right, She’s Gone.


Next, Chuck Prophet chucks some country rock our way using The Left Hand and 
the Right. He’s reminiscent of Robert Mitchum’s knuckles of love and hate in 
Charles Laughton’s only directorial job,The Night of the Hunter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2011/dec/08/favourite-film-night-of-the-hunter>
.

The White Stripes’ Jack Fell in Love With a Girl with his left brain knowing 
that love is fleeting.  I’ve never reached a satisfactory conclusion over that 
one. Can’t work out who Jack’s singing about.


Nilpferd, in comments, said “no sample hip-hop”. So I had to check it out. And 
this is damned good stuff fromDynamic Syncopation featuring Mass Influence with 
2 Tha Left.
Thee Faction have made some funky rock that I wish was mine. Deft Left is not 
unlike the Redskins but with George Harrison-esque guitar.

Is Tom Robinson political? He’s a complicated character, but always manages to 
explain himself in his songs, includingBetter Decide Which Side You’re On.

Now for some Cream. They are dollop of the old school, but they were new once, 
as withPolitician. Jimi Hendrix loved them. Jack Bruce signed my son’s guitar.

And finally? Well, have to do a special one – this is just for Jennifer. Jimi 
Hendrix plays Gloria.

The playlist
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5JcCQlZXMAM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5JcCQlZXMAM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5JcCQlZXMAM&media=>
 Playlist for songs about left and right 

The Mighty Diamonds – Pass the Kouchie 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5JcCQlZXMAM&feature=youtu.be>

Bill Bailey (after Kraftwerk) – Hokey Cokey 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dwaxWoJPUC0>

XTC – Complicated Game <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L_QFMuieWiI> 

Shirley Ellis – The Clapping Song 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8-TzXvoUGGs&feature=youtu.be> 

Elvis Presley – I’m Left, You’re Right, She’s Gone 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7n_m3q7XYz4> 

Chuck Prophet – The Left Hand and the Right Hand 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bfFqgAKXzig> 

The White Stripes – Fell in Love With a Girl 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q27BfBkRHbs&feature=youtu> 

Dynamic Syncopation, featuring Mass Influence – 2 Tha Left 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TsPi4gcVA8k> 

Thee Faction – Deft Left <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-QU7he9-zzk>

Tom Robinson Band – Better Decide Which Side You’re On  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oJqsrEF4gw4>

Cream – Politician <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vlvA0sMvnqo> 

Jimi Hendrix – Gloria <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FBG9RsP5ltk>
 