
Here is this week’s playlist – songs picked by a reader from your suggestions 
afterlast week’s callout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/08/readers-recommend-share-your-songs-about-finishing>
. Thanks for them all. Read more about how our weekly readers recommend series 
works at the end of the piece.

Finishing something, bringing it to an end or conclusion, doesn’t have to be 
all doom and gloom. In fact it can very often be satisfying to finish a piece 
of work, a race, a challenge or something that has been bothering you for some 
time. The conclusion can bring resolution and an opportunity to move on. All 
told, I’m pretty chuffed to have completedmy second stint as guru 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/apr/07/readers-recommend-playlist-songs-with-girls-names>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPL3Yv36aUktyTcCqyhQSRKsUN4rc_wnjaz&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPL3Yv36aUktyTcCqyhQSRKsUN4rc_wnjaz>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPL3Yv36aUktyTcCqyhQSRKsUN4rc_wnjaz&media=>
We start this playlist in our school days. Who doesn’t remember the elation of 
the end of term?Alice Cooper brilliantly captures that excitement at the 
prospect of weeks of freedom – but is he also into a bit of vandalism to go 
with the tricks and japes kids play on their teachers whenSchool’s Out for 
Summer <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2Oo8QzDHimQ>? For me this song brings 
back fond memories of one of my favourite 90s slacker movies,Dazed and Confused 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/18/dazed-confused-comedy>.

Later in life most of us go out into the world and get a job. Poor Bob Dylan 
has been enduring some tough treatment down onMaggie’s Farm 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G8yU8wk67gY> and has decided to call it quits. 
Anyway, he has big ideas of his own and intends to follow his dream.Speech 
Debelle has also got a lot on her mind. Her list of things to get on with is 
long and full of angst. Atop it, though, is to stop procrastinating andFinish 
this Album <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w1Pe80aA5B0> – maybe then she’ll 
have the time and headspace to deal with some of the other stuff worrying her.

When the working day is done, who doesn’t love a good blow out every now and 
again?Corb Lund and his band clearly do, as they’ve drunk the kegs so dry 
they’ve decided it’sTime to Switch to Whiskey 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LNlM5iuX058>. In fact they’ve all had such a 
skinful, they’re either going to start a fight or have already sworn to future 
abstinence.John Lennon painfully shares his experience of deciding to quit his 
heroin habit and goCold Turkey <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OLlrH8q5d3M> – 
in fact he feels so bad, he wishes he was dead. The last couple of minutes of 
this track are the tortuous sounds of someone in serious pain.

Time to slow things down now as the end of summer triggers a wistful 
wanderlust inJoni Mitchell who has an Urge for Going 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z3EofN3Flag>. As the season changes to autumn 
it evokes a need to move away, yet she never quite makes it. There is no 
melancholy here though as we all know summer will return.Nick Drake also 
ponders the cyclical nature of things and our short time here inDay is Done 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y2jxjv0HkwM>. His song provides a warning not 
to hang around if there’s stuff you want to get on with because if you “Didn’t 
do the things you meant to do/Now there’s no time to start a new/Now the 
party’s through”

No playlist about finishing would be complete without a few break up tunes, so 
here come my three faves from the many nominations. First up,Eels, well known 
for their affecting lyrics;End Times 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jmOuMudZt0I&index=6&list=PL3Yv36aUktyTcCqyhQSRKsUN4rc_wnjaz>
 describes the feeling of utter devastation about the end of an important 
relationship. For singer E, the fact that she has gone heralds the end of time, 
there’s almost no point in continuing. Slightly more upbeat and acerbic about 
the end of their relationship, Miki and Jarvis (Cocker) inLush’s Ciao! 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8z59DMRWh9s> sing about their relief at having 
called it a day with the line “And life is wonderful, now that I’m rid of you.” 
Testament that the end of something need not be awful after all.


I’m not totally convinced this next one is a break up song, it seems more a 
philosophical reflection on unkind words contributing towards a break up. In
Here’s Where the Story Ends <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Yq9x-ff0fXs>, the 
Sundays lament the memories of those words and incidents with the line: “It’s 
that little souvenir of a terrible year, which makes me wonder why.”

As this playlist draws to a close I’m reminded of saneshane’s words: “you have 
to have a very special song to end the tape”.

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2450886> saneshane  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2450886> 12 December 2016 3:39pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/89323348> 
sorry I'm late - this is an ace theme.

anyone who has been doing this since the days of C90's will know you have to 
have a very special song to end the tape - if the compilation was tracks about 
finishing - well then you have to try even harder:

"if this was our last song; what would we do"
I think would sum up the finale just about perfectly - remember to leave 4 
minutes of tape for it.

CLOGS - Last Song <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zodW1YIDjew>
yes that is Matt Berninger from The National singing us out.

No pressure then! The track suggested is a lovely finisher but in this 
playlist it is in second-last spot. The subdued guitar and woodwind, with 
simple repeated lyrics sung so languidly by Matt Berninger, on Clogs’ Last Song 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zodW1YIDjew> can be interpreted in many ways 
and make it so beautiful to listen to on repeat.


2016 has been a difficult year in many respects, yet there is still much to 
celebrate as it draws to a close. Thank you to all of my fellow readers 
recommend the contributors for supporting this forum and sharing great music 
every week throughout ...

The problem with playlists is they have to conclude somewhere – and so to the 
finale. To wrap this one upEcho and the Bunnymen remind us in this positive, 
optimistic, soaring tune heavy with brass and strings thatNothing Lasts Forever 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XZF8tVtf-h4>. We shouldn’t wait for life to 
come to us, but go out, grab it and enjoy it while we can.


New theme: how to join in

The new theme will be announced at 8pm (GMT) on Thursday 15 December. You have 
until 11pm on 19 Decemberto submit nominations.

Here’s a reminder of some of the guidelines for RR:

 * If you have a good theme idea, or if you’d like to volunteer to compile a 
playlist from readers’ suggestions and write a blog about it, please email
matthew.holmes@theguardian.com <mailto:matthew.holmes@theguardian.com>.

 * There is a wealth of data on RR, including the songs that are “zedded”, at 
theMarconium <http://www.rrindex.com/index.htm>. It also tells you the meaning 
of “zedded”, “donds” and otherstrange words used by RR regulars 
<http://www.rrindex.com/glossary.htm>.

 * Many RR regulars also congregate at the ’Spill blog 
<http://thespillblog.co.uk/>.  