
Here is this week’s playlist – songs picked by a reader from your suggestions 
afterlast week’s callout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/01/readers-recommend-share-your-songs-about-disbelief>
. Thanks for them all. Read more about how our weekly readers recommend series 
works at the end of the piece.


Funny thing, belief. Most of the time, you don’t exactly choose it, you’re 
either convinced or you’re not. It might be the evidence, it might be an 
overwhelming need or desire to believe that something is true – or untrue. 
Either way, the reasons we give for believing, or disbelieving, may not be our 
real motivation.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPL3Yv36aUktyQQUWWcRtelqIdc5Bo7zEcy&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPL3Yv36aUktyQQUWWcRtelqIdc5Bo7zEcy>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPL3Yv36aUktyQQUWWcRtelqIdc5Bo7zEcy&media=>
Screeching Weasel start the playlist with The Science of Myth 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sm1SbFRjH64&index=1&list=PL3Yv36aUktyQQUWWcRtelqIdc5Bo7zEcy>
, in which they suggest that: “If you’ve ever question beliefs that you hold 
you’re not alone / but you oughtta realize that every myth is a metaphor.” In 
other words, you don’t need to believe in theliteral truth of Bible stories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/17/literal-interpretation-of-bible-helps-increase-church-attendance>
 – or any other stories – to learn something from them. Fair enough, up to a 
point. I doubt a fox ever conned a crow into dropping his bit of cheese, but I 
get Aesop’s message. The trouble is we sometimes believe in an idea because of 
a compelling story – even when the idea isn’t any truer than the tale.


Up next is Colin Blunstone – and he is not a literalist. He can’t quite bring 
himself to write off the concept inI Don’t Believe in Miracles 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZBNmfx9a1To&list=PL3Yv36aUktyQQUWWcRtelqIdc5Bo7zEcy&index=2>
 though, despite the betrayals, even though his faith has been shattered: “If 
you want to run back home, go right ahead … / I believe I’d run to you if you 
should call, but…”


Soom T is not convinced. In Politic Man 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zEhTgh-_LJo&list=PL3Yv36aUktyQQUWWcRtelqIdc5Bo7zEcy&index=3>
, it’s not religion or an unfaithful lover but politicians that suffer the 
songwriter’s ire. “You lie about what you can do, promising everything but the 
truth … I don’t listen no more ... Tired of the words”.

The School provide a beautiful ballad with I Don’t Believe in Love 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u7EBLC_LSRY&list=PL3Yv36aUktyQQUWWcRtelqIdc5Bo7zEcy&index=4>
. Believing in their disbelief perhaps. It’s just that: “You hold my hand, it 
makes me want to cry / let’s take a vow, don’t underestimate it / we both know 
it’s true, we don’t believe in love”. Of course they don’t. Until they dance.


Gary Numan isn’t going along with any symbolic interpretations of the Bible in 
Angel Wars 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J7TGLJYxzR8&list=PL3Yv36aUktyQQUWWcRtelqIdc5Bo7zEcy&index=5>
. He’s pretty clear about where he stands. “I don’t believe in the angel wars / 
I don’t believe in the virgin birth / I don’t believe in the cross on the hill 
/ I don’t believe in the kindness of God to man.” He doesn’t believe in half 
measures either, musically nor lyrically.


More references to religion come from Nick Cave, who doesn’t believe in “an 
interventionist God” or “the existence of angels” but who has a great deal to 
say about what he would do if he did.Into My Arms 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LnHoqHscTKE&list=PL3Yv36aUktyQQUWWcRtelqIdc5Bo7zEcy&index=6>
 is a beautiful piano-led song about scepticism and love.

Maxine Brown released the first version of Oh, No Not My Baby 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o7iuI9Dssig&list=PL3Yv36aUktyQQUWWcRtelqIdc5Bo7zEcy&index=7>
, a Gerry Goffin/Carole King song about refusing to believe the rumours and 
warnings about her lover’s infidelity. The Shirelles had earlier recorded a 
version in which each member of the group took a turn at the lead vocal. The 
record company apparently considered this unreleasable and asked Maxine to 
“find the original melody”. I think it’s fair to say she did.

Gogol Bordello “don’t read the Bible”. They “don’t trust disciple”. They would 
rather “test superstring theory” and “accelerate protons” inSupertheory of 
Supereverything 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iUW00Y5x1tM&index=8&list=PL3Yv36aUktyQQUWWcRtelqIdc5Bo7zEcy>
. And why shouldn’t they? Sceptical but certainly not cynical, this is an 
exuberant gypsy punk celebration of materialism. Or possibly physicalism. Or 
monism. Well, it’s exhilarating, anyway.

The Big Ghana Band provide an extraordinary cover of EMF’s Unbelievable 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bAnjK2Kxyzg&list=PL3Yv36aUktyQQUWWcRtelqIdc5Bo7zEcy&index=9>
, which plays on the duel meaning of the title. “The things you say / your 
purple prose just gives you away / you’re unbelievable.” I have to say I prefer 
this to the original.


Jack White of the White Stripes is puzzled by a disbelief in medical science in
Girl You Have No Faith in Medicine 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F2GeEFi1z7Q&list=PL3Yv36aUktyQQUWWcRtelqIdc5Bo7zEcy&index=10>
. “Is the problem you’re allergic to a well familiar name? / Do you have a 
problem with this one if the results are the same?” He believes in the power of 
belief. He’ll take a sugar pill and “rattle down the street”. She, on the other 
hand…


T M Soundarajan sings a song of disbelief from the 1966 Indian Tamil film 
Selvam <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Selvam_(1966_film)>. It’s titled Avala 
Sonnal 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3VuXLy-ZWZo&list=PL3Yv36aUktyQQUWWcRtelqIdc5Bo7zEcy&index=11>
 and reader Ravi Ramanprovides the translation “Did She Say That?” and some of 
the lyrics in a comment here 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88696072>. 

Motörhead provide us with a rare example of what I can only call belligerent 
resignation. “Don’t talk to me / I don’t believe a word. / Don’t try to make me 
feel alright. / All the love in all the world / is not enough to save my soul 
tonight.” Two of their songs were nominated this week and either could easily 
have made the final list. This one just made it past God was Never on Your Side 
for its intensity and slow-burning rage. And the title, of course; that helped. 
After all, what better way to end a list of songs about disbelief than withI 
Don’t Believe A Word 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qMFddEqepr0&index=12&list=PL3Yv36aUktyQQUWWcRtelqIdc5Bo7zEcy>
?

Note: not all songs appear on the Spotify playlist because some are 
unavailable on the service.

New theme: how to join in

The new theme will be announced at 8pm (GMT) on Thursday 8 December. You have 
until 11pm on 12 Decemberto submit nominations.

Here’s a reminder of some of the guidelines for RR:

 * If you have a good theme idea, or if you’d like to volunteer to compile a 
playlist from readers’ suggestions and write a blog about it, please email
matthew.holmes@theguardian.com <mailto:matthew.holmes@theguardian.com>.

 * There is a wealth of data on RR, including the songs that are “zedded”, at 
theMarconium <http://www.rrindex.com/index.htm>. It also tells you the meaning 
of “zedded”, “donds” and otherstrange words used by RR regulars 
<http://www.rrindex.com/glossary.htm>.

 * Many RR regulars also congregate at the ’Spill blog 
<http://thespillblog.co.uk/>.  