
Below is this week’s playlist – the theme and tunes picked by a reader 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/84316467> from the 
comments below inlast week’s callout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/29/readers-recommend-share-your-songs-about-religion>
. Thanks for your suggestions. Read more about the format of the weekly Readers 
recommend series at the end of the piece.

According to former Daily Show host Jon Stewart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/jon-stewart>, “reason has been a part of 
organised religion ever since two nudists took dietary advice from a talking 
snake”. You may or may not agree with this, but it’s certainly true religion 
has inspired artists and musicians for centuries, and – trying, perhaps, to 
disprove the old maxim that “the Devil has the best tunes” – below is a 
playlist of my favourites from your suggestions this week.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPL3Yv36aUktySBldrZFAgV-wM9uNK5b-hg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPL3Yv36aUktySBldrZFAgV-wM9uNK5b-hg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPL3Yv36aUktySBldrZFAgV-wM9uNK5b-hg&media=>
 The YouTube playlist. 
Firstly, one that some listeners might wish to fast forward through is Decree 
10.05 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y6LqZOfnngg> by Church Universal and 
Triumphant, Inc. feat Elizabeth Clare Prophet. It’s 20-plus minutes of 
invocation about Heaven knows what. An extraordinary track, if a little 
disturbing.

More traditional is Tennessee Ernie Ford’s call for a dose of That Old Time 
Religion <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qHX7gJTGipI&feature=youtu.be>, so, 
ever ready to oblige, we follow on with some old-time religion in the shape of
Wardruna’s Rotlaust Tre Fell <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5gKW1R6mCH4>, a 
piece of Scandinavian folk music that draws upon Norse mythology for 
inspiration.

Iron Maiden, restrained as ever, remind us that the Number of the Beast 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WxnN05vOuSM&list=PL3YsvLz49R32OS8ZJ1f-2uQ6WQaofOZPZ>
 is 666. There are complex explanations as to why this particular number was 
chosen as beastly, but personally I think it was selected because it looks nice 
...
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2601866> d33pf1x  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2601866> 30 September 2016 8:50am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/84339976> 
Iron Maiden <https://www.theguardian.com/music/iron-maiden> - The Number of 
the Beast

Inspired by the Omen films which are all about the appearance of the anti 
Christ and the end of the world as mentioned in the Book of Revelation.

Or is that more inspired by religion rather than about it?

People can get “religious” about all sorts of things. For OPM it’s 
skateboarding, leading toHeaven Is a Halfpipe 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jCSJzw6QM_Q>. Each to their own and all that.

Jello Biafra’s Lard offer us some Hellfudge 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1mi4Sg4pY6s&list=PL1oAxa9Y68q5y7ORZlzOTNcQoNfGXeLLH>
, next. I think I had some of that once – it was kind of chewy ... And then we 
have hippy favouritesQuintessence, who hedge their bets, perhaps wisely, with 
Jesus Buddha Moses Gauranga <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AfNLVjxViWc>. 
Sensible chaps.

God makes many things – all things, in fact, according to some – so it’s no 
surprise that he madePhilou Louzolo funky. His Phunky Coogi 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2Z4ahBe4jgM> is a delightful piece of praise 
in musical form.

Withered Hand (Scottish indie rock musician Dan Wilson) earns his place thanks 
to the wonderful line “Knocking on Kevin’s door” inReligious Songs 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G-bJSOrFFY4>, I am a sucker for a good (or 
bad?) pun.

Bringing up the rear this week, it has to be Kana Uemura with Toilet no 
Kamisama (“God of Toilet”) <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z2VoEN1iooE>. It’s 
a song about both “god” and toilets and yet so much more (for more on the 
lyrics see a translationprovided in the comments by HoshinoSakura 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/29/readers-recommend-share-your-songs-about-religion#comment-84563348>
). There really is a lesson in “Zen” here: how the mundane daily task can, if 
carried out in the right spirit, bring us closer to the divine. It’s a lovely, 
toilety, tune too ...


Note: not all songs appear on this Spotify playlist as some are unavailable on 
the service.


New theme

The theme for next week’s playlist will be announced at 8pm (UK time) on 6 
October. You haveuntil 11pm on 10 October to submit nominations.

Here’s a reminder of some of the guidelines for RR:

 * If you have a good theme idea, or if you’d like to volunteer to compile a 
playlist from readers’ suggestions and write a blog about it, please email
matthew.holmes@theguardian.com <mailto:matthew.holmes@theguardian.com>.

 * There is a wealth of data on RR, including the songs that are “zedded”, at 
theMarconium <http://www.rrindex.com/index.htm>. It also tells you the meaning 
of “zedded”, “donds” and otherstrange words used by RR regulars 
<http://www.rrindex.com/glossary.htm>.

 * Many RR regulars also congregate at the ’Spill blog 
<http://thespillblog.co.uk/>.  