
Sergio Ramos did it again. The clásico was heading into its last minute and 
Real Madrid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> were facing the 
end of a 32-game unbeaten run, when the man who rescued them in the 94th minute 
of the 2014 European Cup final leapt to head in another Luka Modric delivery 
and score another dramatic equaliser. And, while it could never be as 
significant as that night in Lisbon, it could prove a huge moment too – one 
that will go some way to defining the title race in Spain. “In games like this, 
Sergio is always there,” Zinedine Zidane said.

There he was, leading the charge to a Camp Nou corner flag, celebrating 
team-mates in his wake. A match that had appeared to have slipped away,Barcelona
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> leading 1-0 through Luis 
Suárez’s header but unable to add to it, had been levelled, extending Madrid’s 
run and maintaining a six-point lead at the top. “The thing that stands out, 
again, is this team’s heart,” Zidane said. “We believed right until the end and 
got a draw that is very important.” The end was right: even after the goal, 
Casemiro cleared off the line to cling onto a precious point.

Barcelona could hardly believe it. Coach Luis Enrique likened this to getting 
a jug of cold water poured over your head; a real downer. They had wasted the 
opportunity to reduce the gap to three points, and push aside the pessimism – 
all the more so with the return of Andrés Iniesta, who came on as a second-half 
substitute. Instead, the lead remains six, and while it could have been worse, 
that’s significant even at this early stage. Madrid have not been this far 
clear since the spring of 2012 when they won their only league title in the 
last eight years.

Real had been in a good position from the start, until Suárez’s header in the 
53th minute. “Last year we went there with our arses clenched,” Zidane had 
said. Scared in other words. “But,” he insisted, “this time is different.” It 
was supposed to be, at least. That night in April, Madrid began 10 points 
behind, engulfed with doubts. This time, Barcelona were scared, knowing that 
defeat would be disastrous. “They can afford the luxury of losing, we can’t,” 
Gerard Piqué had admitted.

For much of the first half, though, it appeared that neither side felt that 
luxury, unprepared to take a decisive step forward. For a game with so much 
talent, it was a little disjointed, lacking continuity, maybe even a little 
fearful: a draw would at least delay judgment, they knew. Rarely did the ball 
move with pace or precision. Barcelona did not exercise control – a familiar 
problem of late. Sergio Busquets was improved in midfield but Ivan Rakitic to 
the right only rarely got hold of the ball and on the other side André Gomes 
was effectively absent again.

If anyone needed to seek victory it was Barcelona, yet the few opportunities 
were Madrid’s – particularly on their left, where Sergi Roberto was, or more 
accurately, was not. Instead, there was space in which to run, even if there 
was occasionally a reluctance to do so. Lucas Vázquez appealed for a penalty 
after two minutes and he also clipped a neat ball for Karim Benzema’s blocked 
shot and found Cristiano Ronaldo for the half’s best opportunity. Ronaldo went 
past Pique and slipped the ball through Javier Mascherano’s legs but could only 
toe-poke into goalkeeper Marc-André ter Stegen’s hands.

At the end of the half, Benzema progressed – again behind Sergi Roberto – and 
his cross was almost turned in by Piqué. From the corner, Raphaël Varane’s 
header was saved. That was Madrid’s fourth attempt on target; Barcelona had 
just one. Suárez had seen the best opportunity blocked. This was not the way it 
was supposed to be: you have to go back 39 clásicos to the last 0-0. Madrid 
seemed comfortable; Barcelona were crying out for Iniesta off the bench, even 
if the urgency was soon reduced when they took a second-half lead.

Neymar’s free-kick from the left was struck hard into the six-yard box, 
bending inwards. Suárez backed away from Vázquez and headed home. This was a 
different game now, Iniesta was sent on and the ball became Barcelona’s. 
Indeed, Zidane’s reaction, despite trailing, was to send on Casemiro for Isco. 
If it was protection he sought, he did not immediately get it, but Casemiro 
would be decisive in the very last minute. That it got that far was, by then, a 
surprise.

Lionel Messi found Iniesta who laid it to Neymar who, with a swivel of his 
hips, slipped past Daniel Carvajal. From eight yards, the goal at his mercy, 
the Brazilian fired beyond goalkeeper Keylor Navas but over.

Next, Iniesta hit the side-netting and soon after that Messi and Neymar 
combined to create another opportunity. Messi pulled his shot wide. In 10 
minutes, Barcelona had done more than in the previous 60; this looked more like 
them, perhaps even a team overcoming their recent identity crisis.

However, there were home nerves when Messi struck wide from Iniesta’s neat 
pass nine minutes from time. A warning followed when Marcelo crossed to 
Ronaldo, whose header from a tight angle was blocked by Jordi Alba. And then, 
Arda Turan gave away a free-kick on the left, which Modric took. It was time, 
Ramos time.

Barcelona 1-1 Real Madrid: El Clásico – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/dec/03/barcelona-v-real-madrid-el-clasico-live>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fbarcelona-real-madrid-la-liga-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcf4b236d0cae36da75c93d955c637f08350cb5d3%2F0_77_2272_1363%2F2272.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Real%20Madrid%20and%20Sergio%20Ramos%20grab%20point%20at%20the%20last%20from%20Barcelona&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fbarcelona-real-madrid-la-liga-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Real%20Madrid%20and%20Sergio%20Ramos%20grab%20point%20at%20the%20last%20from%20Barcelona&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fbarcelona-real-madrid-la-liga-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcf4b236d0cae36da75c93d955c637f08350cb5d3%2F0_77_2272_1363%2F2272.jpg>
 Luis Suárez celebrates scoring the opening goal for Barcelona. Photograph: 
Toni Albir/EPA  