
The Premier League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> was 
billed as the “league of managers” in the summer. With Pep Guardiola and 
Antonio Conte arriving, José Mourinho returning, and Arsène Wenger, Jürgen 
Klopp and Mauricio Pochettino all fighting for the title, there was a sense 
that the men on the sidelines would steal the limelight from the players. While 
all of these glamorous names have become renowned for their particular 
approaches to the game, some of the less fashionable managers in the league are 
beginning to fight back against unfavourable perceptions.

Managers are generally seen as either offensively or defensively minded, with 
Tony Pulis <https://www.theguardian.com/football/tony-pulis> perhaps the 
archetypal example of the latter group. He gained that reputation at Stoke City 
and, until recently, had only strengthened his status as a reactive coach at 
West Brom. However, while a favourable run of fixtures since the start of 
November has undoubtedly played its part, his players have been in freescoring 
form lately.

Is playing in Europe a disadvantage for the continent's top clubs?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/who-scored-blog/2016/nov/29/chelsea-liverpool-premier-league-champions>
West Brom have taken 10 points from their last four games, averaging a modest 
12.3 shots per game but conceded just 9.3 by comparison. They were rarely the 
more threatening side in any match last season, but there has been a timely 
shift in approach for Pulis, who had lost the backing of some supporters and 
had to deal with a potentially disruptive change of ownership over the summer.

The fans’ concerns last season were certainly understandable. Of the 24 
occasions that a team failed to have a single shot on target in a match last 
season, West Brom were responsible for seven (29%) of them. Pulis’s team have 
mustered at least one shot on target in all 14 of their matches this season by 
comparison, andtheir 3-1 win against Watford at the weekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/03/west-bromwich-albion-watford-premier-league-match-report>
 took their league tally to 20 goals for the season. That’s enough to rank 
seventh in the league, above West Ham, Southampton, Leicester City and, most 
notably, Manchester United, teams that all outscored West Brom last season (in 
fact, only Aston Villa scored fewer goals than West Brom in 2015-16; Newcastle, 
who were relegated, scored 10 more).

This dramatic shift has come about thanks to a more attacking approach from 
the manager, who is no longer shoehorning as many centre-backs into his side as 
possible. Deploying a 4-2-3-1 formation that has given Salomón Rondón far more 
support up front, Pulis is getting the best from Chris Brunt, James Morrison 
and Matt Phillips; this trio are keeping James McClean and Nacer Chadli out of 
the side, which shows the quality they possess. All of a sudden West Brom look 
capable of hurting opponents where last season they seemed so reluctant to open 
up.

David Moyes <https://www.theguardian.com/football/david-moyes> is enjoying 
similar success – three wins in Sunderland’s last four games – by trusting his 
attacking players to fulfil the requisite defensive responsibilities, with 
Victor Anichebe and Duncan Watmore able to get closer to Jermain Defoe without 
leaving their midfield too exposed. It’s a similar case at Stoke City, who have 
been tarnished with the Pulis brush of pragmatism for a long time but are 
unquestionably undergoing a tactical evolution under Mark Hughes.

The Welshman is perhaps an exception to the rule that coaches are split into 
defensive and attacking categories. Tasked with making the Potters a more 
attractive proposition to watch, Hughes has succeeded despite facing pressure 
from fans. Stoke struggled at the start of the season; seven matches into this 
season, they were second bottom with only three points. Having made significant 
strides last season, they looked in danger of regressing. Hughes was tipped for 
the sack but, in a rare occurrence, patience won out.

West Bromwich Albion’s ascent offers Tony Pulis chance for added value
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/04/west-bromwich-albions-ascent-offers-tony-pulis-chance-for-added-value>
From the seven matches that have followed Stoke’s winless start to the 
campaign, the club have picked up 16 points, . It’s a record bettered only by 
league leaders Chelsea – who have been faultless over the same stretch – with 
the Potters scoring 11 goals and conceding just three. Marko Arnautović and 
Xherdan Shaqiri look back to their best after a slow start and the squad has 
been bolstered by the arrivals of Bruno Martins Indi, Joe Allen and – while 
he’s yet to show it – Wilfried Bony. Loanee goalkeeper Lee Grant has been the 
standout newcomer; the 33-year-old boasts the best save success rate in the 
Premier League by a distance (87.1%).


While Ronald Koeman, Mourinho and – until last weekend – Pochettino have 
struggled to achieve attacking fluency in recent weeks,Sunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland>, West Brom and Stoke City are 
beginning to show signs of development. In this league of managers we’re being 
reminded not to forget the “little guys”.

Premier League team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
La Liga team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Bundesliga team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Serie A team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Ligue 1 team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Liga Nos team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
• Follow WhoScored on Twitter <https://twitter.com/WhoScored> and Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/WhoScored>
• Follow Martin Laurence <https://twitter.com/martinlaurence7> on Twitter
 