
Not everyone’s idea of a retirement present, perhaps, but three years ago 
Hamish Ross bought himself a wood to the east of Windermere, roughly triangular 
and bordered by a dry-stone wall. “The first thing we did was fix the walls and 
put up a deer-proof fence,” he said, leading me through the new gate. “They’d 
been getting in for decades – eaten everything. The under-storey had completely 
disappeared. Now, we get excited about brambles.”

As we walked along, he pointed out the line of 10 conifers he’d kept for 
shelter – all that remained of an acre of neglectedSitka spruce 
<https://www.woodlandtrust.org.uk/visiting-woods/trees-woods-and-wildlife/british-trees/common-non-native-trees/sitka-spruce/>
 andlarch 
<https://www.woodlandtrust.org.uk/visiting-woods/trees-woods-and-wildlife/british-trees/common-non-native-trees/larch/>
. With the dense tangle gone, light could once more filter onto the ancient 
woodland floor, helping the 900 indigenous saplings that Hamish has planted 
over the past couple of years. Reaching to a couple of metres high, they were 
woven through the centre of the wood amid mature trees and fallen giants. An 
assortment of buds – elegant orange beech tips, the red bulbs of lime, fat 
nut-coloured horse chestnut and downy crab apple – adorned their branches. This 
winter, he will be planting 350 more.

A narrow trail took us through the grass – something had been trudging the 
same route, night after night. A couple of badger families regularly snuffle 
through, it seems, from the calling cards deposited in shallow scrapes where 
the clan boundaries – or pathways – met.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Frebirth-of-a-native-woodland-lake-district-country-diary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd127c291705f94390ff5cdd0b2031dccb21ee587%2F0_0_3264_2448%2Fmaster%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rebirth%20of%20a%20native%20woodland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Frebirth-of-a-native-woodland-lake-district-country-diary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rebirth%20of%20a%20native%20woodland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Frebirth-of-a-native-woodland-lake-district-country-diary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd127c291705f94390ff5cdd0b2031dccb21ee587%2F0_0_3264_2448%2Fmaster%2F3264.jpg>
 Young saplings well protected at Windermere Wood. Photograph: Karen Lloyd 
Hamish pointed enthusiastically at self-seeded birch, holly, rowan and oak. 
Tiny, perhaps only 25cm high, but a sign that the wood is coming back to life, 
and evidence of what tenacious nature will do – if only it’s allowed to get on 
with it – aided by good walls and fences, and a man on a mission.

We scrambled up a craggy knoll covered in beech and oak. “In the summer, you 
can’t see much because of the leaf canopy – but look at that.” Through the high 
branches, the snow-covered, sheep-cropped Langdale Pikes, Bow Fell and the 
Coniston hills against a wintery blue sky. What would it take for our bare 
fellsides to burgeon again too?

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>
 