
Sales of vinyl in 2016 reached a 25-year high as consumers young and old have 
once again embraced physical formats of music.

More than 3.2m LPs were sold last year, a rise of 53% on last year and the 
highest number since 1991 when Simply Red’s Stars was the bestselling album. 
This was also the first year that spending on vinyl outstripped that spent on 
digital downloads.

The deaths of some music world giants was a key driver in vinyl sales, as 
people invested in records as a mementos. After David Bowie’s death he became 
the bestselling vinyl artist of 2016, with five albums posthumously featuring 
in the top 30.

Vinyl sales bigger than YouTube for British artists
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/20/vinyl-sales-bigger-than-youtube-for-british-artists>
His album Blackstar, which was shortlisted for a Mercury prize, was the most 
popular selling album of the year, while The Rise And Fall Of Ziggy Stardust, 
Hunky Dory, Nothing Has Changed and Changesonebowie were also popular LPs.

The statistics, compiled by BPI, show that this is the ninth consecutive year 
that vinyl has grown, thanks to events such asrecord store day, which has now 
become a nationwide phenomenon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/09/david-bowie-outkast-patti-smith-record-store-day-2016>
, and the increase in shops selling vinyl. Supermarkets such as Tesco now stock 
vinyl and both HMV and Rough Trade have created more floor space to sell more 
records.

At least 30 albums sold more than 10,000 copies in 2016, a stark contrast to 
2007 when digital downloads began to take hold and a meagre total of 200,000 
LPs were sold overall.

Vanessa Higgins, the CEO of Regent Street and Gold Bar Records, and an 
independent label member of BPI Council, said: “It’s twofold in that older 
people are going back to vinyl but I also think the younger generation are 
discovering it in a way they weren’t before.

“People think millennials just stream and are just digital but actually I 
think we are going to see increasingly over this coming year that young people 
still want something tangible and real and that’s where vinyl is taking on the 
role that the CD used to have.”

She said the trend towards streaming – which has rocketed 500% since 2013, 
with 45bn audio streams over 2016 – had led people back to vinyl as a way of 
tangibly owning music and becausestreaming had encouraged music discovery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/01/artists-made-it-huge-streaming-spotify-apple-music>
.

Higgins said: “It used to be music discovery was mainly limited to the radio, 
but now people are free to look and listen to all sorts of music, so people are 
hearing so much more new or different music than they were before. They are 
finding music through streaming and if they love it, they are going out and 
investing in it in a physical format.”

Higgins said it was still mainly benefiting artists on major labels, and that 
for smaller labels such as hers “the capital required to invest in vinyl is a 
lot upfront. And becausemost vinyl is pressed in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/18/in-the-groove-czech-firm-tops-list-of-worlds-vinyl-record-producers>
, the price to manufacture has gone up this year.”

However, she added: “I think what we are going to see this year is more 
smaller artists and independent labels start to benefit from vinyl as well 
because so many different types of music fans are now willing to go out and buy 
it.”

Higgins predicted the digital download would disappear entirely 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/26/spotify-music-download-apple-itunes-streaming-vinyl>
 over the next few years as it became redundant.

The rise of the album - archive, 6 May 1969
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/06/album-music-records-archive> 
While vinyl sales still only account for 5% of the albums market, they are 
becoming increasingly important sources of income for record labels and 
musicians.

Jamie Oborne, the manager of Mercury-nominated band the 1975, whose debut 
album was Urban Outfitters’ biggest selling vinyl of 2015, said: “There’s been 
this cultural shift where people are willing to pay for music again which is 
brilliant. We now sell a ton of vinyl and the margins on vinyl are huge so it 
is really a significant source of revenue for us.”

The boost in vinyl sales is part of a wider shift in the fortunes of the music 
industry back towards turning a profit again. In December, one the biggest 
global record labels, Warner Music, reported their best profits in eight years, 
of which $1bn (£810m) came directly from streaming, and in the first half of 
2016, streaming revenue in the US grew by 57% to $1.6bn. In contrast, CD sales 
were down 10% on last year.

Geoff Taylor, the chief executive of the BPI and the Brit Awards, said: 
“Growth in UK music consumption in 2016 was fuelled by the explosive rise in 
audio streaming, which has increased 500% since 2013, and relative resilience 
from physical formats … We believe this performance is indicative of the 
promise of a new era for music, where recorded music’s investments in a digital 
future fuel compelling benefits for fans, artists and the entire music 
ecosystem.”
 