
Hundreds of refugees have arrived in Mauritania, fleeing Mali’s spreading 
conflict 
<https://www.crisisgroup.org/africa/west-africa/mali/central-mali-uprising-making>
, just a year after armed groupssigned up for peace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jul/01/mali-peace-deal-a-welcome-development-but-will-it-work-this-time>
 with the government in Bamako.

Mali instability casts long shadow over children as aid efforts thwarted
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/21/mali-instability-long-shadow-humanitarian-efforts-thwarted-world-food-programme-unicef>
The arrival of more than 500 Fulani nomads from central Mali adds to the 
strain on Mbera camp in south-easternMauritania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mauritania>, where aid agencies are 
struggling to meet the needs of 42,000 mainly Tuareg and Arab refugees who have 
lived there since they fled northern Mali in 2012.

“I was beaten so many times by Malian soldiers,” says Aissata Diallo* who 
arrived last month with four children under the age of six from Nampala, in 
Mali’s central Ségou region. “The soldiers come to your home. If they cannot 
find the men, they tie up the women and hit and kick us. My brother’s wife had 
a miscarriage after she was beaten with a club.”

Souleymane Diabaté, the representative in Mauritania for the UN children’s 
agency, Unicef, expects more Fulanis to arrive fromMali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mali>, which is only 50km away. “I really 
fear the influx is going to grow. Every time there is an incident we see more 
refugees coming,’’ he said.

Ensuring their wellbeing is getting harder. The UN refugee agency, UNHCR, 
which manages Mbera, has secured only $3.6m (£2.7m) of its $15.5m budget for 
Mauritania this year. A third of staff at the camp have been cut.

Threat of marriage hangs over young Malian refugee girls in Mauritania
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/10/threat-of-marriage-young-malian-refugee-girls-mauritania-mbera-camp>
The World Food Programme is struggling, too. Country representative Janne 
Suvanto said each refugee is supposed to receive food and cash worth $11 every 
month. But cuts are being made. “We had a full rations rupture in March and 
managed to distribute reduced rations in April and May. For August we do not 
have the funds to provide the 1,500 ouguiya (£3.20) cash component each refugee 
is supposed to receive,” he said.

Although the camp registers lower rates of severe acute malnutrition than the 
rest of Mauritania, other urgent issues worry the agencies. The camp – where 
much ofAbderrahmane Sissako’s Oscar-nominated film Timbuktu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/14/cannes-film-festival-review-timbuktu>
 was filmed in 2013 – has effectively become sparsely populated Mauritania’s 
seventh largest town. It is now competing with nearby Bassikounou for water. 
Agencies stress the need for measures to appease Mauritanians living nearby.

There are indications that many of Mbera’s residents were subjected to 
gender-based violence while in Mali. Secondary schooling and vocational 
training are minimal, raising fears that unoccupied boys could be tempted to 
join armed groups who are active only 70km away.

In zone 4, block 6, UNHCR staff have planted metal poles in the sand. Around 
these, since January, the Fulani community have built tents for 537 new 
arrivals. Diallo has received plastic basins and cooking pots from the UNHCR. 
Neighbours have given her rice, oil and lentils while she waits to register for 
rations.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Frefugees-claim-abuse-by-soldiers-as-malis-conflict-spreads%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47a7060dcb8f7f7ec0dba3464bcd9732cadd6a8a%2F0_274_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Refugees%20claim%20abuse%20by%20soldiers%20as%20Mali's%20conflict%20spreads&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Frefugees-claim-abuse-by-soldiers-as-malis-conflict-spreads%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Refugees%20claim%20abuse%20by%20soldiers%20as%20Mali%27s%20conflict%20spreads&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Frefugees-claim-abuse-by-soldiers-as-malis-conflict-spreads%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47a7060dcb8f7f7ec0dba3464bcd9732cadd6a8a%2F0_274_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
 Boys pose with a toy gun at the marketplace in Mbera refugee camp. 
Diallo says the family fled Mali after her husband was arrested by the army 
along with four others and taken to Bamako central prison. “They were tortured. 
One of the men died,” she claims, adding that she had to pay a bribe of 1 
million CFA (£1,270) to secure her husband’s release, after which the family 
fled to Mbera.

She claims her husband is a shepherd with no links to Amadou Koufa, the Fulani 
Salafist jihadi who is one of Mali’s most wanted men. Koufa’sMacina Liberation 
Front 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/27/two-arrested-in-connection-with-bamako-hotel-attack>
 (MLF) wants to revive a 19th-century fundamentalist empire that spanned 
southern and central Mali – from the present border with Ivory Coast to 
Timbuktu.

Mali's peace deal represents a welcome development, but will it work this 
time? | Jean-Hervé Jezequel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jul/01/mali-peace-deal-a-welcome-development-but-will-it-work-this-time>
Diallo’s claims of abuse at the hands of the army are impossible to verify but 
they tally withreports gathered by Human Rights Watch 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2016/02/19/mali-abuses-spread-south>. Nomadic Fulanis 
have a fractious relationship with the rest of the population and have long 
claimed to be victimised by the army and gendarmerie. A revenge motive may in 
part explain the 19 July Islamist attack on Nampala army base in which17 Malian 
soldiers were killed 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-mali-violence-idUSKCN0ZZ11L>. 

Diallo looks blank when asked whether she knows of Koufa, his radical Dawa 
sect, or the MLF. “I do not know why the army comes for us,” she says. “We are 
not in any armed group. We are shepherds. They just do not like us.”

*Name changed to protect her identity

 * Alex Duval Smith travelled to Mbera with support from the EU, which is one 
of its main donors
 