
For Justin Welby, mulling over the state of the world in Davos has been easier 
than the previous week spenttrying to hammer out an Anglican church compromise 
over gay marriage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/15/justin-welby-says-sorry-to-lgbti-community-for-hurt-caused-by-church>
. The Archbishop of Canterbury even cracked one of the better jokes at the 
World Economic Forum.

Asked whether god is in cyberspace, Welby replied: “I think he must be because 
every time I am on the underground or a bus I see people looking at their 
computer or mobile phone saying ‘oh god, why won’t this work’.”

Humour has been in short supply at this year’s Davos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/davos>. The optimism of a year ago that 
the global economy was on the up after the deep slump of 2008-09 has 
disappeared fast. Five big fears have dominated the meeting.

The first has been the refugee crisis, now seen not just as a humanitarian 
tragedy but as a threat to the continued existence of the European Union. Mark 
Rutte, the Dutch prime minister, set the tonewhen he said a solution had to be 
found before better weather in the spring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/21/dutch-pm-says-refugee-crisis-could-shut-down-europes-open-borders-for-good>
 leads to a surge in the number of people seeking asylum from the civil war in 
Syria.

Dutch PM says refugee crisis could shut down Europe's open borders for good
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/21/dutch-pm-says-refugee-crisis-could-shut-down-europes-open-borders-for-good>
Justine Greening 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/21/un-global-womens-economic-empowerment-initiative-davos>
, the UK development secretary,Gordon Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/21/davos-2016-gordon-brown-warns-of-lost-generation-of-syrian-children>
, the former prime minister, andJim Kim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jan/21/davos-world-bank-chief-climate-change-al-gore-pharrell-williams>
, the president of the World Bank, all made the case for investment in building 
up the resilience of countries in the Middle East so that there will be less 
incentive for refugees to leave. For months, the World Bank has been working on 
a plan for how to deal with what it considers to be its number one issue.

Any long-term reconstruction plan, while necessary, is going to come too late 
to stop refugees making the dangerous journey to Europe in 2016. As David 
Miliband, the former foreign secretary and now president of the International 
Rescue Committee, said: “We have got to get real about this. If any of us lived 
in Syria we would be trying to get to Europe. The higher you build the wall, 
the more you empower the people smugglers.”

Some European nations have started to lay the first bricks in that wall, 
raising the fear not just of an uncoordinated response but of the dismantling 
of free movement, one of the pillars of the EU. If the existential threat to 
Europe last year was Greece’s exit from the eurozone, this year’s threat is the 
collapse of the passport-free zone created by the Schengen agreement. European 
leaders are far more worried about that than they were about the return of the 
drachma in Greece.

Europe’s state of near-panic about refugees meant it was unable to focus fully 
on a third Davos issue – whether Britain would decide to leave the European 
Union. David Cameron would dearly like to conclude his renegotiation talks next 
month so that a referendum could be called in June,but he appeared to recognise 
that might not be possible 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/21/david-cameron-eu-referendum-europe-migration>
. “If there is a good deal on the table I will take it. But if there isn’t the 
right deal I am not in a hurry. I can hold my referendum any time up until the 
end of 2017.” With polls suggesting a tight contest, Brexit was being taken 
seriously.

David Cameron 'not in a hurry' to hold EU referendum
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/21/david-cameron-eu-referendum-europe-migration>
The state of the financial markets provided the fourth reason for nervousness. 
Davos opened with shares in freefall amid concerns that China’s economic 
slowdown was in fact a full-scale recession which would engulf the rest of the 
world economy.Mario Draghi prompted a rally by the end of the week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/22/mario-draghi-global-recession-fears-refugee-opportunity>
, but the fact that the president of the European Central Bank could have such 
an impact with an unspecified pledge highlighted the manic depressive state of 
the markets.

Finally, the activities of Islamic State (Isis) in Iraq and Syria, and the 
terrorist attacks on Paris, have led to a heightened awareness of security 
risks. Even the breakthroughs in financial technology – hailed by some as the 
advent of afourth industrial revolution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/19/fourth-industrial-revolution-set-to-benefit-richest-ubs-report-says>
 – were seen as an opportunity for attacks by cyberterrorists.

Not everyone was consumed with gloom at Davos. Despite the geopolitical trauma 
of the last 12 months,John Kerry told delegates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/jan/22/davos-2016-imf-lagarde-draghi-kerry-live#block-56a214a6e4b03d84e4a10370>
 that they were not the victims of a pre-destined future.


The US secretary of state said: “People don’t fly to Davos to celebrate the 
status quo. You’ve come here to change the world for the better, and define the 
future.”


Kerry’s optimism, though, was untypical. The theme of Davos 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/davos-2016> was that the immediate future 
will be similar to the recent past: full of problems.
 