
The small concrete room at the end of the narrow walkway behind the Ansar Ali 
supermarket is in darkness thanks to another power cut. Faded trade union 
posters line the walls of this, theBangladesh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bangladesh> National Garment Workers 
Federation’s (NGWF) office. Sat on a plastic chair in the middle of the room, 
light filtering in through the open door, Shahorbanu relives the story of 
losing a son to the Rana Plaza.

Siddique was a 24-year-old garment worker, a tall man affectionate with his 
mother and his little son, Parvez. When, on24 April 2013, the eight-storey 
factory complex collapsed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/19/rana-plaza-bangladesh-one-year-on>
, Siddique became trapped under thousands of tonnes of rubble. He managed to 
take his mobile phone out of his pocket and call his mother. Shahorbanu 
describes his terrified voice pleading: “Ma, please save me. Somehow, just 
please save me.”

As Shahorbanu tells her story, Rafiqul Islam, vice-president of the federation 
for the Greater Dhaka city suburb of Savar, walks through the door. Tall with 
curly black hair, the sight of him brings Shahorbanu to tears. “My son was just 
like him. I miss when he would come back home and call me Ma – ‘Umma’. It is a 
great suffering to bury the body of a son.”

It was Siddique’s 19-year-old brother Bijan who eventually found his body, 
five days after the collapse. Working as a rescuer digging bodies out of the 
rubble left Bijan traumatised. Shahorbanu describes him as “unable to tolerate 
any loud sounds – even loud talking”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F23%2Frana-plaza-factory-collapse-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F21%2F1429619709649%2F84a854a9-d53d-4273-a8b2-83332301b897-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reliving%20the%20Rana%20Plaza%20factory%20collapse%3A%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2022&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F23%2Frana-plaza-factory-collapse-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reliving%20the%20Rana%20Plaza%20factory%20collapse%3A%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2022&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F23%2Frana-plaza-factory-collapse-history-cities-50-buildings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F21%2F1429619709649%2F84a854a9-d53d-4273-a8b2-83332301b897-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Global trade unions called the collapse ‘mass industrial homicide’, while 
Vogue magazine described it as ‘tragedy on an epic scale’. Photograph: Andrew 
Biraj/Reuters 
In the 90 seconds it took to collapse, the Rana Plaza garment complex became a 
symbol of global inequality. Considered the deadliest unintended structural 
failure of modern times, global trade unions called it “mass industrial 
homicide”. TheRana Plaza Coordination Committee 
<http://www.ranaplaza-arrangement.org/>, set up in response to the disaster, 
puts the final death toll at 1,134 people.

The wreckage, cleared away by day labourers with baskets of rubble on their 
heads, also signified a city out of control – where illegally constructed 
buildings buckle under the weight of people and machinery because regulation 
has been trumped by competition and profit.

Two years on, the only visible memorial to the devastation is two giant 
granite fists clutching a hammer and sickle, erected by the Workers Party of 
Bangladesh. Neighbourhood talk is that a new factory will soon be built on the 
site, as global demand for cheap clothing continues to grow.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F23%2Frana-plaza-factory-collapse-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F21%2F1429620907230%2F88034951-13c6-484a-b0b7-97ff75dcad71-2060x1157.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reliving%20the%20Rana%20Plaza%20factory%20collapse%3A%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2022&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F23%2Frana-plaza-factory-collapse-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reliving%20the%20Rana%20Plaza%20factory%20collapse%3A%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2022&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F23%2Frana-plaza-factory-collapse-history-cities-50-buildings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F21%2F1429620907230%2F88034951-13c6-484a-b0b7-97ff75dcad71-2060x1157.jpeg>
 Shahorbanu, whose son Siddique was killed in the Rana Plaza collapse. 
Photograph: Rainbow Collective 
Bangladesh is the world’s second-largest garment producer, churning out 
billions of pieces of clothing each year. International brands are typically 
attracted by cities where costs of production – including wages, employment 
benefits, and health and safety – are as low as possible. Prior to Rana Plaza 
there had already been a string of disasters in Bangladesh’s garment industry, 
culminating in theTazreen factory fire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/nov/25/bangladesh-textile-factory-fire> 
that killed 112 people six months earlier. Yet business continued as usual.


On the morning of the collapse, garment workers and managers argued on the 
forecourt outsideRana Plaza <https://www.theguardian.com/world/rana-plaza>. 
Large cracks had appeared in the building the day before, and the workers did 
not want to go inside. Another devastated mother, Argina, says her 18-year-old 
daughter, Rubina, was told if she didn’t show up for work that day then she 
would not be paid for the month. She had only been working there for four 
months before she died.

Rana Plaza is a story of city life for millions of impoverished women in the 
modern world. Bangladesh’s garment industry is 85-90%staffed by women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2013/may/23/bangladesh-garment-industry-women-opportunity>
; they are the machine operators, the garment quality inspectors, the ones who 
press shirts and snip loose threads six days a week for 12 hours a day.


Women also make up the majority of the 5,000 people – disabled survivors and 
families of victims – who are still owed compensation by the brands that used 
Rana Plaza. Moushumee worked on the seventh floor in a factory called New Wave 
Style; she survived the collapse but remains traumatised, tortured by 
nightmares and unable to set foot in another garment factory.

A strong trade union might have been able to evacuate Rana Plaza, but 
Bangladesh’s labour laws are skewed in favour of factory owners. Violence 
against union organisers is frequent. In the NGWF Savar office, Rafiqul Islam 
rolls up his trousers to reveal shins covered in scars from being beaten with 
sticks by factory management thugs. He claims that if a factory wants to 
terminate a worker’s contract, they place a gun or a knife in full view of the 
resignation forms they want signed.

Brad Loewen, a former chief building official for the city of Winnipeg, works 
on the 12th floor of a Dhaka tower block. His office is new and sparse; there 
is a desk, a map of Bangladesh and a suit jacket on a hanger. Loewen is the 
chief inspector for the Bangladesh Accord on Building and Fire Safety, a 
legally binding agreement between brands and trade unions established after 
Rana Plaza to replace the voluntary arrangements that went before.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F23%2Frana-plaza-factory-collapse-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F21%2F1429619808897%2F16c47123-1082-4c30-bec5-d3d1b97f9a65-1193x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reliving%20the%20Rana%20Plaza%20factory%20collapse%3A%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2022&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F23%2Frana-plaza-factory-collapse-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reliving%20the%20Rana%20Plaza%20factory%20collapse%3A%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2022&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F23%2Frana-plaza-factory-collapse-history-cities-50-buildings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F21%2F1429619808897%2F16c47123-1082-4c30-bec5-d3d1b97f9a65-1193x2040.jpeg>
 Monument to the 1,134 people killed in the collapse. Photograph: Tansy Hoskins 
The view from Loewen’s office gives a sense of the sheer size of Dhaka; the 
city is a seemingly infinite web of pale buildings surrounded by a haze of 
smog. Roughly 4,000 of these buildings are garment factories, of which 1,500 
are covered by the accord. Opposite is Hossain Market, a garment factory where 
1,200 workers from the Tuba Group went on hunger strike in 2014.

“During a catastrophic failure it’s columns that fail,” Loewen explains. A 
building such as the Rana Plaza complex should have been built to withstand 
twice its anticipated load, but in Dhaka, with its lack of construction 
watchdogs, buildings commonly get “under-built”.

“No one’s watching them,” Loewen says of Dhaka’s contractors. “There’s no 
government regulator, there’s no overall project management … They’re just 
building whatever they want.”

Rana Plaza had numerous illegal floors built on a hopelessly weak structure. 
Its construction materials were of extremely poor quality, and giant vibrating 
generators had been placed on several floors to keep the power on and the 
sewing machines running during the city’s regular power cuts. More and more 
people, machines and fabric bales were crammed inside until the load-bearing 
columns cracked apart.

In the two years since the Rana Plaza tragedy, Loewen’s team of 70 Bangladeshi 
engineers has evacuated or closed 17 unsafe buildings. The team normally 
carries out 200 inspections a month, but political unrest and violence in Dhaka 
means they have achieved only 50 visits in the first few months of 2015.

One building they were able to inspect was the Mega Chois Knitwear factory. 
Having been found highly unsafe, it is now suspended from the Accord process for
refusing to evacuate 
<http://bangladeshaccord.org/2015/03/accord-disclosure-on-refusal-to-temporarily-evacuate-factory/>
. The inspection found that the factory had 600 employees, a childcare centre 
on the sixth floor, and just one unprotected exit out of the building. 
According to Loewen: “The chances of people getting out of that building in the 
case of a fire are extremely limited.”

 * Which other buildings in the world tell stories about urban history? Share 
your own pictures and descriptions with GuardianWitness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/mar/23/50-buildings-great-stories-urban-history>
, on Twitter and Instagram using #hoc50 or let us know suggestions in the 
comments below  