
This Friday, REM come to London! Not to play a reunion show, sadly, but to 
talk about their career and the 25th anniversary of their albumOut of Time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/03/rem-rout-of-time-at-25-voice-of-generation-michael-stipe>
, which is getting the deluxe reissue treatment, also on Friday.

On 18 November, Michael Stipe and Mike Mills from the band will be in 
conversation with the Guardian’s John Harris, and we will stream the event live 
onour Facebook page <https://www.facebook.com/theguardian>. Stipe and Mills 
will also be taking your questions. So if there’s something you desperately 
want to ask them about the contrary career of one of the most unlikely 
superstar bands in pop history, email your question to:R.E.M.Ques@umusic.com 
<mailto:R.E.M.Ques@umusic.com>.

REM on Out of Time at 25: ‘Being the voice of a generation is not a pretty 
place to be’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/03/rem-rout-of-time-at-25-voice-of-generation-michael-stipe>
As Michael Stipe told our own Michael Hann recently: “You can fuck with people 
if you’re gonna be contrarian. And we were always contrarian about it. We would 
go on stage and perform the four songs everyone knew. This was 1987. We would 
open the set with the four songs everyone knew, then – the real fans, you can 
stay. Everyone else go home, go drink somewhere else, go flirt somewhere else … 
But we were always contrarian, and we were always pushing ourselves to do 
things differently. To not have the same setlist every night, to not allow it 
to become a job. We were throwing marbles under our feet at every turn to try 
to trip ourselves, to try to not allow it to become quotidian. Is that the 
word? Uninteresting, mediocre, boring.”

This promises to be a fascinating event – especially because it is their first 
chance to speak publically about Donald Trump’s America. So tune in on Friday – 
Stipe and Mills take to the stage at 12.30pm – and see what they have to say 
about the life ofREM <https://www.theguardian.com/music/rem> and the state of 
the US.
 