
With REM <https://www.theguardian.com/music/rem>, Mike Mills 
<https://twitter.com/m_millsey?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 was used to performing before thousands of people. But with his newest musical 
project, a collaboration with childhood friend and violinistRobert McDuffie 
<http://robertmcduffie.com/>, Mills is entering concert halls dominated by some 
of the world’s finest symphony orchestras.


Concerto for Violin, Rock Band and String Orchestra 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/rems-mike-mills-preps-debut-classical-piece-tour-w433943>
 is a new recording that features Mills on bass and keyboards joined by string 
players performing original compositions that fall outside the expectations set 
by both the pop and classical worlds. He and McDuffie are bringing the 
recording, which also features work by minimalist composersPhilip Glass 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/philip-glass> and John Adams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/john-adams>, on the road. 

This album is a true merging of a rock band with strings. Did you have 
experience working with strings before this?

Just minor projects in the past. There was a little string quartet in [the 
1985 REM song]Feeling Gravity’s Pull 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NodXnjUIZ0U>, there was one musical line we 
threw in there. I did some of the string parts forLosing My Religion 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=if-UzXIQ5vw>. But certainly this new album is 
the most in-depth I’ve ever dealt with any strings.

How do you write for violins when you’re not a violin player?

My approach was that a great melody is a great melody regardless of upon which 
instrument it is played. I also got a great deal of help and input from my 
arranger David Mallamud who helped show me what a violin is capable of. 
Certainly in the sense of Bobby’s virtuosity, which is amazing. But also in the 
sense of what a violin can do.

The voice of this record is a 1735 violin made by Guarneri del Gesu 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1ciBcmwBDyk> that’s worth $3.5m.

You ask any guitar player, or even any bass player, and they’ll have a 
favorite instrument they are connected to and they feel it will help them and 
Bobby felt that way about this violin.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F118714181&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F118714181>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F118714181&media=>
Is there an instrument you feel the same way about?

I have an old 70s Rickenbacker bass from the early days of REM 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/rem> that is suiting these songs really 
nicely.

On Sonny Side Up, the violin serves as the voice. You could replace it with a 
singer you’d have a conventional band.

That was part of the challenge, because without lyrics, the melodies have to 
speak. Fortunately a violin is not necessarily a close approximation of the 
human voice but it does have a lot of the same qualities. So if you do the 
melodies right, you will get a sense that some sort of information is being 
imparted through the melody even though there aren’t any words.

In working with Robert were there conversations about boundaries between the 
rock and classical world and how far each would bend?

He gave me absolutely no restrictions or instructions of any kind. He said he 
wanted strings to be a part of it. Other than that, my goal, and I think 
Bobby’s as well, was to show that there’s less distance between genres of music 
than people think, or in some cases want. Some people like to pretend that rock 
music and classical music have nothing in common. But we are trying to 
completely reject that notion and break those walls down and show it’s all just 
music.

Is that kind of genre-bending easier to see when you’re older? 

I’ve always enjoyed classical music, my father was a tenor and it was always 
in the house. I consider some of the tenor and soprano arias from various 
operas as some of the most powerful and moving music ever created. They still 
make me cry when I hear them. So for me it seemed like a chance to combine 
influences that I have. Even in the early days of REM, people would ask: “What 
kind of band are you, what kind of music do you play?” We used to say: “I don’t 
know, I don’t want to put a label on it.” Labels are destructive and incredibly 
limited. With this piece, a lot of people are referring to it as a classical 
piece. I’m not. There are certainly classical elements to it, but I don’t refer 
to it as a classical piece.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Frem-mike-mills-classical-music-concerto%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f412d7a241547cbb7484d73f0a4e14a67f85d7c%2F0_0_2040_1334%2F2040.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=REM's%20Mike%20Mills%3A%20orchestral%20for%20the%20people&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Frem-mike-mills-classical-music-concerto%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=REM%27s%20Mike%20Mills%3A%20orchestral%20for%20the%20people&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Frem-mike-mills-classical-music-concerto%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f412d7a241547cbb7484d73f0a4e14a67f85d7c%2F0_0_2040_1334%2F2040.jpg>
 REM play the Montreux Jazz Festival in 1999. Photograph: Patrick Aviolat/EPA 
I wonder if audiences are more open to something like this today because, 
through streaming, there is less emphasis placed on genre.

That’s a good question and I don’t know the answer. I do know I was at the 
right point in my life to tackle something like this. In that people know REM 
is over with and not to expect another REM record, so that might clear the 
playing field whatever I might choose to present. As far as the world in 
general to accept something like this, I hope so. Certainly it’s harder and 
harder to do anything original in rock’n’roll, so why not combine rock’n’roll 
and something else to create something that might be a little more original?

You include a new version of the REM song Nightswimming  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O-YHU6BwPR0>here. You were chief songwriter 
behind that song. So why didn’t you sing it originally?

Michael Stipe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/dec/15/rem-michael-stipe-will-sing-again>
 is one of the best singers in rock’n’roll history as far as I’m concerned. I 
never felt it was right to stick my voice out there unless it was a song he 
didn’t care to finish. When I wrote Nightswimming, it was just a little piano 
piece that went around and around and around and he listened to it and was 
inspired to write to it and he finished it as a singer. That’s where that went. 
I never intended that as a piece for me to sing.

What have these performances been like for you?

This is not like a classical concert. You are not expected to sit on your 
hands, you are not expected to be quiet. This is a showcase for Robert 
McDuffie’s violin playing and it is amazing. If you want to yell and scream and 
clap and cheer anytime, feel free to do so. That’s what we discovered the crowd 
was doing, surprisingly. It is not stuffy; it is much more like a rock show and 
a jazz show than a classical show. It just happens to be presented in a concert 
hall.

Last week Americana as a genre outsold mainstream country music 
<http://theboot.com/americana-genre-outsells-country/>. REM is considered one 
of the early bands of the genre. Do you see what you did fitting into what is 
going on with Americana today?

Yes, I can see that, but again those lines are being blurred. Country music is 
even hard to define any more. I think some of that is good and some of that is 
not. We’ve lost some of the essential elements of what we call country music. 
At the same time it opened up the field to a lot more listeners and a lot more 
musicians. The great thing aboutAmericana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/americana> is it is very honest music as a 
rule, it does have some of the best elements of classic country and I’m glad 
that people are responding to it.

Next month REM is releasing a deluxe reissue of its 1991 album Out of Time. In 
putting reissues like that together is there anything you rediscovered about 
your former band?

The last time I heard Out of Time, I thought, “that was nice”. But it’s almost 
like those records were made by different people a long time ago. While I can 
appreciate them, they don’t incorporate into my daily musical thinking. It is 
fun to listen back, and it does bring a new appreciation of my bandmates and 
how good they all were, and still are, and that’s exciting. It does remind me 
it was so much fun to make music with those guys.

A few weeks ago I interviewed Patterson Hood of Drive-By Truckers, who talked 
about how the current election season has made it difficult for progressive 
southerners to get their voices heard. As a longtime southerner, has this 
election created misperceptions of the south?

Yes, that was something that REM experienced in the very beginning of our 
career. People didn’t expect anything to come out of south but redneck country. 
We certainly fought against a lot of preconceived notions and misconceptions, 
musically and certainly politics have always been part of it. Patterson is 
right – all the noise is made by angry, disenfranchised white males down here, 
some of whom have a very legitimate reason to be angry. Unfortunately Trump 
taps into all the wrong reasons and the worst part of it. Patterson is 
definitely right that it’s more important than ever for progressive-minded 
southern white men to say something and to counterbalance the unfortunate 
perception of what goes on down here.
 