
REM by Michael Hann 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/03/rem-rout-of-time-at-25-voice-of-generation-michael-stipe>

I had a startling October, during which I got to interview Bruce Springsteen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/30/bruce-springsteen-interview-born-to-run-change-someones-life-right-song-donald-trump>
 and REM. The former was the one I had been waiting for – the chance to talk to 
the man who had soundtracked my early middle age. But the latter turned out to 
be the one I felt most deeply about.REM <https://www.theguardian.com/music/rem> 
were one of the most important bands of my teens and early 20s – in my memory, 
at least, I fell asleep every night listening to either Murmur or Fables of the 
Reconstruction on headphones. I was awfully nervous about meeting Michael 
Stipe, not just because his music had meant so much to me, but also because so 
many latter-day interviews had turned out to be cantankerous affairs. In fact, 
he was delightful. You’re never going to mistake him for Peter Ustinov – there 
are no anecdotes beginning, “So, Zsa Zsa Gabor and I boarded the Orient Express 
with a case of very fine whisky, a pair of budgerigars and one passport between 
us… ” – but he was engaging and engaged company, forthright and as honest as a 
rock star will ever be. Before I travelled to the States to speak to him, my 
16-year-old daughter had asked who I was going to meet. I told her. “Oh, 
they’re cool,” she said. I pointed out she had barely listened to REM; “Yeah, 
but people know they’re cool anyway.” I repeated that story to Stipe. “Cool? 
From a 16-year-old?” he said. “I’ll take that.” Then – to my astonishment and 
delight – he went hunting through REM HQ for memorabilia to sign for her. I 
have to admit, I was on the brink of tears. Rarely has an interviewee 
confounded me so completely.

 * Read the interview here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/03/rem-rout-of-time-at-25-voice-of-generation-michael-stipe>
Jamie T by Rachel Aroesti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/11/jamie-t-treays-people-weirded-out-by-me-talking-about-anxiety->

Although I was an early Jamie T <https://www.theguardian.com/music/jamie-t> 
devotee, one thing I completely failed to pick up on as a teenage indie 
enthusiast was the way he wove the topic of anxiety into his music (you’d think 
the name of his debut,Panic Prevention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2007/jan/21/shopping.popandrock1>, 
might have been a clue). Before I met him, I looked back at past reviews and 
interviews, and was reminded that it wasn’t just me – at that time so many 
things connected to mental health were simply glossed over by a confused 
public. Even if Jamie Treays didn’t know why he’d decided to bravely confront 
such a stigma, it was fascinating to hear how he’d done so in the face of a 
dismissive and largely unsympathetic response over the years – as well as how 
he now seemed determined to call the shots in his career in order to look after 
his mental health.

 * Read the interview here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/11/jamie-t-treays-people-weirded-out-by-me-talking-about-anxiety->
Bon Iver by Laura Barton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/sep/24/bon-iver-justin-vernon-22-million-interview>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Frem-christine-and-the-queens-marilyn-our-favourite-interviews-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c1a83da0c5d7d204a79c76ebb308b6b3fa5be9d%2F454_177_2200_2750%2F2200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=REM%2C%20Christine%20and%20the%20Queens%2C%20Marilyn%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20our%20favourite%20interviews%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Frem-christine-and-the-queens-marilyn-our-favourite-interviews-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=REM%2C%20Christine%20and%20the%20Queens%2C%20Marilyn%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20our%20favourite%20interviews%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Frem-christine-and-the-queens-marilyn-our-favourite-interviews-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c1a83da0c5d7d204a79c76ebb308b6b3fa5be9d%2F454_177_2200_2750%2F2200.jpg>
 Bon Iver … red line fever. Photograph: Cameron Wittig 
There’s something very special about interviewing an artist over the course of 
their career – as if every few years you pick up the thread of a conversation 
and simply carry on. I think it can result in something quite unusual in terms 
of illumination and honesty, and bring a broader perspective on a musician’s 
career. I’ve been fortunate enough to have just such a long-running 
conversation withJustin Vernon <https://www.theguardian.com/music/boniver> 
since his debut in 2008. This summer in Minneapolis I met him again to discuss 
his third record,22, A Million 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/29/bon-iver-22-a-million-the-downsides-of-success-never-sounded-so-good>
, and the despair, love, determination and fierce friendship that led to its 
making.

 * Read the interview here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/sep/24/bon-iver-justin-vernon-22-million-interview>
Tony Conrad by Ben Beaumont-Thomas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/22/people-thought-we-were-on-drugs-and-we-were-tony-conrad-the-great-avant-garde-adventurer>

As social media calcifies debate into entrenched positions and Spotify sells 
your moods back to you, raise a glass to Tony Conrad, an artist who never let 
himself be neatly packaged up. In perhaps the last interview before his death 
in April, after suffering from prostate cancer, he reflected on a life that 
took in everything from giving the Velvet Underground their name, to meeting 
his wife dressed as a mummy for an erotic underground movie – and the creation 
of masterful drone music. Most important to him, though, was a project 
highlighting children’s academic achievements on local TV. “It wasn’t art, it 
wasn’t social service, it wasn’t teaching – it was nothing!” he said joyfully. 
“My whole life project, my whole art, had gone down into some kind of black 
hole.” We need more like him: people who grow in the cracks of a consumer 
culture, and split it apart.

 * Read the interview here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/22/people-thought-we-were-on-drugs-and-we-were-tony-conrad-the-great-avant-garde-adventurer>
Patti Smith by Tim Jonze 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/16/patti-smith-hyde-park-london-gig-july-interview>

Whenever I get the chance to meet a rock’n’roll icon – and how could you 
possibly describePatti Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/music/patti-smith> if 
not as a rock’n’roll icon – the initial excitement swiftly dissolves into 
anxiety. As I start to read up on them, the stomach knots usually increase: 
Patti Smith used to scream obscenities in the faces of boorish hecklers; she 
slept in graveyards; she took on the entire rock patriarchy. By the time I 
arrived at this interview and realised that, owing to a mixup, I’d kept her 
waiting an hour already, I accepted that we were going to be in for a testing 
time. Imagine my surprise then when she took me arm in arm, apologised for the 
delay tomy day, and began rhapsodising about the Peter Pan statue in Hyde Park. 
She was warm, maternal and extremely generous with her time – but she did take 
a minute to angrily admonish a group of people loitering nearby who were 
talking too loudly, which reassured me that this really was the correct Patti 
Smith I was talking to.

 * Read the interview here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/16/patti-smith-hyde-park-london-gig-july-interview>
Christine and the Queens by Laura Snapes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/sep/04/christine-and-the-queens-heloise-letissier-interview>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Frem-christine-and-the-queens-marilyn-our-favourite-interviews-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F685264bd4a7bbcc5c33402ee902f2ca12d257138%2F0_129_4579_2747%2F4579.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=REM%2C%20Christine%20and%20the%20Queens%2C%20Marilyn%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20our%20favourite%20interviews%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Frem-christine-and-the-queens-marilyn-our-favourite-interviews-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=REM%2C%20Christine%20and%20the%20Queens%2C%20Marilyn%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20our%20favourite%20interviews%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Frem-christine-and-the-queens-marilyn-our-favourite-interviews-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F685264bd4a7bbcc5c33402ee902f2ca12d257138%2F0_129_4579_2747%2F4579.jpg>
 Christine and the Queens … total candour. Photograph: Matthew Baker/Getty 
Images 
Over a two and a half hour lunch with Héloïse Letissier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/christine-and-the-queens> in Paris this 
August, we shared a very un-Parisian bottle of sparkling water. But when we 
parted ways – Letissier to a blood test to assuage her hypochondria – I felt 
drunk on her. I took a cab to Place des Vosges and walked aimlessly until I 
emerged from my daze a few hours later. Even though she was the one being 
grilled, Letissier makes you feel seen. “You are introverted as well,” she 
observed kindly, which might have knocked me off-guard if she hadn’t said it to 
a writer friend of mine a few months earlier. Not that she’s manipulative: 
Letissier is eloquent, intensely intelligent and warm with it. I’d read more 
than 300 French press clippings (and as many in English) as slightly anal 
interview prep. There’s always the danger that there’s nothing left to know 
when you go that far down the rabbit hole. But given Letissier’s total candour 
and apparent ability to discuss anything incisively, I could have talked to her 
for three times longer.

 * Read the interview here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/sep/04/christine-and-the-queens-heloise-letissier-interview>
Madness by Simon Hattenstone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/27/madness-suggs-album-cant-touch-us-now>

I thought I could cope with the full Madness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/madness>. No way, said the publicist, two is 
more than you can handle. He was right, of course. An hour of Suggs and Kix 
talking at you in a Camden pub and you feel battered. Great fun, mind. 
Wonderful stories (if at times I wondered whether they indulged in the old 
poetic licence) from the Nutty Boys. My favourite bit is their nostalgia for 
the good old days when you got hit on the head with bicycle chains, which made 
me smile (not that I’m advocating it). And Suggs’s tale about seeing Amy 
Winehouse just before she died had me welling up.

 * Read the interview here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/27/madness-suggs-album-cant-touch-us-now>
Marilyn by Alexis Petridis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/27/marilyn-peter-robinson-sat-in-room-20-years-taking-crack-watching-alien-films>

Like anyone who’s read Boy George’s autobiographies, I approached interviewing 
Marilyn with a degree of caution. Before, during and immediately after his 
brush with early 80s fame, he sounded like a bit of a nightmare: he happily 
described himself as “vile”. Furthermore, he’d subsequently spent decades in 
drug-addled seclusion. But I was also fascinated by him, not least the fact 
that, 30 years on, he looked like a very modern kind of pop star: more famous 
himself than the records he made, a bigger star than his commercial success 
suggested. He turned out to be a dream interviewee: charming, funny, 
self-aware, unflinching in telling his extraordinary story. The subsequent 
piece went viral: at one point it was the most-read thing on the entire 
Guardian website. “How would I know if people were still interested in me?” he 
snorted when I asked him if he was surprised that people still cared, 32 years 
after he’d last had a hit. “I was locked in a fucking room for years, taking 
drugs and watching Alien.”

 * Read the interview here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/27/marilyn-peter-robinson-sat-in-room-20-years-taking-crack-watching-alien-films>
Teenage Fanclub by Jude Rogers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/04/teenage-fanclub-here-never-famous-getting-old>

The story of Teenage Fanclub is not a drama of epic proportions – if you’re 
looking for whiteouts and breakdowns, take your snarl elsewhere, sunshine – but 
a loving, gently evolving story of a band who’ve been together their whole 
adult lives, writing beautiful songs and taking their fans with them. Being 
asked to write about what a band means and feels to people was a particular 
delight; music’s often about the image and the narrative, of course, but it’s 
also about the endorphin surge when those chords start to chime. In the 
commercial-success stakes, nearly-men TFC will always be. For those of us who 
love them, that’s enough.

 * Read the interview here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/04/teenage-fanclub-here-never-famous-getting-old>
Little Mix by Michael Cragg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/07/little-mix-the-prime-minister-should-dress-like-ru-paul>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Frem-christine-and-the-queens-marilyn-our-favourite-interviews-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2355c13bade145a1e393c36c85963642bdb9559%2F0_29_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=REM%2C%20Christine%20and%20the%20Queens%2C%20Marilyn%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20our%20favourite%20interviews%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Frem-christine-and-the-queens-marilyn-our-favourite-interviews-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=REM%2C%20Christine%20and%20the%20Queens%2C%20Marilyn%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20our%20favourite%20interviews%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Frem-christine-and-the-queens-marilyn-our-favourite-interviews-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2355c13bade145a1e393c36c85963642bdb9559%2F0_29_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Little Mix … hair today. Photograph: Tim P. Whitby/Getty Images 
Little Mix are a very modern pop band. Formed on The X Factor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-x-factor> and born and raised 
under the scrutiny of a social-media world, they should, like their peers, be 
media-trained to within an inch of their lives. Brilliantly, almost 
miraculously, they still have absolutely no filter, which makes interviewing 
them a complete joy. Some parts of our chat – conducted over a heated game of 
Popstars Top Trumps and covering a stolen lamb shank, RuPaul and Syria – proved 
too scandalous to print, which is how I wish all pop-star interviews would go.

 * Read the interview here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/07/little-mix-the-prime-minister-should-dress-like-ru-paul>
Richard Ashcroft by Dave Simpson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/28/richard-ashcroft-i-wouldnt-trade-what-coldplay-have-achieved-for-any-of-my-songs>

I first interviewed Richard Ashcroft in Wigan in his pre-supernova Verve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/verve> days, when journalists dubbed him Mad 
Richard because of his tendency to offer such pronouncements such as “I can 
fly.” Nowadays, acid and grandiosity have given way to family life, wealth, 
sobriety and battles with depression, but he didn’t need more than a couple of 
mineral waters to turn back into Mad Richard. I’m sure his estranged former 
bandmates will have their own views on how superstardom affected him, but at 
least for a couple of hours in a pub on a sunny afternoon, he seemed to cherish 
the opportunity to become his old self.

 * Read the interview here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/28/richard-ashcroft-i-wouldnt-trade-what-coldplay-have-achieved-for-any-of-my-songs>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Frem-christine-and-the-queens-marilyn-our-favourite-interviews-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb73c1c61de315989acc9433e966503876b35c09a%2F0_0_3727_2485%2F3727.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=REM%2C%20Christine%20and%20the%20Queens%2C%20Marilyn%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20our%20favourite%20interviews%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Frem-christine-and-the-queens-marilyn-our-favourite-interviews-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=REM%2C%20Christine%20and%20the%20Queens%2C%20Marilyn%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20our%20favourite%20interviews%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Frem-christine-and-the-queens-marilyn-our-favourite-interviews-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb73c1c61de315989acc9433e966503876b35c09a%2F0_0_3727_2485%2F3727.jpg>
 Endearing … Phil Collins. Photograph: Fabrice Coffrini/AFP/Getty Images 
Phil Collins by Dorian Lynskey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/11/phil-collins-interview-take-a-look-at-me-now-remastered-albums-rerelease-2016>

I had pursued an interview with Phil Collins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/phil-collins> because I was fascinated by 
his story. What I took for granted at the time now seemed like a very peculiar 
journey:one of the most admired drummers of the 70s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/sep/03/genesis-10-of-the-best>
 becomes one of the biggest, most unlikely and, eventually, most divisive stars 
of the 80s, before entering an uneasy retirement. His career was extreme even 
though his music wasn’t. Many veteran stars are too smooth and complacent to be 
rewarding interviewees, but Collins is one of those unfortunate souls in whom 
minor slights take up far more headspace than major achievements. I found his 
intense vulnerability very endearing.

 * Read the interview here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/11/phil-collins-interview-take-a-look-at-me-now-remastered-albums-rerelease-2016>
Barry Hyde by Harriet Gibsone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/05/i-got-my-life-backwards-futurehead-barry-hyde-on-mental-illness-and-his-solo-album-malody>

An interview with Barry Hyde, whose stark and elegant portrayal of bipolar 
disorder was the heart of his solo album Malody, was the piece I received the 
most feedback for. It was a feature I was proud to have been part of. Hyde, 
known by many as the frontman of the buoyant Sunderland art pop groupthe 
Futureheads <https://www.theguardian.com/music/futureheads>, was open and 
articulate about his experience of mental-health problems, from his false 
awakening in the Arizona desert to his diagnosis and the trauma of the years 
that followed. Although keen not to be presented as a crusader, his message to 
men similar to him, men from Sunderland, or any working-class town who might 
not be expressive or open about their feelings, was a pertinent antithesis of 
the usual copy-shifting promo we normally encounter.

 * Read the interview here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/05/i-got-my-life-backwards-futurehead-barry-hyde-on-mental-illness-and-his-solo-album-malody>
 * Read more on the best music of 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/series/best-music-of-2016>  