
For many of the students, creatives and musical misfits bounding around London 
from 1997 to 2007, life revolved around Monday night. Each week a bash called 
Trash was a siren call for the indie glitterati (or just anyone who read the 
Face), a disco that defined the era’s promiscuous relationship with guitar and 
dance music. Its transgressive mix spanned angular indie to electro and 
post-punk, no wave to art-school garage-rock and practically any band boasting 
a bowl cut. LCD Soundsystem andYeah Yeah Yeahs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/yeahyeahyeahs> played their first UK shows 
on its tiny stage. Amy Winehouse was a regular. For a decade, London’s HR 
departments must have wondered why they had so many sick notes on Tuesday 
mornings.

“People still come up to me and talk about how special a time it was for them, 
and how nothing filled that gap that it left,” saysErol Alkan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2012/sep/28/six-songs-me-erol-alkan>
, Trash’s linchpin and now a successful DJ, producer and remixer. He started 
the club as an antidote to the capital’s staid post-Britpop parties – nights 
that were, according toBloc Party <https://www.theguardian.com/music/blocparty> 
guitarist and Trash devotee Russell Lissack, “strictly guitar music and often 
fairly retro, quite generic”.

Lissack, who met his wife on its dancefloor, says Trash’s rallying cry against 
indie tribalism is what made it magical. “If you went to an indie club in the 
late 90s and early 2000s, you’d hear the same music everywhere, whereas at 
Trash you’d hear cool guitar music but also a lot of electronic and bootleg 
mash-ups. The DJs would be actually mixing, which most traditional indie DJs 
weren’t doing at the time. You could hear anything there and it didn’t sound 
out of place.”


Trash quickly became renowned for Alkan’s “mash-up” style, where Death from 
Above 1979 <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2005/jun/17/1> might follow David 
Bowie or Daft Punk. He found kindred spirits in Belgian producers2ManyDJs, AKA 
the Dewaele brothers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/jun/29/soulwax-introversy>, who played 
at the club more times than any other act. “To me, having the Stooges and 
Salt-N-Pepa on at the same time, that was Trash,” says David Dewaele. That kind 
of musical dilettantism, he believes, “became a terrible sport afterwards” – 
too crude and perhaps too popular – but at the time it was groundbreaking, a 
maverick approach to uniting music by vibe rather than genre. It feels a 
million miles away from the DJ sets of today.

“Everything is slightly segregated again,” says Dewaele. “Pop music has become 
this thing, house music has become that thing, even though people listen to 
music very differently to the way they would have in 1997. What Trash musically 
meant to me was: the perfect celebration of eclectic taste.”

Trash was also where you could dance to new alternative anthems before anyone 
else. “I heard House of Jealous Lovers by the Rapture for the first time. It 
was messy!” saysPeaches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/13/peaches-review-oval-space-london>
, excitedly emailing her Trash memories . Band managers would often 
hand-deliver fresh pressings to Alkan on the night – the Verve gave himthe 
first play of Bittersweet Symphony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2007/jan/06/electronicmusic.clubs2> – as 
Trash became a tastemaker ahead of any music mag or radio station. “I remember 
being on guestlist duties the nightthe Strokes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/jun/22/the-strokes-10-of-the-best>
 came down, just after their debut single came out,” says Jodie Banaszkiewicz, 
a music PR who used to work the door. “It was the first time they’d ever heard 
their music in a club.”
 Erol Alkan, Stephen Dewaele and David Dewaele at Razzmatazz, Barcelona, in 
2014. Photograph: Xavi Torrent/Redferns via Getty Images 
Another New York band who’d barely experienced anything like it before was LCD 
Soundsystem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/may/11/lcd-soundsystem-10-of-the-best-james-murphy>
. They played Trash in 2002, the second of two London gigs, as Losing My Edge’s 
punk-funk blitz was capturing clubgoers’ hearts. “The first [UK] show we did 
was in a hotel and it was packed, but I got the feeling that there were a lot 
of people there for reasons besides us,” says LCD’s Nancy Whang. “But at Trash, 
everybody knew who we were. It felt like a punk show, a little bit feral. There 
were no barricades, people were right up the front in our faces. We were 
impressed by how excited people were. And also, because of what Trash was, it 
was exciting to meet people like us.”

Trash was unique. “Coming from Belgium, indie clubs were a weird concept – 
clubs were where people danced to techno or house or drum’n’bass,” says 
Dewaele. “We had student nights but people wouldn’t go there to dance, it 
wasn’t like what we saw Erol was doing.” And it wasn’t only that Trash was 
playing scruffy beats – at its original home ofPlastic People on New Oxford 
Street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/jan/07/london-club-plastic-people-remembered-ade-fakile-floating-points>
, then the Annexe in Soho and finally at world-class electronic music club the 
End, it was playing them on a pristine Thunder Ridge sound system. “It was 
completely, completely unheard of to have that kind of music played in a club 
like the End,” says Alkan. “It had never happened before.”

Like any fashionable party, Trash had its fair share of celebrity attendees, 
with A-listers mingling with whichever band had been on NME’s cover that week. 
The first time 2ManyDJs stepped up to Trash’s turntables, they had a surprise 
visitor. “We played Ace of Spades by Motörhead – a 12in that both Erol and us 
had in our bags, which was quite unusual,” recalls Dewaele. “ThenLemmy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/lemmy> turned up to the DJ booth and gave us 
the horns hand sign, and left. We didn’t even know he was there, neither did 
Erol!”
 Clubbers at Trash at the End in 2001. Photograph: Dave Swindells 
Grace Jones, ever the arbiter of superb party taste, also made it to one – 
“perhaps the only person who’d been toStudio54 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2015/mar/14/studio-54-heady-daze-of-disco-decadence-in-pictures>
,Paradise Garage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/12/new-york-city-clubs-golden-age> 
and Trash,” says Rory Phillips, one of Trash’s resident DJ squad alongside 
Alkan, James Dickie, the Lovely Jonjo and the late Mavs. It doesn’t seem too 
much of a stretch to mention those clubs in the same breath: Trash may not be 
as internationally renowned or incessantly eulogised as its 1970s New York 
equivalents but it had a similar DNA of progressive dance music sewn together 
by resident DJs – and people who made a proper effort to dress for it.

As with those legendary parties across the Atlantic, the real stars of the 
show were the partygoers themselves. The regulars were dubbed Trash Kids, who 
dressed up to get past the guardians of the guestlist. (Recently, a club night 
sprung up in Camden called Turned Away from Trash – a testament to its infamous 
entry policy.) As the NME journalist Leonie Cooper wrote in a 2007 appreciation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2007/jan/06/electronicmusic.clubs2>, “Work 
suits and casual clothes were turned away, while vintage fashion was in”. 
Outfits ranged from neckerchief and 70s band T-shirts in the early days to, 
later, thosegold lamé leggings 
<http://images.asos-media.com/products/american-apparel-high-rise-leggings-in-metallic-gold/5516580-1-lamegold?$XXL$&wid=513&fit=constrain>
 that no one except lead singers could actually pull off. But often the best 
outfits were purposefully anti-effort. “If you stood out, that helped the 
most,” says Nova Dando, a creative director who has worked with many a 
Trash-era musician. “I once went in my pyjamas, and we’d wear clothes we’d just 
made while getting ready to go out.”
 Peaches Performs at Trash at the End, in 2001. Photograph: Jim Dyson/Getty 
Images 
At the turn of the millennium, a new sound dovetailed with Trash’s aesthetic: 
electroclash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/apr/25/fischerspooner-tiga-electroclash-music>
. As a young girl growing up in the Hampshire suburbs, I had read about Trash 
in Glamour magazine, of all places, in an article about the genre’s definitive 
artists:Peaches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/06/peaches-my-video-is-not-porn-its-an-incredible-piece-of-work>
,Chicks on Speed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2003/oct/17/germany.politicalbooks> and 
Fisherspooner. They were clashing punk and pubic hair and deadpan vocals with 
brash electronic beats. For Alkan and co it had a lot of decks appeal – and one 
track in particular changed everything. “Trash was predominantly guitar music 
up until around 2000. But when we first heardFelix Da Housecat’s Silver Screen 
(Shower Scene) <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n_MLgWpiXEU>, it ticked all of 
the boxes,” Alkan says. “It was powerful, imaginative, mysterious … All of a 
sudden there was a record that I felt completely embodied the spirit of Trash.”

“Electroclash made a lot of sense to us,” agrees Phillips. “As a club that 
played indie, glam rock, pop and dance records it seemed like the centre of a 
Venn diagram. I remember Erol playing Silver Screen to me and pointing out 
that, lyrically, it could have been a Suede song.”

By the time I made it to Trash, it was for its finale party. It was also the 
tail end of perhaps the last notable mash-up sound to be ushered through its 
doors: the shonky, punky botch of prog, dubstep, electro and rock that wasnew 
rave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/mar/24/new-rave-the-moment-fashion-and-music-both-got-their-act-together>
. I’ll never forget seeing the coils of people that wound back to Tottenham 
Court Road that night, and queuing behind the genre’s hairsprayed captains, 
Klaxons, who were about to release their mega-hit Golden Skans.

“You’d go to the club and see people in bands and you were like, ‘OK, we need 
to up our game and be a part of this,’” says former Klaxons bassistJamie 
Reynolds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jun/05/klaxons-jamie-reynolds-rock-star>
. He credits the club with inspiring him to give their scrappy rock/dance 
crossoverits tongue-in-cheek name 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2006/oct/13/electronicmusic.popandrock>. 
“Could [new rave] have existed without Trash? It was definitely part of the 
runup to it. If we hadn’t been going to clubs in London every night of the week 
and [Trash] being the biggest one, then we wouldn’t have wanted to own that 
thing.”
 New rave’s hairsprayed captains … Klaxons in 2006. Photograph: Mick 
Hutson/Redferns 
In a way, Trash continued for the next two years, without Erol’s weekly DJ 
sets and at the same spot but under a different name, Durrr, until the End 
itself shut for good in 2009. Since then, no weeknight party has taken its 
place, though countless alternative dance parties – Nag Nag Nag, Adventures 
Close to Home, AfterSkool, Kill Em All and, the only survivor of that era, 
White Heat – have tried to carry the torch.

It’s hard to imagine that a club night like Trash would be able to exist in 
2017. That’s not to say that young people aren’t still looking for a place to 
share the same music and subvert culture. But what withclub closures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/05/fabric-nightclub-closure-uk-nightlife-drugs-death>
 and the sharp rise in living costs, a venue that could afford to take risks on 
a Monday night and a young clientele that could afford to go there every week 
seems an unlikely combination. “It did feel like lightning in a bottle,” says 
Whang. Alkan agrees: “Clubbing has changed dramatically in the years since it 
closed. The fact that Trash ran weekly for that length of time is quite a 
feat.” He ponders his party’s specific appeal. “For me, clubbing had that 
Cheers factor to it – you’d go somewhere and everyone would know you. Something 
[we] tried to cultivate was to make the people who came week in, week out feel 
like they had a home.”

For now, that home is a new Trash Facebook page 
<https://www.facebook.com/trashclublondon/?fref=ts>, a place for people to 
share memories or get back in touch, while also helping to build a better 
picture of a bleary night that is an important part of UK clubbing history. As 
with all the best nights, what is missed most of all – and is the hardest to 
encapsulate – is the attitude. “It really came down to losing yourself in 
music,” says Alkan. “Everything else was about creating the right environment 
to do that. There’s one line that we had on the front of our first website in 
about 1999, from [Madonna’s]Into the Groove 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=52iW3lcpK5M>, which said, ‘Only when I’m 
dancing can I feel this free.’ Trash was just about that sense of escapism.”
 