
In February 2013, Ebtisam Masto fled Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> with her six children. They crossed 
the border to Lebanon and headed for the capital, Beirut, where Masto’s 
husband, Mohammed, had been working to support his family since before the 
civil war began.

When they arrived, Masto registered the family with the UN refugee agency in 
the city. There she heard about a cooking programme for women that was run by 
the Catholic charity Caritas. Masto, who was scared, insecure and on the verge 
of clinical depression, signed up. “I wanted to do something with my life,” she 
told me.

On the first day, Masto found herself with more than 30 women crowded into an 
unprepossessing room with a single stove and a sink. They looked each other up 
and down. Almost all, except a couple of Lebanese women, were Syrian refugees: 
sophisticates from Damascus and Aleppo, Kurds from the north, housewives from 
tiny villages in the north‑west. Some were Christian and some were Muslim, some 
were veiled and some not, some were pro-regime and others had lost sons 
fighting it. An atmosphere of wariness pervaded the room.

Designed with the help of Kamal Mouzawak, a suave entrepreneur who has done 
much to promote traditional Lebanese food over the past decade, the course 
aimed to teach women how to use their home-cooking skills – which they took for 
granted as a domestic chore – to find jobs in catering. More importantly, 
Mouzawak told me, the course was a chance to get the women together, to give 
them a place to share their stories and recipes, to empower them.

Remembrance of tastes past: Syria’s disappearing food culture – podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/audio/2016/dec/23/remembrance-of-tastes-past-syrias-disappearing-food-culture-podcast>
The first task was to make kibbeh, parcels of bulgur wheat filled with minced 
lamb. Kibbeh is a dish found throughout the Middle East and regional 
permutations, as well as numerous transliterations – kibbeh, kubba, kubi – 
abound. The outer shell can be made with semolina or ground rice, the filling 
can be bulked out with pumpkin or potato, or flavoured with lemon, garlic, 
cinnamon, allspice, dried mint, parsley, sumac, cumin, chilli. Kibbeh can be 
fried or roasted or stewed, layered into sloppy casseroles or baked into big 
meatloaves. In Lebanese restaurants, they are small and pinched into an 
American football shape. In Iraq, a kubba is a giant hubcap of dough encasing a 
sprinkling of meat. In Israel, kubba is a Sephardic dish of dumplings in soup.

Everyone on the course had a different way of making kibbeh and everyone 
wanted theirs to be the best. Among the classmates were two Assyrian 
Christians, Marlene and Nahren. They made their kibbeh into a large flattened 
disc stuffed with lamb. It was soft instead of crunchy and no one had ever seen 
kibbeh that was boiled like this before.

“I was so curious to know how they were doing it,” Masto told me earlier this 
year. “But they kept it a secret. They would prepare their dough at home and 
bring it in ready-made. This made me even more curious.”

One morning in class, when the women were talking over coffee, Masto tried to 
engage Marlene in conversation. “I tried in my own way to be polite and kind 
and to counter their wariness and their fear of Muslims. Of course, my real 
motive was to discover the secret ingredient in their kibbeh dough. But there 
was this barrier between us, between Christian and Muslim, so I tried to remove 
the barrier. I tried to show them the peaceful message of Islam and explain 
that Mohammed was a peacemaker, just as Jesus was. This brought us together a 
bit and we began to develop a friendship.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fnewcomer-kitchen-syrian-refugees-toronto-restaurant-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Newcomer%20Kitchen%3A%20how%20Syrian%20refugees%20took%20over%20a%20Toronto%20restaurant%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fnewcomer-kitchen-syrian-refugees-toronto-restaurant-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Newcomer%20Kitchen%3A%20how%20Syrian%20refugees%20took%20over%20a%20Toronto%20restaurant%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fnewcomer-kitchen-syrian-refugees-toronto-restaurant-video&media=>
Newcomer Kitchen: how Syrian refugees took over a Toronto restaurant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/12/newcomer-kitchen-syrian-refugees-toronto-restaurant-video>
Still, relations between classmates occasionally became strained. One day, 
Samira, a widow with grown-up children, asked Marlene if she could help her 
prepare kibbeh. Marlene rebuffed her, telling Samira not to interfere. Samira 
took umbrage and shouted back at her. The kitchen became tense and Mouzawak, 
who was helping oversee the class that day, had to intervene, telling the women 
that they were all there to learn together, and that they should each teach the 
other a dish they could cook together.

Samira and Marlene agreed, but Marlene was not happy about it. “I am obliged 
to agree,” she told Masto, “but I am only going to give the real recipe to you. 
You are the only one who is a good enough cook and trustworthy, and I know you 
will make it in the correct way.”

For Syrians, food is an especially important part of national identity. Syrian 
cuisine has evolved over thousands of years of conquests, trading and 
migrations, shaped and blended by dozens of peoples: Arab, Kurdish, Druze, 
Armenian, Circassian, Assyrian, Alawite, Turkish, Turkmen, Palestinian, 
Ismaili, Greek, Jewish, Yazidi. The Syrian table is an expression of a 
multicultural country and a way of living together that is being destroyed by 
civil war.

Six million Syrians have fled their homeland since 2011. Lebanon has more than 
a million registered Syrian refugees, although most people agree that the total 
number is much higher. Even in exile, many Syrians talk about food with the 
same pride, fervour and obsession withterroir as the French do. Quite often, 
when I was talking to Syrians in Lebanon, they would grumble about the 
inferiority of Lebanese vegetables, the blandness of the imported Australian 
lamb and the lack of variety of the restaurant food.

Even in exile, many Syrians talk about food with the same pride, fervour and 
obsession with terroir as the French do

“The fat – the fat of Syrian lamb!” recalled Magdy Sharshafji, an Assyrian 
businessman who left Aleppo after the war began. I met him one night in Loris, 
the fancy restaurant he had opened in Beirut. He ordered a dish of the famous 
Aleppan cherry kebab for me to try. “I can tell you the difference where the 
sheep has lived, whether it is from Aleppo or Hama, just by the smell of the 
fat!” He grinned, remembering, and then held up his empty palms as a gesture of 
nostalgia and sadness for a world, a life, a culture that may be lost to him 
for ever.

In Sharshafji’s hometown of Aleppo, the cuisine is known for its pepperiness 
because it was an old Spice Road hub: a crossroads where elaborate Ottoman 
dishes mixed with sweet and sour recipes brought by Chinese caravans, and the 
combination of meat and fruit beloved by the Persians. A famous Aleppan dish is 
kibbeh made with quince, cooked with fresh pomegranate juice.

“In Lebanon we have maybe six or eight different kinds of kibbeh. In Syria 
they have endless variations,” Anissa Helou, a Lebanese food writer, told me. 
She laid out the regional variety of Syrian food: “In Damascus, the dishes are 
heartier, more straightforward; street food. And, of course, Damascus is the 
kingdom of baklava. On the coast you have fish, and close to Jordan, in the 
desert you have mansaf [a traditional Bedouin dish of meat cooked in fermented 
dried yoghurt].”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fsyria-refugees-disappearing-food-culture-kibbeh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ab527c5f3680dbcd99b6285b346b74a2ef449f5%2F0_0_4288_2848%2F4288.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Remembrance%20of%20tastes%20past%3A%20Syria%E2%80%99s%20disappearing%20food%20culture%20%7C%20Wendell%20Steavenson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fsyria-refugees-disappearing-food-culture-kibbeh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Remembrance%20of%20tastes%20past%3A%20Syria%E2%80%99s%20disappearing%20food%20culture%20%7C%20Wendell%20Steavenson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fsyria-refugees-disappearing-food-culture-kibbeh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ab527c5f3680dbcd99b6285b346b74a2ef449f5%2F0_0_4288_2848%2F4288.jpg>
 Kibbeh comes in many varieties in countries throughout the Middle East. 
Photograph: Karam Miri/Getty Images/Hemera 
Dima Chaar, a young Syrian chef, bright and pretty with a pixie haircut, told 
me that when she grew up in Damascus, cooking was “a time for talking and 
gossip”. As we sat on a restaurant terrace late one evening after her shift, 
Chaar described a dish her grandmother used to make: lamb cutlets seasoned with 
a whole head of garlic and dried mint, cooked in lemon juice and water. “She 
used to put ghee [clarified butter] in is as well, to make it richer – we used 
to cook it on Fridays when everyone would gather.”

Chaar still travels back and forth between Beirut and Damascus. She visits her 
grandmother and writes down her old recipes. “Nowadays,” she said, “women are 
no longer cooking the complicated stuff. There aren’t large families to feed 
any more. Their sons are killed or have left, they no longer celebrate.”

Chaar drew deeply on a pull of apple-flavoured shisha. “I think most of us 
feel that we are lost. I wanted to stay in Lebanon rather than follow my family 
to Montreal. Yes, I think I hoped to go back to Syria. But after five years, 
honestly, now I am just living day by day.”

When Ebtisam Masto graduated as one of the stars of the Caritas programme, 
Kamal Mouzawak asked her to set up a kibbeh stall at the Souk El Tayeb, his 
farmers’ market in Beirut. This is where I first met her in April earlier this 
year, and I marvelled at her display of kibbeh, which were multicoloured and 
came in different shapes. I bought a lumpy potato one stuffed with spicy walnut 
muhammara, a semicircular variety with meat and mushrooms, a rolled kibbeh with 
spinach and pistachios and another made with lamb and quince.

“In Syria, we would always put meat in them,” Masto told me, “but here in 
Lebanon they prefer lighter and vegetarian.” Two eyebrows rose beneath her 
neatly pleated headscarf as if to signal amusement at the flighty 
sophistication of Beiruti ladies.

Syria’s truth smugglers | Julian Borger
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/12/syria-truth-smugglers-bashar-al-assad-war-crimes>
Everything about Masto’s outward appearance was neat and correct. She wore her 
long outer coat carefully buttoned up, her face was pale and clean of makeup. 
Her demeanour, however, was warm and voluble. She was wary of journalists – the 
last one she spoke to had portrayed her as an opponent of the Assad regime, in 
order to craft a heartwarming story about two Syrian women on either side of 
the war, who were nonetheless great friends, cooks and colleagues.

This had infuriated Masto, who had always maintained a careful position of 
neutrality. She lived in an area in Beirut that was mainly populated by 
pro-Assad Syrians, and after the article came out, Masto was worried about 
possible recriminations. Worse, being perceived as anti-Assad meant it would be 
very difficult for her family to return to Syria, even if the fighting 
lessened. In distress, she complained to the UN refugee agency and it asked if 
she would consider leaving Lebanon. Masto and Mohammed agreed that it was time 
to go.

When I met her, the family’s application for asylum had been approved. They 
had been told they would be resettled in America. At first this news had caused 
consternation. Germany or Canada, they knew, were good countries for refugees. 
“But, as Muslims, we assumed we would not be accepted in America,” she said.

As she quizzed me on what kind of article I intended to write, Masto made it 
clear that she did not want to be quoted about politics in case it caused 
problems with her asylum application. But she was willing to let me come to her 
home to learn how she makes kibbeh.

Masto lived with her family outside the centre of Beirut, high up on mountain 
slopes, in a wooded area that was lush with foliage and strewn with garbage. 
The day after she agreed to show me how to make kibbeh, she welcomed us into 
her home, a windowless cube, off a small courtyard of tiny, one-storey concrete 
structures – more a shanty of interconnected rooms than a cluster of houses. 
The room glowed green under a single fluorescent bulb. It had a rough concrete 
floor, two or three thin pallets arranged around the edges, a small television, 
a large refrigerator, a scuffed sofa and two plastic chairs. It was ruthlessly 
scrubbed and spotlessly clean.

Masto’s husband Mohammed came forward to greet us. He had a handsome square 
face, framed with grey hair that was brushed into a side parting. He declined 
to shake my hand and touched his palm to his chest instead.

“Welcome!” Masto repeated.

“Kibbeh!” I said, anticipating, clapping my hands together.

“Yes, but coffee first.” Khaled, Masto’s 17-year-old son, brought us two cups 
of Nescafé, while his sister Sidra followed with a bowl of sugar.

Masto sat cross-legged next to me on a thin foam pallet. Once Khaled had 
lugged out a big, shiny, sausage-grinding machine and plugged it into a loop of 
extension cord, Masto carefully pulled on a pair of white plastic gloves. A 
bowl of bulgur wheat was placed next to a plastic jug of water. Masto was ready 
to make kibbeh.

Ebtisam Masto was born in 1980 in the town of Jisr al-Shughour, in the 
northern Syrian province of Idlib. She left school when she was 12. When she 
was 15, she married her cousin Mohammed. “She was considered one of the best 
cooks!” said her husband proudly. “They would all cook together, making kibbeh. 
There were always lots of daughters, friends, sisters, because in the village 
women were at home.”

“My sister had a garden with rows of vegetables, and we would have picnics 
there and just pick the vegetables and eat them just like that,” recalled Masto.

Jisr al-Shughour is a Sunni town with a tradition of opposition to the regime 
of Bashar al-Assad and his father before him, Hafez al-Assad. In 2011, when 
Syria began its Arab Spring demonstrations, the people of Jisr al-Shughour were 
among of the first to take to the streets. That summer there was fighting – one 
of the earliest battles of the civil war – and in the confusion and gunfire 
large numbers of the town’s population fled. Masto and her children went to 
Lebanon to stay with Mohammed, but the children were not attending school 
there. After a couple of months, Masto’s parents told her that government 
forces had re-established calm in the town, so she decided to take the family 
home.

At first it was quiet, but soon the fighting started up again. “My children 
were traumatised listening to the sounds of war all the time,” said Masto. 
Pickup trucks piled with corpses drove past. The water was cut. There was no 
electricity. They scavenged firewood. Supplies could not get into the town from 
the countryside and food was scarce. “Eventually, it got to the point where I 
couldn’t find even flour to make the bread or anything to burn as fuel,” she 
said.

In early 2013, they began to kidnap girls. “Who were ‘they’?” I asked. Masto 
pursed her lips. Who knows who. They kidnapped the girls as a business and 
demanded enormous sums of money. Mohammed had not been able to visit them for 
more than a year. When Masto called him in Lebanon, she told him she was 
frightened for their daughters. It became clear they had to get out. They left 
Jisr al-Shughour at six in the morning, and after close calls at government 
checkpoints, they arrived in Damascus at 10pm. From there, they took a bus to 
the Lebanese border where Mohammed met them.

‘They were torturing to kill’: inside Syria’s death machine | Garance le Caisne
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/01/they-were-torturing-to-kill-inside-syrias-death-machine-caesar>
Safe in Beirut, I watched Masto sprinkle the grains of bulgur with water and 
knead them together. Then she fed lumps of the crumbly mixture into the 
electric grinder. The grinder pushed the dough out as coils. She gathered these 
up, kneaded them together and then fed them into the grinder again. With each 
grind, the bulgur absorbed a little more of the water and the dough became a 
little softer and drier until it was as pliable as Play-Doh. Masto likes to add 
a little fine corn meal to her kibbeh. This is her special touch.

Masto was fastidious. She kneaded the dough as she talked. Nothing spilled, no 
grain was wasted. “You need to be delicate in the way you make the dough,” she 
said as she worked it. “You have to make it with love so that people will love 
it. If you do it without love, you cannot touch people.”

The World Food Programme, the emergency food assistance branch of the UN, 
currently supports more than 700,000 Syrian refugees in Lebanon. Since spring 
2016 the programme has dispensed a monthly allowance of $27 per head to the 
two-thirds of refugee families it evaluates as the most vulnerable. The money 
is credited to an electronic card given to each family. They can then spend 
their allowance on food at 490 grocery stores registered with the scheme across 
Lebanon. Since 2012, $770m has been transferred through this system. One day in 
early May, I visited a family in the Bekaa Valley who rely on this scheme.

Abadi al-Eid had arrived in Lebanon with his wife, Khawla, and their three 
children, more than two years earlier, having escaped the Syrian city of Raqqa, 
which has been controlled by Isis since January 2014. They have since had 
another little boy. They live in one of the many small refugee camps that have 
sprung up on fields throughout the fertile plateau between Beirut and the 
Syrian border.

I went with Abadi and Khawla as they did their monthly shop at a small grocery 
store on the Damascus-Beirut road. They brought with them their eight-year-old 
son Ibrahim, who had an undiagnosed neurological condition and whose growth was 
stunted. Everyone called him “Hajji”, an ironic name more commonly used to 
refer to an elder who has made the hajj pilgrimage.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fsyria-refugees-disappearing-food-culture-kibbeh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ba748f554d11984908ce86b68864e3cd06972b6%2F0_539_2448_1909%2F2448.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Remembrance%20of%20tastes%20past%3A%20Syria%E2%80%99s%20disappearing%20food%20culture%20%7C%20Wendell%20Steavenson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fsyria-refugees-disappearing-food-culture-kibbeh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Remembrance%20of%20tastes%20past%3A%20Syria%E2%80%99s%20disappearing%20food%20culture%20%7C%20Wendell%20Steavenson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fsyria-refugees-disappearing-food-culture-kibbeh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ba748f554d11984908ce86b68864e3cd06972b6%2F0_539_2448_1909%2F2448.jpg>
 The Al-Eid family eating lunch in their tent. Photograph: Wendell Steavenson 
for the Guardian 
Hajji grinned and stuck out his arms to shake my hand. He giggled, swaggered 
and marched, he became suddenly aggressive and then teetered on the edge of a 
tantrum. He wanted sweets, he wanted biscuits. His mother gave him a packet of 
biscuits and he hugged his them to his chest and shovelled one after another 
into his mouth.

“He wants to eat everything!” Khawla told me, sighing. He ate all the time, 
she said, but still he was skinny and scabbed. The family had taken him to the 
UN clinic, but there was no money for a blood test. “Before the war, he was not 
like this. They said he cannot go to the school because he is disruptive. We 
have had to move camps five times because other people do not accept him.”

As Abadi pushed the trolley around the little shop, Hajji stamped and 
screamed, hot tears wet on his cheeks. He wanted chocolate cereal. Khawla put 
an expensive box of chocolate cereal into the trolley.

At the checkout, the Al-Eids bought the following:

Two rounds of white cheese

A bottle of Ocean Spray cranberry juice

A bag of zataar, dried thyme

Popping corn

Three large boxes of dried molokhia, a kind of green leaf vegetable

A large pot of yoghurt

Several kilos of different lentils, beans and bulgur wheat

A 16-litre tin of cooking oil

A 4-litre tin of olive oil

Two large cans of fresh peas

Two cans of meat

Four tins of sardines

A 2.5kg kilo tin of tomato paste.

Chocolate cereal

They did not buy any eggs or vegetables or fresh meat, which are expensive. 
There is a joke about a Syrian dish calledbatata ou farouj – potatoes and 
chicken cooked with lemon. These days it is very rare to have chicken, so the 
refugees make the dish without any meat and call it “flying chicken” because 
the chicken has flown away.

The Al-Eids live in a tent large enough to stand up in. The frame is made of 
wood, while the walls are a patchwork of corrugated iron, slats of thin plywood 
and tarpaulin stamped with the UN refugee agency logo. The roof is covered with 
old waterproof advertising banners and weighted with car tyres.

Abadi did not work. He was friendly and smoked cigarettes and when I asked him 
about the future, he opened his palms to the sky, resigned to God’s will.

Khawla crouched next to a blue gas canister on top of which was perched a pot 
of yellow lentil soup. Back in Syria, Khawla told me, she used to cook whatever 
she liked. “Kibbeh, and stuffed vegetables, these things that I used to make, I 
don’t make any more. I am stressed and worried all the time. Sometimes I can’t 
even remember things. I have a bad memory because I can’t think properly. I am 
only living day to day. I miss my family, we would all gather together to eat.”

After Masto had made and shaped the dough, she showed me how to make the 
filling. She chopped an onion without looking at it, in quick, even, long 
slices. The onion was placed in one bowl, broken walnuts in another, finely 
chopped parsley in another.

In the kitchen, on a little stove balanced on a table, she stirred the walnut 
pieces in a hot pan, then poured in pomegranate molasses so that it bubbled. 
She stirred in the onions, careful not to let them burn. After a few minutes, 
she tipped the mixture onto a clean plate and sprinkled it with parsley.

As a child, Masto learned to cook kibbeh from her mother, who came from 
Aleppo. This means that she tends makes her dishes spicy. The subtle fire of 
Aleppo red pepper finds its way into almost every local dish, either powdered, 
like a paprika, or cooked, pulped and dried in the open air into a brick-red 
paste.

From her father, who had been a plumber, Masto learned her love of the Qur’an 
and her love of singing. When they were very little, she and her siblings would 
gather at their father’s knees while he sang suras. If they were curious he 
would show them the words in the Qur’an and spell them out and explain their 
meaning. Masto became a little emotional when she talked about her father. He 
died last year, in exile, in Lebanon.

She put down her kibbeh parcels for a moment and asked: “Would you like me to 
sing the sura for you?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fsyria-refugees-disappearing-food-culture-kibbeh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F771471406c0749e046ec87213ae5587bb7dbe3ef%2F0_0_2447_2447%2F2447.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Remembrance%20of%20tastes%20past%3A%20Syria%E2%80%99s%20disappearing%20food%20culture%20%7C%20Wendell%20Steavenson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fsyria-refugees-disappearing-food-culture-kibbeh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Remembrance%20of%20tastes%20past%3A%20Syria%E2%80%99s%20disappearing%20food%20culture%20%7C%20Wendell%20Steavenson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fsyria-refugees-disappearing-food-culture-kibbeh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F771471406c0749e046ec87213ae5587bb7dbe3ef%2F0_0_2447_2447%2F2447.jpg>
 Ebtisam Masto and her signature kibbeh. Photograph: Wendell Steavensom for the 
Guardian 
She closed her eyes and concentrated all her effort into the words, the 
cadence and the beauty of the verses. She had a glorious voice, strong and pure 
and faithful. In that grim concrete room it struck me that everything Masto 
did, she did with her whole self. Nothing was given less attention than her 
very best. There were tears in my eyes. Without a word, Sidra, Masto’s 
11-year-old daughter, handed me a tissue.

Not long after she had finished singing, Masto returned to her kibbeh. She 
spooned the filling into the prepared cases and pinched the edges closed so 
that they made a double-ended teardrop shape – a classic kibbeh. Then she 
deep-fried them in oil.

Masto’s signature kibbeh is called kibbeh al rayeg, which means kibbeh of the 
monk. The recipe comes from a crossroads outside Jisr al-Shughour where a 
hermit lived. According to local legend, the monk made this kibbeh and gave it 
out to people on Sundays. In the cooking workshop, Masto’s monk’s kibbeh was 
voted the best.

She glowed with pride as she told me this, while mixing the deep red muhammara 
paste with pomegranate molasses and cumin, then loosening it with olive oil to 
make a sauce. Then she placed the kibbeh on a small plate. I ate them with my 
fingers. Salt and sour, the soft crumble of bulgur and nuts crunched together, 
bittersweet.

Once, when talking to refugees in one of the camps in the Bekaa Valley, I 
asked a group of women if they made pickles and jams. The young chef Dima Chaar 
had told me that preparingmouneh (pickles) was a communal activity, part of the 
social fabric of Syria. “My mother used to get together with her neighbours in 
Damascus,” she said. “In artichoke season for example, my dad would go to the 
market and buy kilos of artichokes and then all the women would gather and 
clean them and cook them and prepare them, making preserves or freezing. Mounie 
is the tradition of preserving.

“My favourite mouneh recipe is for lemon baladi – preserved lemons. I would go 
with my mum to the market to buy the lemons, the big ones. They had to have 
quite thick skins. Then you scoop the flesh out and leave them out at room 
temperature for three or four days until the skin blooms with a little white 
mould. Then you rub this off with a damp cloth and stuff the lemons with 
walnuts, red chilli paste and smashed garlic mixed with a little olive oil. 
Then you put them in a jar and fill the jar with olive oil. I used to keep the 
oil and use it to dress salads.”

Twenty or more refugee women in the Bekaa Valley sat around me in a big 
circle. Almost every one of them had a baby or a small child on their lap. Many 
of them had been living in tents for five years, since the beginning of the war.
Mouneh? They shrugged. No, not really. Making pickles is a statement of 
settlement, it embodies the idea of a future of planning and looking forward: 
in six months, we will be here, in the same place. “We just live day to day,” 
one of the women said. “We buy what we need and we eat it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fsyria-refugees-disappearing-food-culture-kibbeh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29ef5f76d1646f0adde571fe0fcdba65fb721482%2F0_0_3888_2680%2F3888.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Remembrance%20of%20tastes%20past%3A%20Syria%E2%80%99s%20disappearing%20food%20culture%20%7C%20Wendell%20Steavenson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fsyria-refugees-disappearing-food-culture-kibbeh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Remembrance%20of%20tastes%20past%3A%20Syria%E2%80%99s%20disappearing%20food%20culture%20%7C%20Wendell%20Steavenson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fsyria-refugees-disappearing-food-culture-kibbeh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29ef5f76d1646f0adde571fe0fcdba65fb721482%2F0_0_3888_2680%2F3888.jpg>
 A Syrian family eat a meal outside their tent at a Syrian refugee camp in the 
Bekaa valley, Lebanon. Photograph: Bilal Hussein/AP 
I put the same question to a young Syrian chef from Damascus named Sam, who 
had been living in Beirut for two years. (He did not want me to use his surname 
– he has siblings still living in the Syrian port city of Latakia.) Sam was a 
tubby, jolly fellow, but he became reflective as he thought of the past. “In 
Damascus when I was younger, I lived with a friend who had a coffee shop in the 
old city. We used to go the market and buy all the vegetables and make pickles 
together. I love to cook, he loved to cook.

“We would gather together six or seven of us, after the coffee shop closed, 
and eat what we had made that day. We would drink arak and listen to music – 
one of my friends played the oud …” Sam stopped. His chest heaved. His smile 
went to a flat line, his lips compressed with the effort of remembering. “I 
have been here two years and I haven’t bought a single piece of furniture. I 
tell myself this is only temporary. I have not made pickles. It’s a thing that 
you do at home, and here it’s not home.”

When I saw them in Beirut in late spring, Masto and Mohammed did not know 
where in America they would be settled. They were nervous. Masto told me, she 
wanted to take a special kind of milled hard-grained wheat with her so that she 
would be able to make the Assyrian kibbeh she had learned from Marlene and 
Nahren.

“It’s not just for Assyrians to preserve their tradition,” she told me. “Food 
is a way to preserve history and culture, to pass traditions on to the next 
generation so that they can understand their origins and identity. In books and 
in schools, children learn about history and different cultures and ruins and 
the remains of different civilisations, but they don’t learn about the food 
which is also a part of their history and culture. If we don’t preserve it and 
teach it to them, it will disappear. It is our duty to keep it going. Kibbeh is 
everywhere, kibbeh holds the culture and region it comes from, it holds its 
identity inside.”

Food is a way to preserve culture, to pass traditions to the next generation 
so that they can understand their identity

When I left Beirut I kept in touch with Masto on Facebook. In the summer she 
posted where she and her family would be settled: Cincinnati, Ohio.

At first, she admitted, when we talked this autumn via Skype, that it had been 
difficult. For the first three weeks the family had to live in a house infested 
with raccoons, but then they were settled in a good house in a good 
neighbourhood. Every morning she and her daughter Amal go to English classes. 
The International Catholic Migration Commission that sponsored their asylum 
application under the auspices of the UN refugee agency, was helping Mohammed 
to train as a forklift truck driver. The children were in school and happy. 
People were very friendly, very helpful. “I am even complimented on my hijab,” 
said Masto, pleased with the warmth and respect of the Midwestern reception. 
(Although at the beginning of December, Masto was more circumspect: since the 
election of Donald Trump, she wrote to me that her family were scared and did 
not know, as Muslims, what the future would bring.)

Not long after Masto arrived in Cincinnati, I had asked her what she thought 
of American food. She admitted she had not yet tried any because she was 
worried it would be not be halal, but added that some friends from the local 
Syrian community had taken her family to a Chinese restaurant and that she had 
liked the sesame chicken.

The first time she had made her signature monk’s kibbeh, she told me, had been 
a disaster. The red pepper paste she had bought at a local Arab food shop was 
bitter and the whole thing was ruined. But she had heard of a wholesale place 
where she could buy a large quantity of red peppers and was going to make some 
herself.

“The climate of Cincinnati is too damp and rainy to dry it outside like it is 
supposed to be,” she told me, “but I can do it in the oven.”

• Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread 
<https://twitter.com/@gdnlongread>, or sign up to the long read weekly email 
here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/jul/20/sign-up-to-the-long-read-email>.
 