
Top NFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl> officials campaigned to 
influence a government research study into the effects of American football on 
brain disease, according to congressional investigators.

ESPN’s investigative team 
<http://espn.go.com/espn/otl/story/_/id/15667689/congressional-report-finds-nfl-improperly-intervened-brain-research-cost-taxpayers-16-million>
 obtained a copy of the damning congressional report, which shows howthe most 
lucrative sports league in the world 
<http://www.cnbc.com/2014/09/04/how-the-nfl-makes-the-most-money-of-any-pro-sport.html>
 tried to pressure the National Institutes of Health (NIH) to move $16m in 
funding meant for the government study.

John McCain says NFL must do more to stop 'tragic outcome' of head trauma
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/27/john-mccain-nfl-head-trauma-ufc-boxing>
Dr Walter Koroshetz, director of the NIH’s National Institute of Neurological 
Disorders and Stroke, said the NFL’s actions to intervene in the grant process 
were unprecedented, according to ESPN’s Outside the Lines investigative series.

The NFL gave a $30m “unrestricted gift” to the NIH in 2012 and the agency 
directed $16m of those funds to a Boston University lead study into football 
and brain injuries,until the NFL backed out of its signed agreement with the 
agency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/22/nfl-reportedly-withdraws-funding-for-boston-university-concussion-study>
, according to Outside the Lines.

The research was funded instead by taxpayer money, though the NFL disputed 
that they pulled funding when the claim was first reported in December 2015. 
The report prompted a congressional investigation into the NFL’s role in the 
study.

NFL spokesman Brian McCarthy said the league rejects the allegations in the 
congressional report. “There is no dispute that there were concerns raised 
about both the nature of the study in question and possible conflicts of 
interest,” McCarthy said in an emailed statement.

He said that the concerns were brought through the appropriate channels and 
that the final decision on funding was made by the NIH. “The nature of those 
conversations and a detailed account of the concerns were communicated in full 
to the committee members,” McCarthy said.

McCarthy said $12m of the $30m has been allocated so far and $6m of that has 
gone to a study done by Boston University School of Medicine and US Department 
of Veterans Affairs received $6m. “The NFL is deeply committed to continuing to 
accelerate scientific research and advancements in this critical area, and we 
stand ready to support additional independent research to that end,” McCarthy 
said.

Maria Pantages Ober, a spokeswoman for Boston University’s CTE lab, said in an 
emailed statement that the lab is “happy and grateful” for the NIH funding. “We 
are looking forward to getting started and we remain focused on the science,” 
Ober said.

The congressional report concluded that the league also tried to redirect the 
funding to its own researchers, in violation of the NIH’s policies on funding 
from private donors. “In this instance, our investigation has shown that while 
the NFL had been publicly proclaiming its role as funder and accelerator of 
important research, it was privately attempting to influence that research,” 
the report said.

Amid opioid epidemic, NFL player risks career to push for medical marijuana
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/17/nfl-medical-marijuana-eugene-monroe-baltimore-ravens>
The report also shows that NFL representatives talked about their objections 
to the study’s lead researcherRobert Stern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/28/nfl-players-could-be-harmed-by-starting-tackle-football-earlier-study-claims>
, a Boston University neurology and neurosurgery professor, who has been 
critical of the league’s handling of concussions.

Stern is clinical director of Boston University’s lab dedicated to the study 
of chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE), which87 of 91 former NFL players 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/18/report-87-of-91-former-nfl-player-brains-have-tested-positive-for-cte>
 tested positive for, according to the lab’s study with the Department of 
Veterans Affairs, published on PBS’s Frontline.

The NIH had ruled that allegations of Stern’s bias and a conflict of interest 
were unfounded. The study is set for its official launch next week. The NFL has 
previously denied that it withheld funding because of Stern.

The report also shows how the NFL tried to offer a last-minute $2m payment to 
the NIH after pulling funds and attempted to move the money to members of its 
brain injury committee. The NIH rejected both proposals.
 