
Donald Trump’s decision to nominate one of Congress’s staunchest opponents of 
abortion as health secretary has drawn immediate condemnation from reproductive 
rights and public health groups.

The groups warned that the selection of Tom Price 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/28/tom-price-health-human-services-secretary-trump-administration>
 – a six-term congressman from Atlanta’s suburbs who is best-known for laying 
plans to repeal and replace Obamacare, and for attempting last year to defund 
Planned Parenthood through a budget maneuver – would have dire consequences for 
abortion rights and contraceptive coverage for millions of US women.

“Trump is sending a clear signal that he intends to punish women who seek 
abortion care,” said Sasha Bruce, the senior vice-president of Naral Pro-Choice 
America. “Tom Price is someone who has made clear throughout his career that he 
does not trust women to make our own decisions about our healthcare … As chair 
of the budget committee, he has been on the frontlines of the efforts to 
dismantle the lifesaving Affordable Care Act, as well as the dangerous attempts 
to defundPlanned Parenthood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/planned-parenthood>.”

Marjorie Dannenfelser, the president of the Susan B Anthony List, an 
anti-abortion political action committee, called Price “an excellent choice”.

“He has a 100% pro-life record,” Dannenfelser said, noting that Price was 
crucial to a 2015 attempt in Congress to defund Planned Parenthood. “As HHS 
[health and human services] secretary, he will play a key role in developing a 
robust healthcare reform proposal that protects life and consciences, while 
promoting options for low-income individuals and families.”

A Georgia congressman, Price has been at the center of the congressional fight 
to repeal the Affordable Care Act, also called Obamacare, ever since it was 
enacted, repeatedly introducing legislation that helped form the basis for the 
Republicans’ replacement plans. His nomination is a signal that Trump plans to 
make profound changes to the healthcare regime enacted under Barack Obama.

What an Obamacare replacement could look like under Tom Price
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/29/obamacare-trump-administration-tom-price-hhs>
Advocates worry that this includes vast changes to women’s access to 
reproductive healthcare. Price is a staunch and longtime foe of abortion 
rights. As the chair of the House budget committee, he shepherded a bill 
through the House that defunded Planned Parenthood through the budget 
reconciliation process, meaning Senate Democrats had no opportunity to 
filibuster the bill. Obama vetoed it last year.

“Picking Price says to me that Mr Trump means it, that he wants to abolish the 
Affordable Care Act and he’s going to follow through on those statements he 
made on the campaign trail,” said Susan Wood, a professor of health policy at 
George Washington University. “Planned Parenthood funding, support for family 
planning services around the country – all these are at risk.”

Obamacare included an unprecedented expansion of contraception coverage at no 
extra cost, an achievement that proponents of the law worry Price will try to 
undermine.

Price’s proposals 
<http://tomprice.house.gov/sites/tomprice.house.gov/files/HR%202300%20Empowering%20Patients%20First%20Act%202015.pdf>
 to replace Obama’s signature healthcare legislation have variously offered 
legal protections to healthcare providers refusing to offer abortion services 
and forbidden the use of federal subsidies to pay for insurance plans that 
offer abortion coverage. His plans have also eliminated mandatory coverage of 
contraception for plans sold on the open market.



It is not clear whether Price has designs on the contraceptive mandate, the 
Obamacare provision that requires all private healthcare plans to cover, at no 
extra cost, a wide range of contraceptive drugs and devices, and prompted an 
increase in the availability of contraception.

But he is hostile 
<https://twitter.com/NARAL/status/803446231834001408?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw> to 
the idea that some women require assistance to pay for birth control, and once 
challenged a reporter to “bring me one woman” who struggled to afford 
contraception. The Trump administration has signaled its opposition to 
requiring all healthcare plans to cover contraceptives. In an interview 
recorded just before the election, Vice-President-elect Mike Pence suggested 
that the Trump administration mightissue a rule 
<http://www.christianpost.com/news/mike-pence-james-dobson-trump-birth-control-mandate-transgender-bathroom-170485/>
 allowing business owners to refuse to cover contraception based on their 
religious beliefs. Price’s department would be responsible for drafting and 
enforcing such a rule.

But Price’s influence will extend even further, from Planned Parenthood’s 
federal funding to the Food and Drug Administration, the agency responsible for 
vetting and approving new drugs and medical devices.

“I am very worried that the incoming administration will once again politicize 
the agency,” said Wood, who served as the director of the FDA’s Office of 
Women’sHealth <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> under the George W 
Bush administration. In 2005, she resigned over political interference in the 
agency’s attempts to make the morning-after pill available over-the-counter.

Under Trump and Price, Wood worries that the FDA will go even further. She 
fears that political forces could cause the agency to not only overregulate 
abortion and contraceptive drugs but even re-evaluate drugs and devices the 
agency has already approved.

Early this year, for example, the FDA approved new labelling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/30/fda-approves-new-abortion-drug-labeling-reproductive-rights>
 for an abortion drug that reduced the number of visits a woman has to make to 
a clinic for a medication abortion and extended the number of weeks into a 
pregnancy the drug is available. The move made the drug more widely accessible 
and was assailed by opponents of abortion.

Trump has pledged to run an anti-abortion administration. “So the question 
becomes whether they step even further and start trying to take things off the 
market,” said Wood.

Price could also help curtail funding to Planned Parenthood, the reproductive 
health organization that is a lightning rod for conservatives. Republicans are 
expected to have the votes in the House and Senate to block federal funding for 
Planned Parenthood. A bill Congress approved in 2015cut off Medicaid funding 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/11/gop-plans-to-defund-planned-parenthood-231905>
, although it preserved Title X family planning funds for low-income women.

Women’s rights groups brace for Trump: ‘We are used to fighting impossible 
odds’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/18/womens-right-groups-fight-trump-pence-aborition-birth-control>
But Price could grease the skids for states looking to defund Planned 
Parenthood even without the action of Congress. In 2011, the Department of 
Health and Human Services issued a memo that stated that federal law prevented 
states from excluding a qualified provider from Medicaid on the basis of the 
medical services it offered – such as abortion. Price’s office could reverse 
course and offer a different interpretation of federal law. That would 
green-light states’ attempts to ban Planned Parenthood clinics from receiving 
Medicaid dollars, although those efforts would still be subject to courtroom 
battles.

“The direction that the Trump administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trump-administration> is moving, on 
governmental support of reproductive health services, is really in the opposite 
direction of where the Obama administration has gone,” said Alina Salganicoff, 
the director of women’s health policy at the Kaiser Family Foundation, a 
not-for-profit public health organization. “There hasn’t been any action from 
them yet, but going on what they’ve been talking about – removing public 
funding for Planned Parenthood – and their records on contraceptive coverage, 
they’re moving strongly in that direction. Price is someone they believe will 
implement their priorities.”
 