
A swarm of scooters forms at the head of a queue of traffic waiting for the 
lights to change. Visors down, engines revving, they jockey for position ahead 
of the cars, trucks and buses on a specially marked patch of tarmac reserved 
for cyclists in many parts of the world.

The buzz rises to a high-pitched crescendo and, as the lights turn green, they 
shoot off. A minute later the lights change and the process begins again. 
Taipei is home to almost one million scooters – as well as 2.7 million people. 
Like many other large Asian cities, the roads here are seen as no place for 
cyclists.

But in the capital of Taiwan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/taiwan> – an 
island once known as “the Bicycle Kingdom” – the authorities have taken the 
unusual step of legalising cycling on 240 miles of city centre pavement. Taipei 
is also tripling its network of cycle lanes to cover 120 miles over the next 
three years – although these too are strips of painted sidewalk taken from 
pedestrians.

Strange as it may seem, it works. Riding on the pavement feels 100% safe – for 
cyclists at least – and many of the riders are women, pedalling along at a 
leisurely pace and with hardly a helmet in sight. Picking your way through the 
city-centre pedestrians during rush hour may be pretty impossible, but in 
general the numbers are encouraging: whereas six or seven years ago few 
cyclists were to be seen in the city, now around 5% of journeys are taken by 
bike. That’s around double the cycle modal share of London, for example, and
four-times that of New York 
<http://www.streetsblog.org/2014/09/18/nyc-bike-commuting-has-doubled-since-2009-while-solo-driving-dropped/>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fbicycle-kingdom-reborn-pavement-cycling-taipei-taiwan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa24c95373ead3fe04d2d4a5d0a8c9355937cf178%2F23_32_1084_672%2F1084.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Return%20of%20the%20Bicycle%20Kingdom%3F%20How%20pavement%20cycling%20is%20transforming%20Taipei&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fbicycle-kingdom-reborn-pavement-cycling-taipei-taiwan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Return%20of%20the%20Bicycle%20Kingdom%3F%20How%20pavement%20cycling%20is%20transforming%20Taipei&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fbicycle-kingdom-reborn-pavement-cycling-taipei-taiwan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa24c95373ead3fe04d2d4a5d0a8c9355937cf178%2F23_32_1084_672%2F1084.jpg>
 Taipei before cars, scooters and multi-level highways. Photograph:Taipics.com 
<http://www.taipics.com/> 
YouBike has changed the image of the city. It’s one of the city government’s 
most popular policies
King Liu 
“We want to be a cycle-friendly city, but we’re not trying to be like 
Amsterdam or Copenhagen,” Anne Chung, transport commissioner for Taipei, tells 
me on the sidelines of theVeloCity global cycling conference 
<https://ecf.com/livepage>, which is taking place in Asia for the first time. 
“There are too many scooters and motorbikes at the moment and it is too 
dangerous to ride on the road with them, so the pavement is safer for cyclists. 
We want people to make cycling part of their lives and be able to combine 
cycling with the metro and buses for the ‘last mile’ of their journeys. We want 
to be able to tell car and motorbike users that there is a smarter way to get 
around.”

The YouBike cycle share system <https://taipei.youbike.com.tw/en/index.php>, a 
public-private partnership between manufacturer Giant and the city authorities, 
plays a key role. Since its launch in 2009, the YouBike network has grown to 
7,000 bikes at more than 200 locations, most of them strategically placed next 
to metro stations and bus stops. Each bike is used an average of 8.6 times a 
day – the highest turnover rate in the world – and by 2018 the system will have 
grown to almost double its present size.
The transformation of Taipei: Fuxing Road - before and after 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/01/now-and-then-embed/embed/embed.html?mobile_before=//media.guim.co.uk/13e004975e51e22da99c88acd2b5aea9365d5286/0_0_480_336/480.jpg&desktop_before=//media.guim.co.uk/541f367593cc2d47d90cd939134bba216d896a4e/0_0_1280_896/1280.jpg&mobile_after=//media.guim.co.uk/0425a0c6a92e9f931e6452d20375f679bb128cbd/0_0_480_336/480.jpg&desktop_after=//media.guim.co.uk/4c4e9d053206c47d8d50f067b97f8591794ff11a/0_0_1280_896/1280.jpg&credit=Photos 
by Taipei Department of Transportation&label_before=Then&label_after=Now&> 
Fuxing Road before and after: a lane was taken from cars and a segregated cycle 
lane built on the widened pavement 
At the same time, Taipei has announced plans to more than triple the length of 
its network of segregated city centre bike lanes to 120 miles by 2019. In 
addition, there are 240 miles of shared use pavements, and 70 miles of 
riverside cycleways outside the city’s flood defence levees, which are hugely 
popular with leisure cyclists at weekends.

Combined with the implementation of on-street parking fees for cars and 
scooters, the approach seems to be working – a survey showed an estimated 31.2% 
of people riding YouBikes had switched from motorbikes and 4.4% from private 
cars.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fbicycle-kingdom-reborn-pavement-cycling-taipei-taiwan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05efdefd1697966abb1c7438fc56578c59bad11d%2F0_153_2448_2449%2F2448.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Return%20of%20the%20Bicycle%20Kingdom%3F%20How%20pavement%20cycling%20is%20transforming%20Taipei&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fbicycle-kingdom-reborn-pavement-cycling-taipei-taiwan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Return%20of%20the%20Bicycle%20Kingdom%3F%20How%20pavement%20cycling%20is%20transforming%20Taipei&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fbicycle-kingdom-reborn-pavement-cycling-taipei-taiwan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05efdefd1697966abb1c7438fc56578c59bad11d%2F0_153_2448_2449%2F2448.jpg>
 Many YouBike riders are women … and few wear helmets 
Taiwan earned its Bicycle Kingdom monicker in the 1980s, when the island’s 
factories turned out more bikes than any other country in the world and the 
‘Made in Taiwan’ label was ubiquitous. Facing increased competition from 
mainland China in the late 90s, Taiwanese bike manufacturersresponded by ceding 
the low-cost end of the market 
<http://taiwaninfo.nat.gov.tw/ct.asp?xItem=30031&CtNode=92&htx_TRCategory=&mp=4>
, and concentrating on higher-spec machines. Giant and Merida have grown to 
become two of the world’s biggest bike companies, and international firms such 
as Specialized, Trek and Colnago have manufacturing sites on the island.

Recently, this interest in high-end bikes has found expression in the huge 
popularity of cycle tours of the island. Taipei’s mayor, Ko Wen-je, completed a 
325-mile route last month, topping a previous 235-mile excursion. Giant’s 
president and founder, King Liu, has completed the full island circuit twice – 
the first time at the age of 73, and the second at 80 – cutting his time from 
15 days to 12.

Liu, now 82, calls his colourful, sturdy YouBikes the “last piece of puzzle” 
in Taipei’s transformation. “It seemed impossible to introduce bike share with 
so many motorbikes and scooters,” he recalls. “At the start the media, the 
public and politicians all disagreed with the vision of bike share. Motorbikes 
had dedicated lanes, but not cyclists. The rights of cyclists were not being 
taken care of well by the government. It took tense negotiations, but it passed 
in the end.


“In the past you wouldn’t see many people cycling in Taipei – but now, with 
YouBike, it has changed participation and the image of the city. It has become 
one of the city government’s most popular policies.”
Nick Mead (@nickvanmead) 
You can take your bike into the public toilet with you in Taipei. Great idea 
#vc2016 <https://twitter.com/hashtag/vc2016?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/MPQKo8Qitf
 <https://t.co/MPQKo8Qitf>
 <https://twitter.com/nickvanmead/status/703886726767386624> February 28, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/nickvanmead/status/703886726767386624> 
I hire a YouBike – a simple matter of touching the dock with a smart card, 
valid for the metro and buses too – and head off on a cycling tour of the city 
with Phil Tai, president of theFormosa Lohas Cycling Association 
<http://www.flca.tw/en/index.php>. 


We want to be a cycle-friendly city, but we’re not trying to be like Amsterdam 
or Copenhagen
Anne Chung 
As we whizz along the riverside – the first area of the capital to see any 
cycle infrastructure – we pass a constant stream of cyclists of all shapes and 
sizes, on everything from YouBikes to top-of-the-range carbon, muddy mountain 
bikes to brushed-steel fixies – all making the most of a sunny day, the
cycle-friendly toilets 
<https://twitter.com/nickvanmead/status/703886726767386624> and the 70 miles of 
traffic-free tarmac on the outer side of the city’s flood defence system.

Back inside the levee walls we negotiate the roads under a series of elevated 
highways – some double, some triple-deckers – and dive into the narrow streets 
of Wanhua, one of the city’s oldest districts. Shared pavements here often run 
through the tight gap between lines of parked scooters and busy shop doorways. 
We stick to the road.

Heading into the modern central business district and towards Taipei 101 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2005/dec/02/naturaldisasters.climatechange>
 – the world’s tallest skyscraper until it was usurped by the Burj Khalifa in 
Dubai – we encounter proper protected cycle ways. When major thoroughfares such 
as Xinyi and Fuxing were remodelled with new underground metro lines, the city 
authorities took the chance to grab a lane of traffic from cars and widen the 
pavement. A slice of that sidewalk was then painted as a cycle lane.

Viva la revolución: Mexico City cyclists fight for the right to ride in safety
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/nov/11/viva-la-revolucion-mexico-city-cyclists-fight-right-safety>
The segregated lanes disappear into shared pavements at major junctions and 
metro stations, and what with all those rush-hour pedestrians, there’s 
potential for conflict – but in a few days cycling around the city, I didn’t 
see any. Even the car drivers pushing through pedestrian crossings on red were 
generally cautious and polite.

Charles Lin, deputy mayor of Taipei and a professor in urban planning, sees 
cycling as part of his strategy to make the city more liveable and sustainable 
by 2050.

“People have always said that form follows function, but the way I see it, 
form follows mobility,” he says. “Mobility decides the image of the city – how 
we are perceived by visitors – and the way we move determines the way we live 
in the city. From now on, neighbourhoods will develop wherever the bicycles go, 
and the cycling-oriented network will lead city-wide development. We are, piece 
by piece, moving towards a more people-oriented city, even though it costs and 
even though it is hard.”

“We are making progress,” adds Chung. “If you come back in three years you’ll 
see a big change in Taipei.”

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 