
Violent and abusive men are being allowed to confront and cross-examine their 
former partners in secretive court hearings that fail to protect women who are 
victims of abuse, a Guardian investigation has found.

Mothers involved in family court hearings have given graphic descriptions of 
the “torture” of being questioned by abusive men – a practice still allowed in 
civil cases but banned in criminal courts.

'Constantly terrified': women on facing their abusers in family courts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/22/constantly-terrified-women-on-facing-their-abusers-in-family-courts>
They describe how former partners can make repeated, sometimes spurious, court 
applications to continue the harassment.

In one case, a mother was cross-examined for two hours by her ex-husband 
despite him being the subject of a restraining order to keep him away from her.

Sarah, whose name has been changed, said: “I thought, why does the judge allow 
him to continue this abuse? I had escaped a really violent relationship, it was 
a very hard thing to do, and the court threw me back into harm’s way 
constantly. It was torture for me.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Frevealed-how-family-courts-allow-abusers-to-torment-their-victims%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63601e57d13ecd175e536efd98b35b2ba06293b5%2F0_134_4252_2551%2F4252.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Revealed%3A%20how%20family%20courts%20allow%20abusers%20to%20torment%20their%20victims&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Frevealed-how-family-courts-allow-abusers-to-torment-their-victims%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Revealed%3A%20how%20family%20courts%20allow%20abusers%20to%20torment%20their%20victims&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Frevealed-how-family-courts-allow-abusers-to-torment-their-victims%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63601e57d13ecd175e536efd98b35b2ba06293b5%2F0_134_4252_2551%2F4252.jpg>
 The court of protection and central family court in London. Photograph: Nick 
Ansell/PA 
Family courts cases are held in private in England and Wales. The testimony of 
witnesses, documentary evidence, expert statements and judicial decisions are 
mostly still secret.

Women who spoke to the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/22/constantly-terrified-women-on-facing-their-abusers-in-family-courts>
 knew they were at risk of being held in contempt of court but said they wanted 
to shine a light on the secretive processes.

The revelations have prompted one MP to demand a review of the way the court 
system operates and a change in the law. Peter Kyle, Labour MP for Hove and 
Portslade, said the situation amounted to the “abuse and brutalisation” of 
women by the legal system. “Mothers need the protection of the law and they 
need to know in advance that the system is there to look out and protect their 
interests,” he said.

“It only takes one woman to be placed in a situation where she can be legally 
be asked by the man who has violently abused her; ‘When did you last have 
sex?’. That only has to happen once to realise that the system is corrupted and
domestic abuse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/21/dont-let-new-money-for-family-violence-fool-you-community-legal-centres-have-been-gutted>
 is going on in our system in the courtroom.”

The evidence obtained by the Guardian spans ongoing and completed cases, 
interviews with participants, lawyers and court officials. It reveals how the 
family court:

 * Allows men with criminal convictions for abusing their ex-partners to 
directly question them – sometimes repeatedly. 
 * Is able to ignore restraining orders imposed by the criminal courts to 
protect the women. 
 * Allows fathers, no matter how violent or abusive, to repeatedly pursue 
contact with children and their mothers. 
 * Can ignore expert evidence that women are at risk from abusive men. 
 * Fails to adequately protect vulnerable victims of domestic and sexual abuse.
Research by the all-party parliamentary group on domestic violence found that 
55% of women had no access to special measures in the family courts, where 70% 
of separation and child contact cases involve some form ofdomestic violence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/21/police-to-get-more-training-to-detect-non-physical-domestic-abuse>
.

One mother whose case was examined by the Guardian was told by a judge to sit 
next to her ex-partner to view a police video of her reporting his sexual 
assault. She said: “Since when is it OK to force a victim of abuse to sit next 
to her abuser around a laptop and watch the police video of the statements she 
made to the police about her sexual abuse? There was no screen in place, they 
provided no separate room for me.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Frevealed-how-family-courts-allow-abusers-to-torment-their-victims%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2a98b2f1aa0c7432a68da160dcd405af49e377c%2F0_863_1890_1134%2F1890.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Revealed%3A%20how%20family%20courts%20allow%20abusers%20to%20torment%20their%20victims&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Frevealed-how-family-courts-allow-abusers-to-torment-their-victims%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Revealed%3A%20how%20family%20courts%20allow%20abusers%20to%20torment%20their%20victims&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Frevealed-how-family-courts-allow-abusers-to-torment-their-victims%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2a98b2f1aa0c7432a68da160dcd405af49e377c%2F0_863_1890_1134%2F1890.jpg>
 Polly Neate. Photograph: Sam Friedrich/for the Guardian 
Polly Neate, chief executive of Women’s Aid 
<https://www.womensaid.org.uk/childfirst/>, has presented research to the 
judiciary that shows a quarter ofvictims of domestic violence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/08/theresa-may-domestic-violence-women>
 surveyed had been cross-examined by abusive partners. “When we talk to judges 
about this they say that this never happens. But it is happening, that is 
clear, and it seems fairly difficult to get this across,” she said.

Neate is in talks with a senior judge selected by the president of the family 
division, Sir James Munby, to force the courts to follow guidance, known as 
practice direction 12J, which is designed to protect mothers from direct 
cross-examination by violent perpetrators of abuse.

Responding to the revelations in the Guardian, Cris McCurley, a family lawyer 
from the north-east, said: “I have worked on hundreds of cases and the direct 
cross examination of victims by a perpetrator happens a lot. It is absolutely 
traumatising. We have got to get something in place to stop this, even if it 
means appointing a special advocate or even a law student to put the questions 
instead of the perpetrator.”

McCurley said the cuts to legal aid and the cutbacks in the whole court 
estate, meant the situation for vulnerable women within the family courts was 
getting worse.Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> who have 
suffered domestic violence are entitled to legal aid if they can prove with 
documentation that they are a victim. Many women do not qualify and are forced 
to represent themselves before their alleged perpetrator.

Jane Monckton-Smith, an expert in domestic homicides, stalking and coercive 
control, said the family court system was antiquated. “The family courts need 
to up their game in order to prevent abusive men using the access they are 
being given by the courts to continue their behaviour,” she said.


Monckton-Smith said the case of Ben Butler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/21/ben-butler-found-guilty-of-murdering-six-year-old-daughter-ellie>
, the father who killed his six-year-old daughter Ellie after a family court 
judge returned the child to him and his partner, should have been a warning 
sign about how some abusive men can manipulate the system and put women and 
children at risk. But that had not happened.

Legal aid cuts mean increasing numbers of men and women are representing 
themselves in court, increasing the chance of some men being able to use the 
process as part of their continuing harassment, abuse and controlling 
behaviour. Ministry of Justice figures released in October 2016 show in 80% of 
family law cases at least one of the parties was a litigant in person.


Zoe Dronfield set up a support group, I want my Mummy (IWMM), after her 
abusive ex-partner was given emergency custody of their child.

“I speak out because most women cannot,” she said. “The family court 
stipulates that they must not talk about their case, so the secrecy goes on and 
they are kept silent.”

Cases examined by the Guardian reveal that judges in some cases appear to be 
ignoring advice from agencies including police, social services andCafcass 
<https://www.cafcass.gov.uk/> officials, to allow an abusive man contact with a 
child.

Mandip Ghai, legal officer for Rights of Women, said: “Judges will bend over 
backwards to try and find a way for contact to take place. We have cases where 
there has been quite serious domestic violence and Cafcass has recommended no 
direct contact, but the judge finds a way of deciding to allow it anyway.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Frevealed-how-family-courts-allow-abusers-to-torment-their-victims%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F432a6e3174026011a62d6655194cfd6ddc25274e%2F432_183_3472_2084%2F3472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Revealed%3A%20how%20family%20courts%20allow%20abusers%20to%20torment%20their%20victims&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Frevealed-how-family-courts-allow-abusers-to-torment-their-victims%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Revealed%3A%20how%20family%20courts%20allow%20abusers%20to%20torment%20their%20victims&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Frevealed-how-family-courts-allow-abusers-to-torment-their-victims%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F432a6e3174026011a62d6655194cfd6ddc25274e%2F432_183_3472_2084%2F3472.jpg>
 Ben Butler, with his partner Jennie Gray. Photograph: Ken 
McKay/Rex/Shutterstock 
Many courts, she said, were failing to carry out fact-finding hearings where 
there were allegations of domestic abuse and that could put a child at risk.

“If there is no fact-finding hearing to establish whether there has been 
domestic violence, then there is no assessment of the risk the child might be 
in. There needs to be some thought about how this situation can be improved,” 
she said.

Don't let new money for family violence fool you – community legal centres 
have been gutted | Chris Atmore
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/21/dont-let-new-money-for-family-violence-fool-you-community-legal-centres-have-been-gutted>
A judiciary spokesman said the president of the family division has 
acknowledged in public a pressing need to address the issue of abusive men 
questioning their victims, and the wider issue of protecting vulnerable victims 
of domestic violence.

In another case, a district judge is allowing a father with a history of 
violence, who has made repeated threats to kill his ex and his child, to 
continue his case for contact with the child. His former partner said: “It 
shocks me that a judge can see all these violent threats, and see from his 
criminal record that this is a man who does what he threatens to do, and … 
consider allowing him contact with his child. That leaves me speechless.”


Claire Waxman, of Voice4Victims <http://www.voice4victims.co.uk/> who are 
campaigning to end the abuse of process in civil courts, said the family courts 
were undermining the criminal justice process. “Women feel bullied by the court 
and they are terrified of their restraining orders being altered because they 
know it will put them at risk, so they agree to everything the family court 
says. It is shocking.”


 