
Two years ago, when the UK had a future in the European Union and Ed Miliband 
was a potential prime minister, the chief business commentator of the Financial 
Times, John Gapper,announced the demise 
<https://www.ft.com/content/b6e43e54-f8a3-11e3-befc-00144feabdc0> of Britain’s 
rightwing tabloids. Unusually for an FT journalist, Gapper had once worked at 
the Daily Mail, and at the FT he often writes about the media, sweepingly and 
authoritatively even by that paper’s standards. “The era of the Fleet Street 
tabloids, the populist and fearsome emblems of British culture and politics, is 
over,” he wrote on 25 June 2014. “It has been over for some years, in fact, but 
neither they nor their critics chose to admit it.”

He pointed to their shrunken print circulations: in 1950 the Daily Express was 
“the world’s best-selling paper”, he wrote, and “sold more than 4m copies each 
day”. Yet by 2014 it was selling barely a ninth of that; and it has weakened 
further since. “The tabloids appeal to a readership limited by class, 
occupation, and social attitude,” Gapper continued. “That is not sufficient in 
the digital era. Young people are not loyal to one tabloid title and few of 
them will subscribe online.”

Gapper cited the phone-hacking scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/phone-hacking> which closed the News of the 
World in 2011; competition from politically neutral, free tabloids such as 
Metro; the distraction of readers by smartphones; and the advancing years of 
key tabloid figures such as Paul Dacre, now 67, who has been the crusading, 
splenetic editor of the Mail for almost a quarter of a century. Gapper 
predicted that Dacre would probably be the last tabloid editor to successfully 
“express their readers’ inner thoughts and emotions … more strongly than the 
readers could themselves”.

Revenge of the tabloids – podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/audio/2016/nov/14/revenge-of-the-tabloids-podcast>
In recent years, the many observers and enemies of the tabloids have 
repeatedly forecast their political decline. In 2010, the blogger Sunny Hundal 
wrote in the New Statesman that that year’s general election had been “notable 
for how little impact the tabloids had”. He concluded, “It’s highly unlikely 
the Sun can claim victory after an election ever again.” This June, in the 
middle of the EU referendum campaign, the i newspaper declared on its front 
page, “The Media Won’t Decide This Vote”. In August, a former managing editor 
of the Sun, Stig Abell,wrote in the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/11/opinion/britains-paper-tigers.html?_r=0> 
that the other tabloids had become “living relics”, with the Express “no more 
than an incontinent shriek of made-up facts about health and immigration”. The 
headline for the piece was “Britain’s Paper Tigers”.

Yet on 23 June 2016, almost two years to the day after Gapper had written 
their obituary, one of the biggest, oldest dreams of the tabloids came 
spectacularly to life, when Britain voted to leave the EU, against the 
predictions of most broadsheet commentators. It was an outcome for which the 
tabloids had campaigned doggedly for decades, but never more intensely – or 
with less factual scrupulousness – than this spring and summer, when the front 
pages of the Sun, Mail and Express bellowed for Brexit, talking up Britain’s 
prospects afterwards, in deafening unison, day after day. Two days before the 
referendum, the Sun gave over its first 10 pages to pro-Brexit coverage.

The referendum has not been the only tabloid triumph of the last 18 months. At 
the 2015 general election, again contrary to most predictions, the 
Conservatives won a majority against the Labour bogeyman the papers had 
alternately mocked and feared for the previous five years: “Red” or “Weird” Ed 
Miliband. At Loughborough University, Prof David Deacon and his colleagues have 
studied the tabloid coverage of the last six general elections, going back to 
1992. “We were doing our initial analysis of 2015 while the campaign was going 
on,” he remembers, “and there seemed to be laughably extreme anti-Labour 
headlines. The levels of partisanship were at least the equal of what we 
recorded in 1992,” widely considered the previous high point – or low point – 
of tabloid electoral influence.

“On polling day in 2015,” Deacon continues, “I was doing the final data runs, 
and I thought to myself, ‘If Miliband gets a hung parliament, in spite of this 
hostility, it will be extraordinary. This election will put us out of 
business.’” He pauses. “But it didn’t.”

When tabloids publish and don’t give a damn | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/28/when-tabloids-publish-and-dont-give-a-damn>
Finally, this July, Theresa May suddenly swept past the favourite Boris 
Johnson to become Conservative leader and unelected prime minister. The Mail 
has long admired and promoted her as a stern, controlling figure, like Dacre 
himself. To his usually formal paper, which was thrilled by her fierce party 
conference speech this month, she is “Theresa”.

British politics now feels relentlessly tabloid-dominated. From the daily 
obsession with immigrants to the rubbishing of human rights lawyers, from the 
march towards a “hard Brexit” to the smearing of liberal Britons as bad losers 
and elitists, the tabloids and the Conservative right are collaborating with a 
closeness and a swagger not seen since at least the early 90s.

“The Sun and Mail have more power now than they have for a long time,” says 
David Yelland, editor of the Sun from 1998 to 2003. “You could argue that in 
Brexit the tabloids had their most powerful moment ever.” In a text less than 
an hour after the Brexit victory was declared, the current editor of the Sun, 
Tony Gallagher, told the Guardian’s media editor: “So much for the waning power 
of the print media.”

Even the most confident and successful modern British politicians have 
regarded the tabloids as culturally and electorally pivotal. In 2012, Tony 
Blair told the Leveson inquiry into the behaviour of the British press: “If you 
have a readership of three to four million … that’s power … I don’t know any 
other way of describing it.” In his autobiography, Blair writes of his decision 
as Labour leader to appease the Sun and its proprietor Rupert Murdoch: “Not to 
[do so] was to say carry on and do your worst, and we knew their worst was very 
bad indeed.”

Like almost every book about New Labour, Blair’s has dozens of index entries 
for the Sun and Mail. Conservatives tend to be more reticent about their 
relations with the tabloids: there are no index references to the Sun in either 
volume of Margaret Thatcher’s memoirs. But shortly before her 1987 general 
election victory, she spoke privately about Murdoch to her confidant Woodrow 
Wyatt. “We depend on him to fight for us,” she said. “The Sun is marvellous.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Frevenge-of-the-tabloids-brexit-dacre-murdoch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3094b0b1a09238e686b6edd408dc7f77f4dddd3e%2F125_79_3201_4358%2F3201.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Revenge%20of%20the%20tabloids%20%7C%20Andy%20Beckett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Frevenge-of-the-tabloids-brexit-dacre-murdoch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Revenge%20of%20the%20tabloids%20%7C%20Andy%20Beckett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Frevenge-of-the-tabloids-brexit-dacre-murdoch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3094b0b1a09238e686b6edd408dc7f77f4dddd3e%2F125_79_3201_4358%2F3201.jpg>
 The Daily Mail has long admired Theresa May. Photograph: Daily Mail 
According to research by YouGov 
<https://yougov.co.uk/news/2015/06/08/general-election-2015-how-britain-really-voted/>
, the paper you read is still “a far better predictor of Labour and Tory 
support than any other indicator”. This applies to all national papers – in 
2015, Guardian readers chose Labour over the Tories by 10 to one. But with the 
rightwing tabloids, uniquely, the link is rapidly growing stronger. At the 2015 
general election, the Tory advantage over Labour among Sun readers was 
one-and-a-half times as big as it had been in 2010. Moreover, as John Curtice 
of Strathclyde University, the veteran analyst of British voting behaviour, 
points out: “People who still read papers in print are disproportionately 
politically interested. They vote!”

The word “tabloid” was invented in 1884 by the pharmaceutical magnate Henry 
Wellcome; before it referred to pithy newspapers, it meant a concentrated dose 
of medicine.

Consider some headlines from the Express this autumn: “Migrant Influx Is 
Threatening To Destroy Our Way Of Life”; “Muslim Bus Driver ‘Put Children’s 
Lives At Risk’ By Stopping For Prayer”; “Benefit Cheats Spared Jail As Fraud 
Rockets”. For the rightwing tabloids, they are unremarkable – such themes and 
stereotypes and phrases have run through the papers for decades: on front 
pages, in news stories, in features, editorials and pieces by columnists, 
almost all the articles agreeing with each other, almost every day. The papers 
have tirelessly devoted themselves to what the Italian political theorist 
Antonio Gramsci referred to as the manufacturing of “common sense”, by which he 
meant the partisan but often unnoticed and unchallenged assumptions that tilt 
public opinion rightwards. In 2013, an in-depth survey byIpsos MORI revealed 
<https://www.ipsos-mori.com/researchpublications/researcharchive/3188/Perceptions-are-not-reality-the-top-10-we-get-wrong.aspx>
 that Britons vastly overestimate the number of British immigrants, Muslims and 
benefit fraudsters.

In an era when agreed facts are becoming rarer, and voters are increasingly 
impatient and distracted, but also disorientated by shock events, influencing 
how issues are talked about is more important than ever – possibly more 
important, in fact, than influencing elections. In Britain, uniquely among 
democracies, a few tabloid newspapers are at the heart of both; their 
preoccupations so familiar that the terms “tabloid” and “rightwing tabloid” 
have become almost synonymous.

Yet the exact workings and nature of their influence are fiercely disputed. 
Politicians, journalists, academics, and tabloid proprietors say contradictory 
things about it. Defenders of the papers say that tabloids understand and 
represent their readers; critics say that they talk down to them and manipulate 
them. Even the owners of tabloids can’t always keep their story straight. In 
2012, Murdoch told the Leveson inquiry that the Sun’s famous claim after the 
1992 election – “It’s The Sun Wot Won it” – had been“tasteless and wrong … We 
don’t have that sort of power.” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/apr/25/rupert-murdoch-sun-wot-won-it-tasteless>
 But at the Sun’s offices in London, some of the rooms have glass walls with 
reproductions of its most mythologised headlines embedded in them, including 
the front page from the day of the 1992 election, about the then Labour leader, 
Neil Kinnock: “If Kinnock wins today will the last person to leave Britain 
please turn out the lights.”

Like Miliband, Kinnock unexpectedly lost. Murdoch told the Leveson inquiry he 
thought this front page was “absolutely brilliant”. He could not resist 
revelling in his paper’s power, it seemed, even as he denied it.

In 1992, the political scientist Ken Newton wrote that identifying the 
political role of newspapers was “a classic conundrum of the behavioural 
sciences”. Do people think and vote as rightwingers because they read rightwing 
papers – or is it the other way around? Are tabloids just one voice in a larger 
media babble, or do they play a unique role in setting the agenda for other 
journalists, such as broadcasters? To what extent do the tabloids shape their 
readers’ social values – or have the tabloids’ own values been made to shift by 
changing public attitudes towards race and gender and sexuality?

In the Britain of Theresa’s Brexit and seemingly perpetual Tory government, 
the rightwing tabloids reign again – even as their business, like the rest of 
the print media, continues to crumble. Is theirs a brittle supremacy? Or is 
their hold on the national discourse secure for another generation?

One way to investigate these questions is to tell the story of their political 
influence on modern Britain. It is not a simple tabloid tale.

Britain is in many ways a perfect environment for a partisan press. It is a 
small, centralised country with a raucous party politics and an enduring 
culture of national newspapers. Unlike local papers, the nationals do not have 
to appeal to everyone, but can have intense relationships with particular 
readerships. British newspapers first appeared regularly during the civil war 
of the 1640s: the earnest Mercurius Britannicus supported parliament, the 
mocking Mercurius Aulicus backed the royalists. Three hundred years on, 
political bias remained so blatant that in 1947 Clement Attlee’s Labour 
government established a royal commission to investigate the press, in 
particular the power of its disproportionate number of rightwing proprietors. 
Lord Beaverbrook, the domineering owner of the Express, told the ineffectual 
commission: “My purpose originally was to set up a propaganda paper, and I have 
never departed from that.”

Two years later, the pioneering social research organisation Mass Observation 
conducted one of the first British studies of the interactions between 
newspapers and their readers, by scrutinising press consumption in libraries 
and other public places. “Most people choose their paper primarily for its 
politics,” it found. Fifty-eight per cent of people read political news 
stories, far more than read sport or “gossip”. With huge electoral turnouts and 
party memberships, Attlee’s Britain was a highly politicised society. 
“Newspaper influence on [reader] opinion,” the study went on, was “a subtle, 
almost imperceptible process”: either “the long-term reinforcement of opinions 
already held”, or to “sow seeds and implant suggestions on points to which 
people have up to now given next to no thought”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Frevenge-of-the-tabloids-brexit-dacre-murdoch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faef06dcd98537d709e418dee36c26edd1aa25b42%2F0_0_3259_4164%2F3259.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Revenge%20of%20the%20tabloids%20%7C%20Andy%20Beckett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Frevenge-of-the-tabloids-brexit-dacre-murdoch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Revenge%20of%20the%20tabloids%20%7C%20Andy%20Beckett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Frevenge-of-the-tabloids-brexit-dacre-murdoch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faef06dcd98537d709e418dee36c26edd1aa25b42%2F0_0_3259_4164%2F3259.jpg>
 The Daily Express has run a steam of anti-migrant front pages. Photograph: 
Express Newspapers/Daily Express 
But Mass Observation warned over‑ideological proprietors: “People tend to 
resist newspaper influences that lead them in a direction they are not disposed 
to follow.” During the 1945 general election, one Express headline read, 
“Gestapo In Britain if Socialists Win”. Attlee won by a landslide.

So used to thinking of tabloids as always omnipotent, modern Britain has 
forgotten that their political influence actually dwindled during the postwar 
decades. Improving literacy and the complexities of the war reduced the impact 
of simplistic newspapers. Mass Observation found the press falling behind 
“books”, “personal experience”, and “friends and family” as political 
influences. The arrival of television during the 50s, which was not allowed to 
be partisan, made the Mail and the Express, founded in 1896 and 1900 
respectively, look still more like bombastic Victorian throwbacks. So did the 
increasingly consensual nature of postwar party politics.

In 1952, the Labour politician and diarist Richard Crossman spent a hospital 
stay reading a British newspaper history: “What struck me,” he wrote 
afterwards, “was the enormous power of the press in politics before 1918 and 
its steady decline since... Today, [when there is] a campaign against a cabinet 
minister, the effect is usually to strengthen his position.”

As the economy recovered from the war, advertising revenue became more 
important to papers, and this brought a pressure to publish fewer political, 
potentially reader-alienating stories. According to the media historians James 
Curran and Jean Seaton, the amount of “public affairs” coverage in the tabloids 
halved between 1945 and 1975. The Mail and Express carried on backing the 
Conservatives, but their readers increasingly ignored the editorials: by 1963, 
28% of Mail readers and 38% of Express readers supported Labour.

In 1964, the struggling Daily Herald, founded half a century earlier as a 
radical paper for striking trade unionists, was relaunched as the Sun. It 
remained Labour-supporting; but as its apolitical-sounding, blandly uplifting 
name might suggest, it was more interested in consumerism, and in what it 
called “pacesetters”: young working-class people, often women, who were joining 
the expanding middle class of southern England.

The idea that newspapers should no longer lecture their readers received 
support from academia.The Sun <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sun> was 
conceived partly on the advice of a sociologist and social forecaster, Dr Mark 
Abrams. He produced reports with graphs and tables which appeared to prove the 
existence of a new, increasingly well-educated, less politically tribal, mass 
newspaper readership. Meanwhile in America, where most academic work on the 
media was done, the analysis of press influence converged on a “minimal effects 
model”. It noted that few voters changed their minds during presidential races, 
when coverage of politics was at its most feverish, and concluded that papers 
were not much of a factor in electoral contests.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Frevenge-of-the-tabloids-brexit-dacre-murdoch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7a12941e044bc5f936f928e83dc0d5d4bab4bc7f%2F0_0_1036_1351%2F1036.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Revenge%20of%20the%20tabloids%20%7C%20Andy%20Beckett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Frevenge-of-the-tabloids-brexit-dacre-murdoch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Revenge%20of%20the%20tabloids%20%7C%20Andy%20Beckett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Frevenge-of-the-tabloids-brexit-dacre-murdoch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7a12941e044bc5f936f928e83dc0d5d4bab4bc7f%2F0_0_1036_1351%2F1036.jpg>
 Rupert Murdoch told the Leveson inquiry that this Sun front page was 
‘tasteless and wrong’. Photograph: GNM/NI 
Like many postwar American ideas, “minimal effects” quickly crossed the 
Atlantic, and helped shape the thinking of the small number of British media 
analysts. In 1974, the respected Colin Seymour-Ure wrote languidly in his book 
The Political Impact of Mass Media: “Most British national newspapers ... are 
‘partisan’ in only a loose sense.” Beaverbrook had died in 1964. The equally 
rightwing co-creators of the Mail, Viscount Northcliffe and Viscount 
Rothermere, had died in 1922 and 1940, respectively.Newspapers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/newspapers> were increasingly controlled by 
corporations seeking profits or prestige rather than political clout. In a 1977 
essay titled “The Organization of Public Opinion”, the media academic Tom Burns 
concluded: “The power of the press barons has gone.”

It had not. In 1969 Murdoch bought his first British paper, the News of the 
World. While mostly interested in sex and scandals, it was traditionally a Tory 
paper. According to Roy Greenslade’s reliable 2003 bookPress Gang: How 
Newspapers Make Profits from Propaganda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/oct/18/society1>, Murdoch was permitted 
to acquire it partly because the other potential buyer was Robert Maxwell, then 
a book publisher and Labour MP.

Murdoch’s own politics, at this stage, were a slightly unformed but usefully 
ambiguous mix, both pro-business and pro-trade union. Despite the elite-bashing 
persona which he would deploy, brilliantly and shamelessly, in the intensely 
class-sensitive world of British newspapers for decades to come, he was in fact 
the son of an Australian press magnate, Sir Keith Murdoch. Sir Keith had been 
so influenced by the Mail’s Northcliffe that he was nicknamed Lord Southcliffe. 
When Murdoch junior was asked if he would tell the News of the World what to 
say, he replied: “I did not come all this way not to interfere.”

When the Sun was also put up for sale in 1969, after its first incarnation 
attracted too few readers, Murdoch and Maxwell again competed to buy it. 
Maxwell wanted to slim the Sun’s staff, while Murdoch assured the paper’s 
powerful unions that he had no such intentions. Again, Murdoch won. His Sun 
tried to be youthfully, fashionably left-liberal: it was against the death 
penalty, nuclear weapons and the Vietnam war; for Labour and personal freedom. 
Its endorsement of the party at the 1970 general election deferred to readers 
rather than tried to browbeat them: “This … far-from-perfect Labour government 
has just about earned the right to … another term of office. That is our view. 
But you have a mind of your own.”

During the late 60s and early 70s, the large advantage that the Conservatives 
had always enjoyed among the tabloids, in terms of both circulation and 
opinions expressed, suddenly evaporated. When the national union of mineworkers 
(NUM) went on strike in 1972 against Edward Heath’s Tory government, the 
Express, despite still being owned by the Beaverbrook family, was sympathetic: 
“These men do a hard, dirty, dangerous job … All they ask is a decent wage. 
They should have it.” The Mail acknowledged “widespread public support” for the 
strike, and commented: “Sympathy for the miners is a good cause. It makes sense 
for Britain.” The editor of the Sun, Larry Lamb, was the son of an NUM official 
and had once edited a union journal. Of the Sun’s pro-strike coverage, Murdoch 
said afterwards, “We certainly pushed public opinion very hard behind the 
miners.”

Just as startling and forgotten, in Britain’s first referendum on EU 
membership, in 1975, the tabloids urged their readers to vote in favour of 
Europe. When the pro-EU side won by 67% to 33%, the Mail rejoiced: “This is the 
most crushing victory in British political history. The effects of this 
thunderous YES will echo down the years.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Frevenge-of-the-tabloids-brexit-dacre-murdoch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54b44b4916709999db45cefad43a9a877459f631%2F0_0_4096_3302%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Revenge%20of%20the%20tabloids%20%7C%20Andy%20Beckett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Frevenge-of-the-tabloids-brexit-dacre-murdoch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Revenge%20of%20the%20tabloids%20%7C%20Andy%20Beckett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Frevenge-of-the-tabloids-brexit-dacre-murdoch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54b44b4916709999db45cefad43a9a877459f631%2F0_0_4096_3302%2F4096.jpg>
 Rupert Murdoch inspects one of the first copies of the Sun in 1969. 
Photograph: PA/PA Archive/Press Association Images 
Yet the tabloids’ flirtation with cosmopolitanism and the left was short. In 
1974, the miners went on strike against Heath again, and the Mail condemned 
them. When he called a general election that February, to try to end the 
dispute, the Sun endorsed the Conservatives. Some of this shift was a reaction 
against the increasing radicalism of parts of the union movement and the Labour 
party. The Mail became preoccupied by the presence of communists in the NUM. 
But the tabloids were also increasingly hit by strikes themselves. The 
stalling, inflationary British economy of the mid-70s had brought lower 
advertising revenues, higher newsprint costs, and higher wage demands. All 
Fleet Street papers had prickly unions, but the Sun’s were the most rebellious 
of all, regularly stopping editions from appearing.

James Alan Anslow joined the Sun in 1977, and worked there on and off for four 
decades, as well as writing and lecturing in academia about tabloids and their 
readers. “Soon after I started at the Sun,” he told me, “I was working on 
production, and I let the word ‘victory’ through on a headline about a strike 
by the firemen’s union. Kelvin MacKenzie [who later became the paper’s most 
aggressively rightwing editor] gave me a bollocking. He said, ‘Don’t you know 
what we’re all about?’”

After Margaret Thatcher seized the Tory leadership from Heath in 1975, Larry 
Lamb quickly became a convert. The Sun editor would invite her to his office 
for evening chats and whisky, and published so many favourable pieces about her 
that the more cautious Murdoch, anxious about the Sun’s large residue of Labour 
readers, would phone Lamb and ask, “Are you still pushing that bloody woman?” 
The Sun had backed the losing side at both the 1970 and February 1974 general 
elections. But by the late 70s many voters were turning against unions and 
collectivism, and the individualistic Sun’s circulation surged, doubling over 
the decade. In 1978, it overtook its once-dominant leftwing rival, the Daily 
Mirror, to become Britain’s best-selling daily paper. In January 1979, amid the 
strike chaos of the Winter of Discontent, the Sun lethally punctured the 
credibility of the Labour prime minister, Jim Callaghan, with a headline that 
sounded like a quote from him but was actually disguised editorialising: 
“Crisis, What Crisis?”

The Mail was an early and effective Thatcher ally too. Its editor during the 
70s and 80s was David English, a zealously rightwing former entrepreneur who 
had backed her coup against Heath (the Mail was the only paper to do so). 
English modernised the Mail’s design, and turned the paper into a less fusty, 
more seductive advocate of Conservative values, presenting them as basic 
British common sense, somehow above mere party politics. The day before the 
1979 general election, the Mail’s front page read, “The Woman Who Can Save 
Britain”. The Sun’s endorsement of the Conservatives was less personal and more 
equivocal, but eye-catching: “VOTE TORY THIS TIME.” The return of the rightwing 
tabloids was complete – and with it came the press culture we still live in now.

As British voters have become more disengaged since the 70s, the tabloids’ 
political messages have had to become louder. “VOTE FOR MAGGIE,” yelled the 
Sun’s front page on the day of the 1983 general election. When Labour moved 
rightwards after losing, choosing the pragmatic Kinnock as leader, the Sun 
immediately dismissed him regardless: “He has no intellectual depth, no 
coherent philosophy.”

Kinnock’s strategist Philip Gould, who would become Labour’s key interpreter 
of voter behaviour during the 90s, began reading the tabloids closely. “I 
looked at those papers and silently wept,” he wrote after the 1992 general 
election campaign. Some tabloid journalists had mixed feelings about their 
papers’ power. James Alan Anslow remembers: “When the Sun did the lightbulb” – 
its famous 1992 front page of Kinnock’s balding head inside a bulb – “I was out 
on the doorstep canvassing for him. Politically, I thought it was awful. 
Journalistically, I felt … professional admiration. I couldn’t help smiling. In 
the office after the paper came out, there was a lot of chatting and smiling. 
There was a sense of being in amongst it – of counting.”

When Labour lost, despite a tired Conservative government, there was a surge 
of academic and media interest in the tabloids’ political role. The “minimal 
effects” model had already begun to attract British doubters. In 1991, the 
media analyst William Miller had written about what he instead called “the 
Basildon effect”. In this heavily working-class Essex constituency, which had 
one of the highest proportions of Sun readers in the country, a small and 
supposedly vulnerable Conservative majority had risen rather than fallen at the 
1987 election. According to Miller, this swing had happened late in the 
campaign – when the Sun’s onslaught on Labour was at its loudest – and it had 
been repeated in other similar Tory marginals. He suggested the paper had 
played a major role.
 The famous 1992 front page of Neil Kinnock’s head inside a bulb. Photograph: 
GMN/NI 
In 1992, John Curtice interviewed a panel of voters from across the country, 
before and after the general election. Unlike Miller, he did not find tabloid 
readers shifting from Labour to the Conservatives. But he wrote that the papers 
did play a part in “winning over or maintaining in the Conservative camp 
electors who might otherwise have abstained or voted Liberal Democrat”. All the 
scare stories about Labour, it appeared, had persuaded these pivotal voters to 
choose the Tories as the lesser evil, as they would in 2015.

More ominously still for non-Tories, in 1992 Ken Newton found that people with 
Labour views who read a rightwing paper – of whom there were still millions – 
were more likely to vote Conservative than people with Tory views who read a 
leftwing one were to vote Labour. Tory papers were better at making converts 
than Labour ones, in other words, just as they would prove better at turning 
leftwing readers into Brexiters than the Labour press would be at creating 
remainers.

By the 90s, many political observers assumed that readers of rightwing 
tabloids were a sort of block vote, to be deployed en masse by proprietors as 
decisively as union members had been by their leaders during the 70s. In 
academia and beyond, the tabloid factor was frequently cited as a reason why 
Labour would never win power again.

There were weaknesses in this argument. The gap between the Conservative share 
of the newspaper market – between 70 and 80% – and the Conservative share of 
the vote at general elections – around 40% – suggested that papers were not 
terribly efficient creators of Tory voters. Even in 1979, when the Sun had said 
“VOTE TORY”, fewer than half of its readers had done so. Another third actually 
believed it had endorsed Labour. As Britain became a less deferential, less 
politicised society, readers could no longer be relied on to absorb or even 
notice bossy political articles in the way that they had in the editorialists’ 
heyday of the 40s.

Yet by the mid-90s, after four consecutive general election defeats, Labour 
was not interested in examining such complexities. Under Blair, the party 
generally sought to accommodate rather than challenge rightwing interests: 
Gould decided that the Mail was “the key influencer of Middle Britain”, Blair 
that Murdoch was “immensely powerful”. More than a year before Blair became 
Labour leader in 1994, a delicate political dance began between him and the 
tabloids – each side seeking to draw maximum advantage from the rising strength 
of the other – which culminated in the Sun endorsing Labour at the 1997 general 
election.

The day before the announcement, Blair’s press secretary Alastair Campbell was 
contacted by the Sun and told to call its editor, Stuart Higgins. “He said they 
were going to come out for us in a big front page tomorrow,” Campbell wrote in 
his diary, capturing the sense of mutual triumph and machismo. “Stuart said 
Rupert Murdoch was sure [about Blair], and laughed … I took [Blair] to one side 
and … I said you remember in 1994 when I said we should try to get the Sun on 
board and you said you weren’t sure it was possible, well, they are. He thought 
it was good news in its own right … [and] in the effect it would have on the 
other side’s morale.” The next day, the Today programme on Radio 4 reported 
that the Conservatives felt bewildered: “Old friends” – its correspondent meant 
the Sun – “are passing them by on the other side of the street.”

Less noticed was the fact that the paper had endorsed Labour on its own, 
almost unchanged, rightwing terms. “Like us, Blair recognises that the Tories 
under Maggie Thatcher achieved remarkable reforms,” said the Sun. “Blair has 
promised to slay the dragon of Europe,” it went on, and might even “tame” the 
welfare state. As well as choosing governments, the tabloids now wanted to 
decide what they did.

In 2004, George Lakoff, a professor of linguistics at Berkeley, published a 
deceptively breezy political book called Don’t Think of an Elephant! Its 
central argument was that how issues are “framed” – which points of view the 
media and other political tastemakers defined as acceptable, and the language 
used to do so – largely decides how voters think about them.

For the last two decades, through Labour, coalition and Conservative 
governments, the tabloids have successfully chosen and then framed most of the 
debates that have dominated British domestic politics, ensuring that law and 
order, immigration, the role of the state, and Britain’s relationship with 
Europe have all been discussed in ever more rightwing terms.

The Blair government’s determination to be “tough on crime”; the Brown 
government’s “British jobs for British workers”; the Cameron government’s 
onslaught on benefits-claiming “shirkers”; the May government’s “Brexit means 
Brexit” – all have been catchphrases, not always with workable policies 
attached, intended to “please the tabloids”, in the euphemistic stock phrase of 
British political punditry.

On occasions, the newspapers have directly intervened in the making of 
government policy. According to Nick Davies’s bookHack Attack: How the Truth 
Caught Up with Rupert Murdoch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/aug/21/hack-attack-truth-rupert-murdoch-nick-davies-review>
, in 2001 the Sun forced Brown as chancellor to permit more private sector 
involvement in the NHS. First, the paper condemned his cherished plan to 
increase NHS spending as too profligate, writes Davies, then a “panicked” Brown 
– desperate not to be portrayed as a traditional tax-and-spend leftwinger – 
“contacted the Sun … agreed to rearrange his diary so that he could go to their 
office that day … [and] sat down with the Sun’s outspoken rightwing political 
editor, Trevor Kavanagh, for an interview which … rapidly became a negotiation 
about policy.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Frevenge-of-the-tabloids-brexit-dacre-murdoch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0ff0099559541821fd4340b2de64fb6748741e78%2F47_36_1149_1569%2F1149.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Revenge%20of%20the%20tabloids%20%7C%20Andy%20Beckett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Frevenge-of-the-tabloids-brexit-dacre-murdoch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Revenge%20of%20the%20tabloids%20%7C%20Andy%20Beckett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Frevenge-of-the-tabloids-brexit-dacre-murdoch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0ff0099559541821fd4340b2de64fb6748741e78%2F47_36_1149_1569%2F1149.jpg>
 The Daily Mail backs Theresa May for prime minister. Photograph: Daily Mail 
In the meantime, policy ideas that have been popular with the public but not 
with these papers, and their proprietors – raising taxes on the wealthy or on 
property; renationalising loathed and ineffective privatised utilities – have 
almost never been enacted.

During the Blair era, tabloid circulations, like those of all newspapers, 
stagnated and then fell. British party politics, fixated on the “centre 
ground”, was often as consensual as it had been during the 50s, when the 
tabloids had felt obliged to tone down their rhetoric. Yet this time they did 
the opposite, emboldened by the Blair government’s acceptance of their agenda 
and eagerness to have friendly relations. The tabloids became more influential 
still.

Meanwhile, as the media in general adjusted to a new world of internet 
competitors, squeezed budgets, and recycled content, the papers became a 
dependable source of polemic for other outlets. “Sky and the BBC are still 
obsessed by reviewing the papers,” says Charlie Beckett, a former TV executive 
who is professor of media at the London School of Economics. Presenters holding 
up tomorrow morning’s front pages to the camera, he points out, “is cheap 
telly”.

The need for broadcasters to be balanced, once seen as a threat, has created a 
market for tabloid shrillness

Yelland says: “The first thing you do when you’ve put together a front page, 
is get it over to Sky, to the paper review shows.” Tom Baldwin, Ed Miliband’s 
press strategist as Labour leader, told me: “They could say ‘Black Is White: 
Exclusive’ on the front of the Mail, and the next day, there’d be a story on 
the BBC: ‘Controversy over whether black is white …’” The legal requirement for 
British broadcasters to be balanced, once considered a threat to the tabloids, 
has created a new market for their shrillness.

It is even possible that the papers’ political stances are even more 
influential now than in the past, precisely because they are less and less 
read. Their positions are simply assumed – rather than widely scrutinised for 
flaws or contradictions – and politicians and public opinion adjust 
accordingly. Gramsci, who died in 1937, would be appalled and fascinated.

As the editor of the Sun, says Yelland, “I was very much aware that most 
people were not reading the political stuff. But the Sun set the mood music of 
Westminster, of the lobby [journalists], of the morning meetings in every 
department in Downing Street.” Like any good tabloid journalist, he may be 
overstating a little, but to manipulate the elite while insisting your 
journalism is for the masses is certainly quite a trick.

While Labour leader, Miliband tried to break out of his party’s suffocating 
tabloid relationship. Baldwin, who supported the move, remembers: “At first, we 
felt we had better keep talking to them, have dinners with the editor of the 
Sun. Ed would have drinks with Dacre. Then phone-hacking happened …” Miliband 
reacted to the scandal by attacking the tabloids’ political influence, and 
calling for them to be properly regulated. “There weren’t ever drinks with 
Dacre after that,” says Baldwin. “Dacre was screaming down the phone at Ed. It 
felt liberating, exciting, scary. Gordon Brown said to us, ‘This is a big thing 
you’ve done. You’ve got to keep your foot on their neck, or they’ll come back 
up and smack you.’”

Yet as often with Miliband, his anti-tabloid initiative petered out. “Ed’s 
management style is to balance,” says a former adviser, “and there were some 
good personal relationships in the Labour team with some tabloid reporters.” 
Baldwin says: “We lost the [internal] argument. We got back to business as 
usual.” At the 2015 election, the tabloids tore into Miliband and Labour 
regardless.

During the Cameron governments, it felt like Murdoch and Dacre were the 
adults, and the politicians were children
David Yelland 
David Cameron underwent a similar experience with the papers. At first, as 
Tory leader – influenced by his adviser Steve Hilton, who believed that in the 
digital era the views of newspapers were of increasingly minor relevance – 
Cameron decided that rather than “sucking up to Murdoch”, as one of his aides 
put it, it was better to “keep your distance” from the tabloids, and to focus 
instead on television appearances. Yet when the effectiveness of Cameron’s 
leadership was widely criticised in 2007 – not least by Murdoch’s papers – he 
quickly changed his approach. He hired the former News of the World editor Andy 
Coulson as his director of communications, and maintained a high-profile, 
highly political friendship with the editor of the Sun and Murdoch favourite, 
Rebekah Brooks. In 2009, the Sun switched its support from Labour back to the 
Conservatives.

Despite Coulson’s resignation over phone-hacking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/jan/21/andy-coulson-resigns-david-cameron>
 in 2011, and conviction for the same offence in 2014, Cameron’s governments 
remained tabloid-friendly throughout, straining to come up with populist 
policies and language.But while the Mail backed the Conservatives as always, 
Dacre and his paper remained lukewarm towards the metropolitan Cameron. And 
when Cameron finally challenged the tabloids’ worldview, the EU referendum, 
they were brutal towards him, and helped terminate his premiership.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Frevenge-of-the-tabloids-brexit-dacre-murdoch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23ee1058c1c337f8d863433588946bd42451e386%2F24_23_761_981%2F761.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Revenge%20of%20the%20tabloids%20%7C%20Andy%20Beckett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Frevenge-of-the-tabloids-brexit-dacre-murdoch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Revenge%20of%20the%20tabloids%20%7C%20Andy%20Beckett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Frevenge-of-the-tabloids-brexit-dacre-murdoch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23ee1058c1c337f8d863433588946bd42451e386%2F24_23_761_981%2F761.jpg>
 When Cameron challenged the Sun’s views on Europe he was brutally attacked. 
Photograph: The Sun 
Baldwin says, “I’ve been amused to hear Craig Oliver”, Coulson’s successor as 
Cameron’s communications director, “raging to left-of-centre journos about the 
rightwing press and how awful they are.” Yelland argues that the tabloid barons 
are simply “better at what they do than the politicians. Murdoch and Dacre have 
been around for so long, fashioning words and campaigns. During the Cameron 
governments, it felt like they were the adults, and the politicians were 
children.”

Will the reign of the tabloids ever end? It was interrupted when the second 
world war created a kinder Britain, and again, fleetingly, after the 
phone-hacking scandal in 2011. Profound social change, or the exposure of 
journalists’ excesses, can weaken even apparently impregnable tabloid citadels.

Over recent decades, shifting public attitudes have undermined some of the 
papers’ certainties. “When I look back at the words I used to use as a Sun 
sub,” James Alan Anslow remembered, “‘the gay plague’, ‘black gangs’. You’d get 
sacked if you used those now!”

Charlie Beckett detects a hard-nosed rationale behind this softening: “In a 
tightening market, you don’t want to put off readers. When you had a 
circulation of four million, it mattered less if you said something racist, 
say, and put off 5% of your readers.” Moreover, the tabloids have sometimes 
received disproportionate credit for their liberal moments. The Mail’s 
much-praised campaigning for the truth about the racist murder in 1993 of the 
black teenager Stephen Lawrence sits uneasily with the endless xenophobic 
nudges of its immigration coverage.

The tabloids still look much the same now as they did three decades ago. 
Redesigns have been much rarer and more cautious than at other papers. So have 
alterations to the basic tabloid prose style. “You know what you’re going to 
get from the first sentence,” says Beckett. “They haven’t caught the 
conversational tone of the internet … their style is very clunky.” David Deacon 
of Loughborough University says that in his research on election bias he finds 
that “People are far more aware [now] of the narrative games, of 
tabloid-speak.” The tabloids have always been self-conscious – “It’s The Sun 
Wot Won It” – but nowadays their political rages would be almost camp, if they 
did not have such consequences. As Baldwin puts it, the papers often read “like 
a parody of themselves”.

Anslow, who is 65, said he sometimes sensed a nostalgia in the air at the 
Sun’s offices. “If we do a special front page, people say, ‘It’s a real 
classic. It’s just like the old days.’”

Two years ago, the paper moved from its old premises in east London, an 
intimidating compound of hulking, almost windowless blocks behind high-security 
fences, widely known as “Fortress Wapping”, to a much blander, more generic 
office building in central London. Its glass-walled, approachable-feeling lobby 
faces directly on to the street. Down one side are blown-up photographs from 
various Murdoch publications. The Sun’s is just a generic showbiz shot, as if 
the paper’s political coverage is less of a priority nowadays. On the Sun and 
Mail websites, political stories are much less prominent than in their print 
editions.

Meanwhile, the Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn is 14 months into an experiment in 
ignoring the tabloids. It may well be doomed; but his leadership has already 
lasted longer than the tabloids expected, and their ceaseless attacks on him, 
like their shouting down of anyone who doubts Brexit will be a success, have a 
small undertone of anxiety about them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Frevenge-of-the-tabloids-brexit-dacre-murdoch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00019ddb76e32e5f9e22e148aa42199f851bfbb3%2F0_0_3153_4055%2F3153.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Revenge%20of%20the%20tabloids%20%7C%20Andy%20Beckett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Frevenge-of-the-tabloids-brexit-dacre-murdoch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Revenge%20of%20the%20tabloids%20%7C%20Andy%20Beckett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Frevenge-of-the-tabloids-brexit-dacre-murdoch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00019ddb76e32e5f9e22e148aa42199f851bfbb3%2F0_0_3153_4055%2F3153.jpg>
 Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn may be ignoring the tabloids but they are not 
reciprocating. Photograph: Guardian 
Twenty-four years ago, the British political scientist Ken Newton pondered the 
multilayered puzzle of how newspapers and their readers relate politically, and 
produced perhaps the closest thing to an answer. “The press and its readers are 
likely to be mutually dependent,” he wrote, “influencing each other in a 
constantly shifting process of mutual adaptation.” The tabloids may have 
adapted – a little – to their readers’ changing attitudes, but the papers 
retain an old-fashioned suspicion of new kinds of Briton, and a nastiness 
towards people who do not fit their rigid worldviews. Above all, the tabloids 
remain stubbornly attached to the optimistic free-market ideas of the one prime 
minister that they have never turned against, Margaret Thatcher – an optimism 
that many of their readers have not felt since at least the 2008 financial 
crisis.

This autumn, both the Sun and the Mail have responded to what the Mail’s owner 
called a “challenging market” for newspapers by making editorial redundancies. 
A Sun journalist emailed me: “Just had massive compulsory redundos in 
editorial. Hardly enough bodies left to get out the paper. Mood is of the 
post-apocalyptic variety – survivors staggering around dazed and confused.”

Anslow, who started on the Sun 39 years ago, was one of those culled. Well 
before it happened, he told me he could imagine a Britain without tabloids 
“within my lifetime”. He went on: “If you take that kind of political 
communication away, we [Britons] will all go into our own ideological silos, 
because of the way social media works.”

More surprisingly, Tom Baldwin also fears that if the tabloids die, then what 
comes next could be worse. “Their political stories contain at least kernels of 
truth,” he says. “Without the tabloids, we’ll be in a totally post-truth 
world.” But in a world without tabloid truths, perhaps other kinds of politics 
will have a chance.

• Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread 
<https://twitter.com/gdnlongread?ref_src=twsrc^google|twcamp^serp|twgr^author>, 
or sign up to the long read weekly email here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/jul/20/sign-up-to-the-long-read-email>.

• Producing in-depth, thoughtful, well-reported journalism is difficult and 
expensive – but supporting us isn’t. If you value the Guardian’s independent 
journalism, please help to fund it bybecoming a Supporter 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/uk/supporter?INTCMP=gdnwb_copts_editorial_mem_becketttabloid_footer>
.
 