
Ian Ritchie has announced a blueprint to promote the development and growth of 
women’s rugby in England <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/womens-rugby-union> 
through all levels of the game from grassroots to elite. Speaking at its 
Twickenham launch, the Rugby Football Union’s chief executive also declared his 
organisation will be “straining every sinew” in its efforts to ensureEngland 
retain the World Cup they won in France two years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/aug/17/england-win-womens-world-cup-canada-match-report>
 when the competition is staged in Ireland next August.

As part of its innovation, England Rugby has announced 48 professional 
contracts for players in both 15-a-side and sevens on a full- and part-time 
basis. The first sponsored series of autumn internationals will take place next 
month when, under their new branding of the “Red Roses”,England Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/england-womens-rugby-union-team> play 
France, Ireland, New Zealand and Canada in matches sponsored by Old Mutual 
Wealth.

Presented to each player on their international debut, the rose is the emblem 
of England rugby and according to the RFU epitomises the unique qualities of 
England Women as strong, relentless and glorious. “I think it’s a very 
important priority for sport and for women as a whole in this country,” said 
Ritchie of the RFU’s plan. “Rest assured that we as an organisation, from top 
to bottom, are very much behind this and want to see the continued expansion 
and growth and success on the pitch of women’s rugby.”

WRU increases investment in grassroots and regions after record turnover
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/05/welsh-rugby-union-investment-record-turnover>
Having hit their target of increasing the number of women playing contact 
rugby in England from 15,000 to 25,000 a year ahead of schedule this summer, 
the RFU plans to double the number of participants by 2021. Other goals include 
increasing the number of women’s teams by more than 75% to 800, the number of 
active women’s clubs to more than 400 and getting more women involved in the 
sport as referees, coaches and volunteers.

“The health of our clubs is dependent on this,” said the RFU director of rugby 
development, Steve Grainger. “We believe it is a fantastic, very inclusive 
sport that women and girls are telling us, in their thousands, that they want 
to experience and take part in.”

Throughout a presentation also attended by England players past and present, 
includingMaggie Alphonsi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/nov/08/maggie-alphonsi-women-rugby-small-talk>
, Sarah Hunter, Natasha Hunt and Emily Scarratt, repeated mentions were made of 
the coverage afforded to women’s rugby during the sevens competition at the Rio 
Olympics. Despite controversiallyremoving 20 of the best players from England’s 
15-a-side programme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/15/england-sarah-hunter-rio-2016-elite-player-squad-sevens-ireland>
 and putting them on professional sevens contracts in the two-year buildup to 
the Games,Great Britain failed to win a medal after losing out to Canada in the 
bronze-medal match 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/08/australia-rugby-sevens-olympic-gold-great-britain-bronze>
. In the absence of their best players, the squad they had left behind came up 
predictably short in the Six Nations.

“The priority now is the Women’s World Cup next year,” said Ritchie, when 
questioned about the plan to focus on Olympic gold at the expense of the 
15-a-side game that backfired in spectacular fashion. “That has to be the focus 
and those players who played out in Rio are now coming back into the 15s squad. 
What we’ve got to do now is make sure there are more players coming through at 
the bottom level of the pyramid. The more people we get to play, the more 
opportunity we get for a better elite performance across the board.”

Despite the ubiquity of the victorious Team GB hockey team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/19/gb-women-hockey-historic-gold-shootout-final-olympics>
 on their return from Rio, Grainger seemed unperturbed England Rugby may have 
missed a trick in the battle for young female hearts and minds. “I think from 
our perspective, the fact is we got great exposure because of the time of day 
it was on and the stage of the Olympics it was on at,” he said. “People are 
still talking to me about it, so let’s face it: the importance is growing that 
opportunity now.”
 