
Dylan Hartley’s conduct as England captain must count in his favour when 
considering his future in the post, according to theRugby Football Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rugby-football-union>.

Hartley faces an independent disciplinary hearing on Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/12/dylan-hartley-england-northampton-leinster-sean-obrien>
 to answer for the third red card of his career after being sent off for 
tackling Sean O’Brien from behind with astiff arm in Northampton’s defeat by 
Leinster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/09/northampton-leinster-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
.

Pro12 sides lead charge against English and French heavyweights in Europe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/13/glasgow-leinster-munster-ulster-european-rugby-champions-cup>
Champions Cup officials confirmed on Tuesday that the 30-year-old hooker has 
been charged with striking, entailing a five-week suspension for a mid-range 
offence and eight weeks if the infringement is considered high-end.

Hartley has an appalling disciplinary record taking in 54 weeks of bans for 
offences including biting, gouging and butting, a track record that is sure to 
result in an increase to the sanction imposed.

The RFU chief executive Ian Ritchie, however, has been impressed by way he has 
led England during the 13 successive Test victories completed this year and 
insists the decision of who leads the team ultimately rests with head coach 
Eddie Jones.

“Dylan has clearly played a fantastic part in captaining the team, on and off 
the pitch just to be clear,” Ritchie said. “His leadership credentials are very 
strong. He’s made a huge contribution, as Eddie would say.

“So you view all these things in perspective and in perspective one looks at 
the totality of what he’s done and what’s happened over the years and I think 
we should be supportive of that. Ultimately we’ll see what happens – I’m not 
going to talk about the disciplinary process as you know. That will take its 
course and we’ll see what happens out of that.

“If he’s eligible for selection it’s ultimately a matter for Eddie, but we 
should recognise and support all that Dylan has done in the last 12 months. It 
is primarily a matter for Eddie and if you look back over it, Eddie’s judgement 
has been really good. We should recognise that and I’m sure we will.”
 