
Sometimes in life there is a choice to be made. Do the right thing or take the 
politically expedient route. For rugby union, as a professional sport,to take 
11 days to recognise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/23/joe-marler-england-world-rugby> 
that crass verbal abuse of an opponent on live television during a high-profile 
Six Nations fixture is unacceptable does no one any credit. One or two people 
may yet come to rue this sizeable miscalculation.

The issue, ultimately, is not so much what Joe Marler said to Wales’s Samson 
Lee as the deeply unsatisfactory chain of events that followed. Marler did 
apologise for his “Gypsy boy” insult in the tunnel at half-time but 
subsequently it has been a textbook case of how not to run a railroad. The 
Rugby Football Union twice tried to declare the matter closed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/22/joe-marler-gypsy-boy-england-wales-rfu-ian-ritchie-six-nations>
, when it self-evidently was not. The Six Nations, for their part, opted to 
clear Marler via a disciplinary process less opaque than seemingly invisible.

England’s Joe Marler in dock again for calling Samson Lee ‘Gypsy boy’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/23/joe-marler-england-world-rugby> 
Given verbal abuse of a player “based on religion, race, colour, national or 
ethnic origin” carries a minimum four-week recommended sanction, someone 
somewhere has badly misjudged the situation. World Rugby, the game’s governing 
body, had been waiting for either the RFU or theSix Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sixnations> to acknowledge as much but has 
now run out of patience. It is not necessary to be a member of the Traveller 
community, or even to class the phrase “Gypsy boy” as offensive or racist, to 
wonder aloud what planet rugby thinks it is living on.

Top-level sport does not exist in a vacuum, far less a public relations 
bubble. Once upon a time it might have been customary for some to categorise 
rugby as “our game” and insist different standards applied. Not any more, 
unless its rulers are actively trying to portray themselves as dinosaur figures 
acting purely out of self-interest. The RFU should not have left it to Eddie 
Jones to administer a few reproving words; it should have waved its legal 
adviser politely away, voluntarily handed Marler either a one-match ban or a 
suspended sentence and ordered him to donate 50% of his match fee to Sport 
Relief.

Instead they opted to duck and weave and divert the spotlight elsewhere. After 
Marlerhad dodged punishment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/16/england-joe-marler-escapes-punishment-wales>
 for applying a forearm to the head of the prone Rob Evans during the England v 
Wales game – it was not felt to be a red card offence so he escaped on a 
technicality – surely the Six Nations’ disciplinary machinery would at least 
ensure the player copped a modest sanction for abusing Lee? When the news broke 
he had been found innocent on both counts, there were jaws on floors from 
Brecon to Bognor Regis. The defence that Marler acted in the heat of the moment 
was only marginally more absurd than the fact it took four deafeningly silent 
days to think up such a desperate excuse.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Frfu-joe-marler-sizeable-miscalculation-sport-denial%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6a62dbeea9afb19e241e32b298943441600f41c%2F0_332_4514_2707%2F4514.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=RFU%E2%80%99s%20sizeable%20miscalculation%20over%20Joe%20Marler%20indicates%20a%20sport%20in%20denial%20%7C%20Robert%20Kitson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Frfu-joe-marler-sizeable-miscalculation-sport-denial%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=RFU%E2%80%99s%20sizeable%20miscalculation%20over%20Joe%20Marler%20indicates%20a%20sport%20in%20denial%20%7C%20Robert%20Kitson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Frfu-joe-marler-sizeable-miscalculation-sport-denial%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6a62dbeea9afb19e241e32b298943441600f41c%2F0_332_4514_2707%2F4514.jpg>
 RFU chief executive Ian Ritchie insisted there was no case to answer because 
nobody on the field had complained to the authorities. Photograph: David 
Rogers/Getty Images 
Still there was time for the RFU to back up the truck. Instead, the union’s 
chief executive, Ian Ritchie, insisted there was no case to answer because 
nobody on the field had complained. This from a union frequently heard 
preaching the values of respect and tolerance. Nobody minded so it never 
happened? Little wonder World Rugby felt it had no option but to take some kind 
of stand, announcing this week it felt the comments amounted to misconduct and 
referring the case to an independent judicial committee.

The odds must now be that Marler will be belatedly punished, regardless of the 
glowing character reference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/23/harlequins-joe-marler-racist-conor-oshea>
 supplied by his Harlequins’ director of rugby, Conor O’Shea. “He is not in any 
way shape or form racist,” insisted O’Shea. “He is an edgy person, he made a 
mistake and he apologised. I am not going to talk about political correctness, 
I am not going to talk about banter. He knows he shouldn’t have said it. He 
apologised at half-time, he knew it was wrong. I had a good sit-down with him 
this week … you couldn’t get anything further from a bloke that is racist 
going.”

Fair enough but this story spiralled way beyond one man’s ill-considered words 
a long time ago. The Six Nations, in particular, is facing some increasingly 
searching questions about its disciplinary processes which is bound to prolong 
the debate further. The RFU, if Marler does receive a ban, will at the very 
least be open to accusations of poor judgment and short-sightedness.Rugby union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rugby-union>, at just the moment it is 
trying to pose as a forward-looking sport about to burst back on to the Olympic 
stage, has already been made to appear silly. All sorts of trouble could have 
been averted had the right things been said and done at the outset.
 