
The echoes of happy new year were still swirling around Welford Road when 
Richard Cockerill, Leicester’s director of rugby, was told that his 23-year 
association with the club had come to an end after an indifferent first half to 
the season left the Tigersin danger of missing out on the Premiership play-offs 
for the first time. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/24/exeter-chiefs-leicester-tigers-premiership-rugby-match-report>

Cockerill, ever loyal to the club he joined as a hooker in 1992 and remained 
at since, apart from a two-year stint at Montferrand to end his playing career, 
said he respected the decision of the board while believing he was still the 
best person to be in charge. He was made director of rugby in 2010 after two 
seasons as head coach, but in the past three years the most successful English 
club in the professional era have lost ground to Saracens, Bath and Wasps, 
clubs built on debt rather than, like the Tigers, spending what they earn.

Manu Tuilagi suffers new knee injury as Saracens edge past Leicester
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/01/leicester-saracens-premiership-match-report>
“It is with great sadness and regret that I leave my position as director of 
rugby with immediate effect,” said Cockerill, the third-longest serving in the
Premiership <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership> following 
Northampton’s Jim Mallinder and Exeter’s Rob Baxter.

“I still believe that I am the right person to lead the team at this present 
time but respect the board’s decision to make change as they see fit in the 
best interests of the club. I arrived back at the club in 2004 as an academy 
coach and leave as director of rugby with a record that speaks for itself and 
stands up against any in club rugby in the world.”

Cockerill was fired because success was in the past and becoming more distant. 
After reaching the Premiership play-off final for nine consecutive years from 
2005,last winning it in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/may/25/leicester-northampton-premiership-final-dylan-hartley>
, they have missed out in the past three years.Sunday’s defeat to Saracens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/01/leicester-saracens-premiership-match-report>
 left them with four victories in their last 17 Premiership matches against the 
champions, they have won at Wasps once since 2007 and they have lost their last 
six matches at Bath, conceding 130 points in their last three visits.

Away form in recent years has been a concern. They have been overwhelmed at 
Glasgow and Munster in the Champions Cup this season and the last time they won 
away in the league against a club that finished in the top four that season was 
at Northampton in March 2014. Their home form was considerably better, but the 
loss to a Saracens team missing three England forwards prompted theLeicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> board to wish Cockerill 
good luck.

Aaron Mauger, the Tigers’ head coach, will take charge on an interim basis 
while the board looks at the coaching structure and whether to redefine the 
role of director of rugby with a greater emphasis on recruitment, one area 
where Leicester have suffered compared to their rivals in recent seasons: the 
ability of clubs to sign two marquee players outside the salary cap has left 
the best supported side in the Premiership and the most financially secure 
struggling to compete.

The mix of Mauger and Cockerill was always going to be intriguing. The former, 
who played as a centre for New Zealand and finished his career at Leicester, is 
an exponent of attacking rugby while the latter is steeped in Leicester’s 
traditional attritional approach.

Indomitable Exeter heap pain and misery on Leicester’s Richard Cockerill
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/24/exeter-chiefs-leicester-tigers-premiership-rugby-match-report>
There were signs of disharmony at the beginning of October when the defence 
coach Scott Hansen, a Kiwi who had arrived with Mauger from the Crusaders in 
the summer of 2015, was sacked following the concession of three-try bonus 
points in their first five matches.Leicester have tactically lacked clarity 
this season, especially away from home, which a long injury list only partly 
explains. When the Leicester chairman, Peter Tom, responded to criticism of the 
Tigers in his programme notes on Sunday, he divorced the playing side from the 
administration.

“The performance in Ireland was not what we wanted or expected,” he wrote, 
“but criticism of the club was well off the mark. We remain in a strong 
financial positions and continue to invest large sums in support of the 
players, backroom staff, facilities and our academy. This remains a club with 
high standards and expectations.”

Which is why a league position of fifth with 10 matches to go and trips to 
Wasps, on Sunday, Bath and Northampton to come, prompted a sacking every bit as 
painful as that of another club stalwart back in 2004 who also had 23 years of 
service, Dean Richards. “We are a big club that deserves to be treated with 
respect,” Cockerill said last month when asked if he feared for his position. 
“There may be ups and downs on the way, but we will be around in 100 years, 
doing what we do. Whether I am here or not is irrelevant.”
 