
A bizarre suburban byelection has been rescued from meaninglessness by 20,510 
Richmond Park electors who haveput Liberal Democrat Sarah Olney into the House 
of Commons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/dec/01/richmond-park-byelection-results-counting-starts-live>
 and given erstwhile Tory pin-up boy Zac Goldsmith an almighty boot in the 
Brexits. The billionaire’s son who was once the environmentalist facelift of 
David Cameron’s rebranded Conservatives and who began the year with hopes of 
becoming London mayor will end it twitted, tarnished and politically unemployed.

Everything about the contest was unreal. Goldsmith resigned as the affluent, 
Thames-side seat’s Conservative MP in protest at the Conservative government’s 
decision to expand capacity atHeathrow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/heathrow> airport despite regretting having 
promised to do so when initially winning the seat in 2010. The party he has 
formally left in order to see that pledge through as an independent indulged 
him in his act of reluctant principle by not standing a pro-expansion candidate 
against him.

They weren’t alone. Olney and Labour’s candidate Christian Wolmar didn’t want 
a bigger Heathrow either. The Greens opted out to assist the Lib Dem. The way 
was left fatally clear for a contest Goldsmith had intend to be a referendum 
about aircraft noise in south-westLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>
 to instead became one about the even bigger and more polluting din that is the 
aftermath of the EU ballot held in June. Goldsmith, like his father before him, 
is a dedicated Leaver in one of the most Remain-leaning quarters of Remain 
City. Ukip stepped aside to help him win. He was in trouble from the very 
beginning.

Goldsmith’s EU view wasn’t the only reason the anti-airport man was cruising 
for a bruising. He’d fought his wretched mayoral campaign claiming that the 
greatly increased majority he’d secured in 2015 showed that his constituents 
valued his independent spirit and personal style. Yet the air war part of that 
mayoral campaign was the nastiest example of negative tactics the capital has 
seen since thenotorious 1983 Bermondsey byelection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davehillblog/2013/feb/24/peter-tatchell-bermondsey-by-election-30th-anniversary>
 - won by theLiberal Democrats 
<http://www.pinknews.co.uk/2006/01/24/simon-hughes-apologises-for-homophobic-smears-in-1983/>
, by the way - and the most sly and pernicious example of dog-whistle politics 
the capital has yet endured.

The Tory muck machine fed its media conduits - primarily the Evening Standard 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/mayor/defence-secretary-blasts-sadiq-khan-as-labour-lackey-who-shares-platforms-with-extremists-a3192571.html>
 and theSunday Times 
<http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/news/Politics/article1665639.ece> - 
guilt-by-association non-stories designed to stir Londoners’ anxieties about 
Islamist terror to the disadvantage of Labour’s candidate, the Muslim Sadiq 
Khan. Called out, Goldsmith became indignant. His defence was that he’d never 
claimed Khan himself held extreme views but that his past support for causes 
also backed by alleged fanatics brought his judgment into question.

But it was Goldsmith to whom London voters assigned guilt by association. 
Rather than Khan being “linked” with extremists in the majority’s minds, 
Goldsmith became linked with dirty politics. This was the direct antithesis of 
all he claimed he stood for, and it did not go unnoticed in Richmond Park. The 
issue came up on the doorstep. Challenged about it, Goldsmith stuck to his 
stubborn denials. A politician long hailed for his grace and purity has become 
indelibly soiled.

For Olney and her party, victory will feel like the next step on a national 
comeback trail in a region of the capital that used to be an orange stronghold. 
For London, it is a local reassertion of its people’s disquiet over the 
turbulence triggered by the Brexit vote and the destructive mentalities it has 
unleashed. A freak of a byelection thatrisked being pointless 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/nov/25/richmond-park-byelection-what-exactly-is-it-for>
 has ended up as a restatement of some of the capital’s most distinctive 
values. It won’t be the last time the city makes its feelings known.

Dave Hill is the author of Zac versus Sadiq: the Fight to Become London Mayor, 
which can be bought from theGuardian Bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/zac-versus-sadiq.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or directlyfrom the author 
<http://davehill.typepad.com/double_q_books/2016/08/one.html>.
 