
About the crassest tag anyone has tried to hang on Rickie Lee Jones  
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2007/feb/24/weekend7.weekend>is that 
she’s “the female Tom Waits”. It is also the kind of tag that will probably 
cause the recipient a good deal of discomfort over the next year or so.


 Unfortunately, it’s also kind of apt. The similarities between Ms Jones and 
the aforementioned Waits are more than a little marked. Both have a basis in 
1940s jazz nostalgia, both seem to be trying to turn themselves into characters 
from some Beat Generation/Damon Runyon 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2009/03/02/talk-it-up> world where Nick the 
Greek slips through the shadows and Jack Kerouac could show up any moment in a 
beat-up Hudson.

 The resemblance doesn’t even stop there. Onstage, in a beat-up cocktail 
dress, pink beret pulled down over one eye and a Sherman cigarillo hanging out 
of the corner of her mouth, Rickie Lee slugs back drinks with the confidence of 
someone who believes she has a cast-iron liver. Just to complete the Waits 
connection, she even hung round with the same LA bohemian street crowd in the 
bars of Hollywood and Venice.

 Like a lot of people who seem determined to turn themselves into an instant 
legend, Ms Jones is unwilling to talk much about her background. “It’s a long 
story; a year and a half long.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F24%2Frickie-lee-jones-rocks-backpages-new-album-other-side-of-desire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F24%2F1435158607741%2Ff92f9aab-2c54-479b-a39e-b34b5d0a4594-1834x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rickie%20Lee%20Jones%3A%20from%20teen%20runaway%20to%20the%20'female%20Tom%20Waits'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F24%2Frickie-lee-jones-rocks-backpages-new-album-other-side-of-desire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rickie%20Lee%20Jones%3A%20from%20teen%20runaway%20to%20the%20%27female%20Tom%20Waits%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F24%2Frickie-lee-jones-rocks-backpages-new-album-other-side-of-desire%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F24%2F1435158607741%2Ff92f9aab-2c54-479b-a39e-b34b5d0a4594-1834x2040.jpeg>
 The singer in 1980. Photograph: David Redfern 
 What she does give away is straight romantic American fantasy. Her father was 
the son of a vaudeville family who spent too much of his childhood dumped in 
orphanages while Mom and Pop worked the circuit. In his turn, he wound up as a 
less-than-successful musician and songwriter. When times were hard, he worked 
as a waiter. And, by all accounts, times were often hard.

 ‘‘We’d move most every year. I was back and forth, mostly between Chicago and 
Phoenix. I went to as many schools as the years I was in school.’’

 Although reticent about the past, she seems to relish telling how she and a 
teenage boyfriend stole a car so they could run away together, and how she was 
one of twelve students booted out of high school in Olympia, Washington, for 
refusing to conform.

A lot of this carries echoes of early Patti Smith legend-laying. But, unlike 
La Smith’s studied posturing, there is an essential robustness aboutRickie Lee 
Jones <https://www.theguardian.com/music/rickie-lee-jones> that makes it much 
more credible. Without any insult, the term ‘broad’ could have been coined for 
her. Contrary to the publicity machine, Ms Jones is no Joni Mitchell sorrowful 
waif. Big-boned, wide-hipped and with a face out of the classic Bardot/Faye 
Dunaway mould, she has moves that, if her voice gave out tomorrow, would 
guarantee a headline spot in any strip joint.

 When singing, she is so aggressively animated that the audience is drawn in 
and all disbelief is suspended. This is crucial for any performer attempting to 
move the audience not only at gut level but also to take them out of present 
reality and transform the place that she’s playing into a mythical sleazy jazz 
joint some 30 years in the past.

 Although not so far down the road as her friend and hero, she seems 
determined to do what Waits has done: become virtually indistinguishable from 
one of his own characters. It could soon be hard to tell the realRickie Lee 
Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/mar/12/rickie-lee-jones-last-chance-texaco>
 from the hipster/hooker/hustler/bar-room broads who show up in the rest of her 
songs. This may be something of a problem.

Tom Waits <https://www.theguardian.com/music/tom-waits> has never had to go 
through the whole media star-making process. For the most part, he was left 
alone by the record company to develop in his own time, and to slowly build his 
now considerable cult following.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5BnMU7J7dAw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5BnMU7J7dAw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5BnMU7J7dAw&media=>
 Rickie Lee Jones, on the other hand, is slap in the middle of the hype 
spotlight. With an album only just in the stores, her management are already 
vetoing interviews and instructing muscle to stop photographers at her shows. 
She has been jerked out of small LA clubs like the A La Carte and the Comeback 
Inn and set adrift in the rock’n’roll big league to record with the likes of 
Willie Weeks, Mac Rebennack, Randy Newman, Tom Scott and Buzz Feiten.

 Right now, she seems to be relishing the experience.

 “Most girls, most artists for that matter, aren’t real secure. They walk into 
a situation and they don’t direct; the producers direct. So you don’t have any 
collaboration, any involvement. It’s very unusual for someone to get this much 
support. Now I know that I won’t have to fight to make these songs heard, I 
feel a lot more confident about writing and performing my music.”

 Sadly, however, sometimes the fight to be heard is what shapes and matures 
talent. The big hype may get instant results, but all too often it can destroy 
an artist. Bruce Springsteen was one of the exceptions who managed to find his 
way back.

 Rickie Lee Jones, undisputedly, has talent. Whether she has the strength to 
ride the machine rather than allow the machine to ride her remains to be seen.

 © Mick Farren, 1979
 