
Travelling Beijing’s subway end to end, from the south-western dormitory 
suburb of Suzhuang to north-east Fengbo, where cranes loom over 
half-constructed blocks, takes five changes and almost three hours – but very 
little cash. The longest direct journey one can take on the subway here must 
also be one of the world’s best public transport bargains: 88km – a highly 
auspicious number inChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> – for just 
2 yuan (roughly 20 pence).


In the weekday morning rush, accountants, shop assistants and researchers 
stare wearily at phones and jostle for space. There are fidgeting children with 
weary parents, labourers on their first ever subway ride, and several large 
eels, curled into an empty oil bottle en route to their carrier’s dinner table. 
It is late summer and the carriages are crammed, but air conditioning keeps it 
cool, blowing wafts of recently applied deodorant across the crowd.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fsep%2F10%2Fbeijing-subway-timelapse-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F8%2F26%2F1409066612629%2FBeijing-subway-timelapse-017.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20claustrophobic%202%20minutes%20on%20Beijing's%20metro%20%E2%80%93%20timelapse%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fsep%2F10%2Fbeijing-subway-timelapse-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20claustrophobic%202%20minutes%20on%20Beijing%27s%20metro%20%E2%80%93%20timelapse%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fsep%2F10%2Fbeijing-subway-timelapse-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F8%2F26%2F1409066612629%2FBeijing-subway-timelapse-017.jpg>
Timelapse video: A claustrophobic 2 minutes on Beijing’s metro, by Elisa 
Cucinelli for the Guardian 
“The subway is the pride of Beijing. It’s the only reason to live in this 
city,” says Liu Jinchang, a sales director, over one shoulder, since he does 
not have room to turn. His tone is jokey, his enthusiasm genuine: he has a car 
but prefers to commute this way because it is faster and easier than driving.

Data and voice services work on board (a mixed blessing) and TV screens in 
most carriages show the news, entertainment programming and public information 
films. Adverts are screened on the sides of tunnels as you speed between 
stations. Stations are clean, well lit and signed in both Chinese and English, 
but are not as gleaming as Hong Kong’s MTR (while state-owned Beijing Subway 
manages almost all of the network, MTR part-owns a second company operating two 
lines).
 Rush-hour queues: nearly 10 million people use the Beijing metro every day. 
Photograph: Tania Branigan 
Older locations are a little shabby and only a handful boast decorative 
touches; Yonghegong has a red-and-gold classical bas relief and ornate railings 
with cloud mouldings that mimic traditional stone carving. This is a 
utilitarian system, reflectingformer leader Deng Xiaoping’s orders 
<http://www.chinaheritagequarterly.org/features.php?searchterm=014_undergroundBeijing.inc&issue=014>
 that, at least in the first phase of the system, “The stations should not be 
built like those of the Moscow Metro. They should be solid and practical, not 
extravagant.”

In the next six and a half years, extensions to the Beijing subway will cover 
more ground than the entire London Underground network has in a century and a 
half.
Interactive graphic: the growth of Beijing's metro system 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/pallen/2014/sept/beijing_underground/beijing_underground3.html>
Interactive graphic: the explosive growth of Beijing’s metro system. Source: 
Wikipedia 
Work on the Chinese capital’s first line started in the 1960s and the vast 
majority of it opened in the last decade. Yet, at 465km long, it has already 
outgrown the Tube network by more than 50km. By 2020, an extra 400bn yuan 
(£40bn) of investment will see it more than double to 1,000km,according to 
Chinese media 
<http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/china/2012-12/30/c_132072226.htm>. The 
addition of 17 new lines will make it one of the world’s longest networks.

Each day 9.75 million passengers ride the lines across Beijing: nearly three 
times as many as take the London Tube and twice as many as use the New York 
system. The subway’s phenomenal expansion reflects that of the city it serves. 
Over the last decade or so, Beijing has grown by roughly half a million 
inhabitants each year – the equivalent of adding the entire populations of 
Sheffield or Tucson annually. The city is already home to 21 million;by 2020, a 
report warned last year 
<http://bjwb.bjd.com.cn/images/2013-03/19/06/20130319wb006bwb006c.pdf>, it is 
likely to have added another four million, on a conservative estimate.

The subway is clean and punctual and has seen no large scale fatal transport 
disasters in recent years, though several workers have died during construction 
since 2007 and two passenger have died due to escalator collapse and 
electrocution, in addition to a number of suicides. (In 1969, the year it 
opened, a spate of fires killed between three and six people and injured at 
least 100 more, resulting in a two-year closure for reconstruction.)


But the strains it now faces reflect the country’s challenge in maintaining a 
decent quality of life in increasingly packed cities. At Xierqi, one of the 
busiest stations, platform attendants help to push commuters into carriages 
during rush hour. There’s a little shoving at the doors, but it’s a remarkably 
calm and polite scene given the crush of bodies.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F10%2F-sp-beijing-subway-china-metro-queues-ticket-investment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F4%2F1409837251718%2F5fbee8b8-c6be-4d79-be3f-5dae7919dc82-2060x1459.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Riding%20Beijing's%20subway%20end%20to%20end%3A%2088km%20of%20queues%20and%20crushes%20on%20a%2020p%20ticket&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F10%2F-sp-beijing-subway-china-metro-queues-ticket-investment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Riding%20Beijing%27s%20subway%20end%20to%20end%3A%2088km%20of%20queues%20and%20crushes%20on%20a%2020p%20ticket&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F10%2F-sp-beijing-subway-china-metro-queues-ticket-investment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F4%2F1409837251718%2F5fbee8b8-c6be-4d79-be3f-5dae7919dc82-2060x1459.jpeg>
 The daily crush at Xierqi – an overground station which is part of the subway 
system, and one of the busiest on the network. Photograph: Tania Branigan 
Cut and cover

“I used to use the subway regularly, but it’s so crowded I rarely do now,” 
said 76-year-old Wang Mengshu.

As a young graduate, Wang helped to design the first line, which began 
construction in 1965 and opened four years later for select, politically 
reliable groups of passengers. Now an expert at the Chinese Academy of 
Engineering and Beijing Jiaotong University, he continues to advise the 
government on transport.

Mao declared the city needed a subway after he visited Moscow. But the system 
was initially intended more for civil defence than commuter transport, said 
Wang. In the event of air raids – like the US bombardments of North Korea and 
Vietnam – the trains would be used to evacuate residents to the Western Hills, 
on the capital’s outskirts. From there, they could be dispatched overground to 
safer parts of China. A sample line was even built at China’s atomic test site 
at Lop Nor, to check the tunnels would withstand nuclear bombs.

The engineering team was supposed to travel to Moscow to study its metro. But 
as bilateral relations deteriorated, the Soviet Union withdrew its experts and 
halted cooperation. Wang and his colleagues finished the designs of the subway 
without ever having ridden on one.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F10%2F-sp-beijing-subway-china-metro-queues-ticket-investment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F4%2F1409838548527%2F32cbee1b-243b-4bee-ab4f-0f56eff2b4b8-2060x1271.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Riding%20Beijing's%20subway%20end%20to%20end%3A%2088km%20of%20queues%20and%20crushes%20on%20a%2020p%20ticket&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F10%2F-sp-beijing-subway-china-metro-queues-ticket-investment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Riding%20Beijing%27s%20subway%20end%20to%20end%3A%2088km%20of%20queues%20and%20crushes%20on%20a%2020p%20ticket&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F10%2F-sp-beijing-subway-china-metro-queues-ticket-investment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F4%2F1409838548527%2F32cbee1b-243b-4bee-ab4f-0f56eff2b4b8-2060x1271.jpeg>
 The Beijing subway in the 1980s. Photograph: Eric Brissaud/Gamma-Rapho via 
Getty Images 
Without tunnelling equipment, workers used the “cut and cover” approach, 
digging a deep trench for each stretch of track, and constructing a tunnel 
which was then covered up again. Most of the remaining stretches of Beijing’s 
city walls were demolished to make way for the works and a ring road running 
above the tunnels.

Public irritation at the disruption meant there was little enthusiasm for 
extending the system. Nor was there much need: the population was far smaller 
and more densely distributed. As late as 2006, the subway carried only 1.5 
million people a day. Now it copes with more passengers daily than it did in 
the whole of 1971, when it reopened – although admittedly, for the first 11 
months, people could only buy a ticket with a letter of recommendation from 
their work unit.

These days, construction is much easier: in less built-up areas, lines are 
mostly overground, and tunnel drilling equipment can excavate around 600 metres 
a month (indeed, Chinese boring machines are now hard at work on Chennai’s new 
metro system). But dealing with the increased traffic is far from simple. The 
system is already exceeding capacity on several key lines.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F10%2F-sp-beijing-subway-china-metro-queues-ticket-investment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F4%2F1409838088072%2F23e518e0-c5c2-4b7f-9af8-488b4129ba80-1020x640.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Riding%20Beijing's%20subway%20end%20to%20end%3A%2088km%20of%20queues%20and%20crushes%20on%20a%2020p%20ticket&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F10%2F-sp-beijing-subway-china-metro-queues-ticket-investment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Riding%20Beijing%27s%20subway%20end%20to%20end%3A%2088km%20of%20queues%20and%20crushes%20on%20a%2020p%20ticket&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F10%2F-sp-beijing-subway-china-metro-queues-ticket-investment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F4%2F1409838088072%2F23e518e0-c5c2-4b7f-9af8-488b4129ba80-1020x640.jpeg>
 Beijing metro - inside the cab with the driver. Photograph: Tania Branigan 
China’s biggest cities are struggling to cope with their swollen populations, 
choked by traffic jams and pollution. They have attracted huge numbers of 
migrants – to clean the streets, construct homes and staff restaurants – but 
have not adequately catered for them or their children.

Now the government wants to accelerate urbanisation to boost domestic 
consumption; city dwellers spend more than rural residents. But its new 
strategy also seeks to tackle some of the problems that have emerged, creating 
a more sustainable model for city life.

The spending spree on urban rail follows similar binges on highways and 
high-speed trains, and will help to shore up economic growth. In just four 
months of 2012, the National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC), China’s 
economic planning body, approved 840bn yuan worth of underground and light rail 
construction; 22 cities already have subways and another 16 will have systems 
operating by the end of 2018. One official has said subway networks across 
China will total 7,000km of track by 2020.

Improved public transport should also reduce smog and traffic. Reforms to 
household registration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/31/china-reform-hukou-migrant-workers>
 will improve migrant workers’ access to services. But they are also designed 
to encourage people to move to smaller cities: the bigger the city, the harder 
it will be to register there. Even so, there is little doubt that the lure of 
the capital will endure.

“Ever since the 1980s, the [Beijing] government has been trying to limit the 
fast growing population, but all these efforts have failed. China has 1.3 
billion people. Big cities like Beijing are bound to attract a significant part 
of the huge population,” said Li Tie, director general of the NDRC’s China 
Centre for Urban Development.

Tokyo accommodates 36 million residents in a smaller area, he noted: in 
theory, Beijing should be able to absorb another 10 million. But it does not 
feel like that to those who live and work here.
 Commuters queue for the bus from Yanjiao to Beijing. More than 150,000 people 
commute from this area every day. Photograph: Tania Branigan 
A four-hour commute – on a good day

“Go on! It’s late already!” Old Shi yells at the huffing figure in a grey 
T-shirt hurtling past towards the door of the 815 bus.

It is 6am in Yanjiao, around 40km east of Beijing, and already the queue winds 
along the street, past the soy milk and pancake stands. Like many parents, Old 
Shi comes down in the mornings to hold a place in the line for his son and 
daughter-in-law, giving them an extra half hour to gulp down breakfast and 
ready their child for kindergarten. But because his son is running late, he 
will probably have to stand in the aisle instead of waiting for a seat on the 
next bus.

The younger Shi should arrive in Beijing in around an hour and 40 minutes, 
where he will switch to the subway for the final stretch of his journey. Each 
day, he and his wife spend four hours commuting – if the traffic is light. On 
bad days it can stretch to five or more.

“They’re exhausted by the time they get home. Once we’ve had dinner and 
they’ve put the kid to bed they go straight to sleep themselves. They don’t 
even have time to watch television,” said his father.

The family could not buy a flat in the capital because his son does not have a 
Beijing hukou, or household registration. The hukou has been used to control 
property sales in big cities, as well as to determine rights to education, 
health and other services, and transferring registration is hard. In any case, 
city homes are vastly more expensive. Shi and his wife are white collar workers 
but their joint income will not stretch any further than Yanjiao.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F10%2F-sp-beijing-subway-china-metro-queues-ticket-investment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F4%2F1409838184167%2Ff7a3cdd1-cb3b-4892-9d1c-086bd7efa0ba-1020x680.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Riding%20Beijing's%20subway%20end%20to%20end%3A%2088km%20of%20queues%20and%20crushes%20on%20a%2020p%20ticket&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F10%2F-sp-beijing-subway-china-metro-queues-ticket-investment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Riding%20Beijing%27s%20subway%20end%20to%20end%3A%2088km%20of%20queues%20and%20crushes%20on%20a%2020p%20ticket&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F10%2F-sp-beijing-subway-china-metro-queues-ticket-investment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F4%2F1409838184167%2Ff7a3cdd1-cb3b-4892-9d1c-086bd7efa0ba-1020x680.jpeg>
 Riding the subway in the middle of the day is more relaxed. Photograph: Tania 
Branigan 
Officials estimate that 150,000 people commute from here to Beijing each day; 
some say the figure is double that. By seven, you can count 200 people – 
damp-haired from the shower, blearily checking phones – in the bus queue.

Vehicles pull up every few minutes, but for each passenger who boards, another 
couple join the line. Those lucky enough to get a seat drowse; the rest must 
strap-hang all the way in. It is not surprising that tempers fray, though most 
of those waiting are remarkably good-humoured. When one man tries queue-jumping 
on his son’s behalf, there is almost a fist fight.

Chinese media suggest Yanjiao is the likely destination for the next subway 
extension. “I’d donate a month of my own salary to have a station built out 
here,” Old Shi says.

But as more communities are connected to the system, the pressure on existing 
lines will increase. And many Beijing residents already chafe at how hectic the 
city is becoming.In his bookUrbanisation <http://www.amazon.com/dp/B00IU9DKEG>, 
Li compares the process to allowing extra people into the elevator of a 
high-rise building: “Those who have been enjoying urban public services are 
unwilling to share the services with anyone else, [least of all] the migrant 
workers who they believe to be inferior, undereducated and underpaid,” he 
writes.

“A city is like an elevator. If you increase the number of passengers but fail 
to upgrade the elevators, those on board will start to complain.”
 Passengers queue for security checks at the Tiantongyuan North subway 
station, which is notorious for its long lines. Photograph: Tania Branigan 
Yang Xingkun, of the Beijing University of Civil Engineering and Architecture, 
said that if passenger numbers continued to rise at the current rate, they 
could hit 16 million by 2020. A plan to integrate Beijing, Hebei province and 
Tianjin could produce an even greater leap.

But upgrading is not easy. Though capacity can theoretically be increased by 
shortening the intervals between trains, Yang said key lines have almost 
reached the safe minimum gaps for services during peak hours.

Developing regional economic centres on the outskirts of Beijing – such as 
Daxing and Tongzhou – would encourage public institutions and companies to move 
and reduce traffic flows into the centre, he said. One mooted proposal is for a 
wholesale clothing market near Beijing zoo to shift to Langfang in Hebei, 
reducing pressure not just on the nearest subway station, but on that line more 
generally.

Authorities have promised to better integrate Beijing with nearby Tianjin 
municipality and Hebei province 
<http://www.scmp.com/news/china/article/1539886/integration-beijing-tianjin-and-hebei-set-be-signature-project-xi>
, to boost development across the region and relieve some of the strain on the 
capital. The catchily named Jing-Jin-Ji proposal will take in up to 130 million 
people and require yet more infrastructure: “Beijing’s seventh ring road”, 
actually running through large swathes of Hebei,will stretch to 940km when it 
opens in 2017 <http://www.china.org.cn/china/2014-07/07/content_32881371.htm>. 

But Jin Xue, an expert on China’s urban development at Aalborg University, is 
concerned by the growing tendency for cities to sprawl outwards.


“Historically, the urban density of Chinese cities was really high,” she said. 
“In recent years, [in places], it has been decreasing … Compact and high 
density cities should still be pursued, not just to preserve farmland, but to 
reduce traffic volumes.”
 A crammed early morning train leaves Tiantongyuan – only the second station 
on this line – in north Beijing. Photograph: Tania Branigan 
Better planning, such as seeking to bring homes and workplaces closer, could 
reduce long commutes and cut congestion.

In the short term, planners hope to relieve the strain on the Beijing subway 
and claw back hefty subsidies by raising fares. Last year losses hit 3.46bn 
yuan – almost four times the 2007 level – thanks to high operating costs and 
low fares. Incredibly, tickets are cheaper now than they were in 2006; 
officials dropped the flat-rate fare by one yuan to attract passengers.

Authorities have already carried out a public consultation on ticket price 
increases; remarks suggest they are looking at distance-based and perhaps 
time-sensitive pricing.Reportedly, more than half the respondents approved of 
higher fares <http://english.caixin.com/2014-08-01/100712032.html> – but what 
kind of rise they would stomach is unclear. The Beijing Evening News said fares 
would have to triple for the system to break even.

In an increasingly unequal society, where social differences have become 
glaring, the subway is a relatively democratic space. Yes, the poorest of all 
take buses and the richest still drive their Ferraris; but beneath the ground, 
managers check messages on their iPhones alongside migrant workers lugging 
bundled quilts. Raising prices would reduce the pressure for those who can 
afford it, but add to the stress for the poorest.

“If prices rise to four or five yuan, I’ll stop taking the subway. At my age I 
don’t have a lot of money,” said 49-year-old Li Zhongqin, a cleaner. That would 
mean changing buses and starting her long day even earlier – and transport 
experts say more and better planned bus routes are desperately needed.

Meanwhile, the better off may choose to drive, at a time when Beijing is 
seeking to reduce car use 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/dec/14/china-worlds-biggest-new-car-market>
.

Even Wang, the tunnelling expert, believes much of the answer to China’s urban 
transport problems lies above ground. He would like to see more bus use and new 
rail links between the busiest train stations. He is unimpressed by the frenzy 
of excavation around the country: monorails cost around 150m yuan per kilometre 
to construct, he said, compared to the 500-700m yuan required per kilometre of 
subway.

“Second-, third-, fourth-tier cities ... those cities don’t need to build 
subways,” he said. “Even if they can afford to build them, they can’t afford to 
run them. But a lot of places think that if they have a subway, then they are a 
big city.”

Additional research by Luna Lin

• Jerusalem’s light railway: commuting with a rifle through the conflicted city
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/may/29/jerusalems-light-railway-commuting-with-a-rifle-through-the-conflicted-city>
 