
1 Bikini Kill – Rebel Girl <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bOCWma5vOiQ>

The term “riot grrrl” tends to come up as soon as someone with a vagina starts 
a band. There are countless women considered riot grrrl figureheads: Kim 
Gordon, Patti Smith, PJ Harvey, the Slits, X-Ray Spex and modern musical 
figureheads like Beyoncé among them. Even Haim have probably been called riot 
grrrl at one time or another. But this list is specific to the riot grrrl scene 
that erupted, fanzine in hand, in the 90s Pacific Northwest, and the bands they 
directly inspired. The original movement ended not long after it began, as 
magazines started putting girls dressed in the grunge kinderwhore style on 
their covers and “riot grrrl was conflated with girl power 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/may/09/slutwalk-feminist-activism>
”. Riot grrrl’s DIY, punk philosophy opposed alternative music’s dominant bro 
culture and created, through gigs and pamphlets, spaces where women could 
discuss issues of gender, race, sexuality, equality and enjoy being able to 
crowdsurf without being groped. As outlined in the manifesto that appeared in 
the fanzine by riot grrrl linchpins Bikini Kill (which I had pinned to my 
bedroom wall for all of my teens), they saw girls as a “revolutionary soul 
force” with the power to change the status quo.

Bikini Kill’s Rebel Girl was the scene’s rebel yell, a short, sharp shock of 
serrated, anthemic punk that’s an ode to attitudinal, give-a-fuck females. The 
titular Rebel Girl holds her head high despite people calling her a “dyke” – 
or, in another recorded version of the song (there are three), a “slut” – 
disparaging the notions of sexual ambiguity and promiscuity that the riot 
grrrls kicked against. But she also rides “the hottest trike in town”, imagery 
that matches how singer Kathleen Hanna sings the song in the style of a girlish 
playground taunt. Musically, it’s the ultimate riot grrrl walk-on music, with 
Tobi Vail’s strutty, Dr Martens-stomp of a drumbeat, guitarist Billy Karren’s 
crunchy, lip curl of a riff and Hanna’s exorcism-strength screech of “in her 
kiss, I feel the revolution”. It is, in a word, badass.


2 Bratmobile – Cool Schmool <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=By02dSYK-kI>

One of the philosophies behind riot grrrl was to reject received ideas of how 
women were supposed to look or behave. They weren’t going to wear the clothes 
men thought were hot, or compromise themselves to get a boyfriend, or kowtow to 
traditional notions of femininity. As a teenager growing up in a time where 
crotch-low jeans and boob tubes were “the fashion”, that was a revelation. But 
riot grrrls also challenged the idea that you had to be able to play an 
instrument to start a band – as Spin once said, “its ideology has always been 
more advanced than its noise”. Enter Bratmobile, the Olympia trio credited with 
coining the term “riot grrrl” in their fanzine, who did not have technical 
ability on their side – their bob-cut garage-rock sounded as if it might fall 
apart at any minute. Their message, however, rose above the music. On Cool 
Schmool, you can imagine frontwoman Allison Wolfe clomping down the school 
corridors in her T-bar loafers, slamming the locker doors nonchalantly as she 
deadpans lines such as “I can bake a pie and look you up and down” like a 
no-mess Velma from Scooby Doo. It’s the middle finger to every schmaltzy prom 
film you’ve ever seen.

3 Heavens to Betsy – Terrorist <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8CyF4w_cxi4> 

Heavens to Betsy only released one album, 1994’s Calculated 
<http://www.allmusic.com/album/calculated-mw0000115999>, but the duo remain a 
riot grrrl cornerstone. Mainly that’s because singer Corin Tucker went on to 
form Sleater-Kinney, and because Betsy were one of the acts that appeared at 
Girl Night at Olympia’s International Pop Underground convention in 1991 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_Pop_Underground_Convention>, the 
mythologised event that shone an internationalspotlight on the movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/jun/14/riot-grrrl-get-noticed?INTCMP=SRCH>
. But beyond these credentials, Betsy’s music has proper raw power. White Girl, 
for example, questioned the indie scene’s privilege and ingrained racism, while 
Complicated offered a six-minute wash of breakup blues (at a time when everyone 
else was thrashing out two-minute belters). You can’t beat Terrorist, though, 
for a firebomb of anger that makes Slipknot sound like baby lambs rolling 
around in a buttercup field. You can almost feel Tucker’s spit fly off the mic 
as she rages about what she wants to do to the guys who treat her “like a piece 
of meat”, with an intensity that sounds like nails scratching out eyes.

4 L7 – Pretend We’re Dead <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GypkmEUhHvQ>

L7 and other female-fronted or all-female bands of this era, such as Hole, 
Babes in Toyland and Veruca Salt, often got thrown in with riot grrrl (they 
were also dubbed “foxcore” by Sonic Youth’s Thurston Moore for a laugh – it 
took off). These bands weren’t as political as bands like Bikini Kill – L7 were 
a fearless LA rock band that just happened to be four women but their feminist 
message still hit hard. Pretend We’re Dead, from their 1992 albumBricks Are 
Heavy <http://www.allmusic.com/album/bricks-are-heavy-mw0000610622>, is a 
schlocky, heavy metal-tinged pop jam that issaid to have been originally a 
break-up song 
<http://www.spin.com/articles/l7-look-back-20-years-pretend-were-dead/>. But it 
took on new meaning with Donita Sparks’s gum-chewing, deadpan command to “say 
no to individuality”. It echoed their generation’s rejection of cultural 
conformity and – alongside feminine ideal-trashing songs like Diet Pill and 
Wargasm – put L7 firmly in the riot grrrl canon. They continued to inspire the 
riot grrrl community, too – especially when, later that same year, during a 
technically hampered set at Reading festival, the crowd began slinging mud at 
the band and Sparks retorted in the manner that only a badass grrrl would: she 
removed her tampon and tossed it into the crowd.

5 Huggy Bear – Her Jazz (1993)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlfP5HNvsWAo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlfP5HNvsWAo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlfP5HNvsWAo&media=>
 Huggy Bear aren’t on Spotify, which is a bit of a disaster, as we like to put 
these 10 best … lists into a handy playlist for you to listen to in one go. But 
you can’t very well have an article about the best riot grrrl anthems without 
including these Brighton punks. They were closely linked to the Olympia bands 
and released a split album with Bikini Kill called Our Troubled Youth/ Yeah 
Yeah Yeah Yeah in 1992, as well as touring the UK together. Their song Her Jazz 
is vital not just for its fierce anti-mainstream message of wanting to “trash 
the square world” and introducing their “future girl vision” but for their 
raucous performance of it on Channel 4’s youth TV show The Word. It was a 
Technicolor glimmer of a punk-rock revival, singer Niki Elliott’s bright red 
hair swinging as she leered over the microphone to the moshpit, and later, in 
what’s been called their “Bill Grundy moment”, angrily shouting at presenter 
Terry Christian during a segment about topless models, backed by a mob-like 
live audience. Watching it now, it still feels thrilling.

6 Sleater-Kinney – Dig Me Out <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FbmZi_VS4ZM>

After riot grrrl’s embers had died out, the scene splintered and its original 
messages muddled, at which point Olympia’s Sleater-Kinney arrived like a 
blowtorch to the ears. Formed by Carrie Brownstein of Excuse 17, Janet Weiss 
and Heavens to Betsy’s Corin Tucker, the trio put female-led rock back on the 
agenda. They played just as hard as any guy with a guitar while singing about 
complex feminist subject matter, both personal and political, be it motherhood 
or war. And they were also the only band to really transcend riot grrrl and 
bring it to a wider audience. Dig Me Out, their third album, was critically 
acclaimed and led them to sharing stages with arena bands like Pearl Jam – 
testament to how, asBrownstein once put it 
<http://www.msmagazine.com/mar03/sk-tour.asp>, “Sleater-Kinney are brave enough 
and strong enough to make a difference and get the word out”. Dig Me Out’s 
title track laid this out for all to hear through Brownstein’s urgent riffs, 
Janet Weiss’s thunderous wall of drums and Corin Tucker’s quivering wail.

7 The Frumpies – I Just Wanna Puke on the Stereo 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q0cuMe-s62w>

One of riot grrrl’s less well-known bands, the Frumpies were already something 
of a riot grrrl supergroup when they formed in 1992, consisting of former 
Bikini Kill members Tobi Vail, Kathi Wilcox and Billy Karren, plus Bratmobile’s 
Molly Neuman on drums. Their glorious racket, which sounds like it was recorded 
in a tin can, is best heard on I Just Wanna Puke on the Stereo, from their 
underrated singles collection Frumpie One Piece. It’s a rattling cutlery drawer 
of distorted guitars, barking cymbals and pure punk energy, all in under 100 
seconds.

8 Le Tigre – Hot Topic <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0idmTWxFs1A>

Kathleen Hanna and her many musical projects over the years could easily 
dominate this list. She was the one who’d scrawl confrontational statements 
across her chest like “slut” and demanded “girls to the front” for her shows. 
She was the archetypal punk frontwoman – uncompromising, unapologetic, 
unafraid. But her next band after Bikini Kill – the electropop trio Le Tigre – 
ditched the grisly guitars and set their songs about feminism and LGBT issues 
to a upbeat, 60s-channelling rhythm. Their mix of skittering beats, beehived 
girl group-pop, lo-fi samples and politics sounded like 60s French singer
Christine Delaroche <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-Y36c4kr6lA> if she’d 
grown up listening to NWA and proto-techno, encapsulating the feminist writer 
Emma Goldman’s statement: “I don’t want to be part of your revolution if I 
can’t dance.” Hot Topic, from their 1999 self-titled debut album, is a 
who’s-who guide to riot grrrl and LGBT icons – among them North Carolina-based 
queercore bandthe Butchies <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hNbcJlAkC7A>, 
Sleater-Kinney, Yoko Ono, literary theorist Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak and 
trans performance artistVaginal Creme Davis 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vaginal_Davis>. The song is only three minutes 
and 45 seconds long, but you could get yourself lost in the library with that 
list for weeks.

9 The Gossip – Standing in the Way of Control 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yn043ArR98M>

The Aretha Franklin-big chorus. The air-drumming smash of an intro (up there 
with the best intros of all time, no question). The fact it makes you want to 
writhe your woes away in an indie club – and not just because the Soulwax remix 
of it was on aload of early Skins adverts 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Nm0onseM1Mw>. The Gossip’s Standing in the Way 
of Control is what happens when you move to liberal Portland from conservative 
Arkansas, immerse yourself in the post-riot grrrl community of labels like Kill 
Rock Stars, and write protest songs that combine punk and Tammy Wynette. Much 
in the way of queercore bands such asTeam Dresch 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xceNTy-yNhA> and the Butchies, the Gossip 
championed LGBT rights and explored gender politics, but their songs were 
catchy and smart enough to sneak on to the radio and become rebellion anthems 
for the masses. SITWOC is their emotional response to America’s 
then-restrictive same-sex marriage laws, making it not just one of the ultimate 
riot grrrl anthems but one of the ultimate protest anthems. Beth Ditto’s voice 
is like a wrecking ball to the ears – her band didn’t just want to take their 
messages to the dancefloor, they wanted to wipe the floor with them.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D74FHIBtWvi0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D74FHIBtWvi0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D74FHIBtWvi0&media=>
10 Perfect Pussy – Driver <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-_Ky86mFGw0>

In 2015, it feels like there’s something riot grrrlish whipping the air. 
Sleater-Kinney have returned with a new record, 10 years after their last and 
still as searing as their first. L7 are rumoured to be back in the studio, 
Babes in Toyland are back on the road and coming to Europe andVeruca Salt are 
recording again 
<http://www.stereogum.com/1670220/reunited-veruca-salt-releasing-first-new-music-in-17-years-for-record-store-day/news/>
. Russia’s Pussy Riot, meanwhile, arereportedly in the studio with Le Tigre’s 
JD Samson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/dec/10/pussy-riot-collaborating-jd-samson-le-tigre>
. And then there’s a huge new wave of young women such as Honeyblood and Skinny 
Girl Diet, who are leadingthe charge of new all-girl punk bands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/dec/31/sound-of-2015-all-women-bands-deers-juce-girlpool>
.

Sleater-Kinney still have the capacity to inspire after a decade away
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/jan/14/sleater-kinney-still-have-the-capacity-to-inspire-after-a-decade-away>
New York’s Perfect Pussy, fronted by the straight-talking Sleater-Kinney fan 
Meredith Graves, are another who fly the flag for what riot grrrl stood for 
(though they’ve attempted to distance themselves from the term riot grrrl in 
the past for fear, and rightly so, of being denied the opportunity to be seen 
as their own force). Still, they openly criticise the male-dominated hardcore 
scene they come from and Graves, as well as Alanna McArdle from Cardiff’s 
Joanna Gruesome, have penned polemics about sexism and misogyny in music, which 
says something for riot grrrl manifesto’s enduring legacy. You can barely hear 
what Graves is singing about on Driver, her shouts smothered by distortion and 
an eerie krautrockish drone, like an old radio announcement crackling through a 
megaphone over an empty town square. But, like the riot grrrls before them, 
Perfect Pussy’s music is more about ethos than singalongability. Live, you can 
imagine that the song explodes in a torrent of feedback and eff-yous against 
industry double-standards, against questioning women’s authenticity in music 
and against anyone who refuses not to take them seriously because there’s a 
women out front.
 