
Take a walk along City Road in St Paul’s today, the area of Bristol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/bristol> that gained notoriety following 
serious riots in the 1980s, and the fried chicken joints and mini-markets give 
way to something less expected: estate agent signs bearing the message “Sold”.

The property website Zoopla has included St Paul’s alongside two other Bristol 
neighbourhoods in its Top 10 Hipster Hotspots Across the UK – the areas to have 
seen the biggest growth in property prices over the last five years. Something, 
apparently, has changed.

Beware the vibrant, emerging, misleading language of gentrification
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/09/beware-the-vibrant-emerging-misleading-language-of-gentrification>
“I remember in the 90s when people were scared to go into St Paul’s,” says 
Oona Goldsworthy, chief executive of the UnitedCommunities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/communities> housing association. “Now 
we’ve got houses just off Portland Square and it’s crazy what’s going on. It’s 
a bonanza.”

According to the report, property in St Paul’s has gone up by 38.5% over five 
years to reach an average price of £261,300. With its proximity to the city 
centre, decent transport and grand Georgian town houses, St Paul’s is 
succumbing to the forces that have transformed the other two areas on the list, 
Montpelier and Stokes Croft.

For the local newspaper, the news has confirmed all its worst suspicions. 
“It’s official,” declared theheadline in the Bristol Post 
<http://www.bristolpost.co.uk/its-official-hipsters-are-to-blame-for-soaring-house-prices-in-bristol/story-29958079-detail/story.html>
. “Hipsters are to blame for soaring house prices in Bristol.” The paper went 
on to state that, “All three areas are now dominated by men wearing beards and 
women riding bikes complete with the mandatory wicker basket on the handlebars.”

While the Montpelier district, with offerings such as the gin, cheese and cake 
emporiumCox & Baloney <http://www.coxandbaloneytearooms.com/>, has long been 
established as a gem of gentrification, Stokes Croft is a more recent addition. 
Described by one local as a concept rather than a place, Stokes Croft is little 
more than a single street, its decidedly humdrum collection of high street 
shops and takeaways transformed in recent years by the arrival of popup artisan 
bakeries, disco barbers and eateries bearing names such as theLove Inn 
<http://theloveinn.com/> and Kale & Kettle <http://www.kaleandkettle.co.uk/>. 
The property prices match the fare: Montpelier has seen a 39.9% rise to an 
average of £494,158 over the last five years, while in Stokes Croft properties 
have gone up by 37.1% to an average of £317,800.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fbristol-st-pauls-housing-hotspots-hipsters-gentrification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F768b2cea2e5f2a4af83f55d93c1e41388ce06505%2F0_407_5177_3107%2F5177.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Riot%20flashpoint%20to%20housing%20hotspot%3A%20hipsters%20help%20to%20bring%20St%20Pauls%20back%20to%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fbristol-st-pauls-housing-hotspots-hipsters-gentrification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Riot%20flashpoint%20to%20housing%20hotspot%3A%20hipsters%20help%20to%20bring%20St%20Pauls%20back%20to%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fbristol-st-pauls-housing-hotspots-hipsters-gentrification%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F768b2cea2e5f2a4af83f55d93c1e41388ce06505%2F0_407_5177_3107%2F5177.jpg>
 Police gather in St Paul’s during the riot in April 1980 Photograph: Aubrey 
Hart/Getty Images 
Like many in St Paul’s and the wider city, Goldsworthy’s organisation is 
struggling to cope with the impact of gentrification on an area that has a 
strong sense of community. “Just because an area becomes successful it doesn’t 
mean poor people can’t live there once it gets an artisan pop-up bakery,” she 
says. “We’ve never had artisan bakeries before but now we have, property 
developers have noticed and moved in.”

One such developer, Gary Sheppard from Helm Construction, told the Post that 
credit should be given to the hipsters. “These districts had been rundown, 
neglected and avoided since they began to decline after the [second world] war. 
No other agency had managed to stem that decline. But the hipster generation 
has succeeded in bringing the life back to previously deserted streets.”

The hipsters, of course, are people too: many are students who have graduated 
from Bristol’s booming universities and simply chosen to stay in the city, 
while others are young professionals escaping London’s high prices – and 
bringing them to Bristol. For Adam Cantwell-Corn, a coordinator of the Bristol 
Cable media co-op, “hipster bashing is obscuring the real causes and culprits 
behind the housing crisis”.

He shows me the site of the Chocolate Factory, a relic that has been the 
subject of a fierce battle between residents, developers and the city council. 
The Chocolate Factory is in Easton, where the appearance of organic cafes and 
groceries in the modest terraced streets marks it out, Cantwell-Corn says, as 
“the thin end of the wedge of what we know to be gentrification”.

Most people now only think about themselves and that's the whole thing about 
gentrification. Destroying communities

Back in St Paul’s, Aileen Edwards stands in her second-floor office in 
Brunswick Square and points to a recently developed building on the other side 
of the square. Spick and span, and rather tasteful, it offers a blend of office 
space and residential living close to both the retail expanse of Cabot Circus 
shopping centre and the boho dreamland of Stokes Croft. It is an offer that
Second Step <http://www.second-step.co.uk/>, the homelessness charity Edwards 
runs, would never be able to match.

“I don’t know how long we’ll be able to afford to stay here,” she says. “This 
area is changing, there’s no doubt about that. Inequality is increasing, the 
private sector is buoyant because of the gentrification and affluence but it’s 
having a terrible effect. People are finding it harder and harder to get social 
housing or private sector rents that are affordable, so they are being pushed 
out to the margins of the city. With gentrification you lose the personality of 
the place.”

As the city council’s cabinet member for homes and communities, Councillor 
Paul Smith has helped set up a gentrification commission, an initiative of the 
city’snew mayor, Marvin Rees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/may/23/bristol-mayor-marvin-rees-racism-inequality>
.

“It isn’t the fault of the gentrifiers but of the housing market,” says Smith. 
“People want to live in St Paul’s to be part of a diverse community, but that 
community moves out. When I was young St Paul’s was seen as an Afro-Caribbean 
area largely, although it was always a majority white working-class area. It is 
still a very mixed community but it is changing. The council blocks anchor it a 
bit. If they weren’t there you could see it gentrifying much quicker.”

Rees, who spent part of his childhood in St Paul’s, addressed the dangers of 
gentrification in his state of the city speech in October. “Our fundamental 
challenge is that while Bristol is getting wealthier, inequality is increasing 
and the city becoming ever more unaffordable,” he said. “Affordable housing is 
also an element in the tough challenge to ensure gentrification does not 
inexorably change the look and feel of our city and reduce its diversity.”

Amirah Cole is vice-chair of the Malcolm X community centre in St Paul’s, set 
up after the 1980 riots. There is a sense that she feels the organisation’s 
sense of purpose is dissolving as the community it was formed to serve 
disappears.

“A community centre should serve its local community,” she says. “So if it’s 
not doing that because the community isn’t interested, you have to ask what its 
purpose is. Most people now think only about themselves, and that’s the whole 
thing about gentrification, destroying communities. I guess it’s social 
cleansing.”

In a cafe on Cheltenham Road, opposite a Tesco Express that was the scene of 
the last riot in the area, in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/apr/22/bristol-riot-police-injured>, the 
woman serving coffee at the counter calls to three young men seated on pews at 
one of the wooden tables. “Guys, you’re washing’s ready,” she says.

Rachel Walker takes a break from distributing coffee and laundry at the At the 
Well Cafe & Launderette 
<http://www.at-the-well.co.uk/thewell/bristollaundrettehome.html>, one of the 
quirkier examples of gentrification in the area. “I’m at the forefront of 
gentrification,” she says. Walker was living in St Paul’s, paying £430 per 
month for a share of a four-bedroom house, but had to move out because she 
couldn’t afford the rent.

“It was very St Paulsy,” she says. “There were council buildings either side, 
there were lots of drugs and drunks, but it didn’t feel dangerous, just 
surreal. It’s central, it’s interesting, I love the cross-cultural aspect of it 
all. There are beautiful houses that could easily become a Notting Hill-like 
area. It feels like everyone in the entire country knows that Bristol is a nice 
place to live. The secret’s out. It’s an alternative to London.”

THE HISTORY OF ST PAUL’S

1780s The Georgian townhouses and squares of St Paul’s are built – but it 
never attains the fashionable status of Clifton.

1948 After wartime bombing, housing is cheap and the Windrush generation of 
immigrants move in.

1968 The first St Paul’s Carnival. It grows to rival Notting Hill as a 
celebration of black culture.

1980 After a police raid on a cafe, social tensions erupt in the St Paul’s 
riot.

1999 Banksy’s Mild Mild West mural appears on Stokes Croft, next to St Paul’s. 
There were plans to cover it in glass to protect it from vandals, but it is now 
maintained by local activists.
 