
The rise in the annual inflation rate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/18/uk-inflation-rises-near-two-year-high-consumer-price-index>
 to 1% last month is just the start. Thecost of living in Britain 
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/economy/inflationandpriceindices/bulletins/consumerpriceinflation/sept2016>
 is certain to increase noticeably over the next 12 months and likely to peak 
at about 3%, perhaps even a bit higher.

A bit of perspective is needed. By Britain’s recent standards, inflation is 
still low. Harold Wilson could only dream of 1% inflation when prices were 
shooting up at an annual rate of almost 26% in 1975. Despite her best efforts, 
Margaret Thatcher never managed to drive inflation down to its current level.

This is a different age. Globalisation, de-unionisation and weak growth have 
led to the death of inflation. For the past two or three years, the big fear 
for central banks has been deflation rather than inflation.

Britain no longer has that problem. The sharp fall in the value of the pound 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/11/pound-completes-worst-four-day-performance-since-brexit-vote>
 since the referendum on 23 June has banished any fear of deflation for several 
years to come, because anything that is imported – from French wine to Apple 
iPhones – costs more.


The upward movement in September from 0.6% in the year to August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/13/uk-inflation-remains-unchanged-at-06>
 did not have much to do with theslide in the pound’s value 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/16/let-the-pound-fall-and-the-economy-rise>
, but make no mistake, the fall in sterling will eventuallyfeed through into 
higher prices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/13/marmite-bananas-sterling-swings-prices-consumers-shopping>
 in the shops and at petrol stations.

Two factors explain the inflation increase. The first is that some prices are 
going up. Clothing was dearer, motorists noticed that petrol and diesel were a 
bit more expensive. Hotel bills were also higher, which is mainly explained by 
the above inflationincrease in the minimum wage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/01/the-national-living-wage-and-what-it-means>
 in April. The higher salary costs that resulted from theintroduction of the 
“national living wage” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/29/the-guardian-view-on-the-national-living-wage-not-the-end-but-the-beginning>
 are being passed on to customers.

The second reason for the upward movement is that prices were falling in 
September 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/13/uk-inflations-dips-below-zero>
, due to tumbling global energy costs. That has since ceased to flatter the 
annual inflation rate.

There were further sharp falls in energy prices during the final quarter of 
last year, so had sterling remained unchangedon the foreign exchanges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/03/uk-stocks-rally-as-brexit-fears-fade>
 in recent weeks, there would still have been a pickup in the annual inflation 
rate.

The fall in the pound to its lowest level against the dollar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/06/brexit-pound-plunges-to-30-year-lows-as-eu-fears-bite-into-global-markets-again>
 since the mid-1980s will accelerate this process. While inflation is still 
comfortably below the government’s 2% target, it won’t be for long. Expect the 
annual cost of living increase to reach 2% by early 2017 and 3% by next summer.

Competition in the high street could spare consumers from some of the effects 
of the weak pound. But if businesses find they are operating with lower profit 
margins, they will seek to save money by tightly controlling wages. One way or 
another, living standardsare going to be squeezed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/17/rising-inflation-expected-to-hit-consumers-pockets-pound-sterling-dollar-brexit>
.

What’s more, government welfare changes mean those on the lowest incomes will 
be especially hard hit, because George Osborne’s July 2015 budget froze 
non-pensioner benefits in cash terms for the duration of the current parliament.
The Institute for Fiscal Studies <https://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/8699>
estimates that 11.5 million benefit claimants would have been £260 a year worse 
off by 2019-20 before sterling’s slide. Higher inflation has pushed that figure 
to £360.

Will higher inflation lead to the Bank of England raising interest rates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/28/uk-bank-of-england-monetary-stimulus-brexit-vote-effects-minouche-shafik>
? Almost certainly not. Threadneedle Street has already said it is prepared to
accept a temporary overshoot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/14/prices-to-continue-rising-warns-bank-of-england-governor>
 of the 2% inflation target, rather than risk damaging the economy’s growth 
prospects. Only if higher inflation looks to be becoming embedded will the Bank 
move. For the moment, that does not appear to be much of a risk.

 