
The number of thirtysomethings leaving London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/13/under-35s-in-the-uk-face-becoming-permanent-renters-warns-thinktank>
 has leapt in recent years as high housing costs have forced people to move out 
of the capital, according to campaigners.

Analysis by the group Generation Rent <http://www.generationrent.org/> showed 
that 65,890 people in their 30s moved from London to another part of the UK in 
2014-15, a net loss of 30,410 in that age group. This was 48% higher than in 
2011-12, when 20,590 more 30 to 39-year-olds moved out than moved in.

I finally own my first house – so why do I have buyer’s remorse? | Stuart 
Heritage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/26/i-finally-own-my-first-house-so-why-do-i-have-buyers-remorse>
Internal migration data from the Office for National Statistics also showed a 
sharp increase in the number of children leaving the capital. In 2014-15, 
26,920 more children under 10 moved out ofLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> than came in, compared with a 
difference of 19,980 three years previously.

Generation Rent said the exodus had taken place during a period in which house 
prices in London rose 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/11/average-london-home-doubles-price-house-property>
 by 37%, compared with 16% in the UK as a whole, and rents increased by 10%, 
compared with 4% outside London.

It said almost two-thirds of people moving out of London had gone elsewhere in 
the south-east 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/30/property-prices-skyrocket-towns-near-london>
 and the east of England commuter belt, while 12% had moved to the Midlands and 
11% to the north of England.

Mortgage approvals fall by a fifth, says British Bankers’ Association
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/sep/26/mortgage-approvals-fall-by-fifth-british-bankers-association-bba>
Only among twentysomethings are more people moving into London than out; in 
2014-15, there were 37,950 more people in this age group living in the capital 
than the year before, a 3% increase.

Betsy Dillner, the director of Generation Rent, said: “Growing numbers of 
Londoners are giving up on the city and its extortionate housing market.

“London is an incredible city and the decision to move away isn’t taken 
lightly. These people are leaving friends and family in order to find a home 
they can afford, and some are leaving their jobs. This should worry everyone in 
London, from employers facing a loss of skills to communities losing valued 
neighbours, and particularly Sadiq Khan, whose housing policies will need to 
stop this exodus.”

Research by Lloyds bank found that moving to somewhere an hour’s commute from 
London could mean paying hundreds of thousands of pounds less for a family 
home. While the average price of a home in London transport zones one and two 
was £741,919, in Wellingborough, Northamptonshire, the average was £183,345, 
while in Peterborough, it was £189,319, Lloyds said.

Struggling to get on the housing ladder? Why not buy with friends
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/sep/26/struggling-housing-ladder-buy-with-friends-two-incomes>
Andrew Mason, the Lloyds mortgage products director, said: “Commuters to 
London who don’t mind a longer journey between home and work could reap the 
financial benefits of living outside of the capital.

“However, the decision of whether to live in the city or further away is not 
simply a trade-off between financial costs and journey times. Quality of life 
is also a major factor: family circumstances, better schools, physical 
environment and homes that offer better value for money also come into the 
equation.”
 