
Sequestered away in a north London cafe among a maze of recording studios, 
20-year-old Chloe Latimer, AKA Glasgow-born, dark-pop practitioner Kloe, is 
struggling to focus. A very serious-looking man with a laptop a couple of 
tables down keeps eye-rolling in her direction and it’s throwing her off her 
game. To be fair to him, a quiet cafe isn’t Kloe’s natural environment: her 
sweary outbursts mix loudly with the sort of unvarnished opinions pop stars 
aren’t meant to give these days.

Asked if she’s annoyed that the nuanced pop of her debut EP Teenage Craze, or 
the fizzing follow-up singles UDSM and Liability, failed to earn her a spot on
the BBC Sound of 2017 longlist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/28/bbc-music-sound-of-2017-longlist-revealed-jorja-smith-anderson-paak-and-more>
, she gives the kind of answer her label Columbia might not want for the press 
release. “I couldn’t give two fucks, honestly,” she says, a mischievous grin on 
her face. “I’m not going to rush my music out to get on a fucking poll and wank 
off Radio 1 for a bit.”

On the weekends I’d drink cider in the park with all the cool kids and then in 
the week I’d write songs

Bored senseless by school (“I didn’t like being patronised”), Kloe studied her 
musical heroes, mixing an early love for Taylor Swift with her dad’s 
recommendations of Joni Mitchell and Bowie. “I’d sit with all their lyrics and 
chords and just study them. I think songwriting is so fascinating.” An early 
acoustic singer-songwriter phase led to aBritain’s Got Talent audition at the 
age of 13 (thankfully, she didn’t get through), whilea YouTube channel 
<https://www.youtube.com/user/chloelatimer> still exists of her covering her 
favourite band, the 1975.

Keen to keep her musical exploits secret “at one of the worst schools in 
Glasgow”, she took on dual roles: “I was like Clydebank’s Hannah Montana – on 
the weekends I’d drink cider in the park with all the cool kids and then in the 
week I’d lock myself in the music rooms and write songs.”

As she got older, her musical tastes evolved, taking in intelligent, 
emotion-led pop music by the likes of Charli XCX and Lorde; the latter she 
credits with “changing the game and making a new lane for people like me”. In 
2015, she landed a record deal and her 2016 debut EP was given a huge lift 
after the delicateGrip, <https://soundcloud.com/kloemusic/grip-1> inspired by a 
drunken fumble with a band’s frontman at a festival, was played by Zane Lowe. 
As with all Kloe’s songs, Grip’s magnetism comes from its lyrical honesty. “You 
know you get revenge porn? Well, I do revenge songs,” she says, before 
outlining a self-imposed ban on writing any more songs about boys.

With her debut album currently taking shape between London and LA, Kloe is 
pragmatic about her current position in the pop cosmos. Well, sort of. “I am 
Beyoncé in my own head – I’ve won five Grammys, I’ve toured the world, played 
arenas – but no one knows who the fuck I am yet,” she cackles. That’s 
categorically about to change.

Three more to watch

■ Six-foot-tall Welsh warbler Betsy <http://betsymusic.co.uk/> sounds like 
Shirley Basseyand Cher. Terrifying, but in a good way.

■ Eighteen-year-old Streatham-born rapper David Santan, AKA Santan Dave, or 
justDave <https://soundcloud.com/santandave>, ie the future of UK hip-hop. 
Wiley, Stormzy and recent collaborator Drake are all fans.

■ Pixx <http://pixxmusic.com/>, AKA 20-year-old Hannah Rodgers, is a Brit 
school alumna turned 4AD-signed experimentalist. An album of Grimes-esque 
odd-pop is due early this year.
 