
Six months after the international criminal court’s new Dutch palace of 
justice was formally opened on windswept sand dunes beside the North Sea, a 
tide of nationalist sentiment is threatening to undermine the project.

Three African states have begun withdrawing from its jurisdiction, raising 
fears that a succession of others will follow suit. Russia has removed its 
signature from the founding statute, the Philippines and Kenya are openly 
contemplating departure and key member nations – including the UK – have 
limited its funding.

The tribunal embodies international efforts to prosecute those responsible for 
genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity, but in 2017 it will face 
serious challenges to its credibility, insiders say.

Brexit, the election of Donald Trump and derogations from the European 
convention on human rights all represent a common theme of emphasising national 
interests over international – usually stigmatised as “foreign” – laws.


The most immediate threat is the move by Burundi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/12/burundi-politicians-back-international-criminal-court-icc-withdrawal>
,South Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/21/south-africa-to-quit-international-criminal-court-document-shows>
 andthe Gambia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/26/gambia-becomes-latest-african-nation-to-quit-international-criminal-court>
, which in the last quarter of 2016 have all served notice of intention to 
withdraw, citing complaints that ICC prosecutions focus excessively on the 
African continent.

Their exits, which will come into force a year after they served notice, will 
leave 121 member states that have ratified the 1998 Rome statute. China, the 
US, India, Russia, Indonesia and Israel are among those who have refused 
membership.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Frising-nationalism-leaves-international-criminal-court-at-risk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97b2ab89b654b9fcd7fa901024de6fa459497eab%2F0_304_3340_2004%2F3340.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rising%20nationalism%20leaves%20international%20criminal%20court%20at%20risk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Frising-nationalism-leaves-international-criminal-court-at-risk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rising%20nationalism%20leaves%20international%20criminal%20court%20at%20risk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Frising-nationalism-leaves-international-criminal-court-at-risk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97b2ab89b654b9fcd7fa901024de6fa459497eab%2F0_304_3340_2004%2F3340.jpg>
 Fatou Bensouda at The Hague. Photograph: Michael Kooren/Reuters 
Efforts are being made to reverse the departure of the Gambia, which is home 
to the ICC’s chief prosecutor, Fatou Bensouda. Speaking after the court’s 
annual assembly of state parties in The Hague in November, she acknowledged: 
“It’s a regression for the continent that there are some African states that 
are deciding to withdraw from the ICC.”

The ICC encourages countries, she stressed, to try cases in their own courts 
as a first option. “The ICC was not meant to take each and every case,” 
Bensouda said. “There must be national efforts, there must be regional efforts 
that are also trying to bridge the impunity gap.”

Bensouda urged support for the court’s proposed 7% increase in its annual 
budget of just over €147m. There was, however, concerted resistance to the 
plans even from normally supportive states, which pared it back to 3%.

Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch both criticised resistance 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/news/2016/11/states-shouldnt-use-icc-budget-to-interfere-with-its-work/>
 by the UK, Canada, France, Germany, Italy and other countries to the increase 
on the grounds of the global financial crisis and inefficiencies in the court. 
“The goodwill of even the strongest champions of international justice to 
support and fund the ICC cannot be taken for granted when their financial 
interests are affected,” the organisations warned.

Commenting on the settlement, a UK Foreign Office spokeswoman said: “We are 
committed to working with the court and states parties to ensure the budget is 
as streamlined as possible. The UK worked … with the six other biggest 
contributors to obtain an acceptable settlement figure.”

The ICC – motto “peace through justice” – has opened 10 full-scale 
investigations since 2004 into former presidents, politicians and warlords, all 
but one involving crimes allegedly committed in Africa. The only non-African 
investigation is into claims ofwar crimes in South Ossetia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/27/icc-inquiry-alleged-war-crimes-south-ossetia-russia-georgia>
 after the conflict between Russia and Georgia in 2008.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Frising-nationalism-leaves-international-criminal-court-at-risk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6bdcf428926e5a45291dba5da2ae148897c619b1%2F0_71_4096_2459%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rising%20nationalism%20leaves%20international%20criminal%20court%20at%20risk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Frising-nationalism-leaves-international-criminal-court-at-risk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rising%20nationalism%20leaves%20international%20criminal%20court%20at%20risk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Frising-nationalism-leaves-international-criminal-court-at-risk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6bdcf428926e5a45291dba5da2ae148897c619b1%2F0_71_4096_2459%2F4096.jpg>
 The new home of the international criminal court (in The Hague. Photograph: 
Martijn Beekman/EPA 
The ICC’s 10 separate, preliminary examinations cover a broader geographical 
area: Afghanistan, Burundi, Colombia, Gabon, Guinea, Iraq, Nigeria, Palestine, 
the Gaza flotilla and Ukraine. The Iraq examination is into the conduct of 
British troops following the 2003 invasion; the Afghan inquiry could target 
both US and Taliban forces.

The prosecutor has so far secured five convictions, including that of Thomas 
Lubanga Dyilo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2012/jul/10/icc-sentences-thomas-lubanga-14-years>
, a Congolese warlord who forcibly conscripted child soldiers and whose rebel 
followers carried out massacres, rapes and mutilations.



Prof Sir Geoffrey Nice QC, who led the prosecution of Slobodan Milošević at 
the international criminal tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), was in 
The Hague for the ICC’s annual assembly. He accepts there is a risk of collapse 
but is determined the court should survive.

“The ICC may have demonstrated shortcomings, unsurprisingly, in its early 
years,” he told The Guardian. “We hope it is doing better now. It was 
unfortunate or worse that it only pursued African countries even though some of 
these case were a result of African countries referring their own continuing 
conflicts in order to get the ICC on their government’s side.

“The three withdrawals and other threatened withdrawals will not terminate the 
court immediately but the court needs now to put on its best performances and 
produce truly creditable results.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Frising-nationalism-leaves-international-criminal-court-at-risk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F99c2f21f1c4238bc081c3304a28086de2c12d61f%2F0_30_2048_1228%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rising%20nationalism%20leaves%20international%20criminal%20court%20at%20risk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Frising-nationalism-leaves-international-criminal-court-at-risk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rising%20nationalism%20leaves%20international%20criminal%20court%20at%20risk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Frising-nationalism-leaves-international-criminal-court-at-risk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F99c2f21f1c4238bc081c3304a28086de2c12d61f%2F0_30_2048_1228%2F2048.jpg>
 Former Yugoslav president Slobodan Milošević is led into the UN war crimes 
tribunal during his five-year trial. He died in his cell before the trial had 
concluded. Photograph: Jerry Lampen/AFP/Getty Images 
The court was hobbled from the beginning, Nice said, by the world’s most 
populous states’ refusal to ratify the treaty. “The saddest consequence of 
recent withdrawals is that the prospect of their ever joining becomes ever more 
remote … but there is work for the court to do if it can find courage and 
enough funds.”

Nice believes that the UN security council should be challenged “more bluntly” 
when its members exercise a veto in favour of another state – “by the US to 
protect Israel, by China to protect North Korea” – which prevents judicial 
accountability for crimes.

Prof Philippe Sands QC, who has appeared as an advocate before the ICC, said: 
“There are clear signals of concern about the future wellbeing of the ICC in 
relation to Africa.


“If you take what is happening to the ICC along with Brexit and Trump, there’s 
a real warning here of a threat to the post-1945 settlement that involved free 
trade, prohibitions on the use of violence and protection of human rights. 
There’s a danger of that unravelling and, if that happens, then of a return to 
the absolute sovereignty of the 1930s.”


The League of Nations and its attempts to establish an international legal 
order between the wars broke down in Africa over its failure to prevent the 
Italian invasion of what was then Abyssinia in 1934.


The latest pattern of defections suggests an element of self-interest. The 
objections from President Rodrigo Duterte of the Philippines follow awarning 
from the ICC’s prosecutor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/14/philippines-drug-crackdown-warning-icc-rodrigo-duterte>
 that the country could be investigated for the extrajudicial killing of 
thousands of alleged drug users and dealers.

Burundi, meanwhile, is the subject of a preliminary examination by the court; 
and Russia’s denunciation comes shortly aftercalls from the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/11/russia-should-be-investigated-for-syrian-war-crimes-says-boris-johnson>
 and US for its Syrian bombing to be subject to an ICC war crimes investigation.

One aim of establishing the ICC was to replace specialist tribunals dealing 
with former Yugoslavia, Rwanda and Sierra Leone, which had considerable success 
dealing with the aftermath of individual conflicts but faced allegations of 
dispensing victors’ justice.

The ICC is not short on ambition. It recently announced that it would look at 
environmental destruction crimes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/sep/15/hague-court-widens-remit-to-include-environmental-destruction-cases>
 and illegal land grabs. Bensouda has suggested that the court may have 
jurisdiction over many foreign fighters in Syria and Iraq even though those 
nations are not member states.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Frising-nationalism-leaves-international-criminal-court-at-risk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8756337d3b7eb8297a49a035f2526c1fef15bbc1%2F1390_0_1560_1950%2F1560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rising%20nationalism%20leaves%20international%20criminal%20court%20at%20risk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Frising-nationalism-leaves-international-criminal-court-at-risk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rising%20nationalism%20leaves%20international%20criminal%20court%20at%20risk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Frising-nationalism-leaves-international-criminal-court-at-risk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8756337d3b7eb8297a49a035f2526c1fef15bbc1%2F1390_0_1560_1950%2F1560.jpg>
 Richard Goldstone. Photograph: Fabrice Coffrini/AFP/Getty Images 
Within South Africa, notice of withdrawal from the ICC has triggered an 
anguished national debate. Judge Richard Goldstone, who served as a prosecutor 
at the ICTY, has been leading the campaign to prevent South Africa’s exit.

“President Nelson Mandela, together with his administration, was a firm 
supporter of the ICC and more generally on furthering the mechanisms of 
international justice,”Goldstone wrote 
<https://www.justsecurity.org/33731/justice-richard-goldstone-south-africas-attempt-withdraw-intl-criminal-court-unconstitutional/>
 in October. “This is an unfortunate development that detracts from their 
inspiring legacy. It will also encourage those states, and specially in Africa, 
whose leaders have good reason to fear the international criminal court, to 
follow this most unfortunate example.”

Responding to threats of withdrawal, an ICC spokesman said Russia was never a 
full member-state party at the ICC and that the Philippine government has made 
no official declaration of withdrawal.

The spokesman said: “It is a sovereign right for each state to decide whether 
or not to join and to remain party to the Rome statute.”

The spokesman denied that the ICC focused on one specific region of the world. 
“Geographic considerations as such have no part in the exercise of this legal 
mandate,” he added. “Most of the ICC‎ investigations in Africa were opened at 
the request of the African governments themselves. Two more were opened 
following referrals to the ICC prosecutor by the United Nations security 
council.”

In response to the underfunding of the ICC budget estimate, the spokesman 
said: “The court requested a particular level of funding but the amount 
allotted by the assembly was lower and therefore the court will have to adjust 
its planned activities for 2017 in response to the budget that was adopted. The 
court will continue to carry out its work and will use the approved resources 
in the best and most efficient way to fulfil its mandate.”

• This article was amended on 3 January 2017 to clarify that Geoffrey Nice led 
the prosecution of Slobodan Milošević at the international criminal tribunal 
for the former Yugoslavia.
 