
In February, Lebanon’s tourism ministry released a promotional video shot 
using drones. It shows off the country’s postcard beauty: its historic cities, 
snow-capped mountains and pristine rivers, a country where you can (supposedly) 
ski in the morning and swim in the ocean in the afternoon.


Conspicuously overlooked in the film is Beirut’s garbage crisis – the rampant 
dumping of trash in the city’s parking lots, valleys and shoreline, which has 
caused an environmental and public health disaster that the state is eager to 
downplay.

A new video from the You Stink movement <http://www.youstink.org/>, released 
this week, parodies the tourist board film. It too features a soundtrack of 
chirping birds and relaxing new-age music, and begins by panning over a lush 
pine forest, slowly rising above the treetops to reveal the very real sight of 
hundreds of tons of household waste, cutting a path through the greenery like a 
natural river of garbage.

“We wanted to counter the lies of the ministry of tourism,” says activist Aly 
Sleem. “They are talking about a greenLebanon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/lebanon>, and this is humiliating us as 
Lebanese. Trash covers forests, rivers and lots of areas which are considered 
touristic.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F11%2Friver-garbage-parody-drone-video-mocks-beirut-lebanon-rubbish-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffda69351c9668e30a3e25ec35f9703efa4212a6f%2F0_0_859_614%2F859.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=River%20of%20garbage%3A%20parody%20drone%20video%20mocks%20Beirut's%20rubbish%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F11%2Friver-garbage-parody-drone-video-mocks-beirut-lebanon-rubbish-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=River%20of%20garbage%3A%20parody%20drone%20video%20mocks%20Beirut%27s%20rubbish%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F11%2Friver-garbage-parody-drone-video-mocks-beirut-lebanon-rubbish-crisis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffda69351c9668e30a3e25ec35f9703efa4212a6f%2F0_0_859_614%2F859.jpg>
 The protest against Beirut’s rubbish crisis has increasingly resorted to viral 
videos and memes. Photograph: You Stink 
Since the simmering rubbish crisis quite literally overflowed eight months 
ago, when the country’s main landfill reached capacity and municipalities 
started dumping it wherever they could find a bit of open land – or just 
burning it – tens of thousands of Lebanese people have protested using music 
videos, throwing eggs, even building a medieval catapult to hurl trash bags at 
the prime minister’s office. Activists say the government’s failure to find 
alternate sites has meant rampant illegal dumping under highway overpasses, in 
abandoned lots or concealed in country roads. They have demanded sanitation 
reform, urged recycling efforts and called for the resignation of ministers.


Many blame wider post-war corruption, which has long hamstrung the Lebanese 
state’s attempts to deliver basic public services. For decades, power outages 
and poor drinking water have forced citizens to rely on generators and bottled 
water. Meanwhile,public space and coastline access are rapidly disappearing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/mar/17/rem-koolhaas-dalieh-beirut-shore-coast>
 as politicians approve luxury towers and private marinas.

But it is the stench of festering garbage throughout Beirut that has caused 
the biggest cross-sectarian show of public outrage in recent years.

Public health officials and researchers from the American University of Beirut 
have warned that airbornetoxin levels have grown 
<http://www.voanews.com/content/lebanon-trash-crisis-drags-on-worries-doctors/3224268.html>
 exponentially, including aspike in carcinogens 
<http://www.aub.edu.lb/news/2015/pages/carcinogen-waste-fires.aspx>, as a 
result of dump burning – a tactic used by many municipalities as a makeshift 
solution. There are fears that garbage concealed in rural areas has seeped into 
the water table.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.facebook.com%2Ftol3etre7etkom%2Fvideos%2F1690685194526928%2F&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.facebook.com%2Ftol3etre7etkom%2Fvideos%2F1690685194526928%2F>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.facebook.com%2Ftol3etre7etkom%2Fvideos%2F1690685194526928%2F&media=>
Video (click image to watch): A medieval-style catapult hurls garbage at police 
in Beirut, Lebanon 
The live protests shrank considerably over the winter after a summer crackdown 
by government forces that saw the use oftear gas, water cannons 
<https://www.rt.com/news/313128-lebanon-teargas-water-cannon/> and the arrest 
of hundreds of demonstrators. You Stink has increasingly resorted to the 
internet, using viral videos, infographics andmemes 
<https://www.facebook.com/tol3etre7etkom/photos/pb.1617833955145386.-2207520000.1457560020./1698796760382438/?type=3&theater>
 on its Facebook page to shame politicians. They have filmed themselves offering
“free delivery” <https://www.facebook.com/tol3etre7etkom/videos> of garbage 
bags to government ministries and unleashing hundreds of ping pong balls down 
the hill facing the Grand Serail. They have also staged ballroom dancing at 
dump sites and dedicated particular garbage piles to individual cabinet 
ministers.


The tourism minister has threatened to sue 
<https://www.dailystar.com.lb/News/Lebanon-News/2016/Mar-08/341132-lebanon-tourism-ministry-threatens-you-stink-over-spoof-video.ashx>
 the makers of the parody film for using the ministry’s logo, saying it “harmed 
Lebanon’s image” and violated copyrights.

“They only care about their logo, not about the garbage,” Sleem says.

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 