
Wales have in the past used their November encounter with a second-tier nation 
to give their reserves a run, but a series of unimpressive performances and a 
couple of unexpected results mean six 2013 Test Lions will take the field 
against Japan in Cardiff on Saturday.

The Wales interim head coach, Rob Howley, who is also aware that only a 
comfortable victory against Japan will consolidate his side’s place in the top 
six of the world rankings, has made 10 changes from the side whodefeated 
Argentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/12/wales-argentina-autumn-internationals-match-report>
 last Saturday without forsaking experience.

Jamie Roberts, who was dropped for that match after the heavy defeat by 
Australia, and Jonathan Davies resume their midfield partnership; Leigh 
Halfpenny moves to the wing from full-back, swapping places with Liam Williams. 
In the back five in the pack, Alun Wyn Jones, Dan Lydiate and Sam Warburton 
start.

Semesa Rokoduguni’s return offers England impact against his native Fiji
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/16/england-fiji-samesa-rokodugini-autumn-internationals>
Cory Hill makes his first start in the second row, Gareth Anscombe gets a rare 
outing at outside‑half and Nicky Smith replaces the veteran Gethin Jenkins 
whose 36th birthday present was a rest before the match against South Africa 
next week. Keelan Giles, the uncapped 18-year-old wing, is on the bench.

“The side we have picked shows the huge respect we have for Japan who play a 
high-octane game and score tries from everywhere,” Howley said. “It is 
important to have experience in the team and it gives us the chance to play the 
likes of Cory and James King [the No8] alongside established players and if 
Keelan comes on, he will have experience all around him.”

Giles, who was called into the squad last week after impressing in the opening 
two months of the season with Ospreys, has already made his mark in training, 
earning comparisons with Wales’s record try‑scorer, Shane Williams, with his 
nimble footwork and pace. Howley advised caution. “Give him time and not as 
many headlines as he has had over the last couple of weeks,” he said. “The 
Ospreys have been impressive in the way they have developed a young talent and 
it is important we continue that on the international scene. The hope is that 
he has an opportunity to come on and enjoy his first touch of the ball in 
international rugby.”

Wales were beaten by Japan when the sides last met, 23-8 in Tokyo in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jun/15/japan-upset-wales-historic-win>. 
Eddie Jones coached the 2019 World Cup hosts then while Wales fielded a virtual 
shadow side with 16 players involved in the Lions tour to Australia that year. 
Six of the 23 then are in the matchday squad this weekend, including Liam 
Williams.

“We are treating this as if it were a World Cup group game or a knockout 
qualifier,” said Warburton, who has reclaimed the captaincy and the position of 
openside flanker. “The win, no matter whether it is good or ugly, is the most 
important thing and if we get an opportunity for three points in front of the 
posts, we will take it. We want to take momentum into next week’s game.”

Wales team to face Japan

Liam Williams (Scarlets); L Halfpenny (Toulon), J Davies (Scarlets), J Roberts 
(Harlequins), A Cuthbert (Cardiff Blues); G Anscombe (Cardiff Blues), Lloyd 
Williams (Cardiff Blues); N Smith (Ospreys), S Baldwin (Ospreys), S Lee 
(Scarlets), C Hill (Newport Gwent Dragons), A W Jones (Ospreys), D Lydiate 
(Ospreys), S Warburton (Cardiff Blues, capt), J King (Ospreys).

Replacements: K Dacey (Cardiff Blues), R Gill (Cardiff Blues), S Andrews 
(Cardiff Blues), J Ball (Scarlets), R Moriarty (Gloucester), G Davies 
(Scarlets), S Davies (Ospreys), K Giles (Ospreys).
 