
It was a departure not intended to make a splash. It came with the soft hiss 
of the airlock at the entrance to the bunker and the flutter of a single piece 
of paper into the unseasonably cold Friday evening. “It’s the right time to 
go,” said the communiqué, and late on this day was the right time to do it 
without a fuss. The bunker door closed again automatically and, one last time, 
the air was sucked out of the lock that separated theRugby Football Union’s 
director of professional rugby from the outside world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/29/rob-andrew-leave-rfu-end-of-season>
.

Nigel Melville replaces Rob Andrew as RFU’s director of professional rugby
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/29/rob-andrew-leave-rfu-end-of-season>
How different it might have been. Once upon a time, Rob Andrew 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rob-andrew> was both darling and rebel in 
the deeply cautious world of English rugby. As a player he was outstanding in 
an understated way, easily seeing off the challenge of the more flamboyant 
Stuart Barnes and winning 71 England caps, going on two Lions tours and playing 
in three World Cups. He was brave – a tackling outside-half in his day was a 
pioneer – and pinpoint-accurate with his kicking and much more ruthlessly 
determined than would ever be revealed by either his fresh countenance or his 
nickname of “Squeaky”.

This steeliness prompted him to leave Wasps – where he had played outside the 
scrum-half who now replaces him at the RFU, Nigel Melville – for Sir John 
Hall’s Newcastle at the turn of the game from amateur to professional. These 
were rugby’s Yukon days, and in its rush the poor souls of the governing body 
at Twickenham were crushed underfoot, with their hands held aloft, eyes raised 
to heaven and the words “Let’s all respect the moratorium,” dying on their lips.

Andrew was at the head of the charge: a winning player, a transforming coach 
and the talent-spotter who discovered Jonny Wilkinson. He was the baron of 
Newcastle and a long way from Twickenham. There, once the RFU picked themselves 
up, dusted themselves down and thought on how to regain some measure of 
control, somebody had the traditional idea of ordering a report, but gave it a 
brilliant twist by suggesting that it be written by one of the insurrection’s 
ringleaders.

And so it was that the Andrew Report was commissioned. It turned out to be 
wonderfully ahead of its time, with its promotion of a structured season in 
which the domestic, European and Six Nations elements worked as a progression, 
one leading to the next rather than as overlapping rivals for space in a 
crowded calendar.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Frob-andrew-rebel-establishment-master-of-survival-rfu%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe26af3bb78b977de4ec16d4f670fcede66226559%2F0_83_4431_2659%2F4431.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rob%20Andrew%3A%20the%20rebel%20who%20became%20the%20establishment%E2%80%99s%20master%20of%20survival%20%7C%20Eddie%20Butler&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Frob-andrew-rebel-establishment-master-of-survival-rfu%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rob%20Andrew%3A%20the%20rebel%20who%20became%20the%20establishment%E2%80%99s%20master%20of%20survival%20%7C%20Eddie%20Butler&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Frob-andrew-rebel-establishment-master-of-survival-rfu%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe26af3bb78b977de4ec16d4f670fcede66226559%2F0_83_4431_2659%2F4431.jpg>
 Rob Andrew sits alongside Martin Johnson, as the England manager announces his 
resignation in November 2011. Photograph: David Rogers/Getty Images 
Such glorious nonsense never became reality, but it helped the far more 
achievable goal of turning the rebel. Andrew stayed on the outside long enough 
to be the yelp on BBC radio that greeted the drop goal landed by his protege, 
Jonny, at the World Cup final of 2003, but by 2006 he was part of the 
establishment, the RFU’s director of elite rugby. And into the bunker he 
descended, deeper and deeper, changing his title – to operations director to 
professional rugby director to director of professional rugby – but unable to 
check the equally downward direction of English rugby after 2003. He oversaw 
the sacking of England coaches Brian Ashton, Andy Robinson and, after 2011, 
Martin Johnson.

The old rebel was now the establishment’s master of survival: changing titles, 
moving sideways, losing influence, but still there. In his defence, from deep 
underground came the agreement he brokered between England and the clubs on the 
matter of player release. And he leaves with the update about to be signed. 
They are important, but hardly the output of a visionary.

In his place comes the older Melville – 55 to Andrew’s 53 – who never 
fulfilled his promise as a player, thanks to a whole catalogue of injuries, but 
who has at least, after coaching Wasps and Gloucester, been out in the world. 
More specifically, he has been selling rugby to America as CEO and president of 
rugby operations for USA Rugby. Now that’s a title.

It means he’s used to the sound of a fanfare, which will make a contrast with 
the soft hiss of the airlock at Twickenham. Rob Andrew is leaving the bunker; 
strike up the Melville trumpets.
 