
Tired of political correctness, debates on cultural appropriation and being 
shamed over racist jokes on Twitter? Don’t worry. There is still an entire 
country you can safely stereotype – and it’sRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, of course.

Although it has resulted in some controversy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/05/robbie-williams-party-like-a-russian-video>
, Robbie Williams’sParty Like a Russian 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MdYGQ7B0Vew> is not likely to negatively 
impact his career, spark a protest, or cause Robbie to be no-platformed should 
he suddenly feel the burning need to speak at an academic conference. It’s just 
a song about those crazy Russians, with their vodka-soaked escapades and 
curious penchant for putting dolls inside other dolls. Everybody knows that 
stereotyping Russians is a harmless bit of fun – and if you have a problem with 
it, you’re an oversensitive loser who can’t take a joke.

The idea that there are “good” and “bad” stereotypes is not new and, as Yale 
University professorMarijeta Bozovic has noted 
<http://jordanrussiacenter.org/news/party-like-russian/#.V_UW0DYrKrM>, there is 
something odd about the way in which tired cultural cliches are “smilingly 
tolerated by cosmopolitan elites when directed at Slavs in the 21st century”.

At the same time, Williams’s song is more than just a collection of dumb 
references to oligarchs and Rasputin; it is also quite obviously a 
tongue-in-cheek response to the notorious excesses of the Russian elite. Lines 
such as “I put a bank inside a car inside a plane inside a boat / It takes half 
the western world just to keep my ship afloat” can also be read as a wink in 
the direction of all of those western lawyers and politicians who have no 
problem letting corrupt Russians store their dirty money abroad, sanctions be 
damned.

Russians outraged by 'crude stereotyping' in Robbie Williams video
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/05/robbie-williams-party-like-a-russian-video>
At a time when Russia’s poverty rate is growing 
<https://themoscowtimes.com/articles/poverty-hits-critical-level-government-48121>
, it is telling that it was pro-Kremlin media outlets such asVesti 
<http://www.vesti.ru/doc.html?id=2805124> and Life News 
<https://life.ru/t/%D0%B7%D0%B2%D1%83%D0%BA/910689/orghanizatory_prazdnikov_piesnia_o_russkikh_oligharkhakh_ostavit_uiliamsa_biez_zakazov>
 that have had a particularly tetchy response to the pop song in question. 
Protests by Russia’s working-classfarmers 
<https://www.opendemocracy.net/od-russia/svetlana-bolotnikova/pitchforks-are-coming-russia-protests>
 andtruckers 
<http://www.rferl.org/a/russia-protesting-truckers-christmas-far-from-home/27472560.html>
 have grown in number over the past year, and in light of that popular 
reminders of how great life is at the top are a nuisance. And although the song 
ostensibly targets wealthy Russian businessmen, it’s no secret that high-level 
Russian officials enjoy an equal, if not greater, level of wealth. Big business 
and big politics in Russia are inexorably linked, and “Russian oligarch” v 
“Russian politician” is a false dichotomy.

Not only that, but Williams is absolutely right to defend his song on the 
grounds that “Russians are ridiculously good partiers”. They are. Whether rich, 
poor or somewhere in between, Russians know how to have fun. Do you expect to 
have a wild time when you get together for a dinner party with a bunch of 
middle-class western professionals who have spouses and children? No, you 
expect to drink Merlot and debate “helicopter parenting”.

A similar evening with a bunch of middle-class Russian professionals (and 
their spouses, and, sometimes, their children) is more likely to wind up with 
everyone heading off to an underground boxing match, which will lead to a trip 
to greet the sunrise on a roof with everyone in various stages of undress, 
weather permitting. I’m not saying I’ve danced naked on a rooftop in Russia – I 
will admit to nothing – but let’s face it, a regular evening in Russia is often 
anything but.

Russians party like there’s no tomorrow because there may very well not be one

This has nothing to do with how those Russians are innately “wild” and “crazy” 
and “uncouth” – and everything to do with the fact that these people have lived 
under unpredictable governments for generations. They party like there’s no 
tomorrow because there may very well not be one.

Russian intellectuals are fond of lamenting the lack of a “Russian national 
idea”, but the country already has one. It’sYolo 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwjtyJaK48PPAhXBQBQKHbEfB_QQFggeMAA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fen.wikipedia.org%2Fwiki%2FYOLO_(motto)&usg=AFQjCNHBKS9oqKzTYYkLJ0R6d639YsVMtg&sig2=NaelHSIchaKbHy6cyFMEwA>
. Even the plan to seize Crimea, while obviously honed a while ago, was 
executed on a spur-of-the-moment decision. That’s not a stereotype, that’s a 
political and social reality, even if songs about nesting dolls do a poor job 
of capturing it.

Ultimately, the most offensive part of Party Like a Russian has to do with the 
fact that westerners have an easier time laughing at the excesses of Russian 
new money, while ignoring and/or glamorising heedless consumption back home.

When “exotic” foreigners demonstrate their wealth, they’re being ostentatious 
and ridiculous. When locals do it, they’re being perfectly reasonable; which is 
why I’m not holding my breath for the follow-up – “Party Like a Tory”.
 