
After their appearance at Coachella this year, Philadelphia power-pop group 
Sheer Mag performed in a stuffy tattoo parlor with foggy windows in Santa Rosa, 
California. The sleepy city is about an hour north of Oakland and San 
Francisco, and is most famous for being thehometown of Peanuts creator Charles 
Schulz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/dec/21/snoopy-peanuts-movie-charles-schulz-museum-santa-rosa-california>
. The group ate pizza on the sidewalk, loaned some gear to local post-punk 
outfit Creative Adult, and at the end of a spirited set for a churning crowd, 
wore satisfactorily exhausted expressions.

Shows like that are increasingly common in Santa Rosa, and it has a lot to do 
withthe prohibitive cost-of-living 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/05/high-house-prices-san-francisco-tech-boom-inequality>
 in nearby San Francisco. “I had every intention of moving down to the city,” 
said Ian O’Connor, 23, who organized the gig. “But when the time came, it was 
too expensive.” Instead, in the last three years, he has booked dozens of 
all-ages gigs in Santa Rosa, mostly at unofficial venues: detached garages, 
living rooms, lobbies of sympathetic businesses. The scene thrives on the 
participation of people like him, area natives in their early 20s who, not so 
many years ago, would’ve likely moved an hour south to Oakland or San Francisco.

From Bad Brains to Cerebral Ballzy: why hardcore will never die
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/20/hardcore-music-hard-fast-us-punk-rock>
O’Connor stressed that though Santa Rosa is relatively affordable, the local 
punk scene faces challenges that cities with established reputations lack. “If 
you’re in the big city, you can sort of just jump into the stream,” he 
explained. “If you’re in a small town, you have to get down on your hands and 
knees and dig a ditch so that the water can run.”


One hallmark of punk’s inception in the Bay Area and throughout the Pacific 
north-west was the notion of cities as places of possibility, so hollowed out 
by eroding tax bases and selective civic neglect that they seemed “deserted and 
forgotten”, as music journalist Jon Savage wrote ofhis 1978 trip to report 
<https://books.google.com/books?id=g1eXAwAAQBAJ&pg=PA50&lpg=PA50&dq=jon+savage+dead+kennedys&source=bl&ots=XyGsVSkkcR&sig=Zl4kyY-ULOzYpsFrmACNHp5lvto&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjI1JGdmsfPAhUKz2MKHb3WAa8Q6AEINzAE#v=onepage&q=jon%20savage%20dead%20kennedys&f=false>
 on San Francisco punk bands such as Crime andthe Dead Kennedys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2007/nov/03/popandrock3>. “It was there to 
be remapped.”

But with the same cities stricken by intensifying affordability crises – 
premiums on space that make somewhere to live, let alone rehearse and perform, 
available to a dwindling few – they don’t beckon young punks like they used to. 
And though reports of music scenes’ deaths tend to overstate, news of 
shuttering venues (see eulogies for The Smell, The Know, and LoBot) deters some 
of the intrepid transplants needed for invigoration. Dissipating metropolitan 
allure, however, helps account for the strength of scenes in outlying towns.

In Santa Rosa, Acrylics are at the center of things. The five-piece, which 
recently announced a forthcoming record on leading west coast punk label Iron 
Lung, boasts a lashing and cantankerous sound, with staccato turnarounds and 
nervy guitar leads. They share members with a constellation of groups, 
including tightly wound punk outfit Fussy; sturdy hardcore units Rut and 
Service; and the dynamic noise-rock band OVVN.

“The people who before just came to the shows are now setting them up,” said 
Ben Wright, 24, who recorded recent releases by most of the aforementioned 
groups and plays guitar in Acrylics. “It’s been pretty astounding in terms of 
genuine participation… We could move and struggle somewhere else, but I think 
there’s a lot of people who’d like to see Santa Rosa become something like 
Olympia.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Flive-music-punk-move-to-suburbs-out-of-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d3c57849fda81ccbd16f388e5fe6e223359014e%2F189_0_1639_2048%2F1639.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rock%20in%20the%20suburbs%3A%20why%20punk%20moved%20out%20of%20the%20city%20and%20into%20the%20cul-de-sac&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Flive-music-punk-move-to-suburbs-out-of-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rock%20in%20the%20suburbs%3A%20why%20punk%20moved%20out%20of%20the%20city%20and%20into%20the%20cul-de-sac&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Flive-music-punk-move-to-suburbs-out-of-cities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d3c57849fda81ccbd16f388e5fe6e223359014e%2F189_0_1639_2048%2F1639.jpg>
 A band with real fibre: Acrylics at the Nuthole in Seattle. Photograph: J Party
Scott Young, 28, grew up in the Pacific north-west and moved to Olympia, 
Washington, in 2006. Until recently, he played bass in Gag, a winkingly 
scabrous hardcore band that’s lately influenced the genre significantly. Corey 
Rose Evans, 23, moved to Olympia from the Bay Area in 2010 to attend Evergreen 
State College and eventually joined both Vexx, a raucous foursome composed of 
inventive, tactile instrumentalists and a mightily expressive singer; and 
G.L.O.S.S. (“Girls Living Outside Society’s Shit”), a blistering and bold 
hardcore outfit that foregrounds transgender issues and skewers reformist 
politics. The scene is decidedly autonomous, centered around small labels and 
self-organized gigs.

Young and Evans separately explained that despite Olympia’s outsized impact on 
independent music – genesis of riot grrrl, outpost of indie-pop, headquarters 
of K Records and Kill Rock Stars – there’s still a strong sense that every 
participant in the punk scene is integral, not unlike the less developed 
community in Santa Rosa. The scene is decidedly autonomous, represented by 
small labels and unsanctioned venues. Young lamented that ever since Ben 
Trogdon, who publishes the underground broadsheet Nuts, moved to New York a few 
years ago, “No newsletter or printed material has really filled the void.” 
Still, he reckoned, “Olympia does feel like it has the sense of freedom or 
possibility that used to exist more so in the city.”

In a widely publicized Instagram post explaining the band’s decision not to 
work with Epitaph Records, G.L.O.S.S. vocalist Sadie Switchblade ended on a 
similar note, one that resounds throughout small-town punk scenes: “What I’m 
trying to say is that we don’t have to jump into their world, we can create a 
new one.”

What I’m trying to say is that we don’t have to jump into their world, we can 
create a new one

Evans, who said she never paid more than about $100 in rent, put things more 
starkly: “People in Olympia don’t think moving to a bigger city would be 
daunting – just dumb. Why pay five times the rent?”

Throughout the 2000s, Keith Testerman, 35, helped define Portland punk as a 
member of the bands Warcry and Hellshock. Five years ago, he cofounded the 
venue and rehearsal complex Black Water. A developer paid them to leave the 
first location, he said, so they moved across town. “In the past couple years, 
about a half dozen places that had punk shows closed down,” Testerman said. 
“None of them will be able to reopen as a shadow of what they once were.”

According to Samantha Gladu – bassist in the feminist, wrestling-themed 
hardcore band Macho Boys and chief advisor to state senator Chip Shields – 
recent revelations about what a state investigation found to be cripplingly 
over-burdensome nightclub regulations have done little to calm the Portland 
punk scene’s nerves: “Rising rents and recent reporting on the city 
government’s apparent selective regulation for venues leave punks with the 
impression that not only can they not afford Portland, they aren’t part of some 
officials’ vision for Portland.”

Though the average rent is higher in Seattle than Portland, Jensen Ward, 38, 
had a rosier diagnosis for the city’s punk scene. The proprietor of Iron Lung 
Records and drummer in a long-running hardcore band of the same name noted that 
punks often shuttle between Seattle and Olympia; some of them live in houses 
that host shows in Seattle while playing in bands associated with Olympia. 
Indeed, a printed monthly show calendar listing underground punk gigs includes 
Seattle, Olympia, and Tacoma, another Washington town of repute in the scene 
(not least because of the lean post-punk act Criminal Code).

B Rousse, 38, who drums in Oakland hardcore groups Replica and No Statik 
thinks the smaller town gigs are more appealing now. “Anyone in my world who’s 
booking a tour for a punk band goes, ‘Play Santa Rosa. Play Olympia.’ About San 
Francisco, they go, ‘Eh, I don’t know.’”

Of course, Connor Alfaro of Acrylics, OVVN, and Fussy pointed out that the 
urge for young people to move to the city has a lot, if not more, to do with 
the urge to flee their hometowns. “I left Santa Rosa and moved to Oakland for a 
couple of years and I had a great time, but I came home,” he said. “It’s not 
considered a cool city, but people are starting to recognize what we’re doing 
as meaningful.”
 