
The Philippine president, Rodrigo Duterte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/rodrigo-duterte>, lashed out at western 
“bullying” and “hypocrisy” during his first meeting with his Russian 
counterpart, Vladimir Putin, and said that when it came to alliances the United 
States could not be trusted.

'He's vulgar – but honest': Filipinos on Duterte's first 100 days in office
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/08/rodrigo-duterte-first-100-days-philippines-president>
 In talks with Putin during the Apec summit in Lima, Duterte held nothing back 
in hisviews about major powers like the United States 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/24/us-philippines-president-rodrigo-duterte-separation-comments>
, suggesting he is sticking to his guns onrealigning foreign policy away from 
Washington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/26/philippine-president-calls-for-removal-of-all-us-troops>
, despite his warm words for the incoming US president, Donald Trump.

 “Historically I have been identified with the western world. It was good 
until it lasted,” he told the Russian leader.

 “And of late I see a lot of these western nations bullying small nations. And 
not only that, they are into so much hypocrisy,” he said, according to a 
transcript of Saturday’s meeting provided by his office.

Philippine president calls for removal of all US troops
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/26/philippine-president-calls-for-removal-of-all-us-troops>
Putin congratulated Duterte on his May election win and said he had done a lot 
in a very short time to build trust and confidence between Russia and the
Philippines <https://www.theguardian.com/world/philippines>.

 Duterte responded with similar words and then chided western powers, 
particularly the United States, for intervening in conflicts for their own 
national interest and cajoling others to side with them.

Duterte’s overtures to Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> are 
similar to those he made to China, until recently a bitter rival. He is now 
praising Beijing and tapping it for investment in a stunning about-face that 
has unnerved a region wary of a Chinese hegemony taking shape in south-east 
Asia.

 The mercurial former mayor insists the shift is his pursuit of an independent 
foreign policy, but that has come with repeated threats and verbal tirades 
against the United States, for decades a staunch ally, investor and donor.

 Prior to leaving for Peru, Duterte said he might follow Russia and withdraw 
from the international criminal court (ICC) because of western criticism of his 
deadly war on drugs. He said if Russia and China decided to create a “new 
order” in the world he would be first to join.

 In his talk with Putin, Duterte blasted the United States and its western 
allies for taking the lead in wars he said had ultimately failed.

 “They seem to start a war but are afraid to go to war. That is what’s wrong 
with America and the other,” he said.

 “They were waging war in so many places, in Vietnam, in Afghanistan and in 
Iraq … They insist if you are allied with them that they follow you.”

 Duterte has spoken of his admiration for President Xi Jinping of China and 
also for the leadership of Putin. In an interview with Al Jazeera broadcast on 
Thursday he described Putin as sincere, and joked that he had a “hillbilly” 
style.
 