
President Rodrigo Duterte <https://www.theguardian.com/world/rodrigo-duterte> 
of the Philippines has threatened corrupt government officials with the 
prospect of being thrown out of a helicopter, warning he has done it himself 
before.

The former prosecutor said he once hurled a Chinese man suspected of rape and 
murder out of a helicopter.

The global rise of populist political movements – Project podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/audio/2016/dec/29/dramatic-global-rise-populist-political-movements-project-podcast>
“If you are corrupt I will fetch you using a helicopter to Manila and I will 
throw you out. I have done this before, why would I not do it again?” Duterte 
said during a speech to victims of a typhoon on Tuesday, a clip of which was 
posted on a video feed of the president’s office.

He later appeared to attempt to row back on the claim, telling CNN: “We had no 
helicopter. We don’t use that”. He described the incident as “just the creative 
imagination of this Tulfo,” without explaining what a Tulfo was.

 It comes a few weeks after he admitted killing people during his 22 years as 
a mayor of Davao city, sometimes riding a motorcycle looking for “encounters to 
kill”. He said those killings were part of legitimate police operations, 
including a hostage incident. Some senators have warned Duterte he risks 
impeachment over his comments.

 Duterte also said six people arrested last week during a seizure in the 
capital of more than half a tonne of methamphetamine, known locally as “shabu”, 
were fortunate he was out of town. “They were lucky I was not in Manila that 
time. If I had known there were that much shabu inside a house, I would 
definitely kill you,” he said. “Let’s not make any drama, I will personally gun 
you down if nobody else will do it.”

 It was not immediately clear when or where the helicopter incident Duterte 
spoke of took place. His spokesman, Ernesto Abella, also suggested it may not 
have actually happened. “Let’s just say, urban legend,” Abella said, without 
elaborating.

 The United Nations’ top human rights envoy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/20/un-rights-chief-calls-for-investigation-into-duterte-claims>
 has called for aninvestigation into Duterte’s claims of killing people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/23/philippines-to-investigate-president-dutertes-claims-he-killed-suspects>
, to which Duterte last week responded by calling him “stupid”, an “idiot” and 
a “son of a bitch” who should go back to school.
 