
She has journeyed from Ambridge, which was rocked by her character’s wild 
affairs with both the young Grundy brothers, to Hollywood, where she is one of 
the most exciting and in-demand stars.

From 2017 the Birmingham-born actor Felicity Jones will also take her place in 
theNational Portrait Gallery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/national-portrait-gallery> in a new 
commission through the John Kobal new work award.


In the same week that Jones, 33, can be seen in cinemas as the lead in the new 
Star Wars film, Rogue One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/13/rogue-one-a-star-wars-story-review-felicity-jones-gareth-edwards>
, the NPG unveiled a new photographic portrait, which will go on display next 
year.

It was taken by the photographer Laura Pannack <http://laurapannack.com/> 
among the reeds of the Walthamstow Marshes in north-east London.

Pannack said the marshes were near her home and were chosen over other 
park-based locations because they “felt more unusual and emotive. We both 
agreed it felt wildly atmospheric.

“Felicity was incredibly enthusiastic and really keen to contribute ideas to 
ensure the portrait was a creative collaboration.”

Jones’s parents worked on the Express & Star in Wolverhampton, her father as a 
journalist and her mother in advertising.

She has carved out a stellar movie career with a CV that includes Like Crazy, 
The Amazing Spider-Man 2 and The Theory of Everything, in which she played Jane 
Hawking.

For 10 years she was in The Archers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-archers> as Emma, daughter of 
Neil and Susan Carter, and her character went out with both Will and the less 
boring Ed Grundy.

A teenage Jones was also a star of the ITV children’s series The Worst Witch 
before something of a breakthrough year in 2007 when she took the lead in ITV’s 
Northanger Abbey and made her stage debut inPolly Stenham’s That Face at the 
Royal Court <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2007/apr/26/theatre3>.

The John Kobal award has been given annually since 2012 to a photographer 
under 35 whose work is selected for the Taylor Wessing photographic portrait 
prize at the NPG.

Simon Crocker, chairman of the John Kobal Foundation, said: “When you get 
perfect harmony between a captivating sitter like Felicity and a talented 
photographer like Laura you get a wonderful portrait like this – thoughtful, 
fresh and intriguing. We could not be more pleased with it.”
 