
Thousands of Rohingya Muslims who have fled to Bangladesh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bangladesh> from Myanmar where they have 
been attacked by security forces are being pushed back by the Bangladeshi 
authorities, according to Amnesty International.

Those that do make it to makeshift camps in the town of Cox’s Bazaar are 
facing shortages of food and water, and some are suffering from severe 
malnutrition.


The Rohingya are fleeing military operations in Myanmar in which scores of 
people have been killed and as many as 30,000 displaced. The attacks are in 
reprisal for an assault on three border posts last month that left nineMyanmar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/myanmar> police officers dead, but the 
Rohingya have been persecuted in the country for years.


Bangladeshi border guards have detained and forcibly returned hundreds of 
people, Amnesty said on Friday. The actions were in violation of international 
law, which prohibits the return of people to a country or place where they are 
at serious risk, it added.


Myanmar must react to humanitarian crisis | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/28/myanmar-must-react-to-humanitarian-crisis>
“The Rohingya are being squeezed by the callous actions of both the Burmese 
[Myanmar] and Bangladesh authorities,” said Champa Patel, Amnesty’s South Asia 
director.


“Fleeing collective punishment in Burma, they are being pushed back by the 
Bangladesh authorities. Trapped between these cruel fates, their desperate need 
for food, water and medical care is not being addressed.”


She added: “The Bangladeshi government must not add to the suffering of the 
Rohingya. They should be recognised and protected as refugees fleeing 
persecution, not punished for who they are.”


Earlier this week, a senior UN official, John McKissick, accused Myanmar of 
seeking to ethnically cleanse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/24/rohingya-flee-to-bangladesh-to-escape-myanmar-military-strikes>
 the country of its Muslim minority.


Aung San Suu Kyi, Myanmar’s de facto leader, has been criticised for not doing 
more to end the military actions, which – according to witness accounts given 
to Amnesty – include firing at villagers from helicopter gunships, torching 
hundreds of homes, carrying out arbitrary arrests and raping women and girls.

Who are the Rohingya 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=50ada5b7-66e0-4fc1-b40f-c01f1fa3ba76>
The Myanmar government has denied allegations of human rights violations by 
the military and has accused “Rohingya lobbyists” of disseminating fabricated 
accounts. Access to the area for aid workers, human rights monitors and 
independent journalists is effectively barred, said Amnesty.


A 38-year-old man told Amnesty: “My sister and brother were both kidnapped by 
the army. I saw with my own eyes how the military burned down our village, and 
how soldiers raped women and girls.”


Another man, aged 58, said: “We saw helicopters firing on the village. We ran 
into the forest to save our lives.”


A woman aged 44 said soldiers had handcuffed young men in her village before 
shooting them dead and pushing their bodies into mass graves.

“The response of the army to the attacks on security forces six weeks ago went 
far beyond what was necessary and proportionate,” said Patel. “Instead of 
investigating and arresting specific suspects, the army carried out operations 
amounting to collective punishment.”

There are about 1 million Rohingya in Myanmar who are denied citizenship. 
Hundreds of thousands have fled to Bangladesh, many of whom live in camps in 
Cox’s Bazaar. The Bangladesh government has refused to grant refugee status to 
Rohingya arriving from Myanmar since 1992.

 