
Rolf Noskwith, the last surviving member of the team put together by Alan 
Turing <https://www.theguardian.com/science/alan-turing> to break the German 
navy’s Enigma ciphers during the second world war, would never have been 
allowed to play a leading role in the work of Bletchley Park, the codebreaking 
centre in Buckinghamshire, if the views of Britain’s security chiefs had held 
sway.

Noskwith, who has died aged 97, was studying mathematics at Trinity College, 
Cambridge, in 1941 when he was spotted as a potential codebreaker. But he was 
initially banned from going to Bletchley because he had been born inGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> and was therefore seen as a 
security risk.

Trinity had indeed produced some notable traitors: four of the KGB’s Cambridge 
spies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/oct/23/mi5-mi6-coverup-cambridge-spy-ring-archive-papers>
 had studied there, none of them spotted by the Security Service, which even 
recruited Guy Burgess as an agent and Anthony Blunt as an officer, while 
sanctioning Kim Philby’s employment by MI6 andJohn Cairncross 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituaries-john-cairncross-1576877.html>
’s role as a Bletchley Park intelligence officer.

By contrast, the suspicion of Noskwith was surprising given that he was a 
German Jew whose family had emigrated to Britain shortly before Hitler came to 
power. Fortunately the authorities relented and after being interviewed by CP 
Snow, then a civil service commissioner, and Hugh Alexander, the administrative 
head of the Hut 8 naval Enigma team, Noskwith arrived at Bletchley in 1941, 
aged 22. He joined a Hut 8 team that included Joan Clarke, who at one point was 
engaged to Turing, and which was about to begin breaking the naval Enigma 
ciphers on a daily basis.

The ability to read messages sent by German U-boats giving their locations 
allowed the Admiralty to re-route allied convoys around the U-boat “wolf 
packs”, which had sunk large numbers of allied ships bringing supplies and US 
troops across the Atlantic. Breaking those messages is estimated to have cut at 
least two years off the end of the war.

In February 1942, the German navy introduced the more complex Shark four-rotor 
Enigma machine (the basic naval machine had three rotors). Hut 8’s inability to 
break it allowed the U-boats to pick off the Atlantic convoys one by one, but 
by mid-December 1942 the team had found the key, and thereafter the U-boats 
were on the run, relentlessly taken out by long-range Liberator aircraft on the 
basis of locations deciphered at Bletchley.

By the end of the war, Noskwith was so steeped in codebreaking that, he said: 
“I was unable to tear myself away.” He stayed with Bletchley Park’s successor 
organisation,GCHQ <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/gchq>, when it moved to 
Eastcote in north-west London, working first on a backlog of Japanese naval 
attache messages that required a similar technique to naval Enigma, and then 
concentrating on codes and ciphers used by Tito’s Yugoslavia.

Noskwith was born Rolf Noskovitch in Chemnitz, Germany, the son of Polish 
Jews, Malka (nee Ginsberg) and Chaim, who owned a clothing factory in the city. 
The family moved to Britain in 1932, not because of persecution – although it 
was already rampant – but because tariffs on their goods made them too 
expensive to export to the UK.

Rolf’s father decided to change the family name to Noskwith and then set up 
Charnos <https://charnos.co.uk/>, a textile business based in Ilkeston, 
Derbyshire, which capitalised on the growing popularity of stockings and 
lingerie. Rolf studied at Nottingham high school before going to Cambridge.

He left GCHQ to join the family business in 1946. A year later he had a chance 
meeting withWalter Eytan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/may/29/guardianobituaries1>, another 
former member of Hut 8 who was then involved in setting up the state of Israel. 
Eytan asked Noskwith if he would come and break codes for the Israelis – but he 
turned down the offer.

In 1957, by which time he had become chairman of Charnos, Noskwith married 
Annette Greenbaum, a German Jew who had come to Britain on the Kindertransport, 
the refugee system which brought some 10,000 Jewish children to the UK. She was 
the daughter of Franz Greenbaum, Turing’s psychiatrist in the period leading up 
to his death in 1954.

Throughout his later life, Noskwith retained a strong interest in 
codebreaking, contributing a chapter to Codebreakers: The Inside Story of 
Bletchley Park (1993), edited byFH Hinsley 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/obituaries/obituary-professor-sir-harry-hinsley-1145675.html>
 andAlan Stripp 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/obituaries/4969589/Alan-Stripp.html>, as well 
as a more expansive account of his reminiscences in The Bletchley Park 
Codebreakers (2011), edited by Ralph Erskine and me.

After seeing the 2014 film The Imitation Game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/16/the-imitation-game-review-engrossing-thriller-benedict-cumberbatch>
, in which Benedict Cumberbatch played Turing, Noskwith compiled a long list of 
the movie’s errors. He routinely kept it in his pocket and would pull it out 
whenever anyone asked him if the film accurately reflected life at Bletchley 
Park.

He is survived by Annette and by their son, Adrian.

• Rolf Noskwith, codebreaker and businessman, born 19 June 1919; died 3 
January 2017
 