
Rolls-Royce <https://www.theguardian.com/business/rollsroycegroup> has said 
annual cost cuts will be at the top of its target range and it is increasingly 
looking to the future after a string of profit warnings.

The UK engine maker said the short-term outlook in some markets was tough but 
that it was on track to meet forecasts for annual profit. Cost savings for the 
year will be about £200m, the high end of its guidance,it said in a trading 
update 
<http://otp.investis.com/clients/uk/rolls-royce1/rns/regulatory-story.aspx?cid=171&newsid=817379>
.

The Derby-based engineering company is one year into an overhaul under its 
chief executive, Warren East,after a slowdown in some of its biggest markets 
prompted repeated warnings about financial performance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/06/rolls-royce-profit-warning-warren-east>
.

East, who took over in July 2015 and previously ran ARM Holdings, has cut 
layers of management and reorganised the business after finding what he said 
was a lumbering company too slow to react to market demands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/24/rolls-royce-chief-warns-of-senior-job-cuts-because-engine-maker-needs-fixing>
.

East said: “We have made significant progress over the last 12 months 
implementing the findings of our operating review, including key changes to the 
management and structure of our company.

“At the same time, we are taking actions that are adding pace and simplicity 
to our processes. It is now time to look further ahead. Together with my new 
team, our focus is turning towards the group’s long-term goals.”

For more than two decades Rolls was a symbol of British manufacturing 
excellence as one of the world’s top makers of engines for aircraft, ships and 
industrial use. But it publishedfive profit warnings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/feb/13/rolls-royce-defence-cuts-2014-revenues-profits>
 in 18 months from early 2014, includingtwo under East 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/12/rolls-royce-share-price-plunges-after-latest-profit-warning>
 as he got to grips with the business.

The company’s problems included falling oil prices, which cut sales at its 
marine division, and weaker demand for some aircraft engines, including for 
corporate jets. East concluded the company had become bureaucratic and bloated, 
making it vulnerable to slowing sales and too slow to pick up on customers’ 
demands.

In the trading update, East said Rolls-Royce’s long-term order book was close 
to record levels but that markets in the short run were mixed, with difficult 
trading persisting in some.

Demand for engines for extra-wide-body civil aircraft was strong, but there 
was further weakening in business aviation and no sign of recovery in offshore 
oil and gas markets for marine, where orders were “very weak”.

East said: “We have an outstanding portfolio of businesses with highly 
differentiated products and services that, with appropriate investment, are 
well positioned to create significant value long into the future, despite some 
near-term market-led challenges.”


East has promised to rid Rolls-Royce of the “accounting fog” that made the 
company impenetrable to analysts and investors by making recording of TotalCare 
servicing contracts and research and development costs clearer.

Rolls-Royce said applying a new accounting standard to its 2015 results would 
have knocked £700m off operating profit and revenue at its civil aerospace 
division. The adjustments included recording payments for after-sales servicing 
of engines when the work was done instead of upfront.

Rolls-Royce shares, which have gained 28% this year, fell 2.6% to 735p in late 
morning trading on Wednesday.
 