
Rolls-Royce is on the slide following a report that the Serious Fraud Office 
has widened its investigation into the aero engine-maker.

With the wider market down nearly 1.5%, Rolls shares have dropped 20.5p or 3% 
to 635.5p.

Rolls said in 2013 that the SFO had launched a formal investigation into 
concerns about possible bribery and corruption in China and Indonesia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/dec/23/rolls-royce-sfo-bribery-corruption-investigation-indonesia>
. Nowthe Financial Times has reported  
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/d7f81cba-1d0d-11e6-8fa5-44094f6d9c46.html#axzz495i4iIWu>
(£) that the probe has now been extended to look at Rolls’ former energy 
operations in Nigeria. The report said the SFO was investigating whether Rolls 
or its agents were involved in any bribery of government officials in Nigeria 
up to 2013.

The SFO did not comment. Rolls said it was co-operating with the authorities 
but would not discuss continuing investigations. A spokesperson said: “Concerns 
about bribery and corruption involving intermediaries in a number of overseas 
markets remain subject to examination by the SFO and other authorities. We are 
co-operating with the authorities.

“We do not comment on the subject of ongoing investigations nor on the 
countries in which those investigations are being conducted. We have made it 
clear thatRolls-Royce <https://www.theguardian.com/business/rollsroycegroup> 
will not tolerate business misconduct of any kind.”

In 2012 Rolls said it had asked a leading law firm, reported to be Debevoise & 
Plimpton, to conduct a review and this raised matters of concern in Indonesia, 
China and other markets. The company said it had passed on a file to the SFO.

There have also been questions about Rolls’ conduct in Brazil. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/01/rolls-royce-brazil-corruption-probe-deepens>

The company has faced a tough trading environment, with orders from oil 
industry customers for power systems being cancelled due to the falling crude 
price. It has issued a number of profit warnings andearlier this year cut its 
dividend payout for the first time in 25 years. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/12/rolls-royce-cuts-dividend-for-first-time-in-almost-25-years>
 