
Rolls-Royce <https://www.theguardian.com/business/rollsroycegroup> sold 
equipment to Iran for decades, a confidential company memo reveals, exploiting 
a series of loopholes in US sanctions to avoid breaking the law.

The Iranian government amassed the world’s largest collection of the British 
engineering group’s signature turbine and booked millions of pounds of orders 
each year, according to a briefing drafted in 2009 for thecompany’s then chief 
executive, Sir John Rose 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/feb/11/sir-john-rose-rolls-royce>.


Trading in Iran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> appears to have 
carried on despite the enormous political risk of being seen to avoid US 
sanctions.

A quarter of Rolls-Royce’s entire £14bn revenue is generated in the US, with 
much of that reliant on military contracts. The company signed orders worth 
$224m (£181m) from theDepartment of Defense 
<http://www.rolls-royce.com/~/media/Files/R/Rolls-Royce/documents/investors/rr-plc-retail-bond-investor.PDF>
 in the first half of 2015 alone.

The company appears never to have issued a statement on its decades-long 
Iranian operation. The only mentions of Iran on Rolls-Royce’s website date from 
after thesoftening of US sanctions earlier this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/16/sanctions-against-iran-to-be-lifted-after-compliance-with-nuclear-deal>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Frolls-royce-exploited-us-sanctions-loopholes-to-trade-with-iran%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc13cef32ae48a3874db7da7230b714a7f86ec279%2F824_163_2036_1221%2F2036.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rolls-Royce%20exploited%20US%20sanctions%20loopholes%20to%20trade%20with%20Iran&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Frolls-royce-exploited-us-sanctions-loopholes-to-trade-with-iran%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rolls-Royce%20exploited%20US%20sanctions%20loopholes%20to%20trade%20with%20Iran&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Frolls-royce-exploited-us-sanctions-loopholes-to-trade-with-iran%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc13cef32ae48a3874db7da7230b714a7f86ec279%2F824_163_2036_1221%2F2036.jpg>
 Sir John Rose in 2008. Photograph: Chris Ratcliffe/Rex Features 
Zafar Khan, an aerospace and defence analyst at Société Générale, said he had 
never heard of Rolls-Royce trading with Iran. “I am little bit surprised, given 
that it’s under sanction and these guys have a pretty big exposure to the US 
both on the commercial [aerospace] side as well as defence,” he said.


Relations between Iran and the west deteriorated dramatically throughout the 
2000s amid concerns the country was trying to develop a nuclear weapons 
programme, with theUN security council approving fresh sanctions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2006/dec/24/usa.iran> on Iran in 2006.


US sanctions were first imposed after the Iranian revolution in 1979. In 1995, 
the then US president, Bill Clinton, signed into law tough measures 
specifically banning companies from dealing with Iran’s energy sector.


A joint investigation by the Guardian and BBC Panorama has documented 
Rolls-Royce’s widespread use of middlemen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/31/rolls-royce-middlemen-may-have-used-bribes-to-land-major-contracts>
– commercial advisers or agents in industry parlance – in aneffort to secure 
high-value contracts around the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/31/the-12-countries-where-suspicious-activity-linked-to-rolls-royce-has-been-identified>
.


The company has been under investigation by the Serious Fraud Office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/serious-fraud-office> over allegations it paid 
bribes through intermediaries since 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/31/why-the-rolls-royce-investigation-is-so-important-to-the-sfo>
. Rolls-Royce said it was fully cooperating with investigations into the 
allegations and could not comment in detail.

How to contact the Guardian securely
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/help/2016/sep/19/how-to-contact-the-guardian-securely>
Earlier this year, Australia’s Fairfax Media published an investigation into 
the oil and gas services firm Unaoil after a leak of the 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/serious-fraud-office> company’s emails. 

Police subsequently raided the firm’s headquarters in Monaco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/01/authorities-monaco-raid-oil-firm-unaoil-hq-corruption-investigation>
 as part of an investigation into “a vast, international corruption scandal 
implicating numerous foreign oil industry firms”, according to a statement 
released by the Monégasque government.


Unaoil, which has denied carrying out corrupt practices on behalf of 
Rolls-Royce or 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/19/serious-office-opens-criminal-investigation-into-unaoil>
 any other company, is fighting a court case against the SFO 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/dec/01/monaco-oil-firm-starts-legal-action-against-serious-office>
 over the legality of the Monaco raid.

In 2008, Unaoil was provisionally appointed Rolls-Royce’s Iranian agent after 
lobbying to replace an existing firm.

Why the Rolls-Royce investigation is so important to the SFO
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/31/why-the-rolls-royce-investigation-is-so-important-to-the-sfo>
However, the engineering company’s new head of energy was “concerned with the 
exposure to Iran” and “wanted to get the OK from Sir John Rose to proceed”, 
according to a Unaoil memo seen by the Guardian.


A seven-page briefing was subsequently drafted for Rose to aid his decision. 
The document, which was shared with Unaoil by a senior Rolls-Royce executive, 
details the enormous success Rolls-Royce enjoyed in the country despite what 
the author described as “the poor investment climate”.


The document highlights the scale of sales of the company’s signature Avon 
generator turbine – which can be used for a number of tasks.

“Iran is the location of the largest fleet of industrial Avon packages in any 
country,” said one paragraph. “The R-R Industrial Avon is the Iranian equipment 
of choice, but export controls and the political environment have resulted in 
an inability to trade complete new packages.”


Between 1975 and 1995, state-owned oil and gas firms in Iran procured almost 
100 Rolls-Royce industrial turbines, according to the memo. By 2009, 69 Avon 
turbines had been acquired by the National Iranian Oil Company.


However, after sanctions were toughened in 1995 the company decided it would 
no longer sell complete turbines to Iran. Instead, it would supply spare parts 
and assistance to maintain the operation of the existing Iranian turbines.


“The USA & the UK have strict export controls, that effectively stop R-R 
Energy from supplying new OEM [original equipment manufacturer] equipment but 
allow the supply of non USA source parts to support installed equipment,” the 
document explained.


“Every part shipped to Iran is ‘rated’ by the Department for Business, 
Enterprise and Regulatory Reform (BERR), and if required, the appropriate 
export licence is obtained. Technology requiring a licence is not supplied.”


The company generated £69m of orders in the country between 2001 and 2009, 
according to the briefing, and also signed a “technical assistance agreement” 
to support a facility that carried out repairs and overhauls on about 10 
turbines each year.


Rolls-Royce middlemen may have used bribes to land major contracts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/31/rolls-royce-middlemen-may-have-used-bribes-to-land-major-contracts>
Rolls-Royce adopted several measures that distanced its substantial American 
division from the Iran trades. Components destined for Iran were manufactured 
outside the US. Payments were made only in sterling and euros, rather than 
dollars.


“RRPE [Rolls-Royce Power Engineering] is compliant with all UK & US export 
controls and does not have any US management. Standard practice within RRPE, 
for all exports of parts, is not to engage US management in the details,” the 
briefing states. “This ensures compliance with the Iran Transactions 
Regulations, administered by the US Department of Treasury’s Office of Foreign 
Assets Control (OFAC).”


The document also claimed “RRPE do not have any US employees”.


By September 2009, Rose had decided to withdraw. According to an email between 
senior Unaoil staff, the company had “received feedback [...] that Sir John 
Rose has decided that RR will stop doing business in Iran. He feels the 
financial benefit of Iranian business is far outweighed by the potential risk 
to RR of there [sic] US customer base reacting to dealing with a company that 
support Iran.”


The email adds: “They agree there is nothing illegal in what they do, but he 
is concerned about a political reaction. RR’s largest customer is the US 
defence industry.”


Rolls-Royce disputed that any aspect of its supply of equipment to Iran had 
been secret but declined to comment on the record as to what information it 
provided to US government officials or shareholders.


A spokesperson said: “Rolls-Royce refutes any accusation that it has traded 
‘in secret’ in Iran or that it circumvented US sanctions.


“We work with regulators in the UK, US and elsewhere to ensure that we 
understand and comply with sanctions regimes. We have consistently taken 
extensive steps to ensure compliance with Iran-related sanctions.” Rose did not 
respond to requests for comment.

• This article was amended on 22 December 2016. An earlier version referred to 
the specific inclusion of the National Iranian Oil Company on the US sanctions 
list. To clarify: that happened in 2012, after Rolls-Royce had stopped working 
with the company.


• If you would like to pass on any confidential information, you can send a 
message via the Guardian’s SecureDrop service (see howhere 
<https://securedrop.theguardian.com/> and here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jun/05/guardian-launches-securedrop-whistleblowers-documents>
).
 