
Rolls-Royce <https://www.theguardian.com/business/rollsroycegroup> is doubling 
the number of senior management job cuts for 2016 to 400 and forecasting a 
recovery in profits for the second half of the year.

The Derby-based engineering group posted an 80% drop in first-half profits. 
Investors were cheered, however, that the company stuck to its view that 
profits would bounce back in the second half, suggesting its turnaround plan is 
bearing fruit after a series of profit warnings.

The aero engine maker’s shares rose nearly 19% on Thursday to 870p, the best 
performer on the FTSE 100 index in London.


Warren East, the chief executive, said the company’s order intake had been 
good. Its order book has swelled £3.1bn to £79.5bn since the end of last year, 
as it won deals from airlines including Norwegian, China Eastern, Virgin 
Atlantic and Gulf Air. It will launch the new Trent XWB-84 EP engine with 
Singapore Airlines in February.

East said the transformation programme was also starting to deliver. The 
company made an underlying pretax profit of £104m in the first six months of 
the year, beating analysts’ forecasts of a £16m loss. On a statutory basis it 
was £2.15bn in the red, as the pound’s recent tumble against the dollar 
resulted in a £2.2bn writedown at its US dollar hedge book. The City is 
expecting an underlying profit of £669m for the year as a whole.

Rolls is stepping up the cull of senior managers, cutting almost a fifth of 
the 2,000 bosses worldwide. Half of the 400 job cuts are in the UK, mostly in 
Derby. About 270 people have already left the company, including 50 senior 
managers last Christmas. Rolls-Royce employs 23,000 people in the UK, including 
14,000 inDerby <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/derby>.

East said the firm was well on its way to achieving between £150m and £200m of 
cost savings a year by the end of 2017. This includes cutting lead times on the 
assembly of Trent engines, reducing the number of people attending meetings and 
the frequency of meetings.

While thinning out management, the company has been hiring on the factory 
floor. It has 600 nuclear designers and engineers working on the reactors for 
the Successor nuclear missile submarine project, half of whom joined in the 
last two years. TheHouse of Commons recently voted to renew the Trident 
programme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/18/mps-vote-in-favour-of-trident-renewal-nuclear-deterrent>
, replacing four submarines that carry nuclear warheads.

The hires form part of an increase in the nuclear submarine workforce by 900 
to more than 3,000 at Raynesway, Derby. More than 700 people joined the 
division, which services the UK’s existing fleet, last year, with two-thirds 
coming from other parts of the company. The rest will follow this year.

East said: “We are not just firing. We are also hiring.” The company announced 
in March that it was taking on 350 people at its factory in Derby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/21/rolls-royce-to-create-hundreds-of-jobs-in-derby>
 to assemble its Trent XWB civilian aircraft engine.

The company’s revenues were down 5% in the first six months of the year on the 
back of a 25% fall in the marine business, the result of falling demand from 
oil and gas customers and a 5% fall in civil aerospace, the company’s biggest 
division by revenue. Nuclear, the smallest division, posted a 14% increase.

Rolls-Royce, which makes engines for Boeing’s 787 Dreamliners and Airbus’s 
A380 superjumbos, hadissued five profit warnings in less than two years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/neil-woodford-dumps-rolls-royce-stake-profit-warning>
. It has been hit by the oil price slump and a decline in defence spending.

Latith Kahalaf, an analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, said: “Keeping the order 
book growing requires constant investment into new product development,” he 
said. “Mr East seems to be taking steps in the right direction, however the 
road ahead could well be a long one.”

BAE Systems <https://www.theguardian.com/business/baesystems>, which makes 
military equipment such as Astute submarines and Eurofighter jets, is also 
expected to benefit from the Trident decision. The company posted a near 5% 
increase in first half-profits to £408m from £390m a year earlier.

The defence contractor is also benefiting from growing tensions between Nato 
governments and China and Russia, which have led to a reversal of the defence 
budget cuts made after the 2007/08 financial crisis and global recession.

BAE’s chief executive, Ian King, said: “In the United States, we are seeing 
encouraging signs of a return to growth in defence budgets and improved 
prospects for our core franchises. In the UK, the result of the EU referendum 
will lead to a period of uncertainty, but we do not anticipate any material 
near-term trading impact on our business.”
 