
Rolls-Royce <https://www.theguardian.com/business/rollsroycegroup> has written 
to staff to say the company wants Britain to stay in the European Union.

The aircraft engine maker told employees that Brexit would put the company’s 
future investment plans in the UK at risk and hand its American rivals a 
competitive advantage.

Warren East, the chief executive, said a planned new £65m engine testing plant 
was a “good example” of the kind of investment that might be put at risk if 
Britain voted to leave the EU on 23 June.

He told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme on Wednesday: “We believe it is much 
better for our employees, our customers and our suppliers if Britain remains 
part of Europe.

“This is because we are a very interconnected operation across Europe. If 
Brexit occurs there will almost inevitably be a period of uncertainty, and 
uncertainty is what we can’t cope with.

“We’re making investment decisions all the time about where to place different 
parts of our operation, and uncertainty created by Brexit puts a lot of those 
decisions on hold and that pause is something that our US competitors don’t 
have to cope with. That’s why it’s not so good for us.”

Rolls-Royce <https://www.theguardian.com/business/rollsroycegroup> employs 
more than 50,000 people around the world, with three-quarters of the workforce 
based in the EU. Major customers include the European aircraft maker Airbus.

Its largest UK plant is in Derby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/21/rolls-royce-to-create-hundreds-of-jobs-in-derby>
, where it designs, tests and assembles Trent jet engines.

“We have to deal with whatever the outcome happens to be,” East said. “All 
we’re saying today is, a Brexit result would likely lead to a period of 
uncertainty.


“We need to make investment decisions throughout that period, we’re going to 
be held back by uncertainty, and we could do without that. But we’re going to 
continue to be a global leader no matter what.”


Rolls has faced difficult times recently, issuing a string of profit warnings 
andcutting its dividend for the first time in almost 25 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/12/rolls-royce-cuts-dividend-for-first-time-in-almost-25-years>
.

The FTSE 100 company is also the subject of an ongoing investigation by the 
Serious Fraud Office, followingallegations of bribery and corruption in 
Indonesia and China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/dec/23/rolls-royce-sfo-bribery-corruption-investigation-indonesia>
.

East said that since he was appointed chief executive almost 12 months ago, he 
had not witnessed any problems with the culture of the business.

“I don’t think that is a problem which existed then and it certainly doesn’t 
exist today. We will tolerate absolutely no improper behaviour whatsoever and I 
think every one of our 50,000 plus employees is well aware of that. It’s well 
known there is an SFO investigation going on into some historical practices.

“We have some of our facilities that need modernisation, and some of our 
processes, practices and behaviours also need modernisation.”

 