
The Rolls-Royce <https://www.theguardian.com/business/rollsroycegroup> boss 
Warren East is due to tell investors that trading in the first months of the 
year has met expectations and that the embattled engine maker’s turnaround plan 
is on track.


Before its annual meeting in Nottingham on Thursday, the British company, 
which makes engines for aircraft and ships, stuck to its full-year outlook after
issuing five profit warnings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/neil-woodford-dumps-rolls-royce-stake-profit-warning>
 in less than two years.

The first six months of this year are expected to be “close to break-even”. 
Rolls-Royce expects business to pick up in the second half due to increased 
large engine deliveries, good revenue growth in servicing engines and benefits 
from its restructuring programmes. Last year, it made two-thirds of its profits 
in the second half and this year profits will be weighted even more heavily 
towards that period.

Analysts expect 2016 pre-tax profits to halve from last year to £671m, 
according to the company 
<http://www.rolls-royce.com/~/media/Files/R/Rolls-Royce/documents/investors/consensus-march-03-2016.pdf>
 (pdf).


Rolls-Royce has been hit by falling demand for corporate jets in emerging 
markets, cuts to defence budgets and plunging oil prices that have prompted 
energy companies to scale back investment plans.

Reiterating comments he made in February, East said: “Despite steady market 
conditions for most of our businesses, 2016 continues to be a challenging year 
overall as we sustain investment and start to transition major products in 
civil aerospace, and tackle weak markets in marine.”


Rolls-Royce, which manufactures engines for Boeing’s 787 Dreamliners and 
Airbus’s A380 superjumbos, said it was “well on track” to deliver the expected 
cost savings of £30-£50m this year. The restructuring programmes in civil 
aerospace, defence aerospace and its marine division are also on track, 
including plans to revamp its factory in Indianapolis in the US in the second 
half of the year.


The Jefferies analyst Sandy Morris said: “In the last two months, things had 
gone quiet around Rolls-Royce. We do not see why today’s update should disturb 
the peace.”

The group recently announced plans to hire 350 people at its factory in Derby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/21/rolls-royce-to-create-hundreds-of-jobs-in-derby>
 to assemble its Trent XWB engine – welcome news after a big wave of job cuts 
totalling 2,600 in November 2014 that mostly affected Derby and Bristol.

The US activist investor ValueAct has built a near 11% stake in Rolls-Royce, 
becoming its biggest shareholder, and has been given a seat on the board. 
Bradley Singer, the San Francisco-based firm’s chief operating officer, joined 
as a non-executive director last month and also became a member of 
Rolls-Royce’s science and technology committee.
 