
The recent rise of the populist right 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/11/populists-us> in Hungary 
and Poland has raised the alarm about the future of democracy in Europe, as 
constitutional safeguards, media pluralism and civil society come under 
sustained attack.

But there is another threat hiding in plain sight: the abuse of 
anti-corruption laws inRomania <https://www.theguardian.com/world/romania>, a 
country often lauded as an example of successful reform in central and eastern 
Europe.

The country has been praised by EU leaders 
<http://www.romaniajournal.ro/eu-praises-romania-scolds-bulgaria-keeps-monitoring-on-both/>
 for its crackdown on graft, and its national anti-corruption body has been 
held up as amodel for others 
<http://www.agerpres.ro/english/2015/02/24/iohannis-romania-becoming-model-inspiration-for-other-countries-in-fighting-corruption-14-40-09>
 to follow. But scratch beneath the surface and all is not as it appears.

In compiling a recent report for the Henry Jackson Society 
<http://henryjacksonsociety.org/> thinktank we found a body ofevidence to 
suggest that the Anti-Corruption Directorate (DNA) isabusing its power 
<https://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/15/world/europe/romania-prosecutor-laura-codruta-kovesi.html>
 and reverting to communist-era methods to serve its own interests and pursue 
political vendettas.

Significantly, the critics include a number of former supporters, including 
Traian Băsescu, Romania’s president from 2004 to 2014, who initiated the 
country’s first major anti-corruption drive but has nowaccused the agency 
<http://www.nineoclock.ro/basescu-justice-has-to-be-defended-from-those-who-do-injustice-in-the-judiciary-those-who-ordered-pre-trial-arrest-of-acquitted-defendants-should-be-arrested/>
 of violating human rights and acting outside the constitution.

Conviction rates in Romanian corruption cases are astonishingly high at 92%, 
and a close look at the methods used by the DNA reveals why. Almost all of the 
most high-profile cases involve one kind of procedural violation or another.

There are examples of guilty verdicts secured with the uncorroborated evidence 
of witnesses who testify in exchange for immunity. Suspects are sometimes told 
that if they do not cooperate then family members could also face prosecution.

Pre-trial detention is used as another form of leverage (despite the 
non-violent nature of the crimes in question) and edited transcripts of 
telephone intercepts areroutinely leaked 
<http://www.humanrightseurope.org/2015/02/romania-former-mayor-awaits-court-judgement/>
 to the media to discredit defendants in advance of their trials.

We have also seen cases where judges who have ruled against the DNA 
<http://www.recentnews.ro/sri-si-dna-pregatesc-arestarea-judecatorilor-care-au-achitat-o-pe-mariana-rarinca/>
 subsequently found themselves under investigation, and cases where people in 
the highest echelons of government have accused their critics of corruption on 
national television.

In May 2014, the then socialist prime minister, Victor Ponta, suggested that 
Dan Adamescu, the owner of a critical newspaper, România Liberă, would shortly 
be arrested for corruption. Adamescu was detained a few days later and 
subsequently convicted of bribery after a legal process riddled with violations.

The case is in danger of turning the British courts into an extension of the 
dysfunctional legal system, after the Romanian authorities issued a European 
arrest warrant last year to secure the extradition ofAdamescu’s son Alexander 
<http://www.spectator.co.uk/2016/09/the-case-that-shows-why-we-must-not-stay-in-the-european-arrest-warrant/>
. The only evidence against the younger Adamescu appears to be that he has 
continued to campaign for his father.

Some of the most troubling allegations in Romania, however, concern the close 
relationship between the DNA and the Romanian intelligence service (SRI), the 
successor to the feared communist-era Securitate secret police.


The DNA relies on the SRI to intercept about 20,000 telephone calls 
<https://freedomhouse.org/report/nations-transit/2016/romania> each year and 
has acknowledged that the intelligence agency also plays a role in initiating 
investigations.

In 2015, one SRI general sparked outrage by describing the courts as a 
“tactical field” 
<http://www.juridice.ro/373666/dumitru-dumbrava-sri-este-unul-dintre-anticorpii-bine-dezvoltati-si-echipati-pentru-insanatosirea-societatii-si-eliminarea-coruptiei.html>
 of operations and alluding to his agency’s role in influencing the outcome of 
cases. Judges and lawyers responded by demanding an inquiry into longstanding 
suspicions that the SRI has continued the old Securitate practice of placing 
undercover agents in the judiciary, but the government refused.

The case of Alina Bica, head of the agency responsible for countering 
organised crime and terrorism, illustrates the power of the DNA-SRI nexus.

Bica was arrested by the DNA on corruption charges in 2014 and her experience 
followed a familiar pattern. She spent months in pre-trial detention, her 
husband was arrested and efforts were made to destroy her reputation with media 
leaks.

Bica claimed she was detained after refusing to arrest individuals whose names 
were suggested by the SRI. When she cited lack of evidence, she was told:“You 
will not end well.” 
<https://www.eureporter.co/frontpage/2016/02/16/romanias-results-on-anti-corruption-come-at-a-high-cost-to-human-rights-the-pursuit-of-alina-bica/>

None of these details are reflected in the European commission’s monitoring 
reports <http://ec.europa.eu/cvm/progress_reports_en.htm> on Romania, which 
paint the country’s fight against corruption in an optimistic light.

But by turning a blind eye, the European Union risks encouraging other 
countries in the region to follow Romania’s example, using the “fight against 
corruption” as a smokescreen to weaken democratic standards.

It is an environment that provides the perfect breeding ground for the type of 
creeping authoritarianism we are seeing inHungary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/hungary> and Poland.

David Clark was a special adviser at the Foreign Office from 1997 to 2001 and 
now works as a freelance foreign policy commentator and consultant

 