
Ron Wyden is taking Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> at his word.


Much of official Washington is wondering whether Trump will implement the 
agenda that won him the presidency. Some of Trump’s defenders, like tech 
investor Peter Thiel, contend that Trumpshould not be taken literally 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/31/peter-thiel-defends-donald-trump-muslim-ban-mexico-wall>
.

But the Democratic senator from Oregon shows no signs of interest in that 
discussion. As perhaps the Democratic party’s premier civil libertarian on 
Capitol Hill, his anticipation of theTrump administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trump-administration> starts from the 
perspective that the president-elect will govern as he campaigned: against 
Muslims, against immigrants, for torture, for surveillance. Wyden, from his 
perch on the intelligence committee, is preparing for a four-year battle.

“We’re going to have to make sure now that a political agenda doesn’t replace 
a set of constitutional priorities. That’s the heart of it,” Wyden said in an 
interview with the Guardian this week.

Wyden is one of the few national politicians who can plausibly claim to have 
fought national security abuses and championed civil liberties with equal vigor 
in the George W Bush and Barack Obama administrations. He is far more 
comfortable discussing policies or proposals than he is discussing 
personalities, opting to refer to Trump simply as the president-elect.

“You look at some of what the president-elect has to say and it certainly 
ought to be a wake-up call from the standpoint of potential abuse of power,” 
Wyden said.

A quote sticking in Wyden’s mind these days is one Trump issued in July after 
the Democratic National Committee hack, which US intelligence has blamed on 
Russia. Trump, discussing his political opponents, mused: “Honestly, I wish I 
had that power. I’d love to have that power 
<http://www.vox.com/2016/7/27/12298664/trump-dnc-hacking-power>.” By 20 
January, it will no longer be hypothetical.

Barely a week after the election, Wyden conceded that it’s “probably early for 
strategy”, but he said he has early priorities for racking up wins, in order to 
provide privacy, cybersecurity and civil-liberties advocates with the momentum 
needed to take on the Trump administration.

One is to block a measure Wyden said is “still alive in the intelligence 
authorization” bill that would provide the FBI with powers to scour Americans’ 
browser history without court oversight. There, his approach is 
straightforward: “running the clock out” on the current Congress and “scour all 
these bills” to see it doesn’t get added to any other piece of legislation. But 
congressional inertia can cut against him as well.

On 1 December, an impending change to the federal rules of criminal procedure 
will vastly expand law enforcement’s ability to remotely hack suspect 
electronic devices, unbound by jurisdiction. Opponents have few options, as the 
change, known as Rule 41, will take effect if Congress “does what it does best 
– which is nothing”, Wyden said. “We understand our backs are against the 
wall.” He and his allies, including Democratic senator Chris Coons and GOP 
senator Mike Lee, are attempting todelay the change 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/sheerafrenkel/lawmakers-want-to-halt-changes-that-would-allow-trump-admin?utm_term=.wp4MnN8Br#.xbLoWQNY4>
.

When Trump officially takes over, the stakes will escalate. Perhaps most 
urgent is Trump’s proposal to create a database of Muslims, which is “just 
light years away from what you can debate is constitutional”, Wyden said.

“I will use my opportunities on the intelligence committee, as a member of the 
Democratic caucus, the bully pulpit that I have, to drive that message from one 
end of the country to another. That would be unconstitutional,” Wyden said.

By the end of 2017 will come an epic fight against the intelligence agencies 
over surveillance. They will seek the renewal of an expiring legal provision, 
known as Section 702 of the Foreign IntelligenceSurveillance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/surveillance> Act, that permits a vast 
dragnet of data collection, to include Americans’ international communications.

“Our fight to reform 702 also got a lot more important as the result of the 
election,” Wyden said.

Similarly, he considers Trump’s call this year to boycott Apple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/19/donald-trump-apple-boycott-fbi-san-bernardino>
 over its encryption battle with the FBI indicative of antipathy to 
privacy-protective cybersecurity.

Wyden said he “will fight the Trump administration, and again, Democrats and 
Republicans in the Congress” who propose weakening encryption; telling Vicehe 
would filibuster 
<https://news.vice.com/story/oregon-sen-ron-wyden-threatens-to-filibuster-if-trump-goes-after-encryption>
 any such effort.

Unprompted, Wyden anticipates relitigating the years-old fight against 
torture, an issue prospectively settled under Obama, though anything but when 
it comes toaddressing the CIA’s history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/09/cia-insider-daniel-jones-senate-torture-investigation>
. With Trump, “we’re going to have to deal with that again”. A first step he is 
planning will be attempting to ensure the committee’s landmark torture report 
isn’t destroyed – a very real possibility if it escapeslegal limbo to return to 
a panel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/11/cia-torture-report-aftermath-daniel-jones-senate-investigation>
 now controlled by report opponent Richard Burr of North Carolina.

Trump’s allies are signaling that a legal prohibition on CIA torture enacted 
in 2015 is not an immovable obstacle. On CNN this week, Pete Hoekstra, a former 
House intelligence committee chairman, said, “That’d be a process you’d have to 
work through with Congress, and you’d probably do it in secret and you probably 
wouldn’t do it through the public process.”

It remains to be seen if Wyden would have access to such secret decisions, 
even from his perch on the intelligence committee. The Trump administration 
could revert to a process of keeping the full committee from learning most 
intelligence practices. Wyden’s “very good relationship” with incoming ranking 
panel Democrat Mark Warner of Virginia will become critical to those efforts.

Yet Wyden might have had Warner’s perch. He was next in line to take the 
ranking membership with Dianne Feinstein’s departure, a move that would have 
strengthened Wyden’s opportunities for oversight over the intelligence agencies 
in the age of Trump enormously. Doing so would have meant he would have had to 
give up his position on the finance committee, and Wyden considered his 
potential loss of influence over healthcare, trade enforcement and technology 
policies too high a price – to the consternation of some of his allies outside 
government.

“In this horror show context, congressional oversight is more important than 
it has ever been before. We would have preferred Senator Wyden leave his chair 
on the finance committee and take the ranking chair on the intelligence 
committee. We need his experience, skepticism and diligence right now, and we 
need it badly,” said Human Rights Watch’s John Sifton.

Still, Sifton said, Wyden is “a vigorous and vocal defender of civil liberties 
and human rights and has worked, often thanklessly, to prevent abuses and 
overreach by CIA and other agencies in the intelligence community”.

While he has been able to forge coalitions with privacy-minded Republicans on 
discrete issues, Wyden has seen his stable of allies diminish in recent years. 
Mark Udall, who pushed for accountability on CIA torture, lost his 2014 
re-election. Russ Feingold, the only senator to havevoted against the Patriot 
Act <https://epic.org/privacy/terrorism/usapatriot/feingold.html>, failed in 
his 2016 comeback bid. He can still count Rand Paul, the Kentucky Republican, as
a partner on constraining surveillance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/15/rand-paul-rudy-giuliani-john-bolton-secretary-of-state-trump>
.

Wyden acknowledged that “there was a hope we would have some more like-minded 
members in the Senate who would be here,” but he has vowed to “mobilize” should 
Trump govern as he campaigned.

“We are going to mobilize, both in the Congress and in the country, around 
core constitutional values: speech, privacy, the sanctity of the courts.”
 