
In 1924, New York publisher Condé Nast built a duplex apartment on a rooftop 
on 1040 Park Avenue. Decorated by interior designer and socialite Elsie de 
Wolfe, the grand space, with its 75ft conservatory and multiple entertaining 
spaces, became famous for lavish parties. It was one of the earliest examples 
of the penthouse apartment – a typology that has since been associated with 
luxury, where those with means can enjoy a home and open space in the heart of 
the city, far from the crowded streets below.

A few decades later, a different style of rooftop abode emerged in the capital 
of the newly independentIndia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>. 
Influenced by the Garden City movement and the legacy of architect Edwin 
Lutyens, who designed much of Delhi, post-independence planning rules aspired 
to create a low-rise city with plenty of breathing space.

Buildings in Delhi’s residential areas were restricted to two storeys, with 
construction permitted on only a fraction of the space on the third floor, so 
on top of homes, families built small dwellings for their own use, as 
accommodation for domestic staff or to rent out cheaply. Exposed to the 
elements, the single room on the top floor became known evocatively as the
barsati – derived from the Hindi word for rain, barsaat. These apartments – 
generally, a small shack with a large terrace – afforded a new generation of 
urbanites cheap living space near the centre of town.

The rooftop space gives a sense of intimacy with your neighbours, in an 
otherwise rather brash city

But it’s a typology that, as land values rise and the population grows, is 
fast disappearing. While there are no official figures, anecdotal evidence 
suggests that in the 1980s, 75% of small rentable properties in many 
residential suburbs werebarsatis – the same areas today have only a few dozen 
such properties, but many more apartment blocks. “This city has transformed 
dramatically,” says Rahul Rewal of Delhi-based estate agent Mark Estates. “The
barsati is now a thing of the past.” 

The result is a city that is increasingly dense, but also increasingly 
unaffordable for young workers, students and creatives. As the city’s 
boundaries move further outwards, those who might have once lived close to the 
centre now occupy flats in gated condominiums on the city’s periphery. The 
underlying story of urban sprawl and gentrification is replicated in cities 
across the developing world.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fdec%2F16%2Frooftop-cities-transformation-delhis-affordable-barsati-homes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F12%2F10%2F1449757547373%2F0c6cf001-affe-41c0-85c3-b0046a14fc22-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rooftop%20cities%3A%20the%20transformation%20of%20Delhi's%20once%20affordable%20'barsati'%20homes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fdec%2F16%2Frooftop-cities-transformation-delhis-affordable-barsati-homes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rooftop%20cities%3A%20the%20transformation%20of%20Delhi%27s%20once%20affordable%20%27barsati%27%20homes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fdec%2F16%2Frooftop-cities-transformation-delhis-affordable-barsati-homes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F12%2F10%2F1449757547373%2F0c6cf001-affe-41c0-85c3-b0046a14fc22-1020x612.jpeg>
 Rachit Tiwary’sbarsati in the middle class suburb of Greater Kailash. 
Photograph: Debika Ray 
The transgressive appeal of the rooftop space is not a recent development – in 
the 1920s,Mexico City’s rooftop azoteas became a hotbed of creative thinking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/nov/06/trespassers-on-the-rooftops-secret-history-mexico-city-cultural-revolutionaries>
. A movement is currently underway in Spain toclaim rooftops for community use 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/01/spain-reclaiming-rooftops-redetejas-culture>
 –privately owned spaces that are, because of their exposed position, very 
public. Events and performances taking place on these terraces are returning 
life to this once well-used level of these cities.

At the same time, rooftops spaces are being harnessed for their property 
potential. In Barcelona, city planning authorities have welcomed La Casa por el 
Tejado, a project to drop prefabricated homes on to the city’s abundant flat 
rooftops in an effort to increase the supply of homes. Under the scheme, the 
owners of the building give architect Joan Artes and his team permission to 
build an extra storey in exchange for carrying out improvements to the communal 
facilities. A more troubling example of capitalising on rooftops can be found 
in Hong Kong, where eye-watering property prices have resulted in a 
proliferation ofrooftop slums <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-30140724>: 
cramped, windowless shacks, often poorly constructed out of cheap materials, 
with facilities shared between several families.

High prices are gradually making barsatis an elitist concept, out of the reach 
of even middle-class city dwellers

Meanwhile, in Delhi the roofspace is vanishing. Since India’s economy 
liberalised in the 1990s, its planning laws have changed to allow increasingly 
high-rise construction in residential areas – raising the allowance to four 
storeys led to the demolition of family homes to make room for developer-built 
apartments. “Real estate in Delhi is so expensive now that it doesn’t make 
sense for anyone to not use buildable space,” says Sonali Rastogi, a member of 
the public conservation groupDelhi Urban Arts Commission <http://duac.org/> and 
co-founder of architecture practice Morphogenesis. “And that has lead to the 
decline of thebarsati.”

While they were never really affordable for the city’s poorest, high prices 
are gradually makingbarsatis an elitist concept, out of the reach of even 
middle-class city dwellers, argues Rewal. “Many youngsters with their first 
jobs can no longer afford them so they are being transformed intoboutique 
residences <http://www.prismma.in/delhi-architect-residence/> lapped up by 
expats from Europe.”

There was a time, he recalls, when light, open terraces were not a luxury and 
young working people and fledgling artists could afford to rentbarsatis. As a 
result, the rooftops of Delhi become associated somewhat with the city’s 
artists and intellectuals. “Delhi may not have flourished in the manner of 
Mexico, where theazoteas were incandescent with creativity, but there is 
something about rooftop cities that encourages curiosity, and that mitigates 
against conservatism,” says Delhi-based journalist and author Nilanjana Roy. “
Barsatis in south Delhi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/delhi> were 
affordable, and they encouraged a kind of open flow of ideas – one reason why 
artists and actors took to them.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fdec%2F16%2Frooftop-cities-transformation-delhis-affordable-barsati-homes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F12%2F10%2F1449757228930%2F7ae1039f-b0c3-4b32-8e33-e83bd2782510-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rooftop%20cities%3A%20the%20transformation%20of%20Delhi's%20once%20affordable%20'barsati'%20homes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fdec%2F16%2Frooftop-cities-transformation-delhis-affordable-barsati-homes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rooftop%20cities%3A%20the%20transformation%20of%20Delhi%27s%20once%20affordable%20%27barsati%27%20homes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fdec%2F16%2Frooftop-cities-transformation-delhis-affordable-barsati-homes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F12%2F10%2F1449757228930%2F7ae1039f-b0c3-4b32-8e33-e83bd2782510-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A staircase leads up to the upper terrace at Serena De Sanctis’s home in 
Bhogal. Photograph: Debika Ray 
Writer and historian William Dalrymple lived in one too, when he first moved 
to Delhi,as did writer and activist Arundhati Roy 
<http://www.thedelhiwalla.com/2011/05/09/city-life-barsatis-south-delhi/>, 
painter MF Husain and writer Pankaj Mishra. In Anita Desai’s short story, The 
Rooftop Dwellers, the protaganist Moyna moves into a simple rooftop room, whose 
“very bareness gave her the freedom to indulge her wildest dreams and fancies”. 
The terrace, where she entertains friends “just as she had imagined an adult 
working woman in the metropolis might do”, is a “clear, empty space under an 
empty sky, with a view of all the other rooftops stretching out on even side … 
giving her a sense of being the empress of all she surveyed.”

“The terrace was a lovely thing”, says journalist Ian Jack, who spent the 
1970s living in abarsati in Defence Colony with his then-wife. “We erected a 
shamiana [tent] there when we married and I enjoyed the nightly sounds of the 
chowkidar [guard] and the freight trains hauled slowly by steam locomotives 
round the Delhi loop line. The rent would have been a few hundred rupees a 
month – the professional middle class then didn’t have much money. A lot of tea 
was drunk. Cars other than taxis were rare. The sun shone from blue skies all 
through the winter – amazing to think of now. That’s what I think of when I 
hear the wordbarsati.”

“Kite flying, sunbathing in winters, morning yoga,” recalls Rewal of the 
barsati’s heyday. “People used to store a charpai [bed] in the constructed area 
and sleep on the terraces during power outages, or just watch the rain fall on 
the exposed brick terraces. The bachelor or young children in the family ended 
up using thebarsati for privacy.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fdec%2F16%2Frooftop-cities-transformation-delhis-affordable-barsati-homes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F12%2F10%2F1449757302116%2F41458e6f-bf54-4011-91be-db8c062b8680-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rooftop%20cities%3A%20the%20transformation%20of%20Delhi's%20once%20affordable%20'barsati'%20homes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fdec%2F16%2Frooftop-cities-transformation-delhis-affordable-barsati-homes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rooftop%20cities%3A%20the%20transformation%20of%20Delhi%27s%20once%20affordable%20%27barsati%27%20homes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fdec%2F16%2Frooftop-cities-transformation-delhis-affordable-barsati-homes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F12%2F10%2F1449757302116%2F41458e6f-bf54-4011-91be-db8c062b8680-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The view from Serena De Sanctis’barsati in Bhogal, Delhi. Photograph: Debika 
Ray 
The appeal of the rooftop space remains for some. Serena De Sanctis, an 
Italian photographer, has shared abarsati in a relatively affordable area, 
Bhogal, with her boyfriend since they arrived in Delhi in 2013. A narrow 
staircase by her front door leads up to an upper terrace, from which you can 
see far into the distance. A few metres away, on an adjacent rooftop, a woman 
is taking down clothes from a washing line. There is a sense of intimacy with 
your neighbours, in an otherwise rather brash city. “To open your door and have 
this view – it isn’t possible in a regular flat,” she says. It is a few days 
before Diwali and she expects the residents of the whole building to make use 
of the space. “Everyone comes up to use this terrace – especially during 
celebrations. Children fly kites.”

Increasing pollution and traffic in Delhi are starting to make such spaces 
unappealing. Writer and editor Dhritabrata Bhattacharjya Tato moved out of his
barsati in the suburb of Jor Bagh four months ago, after a flyover and a tall 
office building were erected near his flat. “I have great memories of that 
place,” he recalls. “I had this huge terrace where I could have parties for 
50-60 friends. My artist friends would display their work sometimes. But over 
the past three or four years, the area lost its charm.”

Trespassers on the rooftops: a secret history of Mexico City's cultural 
revolutionaries
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/nov/06/trespassers-on-the-rooftops-secret-history-mexico-city-cultural-revolutionaries>
“Charm” is perhaps what is now lacking for many when it comes to the barsati. 
Rachit Tiwary had not heard the term before he moved into his apartment in the 
affluent suburb of Greater Kailash, walking distance from the television 
studios of news channel NDTV where he works. His spacious terrace has a small 
gazebo and a porch swing. But the cost of living in Delhi is become an 
increasing concern. “A quarter of my income goes on renting this place, which 
is crazy,” he explains. He hopes to move within the next six months to a 
two-bedroom apartment – most likely in the neighbouring city of Gurgaon, where 
properties are more affordable, and modern – offering the convenience of 
communal facilities and maintenance.

Many young professionals now live on the city’s periphery, in “satellite 
cities” such as Gurgaon and Noida, vast new cities of gated developments, 
malls, offices and highways. Economic factors have made the shift inevitable, 
but has such spatial dispersion been accompanied by a decline in creativity and 
social radicalism? Roy appreciates the concern. “Up to the early 2000s, the 
city’s architecture was markedly friendlier and more open than it is now,” she 
says. “The gated communities and walled enclaves that have come up are more 
formal, perhaps more intellectually conservative, spaces. The sense that a lot 
of Delhi’s intellectual life now takes place in small, gated communities of the 
mind is hard to ignore.”

But she cautions against overly romanticising Delhi’s previous form. “Friends 
in Gurgaon say that a thriving intellectual community is gradually developing 
there.” Rastogi agrees: “The hubs around Delhi are now maturing to a level of 
cultural independence – there are events, theatre, art, and independent social 
activism. After all, how long can such a rapidly sprawling city continue to 
believe that its centre will always form every aspect of its inhabitants’ 
cultural experience?”

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> to join the discussion
 