
When the late Tokyo property tycoon Minoru Mori 
<http://usatoday30.usatoday.com/money/economy/housing/story/2012-03-12/japan-property-tycoon-obit-minoru-mori/53495974/1>
 completed construction of Roppongi Hills in 2003, it was hailed as a 
technological wonder – a huge, sprawling hodgepodge of residential, commercial, 
leisure and retail functions that performed as if it were a self-contained 
neighbourhood. And it was, though perhaps not in the way its designers imagined.

The layout was almost perversely illogical: 724,000 square metres of floor 
space distributed among four distinct high-rises and a warren of multi-level 
passages that could have been designed by Magritte. The joke about Roppongi 
Hills is that once inside, no one has ever been able to figure out how to get 
from point A to point B and back again – even with a map.


Whether intended or not, this complex mimics the maze-like quality of many old 
Tokyo neighbourhoods. Until the end of the second world war, the city had the 
unfortunate habit of burning down every couple of years (in fact, local 
firefighting brigades were traditionally made up of carpenters, thus providing 
an historical rationalisation for Tokyo’s infamous “scrap-and-build” 
reputation).

Since the war, the city seems to have been transforming itself on an almost 
daily basis, resisting any attempts at urban planning owing to the makeshift 
nature of its neighbourhoods, a laissez-faire attitude toward development, and 
a penchant for the new. In this, Roppongi Hills was no different.


The neighbourhood the complex replaced was a jumble of miscellaneous 
structures delineated by several main thoroughfares and the studios of a major 
commercial broadcaster. By the 1960s, the area contained five nine-storey 
apartment buildings run by the national housing authority, but mostly it was 
made up of closely packed wooden houses arranged along twisting streets that 
were so narrow they couldn’t accommodate fire trucks – and which only had one 
exit point.

The joke goes that no one has ever been able to work out how to get from point 
A to point B and back – even with a map
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Froppongi-hills-tokyo-controversial-new-high-rise-history-of-cities-50-buildings-day-38%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F11%2F1431361553466%2F2d2b1ec1-87a0-4a1d-b1fb-e68af9ec69f6-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Roppongi%20Hills%3A%20controversial%20blueprint%20for%20Tokyo's%20new%20breed%20of%20high-rise%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2038&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Froppongi-hills-tokyo-controversial-new-high-rise-history-of-cities-50-buildings-day-38%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Roppongi%20Hills%3A%20controversial%20blueprint%20for%20Tokyo%27s%20new%20breed%20of%20high-rise%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2038&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Froppongi-hills-tokyo-controversial-new-high-rise-history-of-cities-50-buildings-day-38%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F11%2F1431361553466%2F2d2b1ec1-87a0-4a1d-b1fb-e68af9ec69f6-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Roppongi Hills is self-sufficient in the event of power outages – essential 
for a facility that relies on elevators. Photograph: Maisant 
Ludovic/Hemis/Corbis 
The Roppongi neighbourhood is in the heart of the Yamanote, an area of the 
city centre ringed by the railway line – whatTokyo historian Edward 
Seidensticker <http://www.nytimes.com/2007/08/31/arts/31seidensticker.html?_r=0>
 called the “high city”, where the “proper people” lived. Except that Roppongi 
wasn’t considered proper. During the pre-modern era and blessed with abundant 
ground water, the area was populated by samurai warriors who supplemented their 
measly sinecures by raising goldfish. The tradition continued: the first head 
of the Roppongi Hills residents’ association, Tamotsu Hara, used to breed 
goldfish himself before his house was condemned and he moved to a comfortable 
corner unit on the 41st floor.

Before the war, Roppongi was home to the Japanese military; afterwards, the 
Americans used it for a base that outlasted the occupation. By the high-powered 
1980s it had became Tokyo’s designated exoticdemimonde, famous for bars and 
discos frequented by foreign residents and servicemen on the prowl. It was 
never as respectable as the nearby neighbourhoods, but it was on the edge of 
the commercial district that Minoru Mori’s family was quickly filling up with 
tall office buildings. In 1986, he gained permission from the Tokyo prefectural 
government to redevelop Roppongi, of whichKohn Pedersen Fox Associates 
<http://www.kpf.com/project.asp?ID=32> was the master-planner of the scheme – 
the biggest such project in the city’s history.

It took Mori 17 years to negotiate the title transfers. About 400 households 
were promised condominiums in the towers to be constructed on the land they 
were being asked to give up, but only 161 actually took up the offer. During 
the extreme “bubble” period of the late 1980s, property values in Roppongi 
skyrocketed – so even though the owners could sell their land for huge profits, 
the new condos would cost them even more. Moreover, the management fees of more 
than 60,000 yen (£320) a month were beyond the means of most of these families.


Japanese city planners have always been interested in the self-contained 
community. In the 1960s and 70s, “new towns 
<http://www.japantimes.co.jp/community/2011/11/01/how-tos/japans-new-towns-are-finally-getting-too-old/#.VVhjHqZkDS8>
” designed by the central housing authority sprung up in the suburbs of the 
country’s major cities. Modern apartment blocks and single-family houses would 
be within walking distance of shopping and leisure facilities – and, most 
importantly, work places. Though popular, these developments never attracted 
the businesses that would have made them true “towns”, sosalarymen residents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2012/feb/01/salarymans-guide-to-tokyo-city> 
ended up commuting into the city.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Froppongi-hills-tokyo-controversial-new-high-rise-history-of-cities-50-buildings-day-38%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F11%2F1431361616626%2F9e73e282-d3da-415a-9b28-eec5a8d47b24-2060x1406.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Roppongi%20Hills%3A%20controversial%20blueprint%20for%20Tokyo's%20new%20breed%20of%20high-rise%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2038&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Froppongi-hills-tokyo-controversial-new-high-rise-history-of-cities-50-buildings-day-38%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Roppongi%20Hills%3A%20controversial%20blueprint%20for%20Tokyo%27s%20new%20breed%20of%20high-rise%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2038&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Froppongi-hills-tokyo-controversial-new-high-rise-history-of-cities-50-buildings-day-38%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F11%2F1431361616626%2F9e73e282-d3da-415a-9b28-eec5a8d47b24-2060x1406.jpeg>
 Roppongi Hills offers stunning views of Tokyo, a city that is constantly 
developing. Photograph: Blaine Harrington III/Corbis 
With Roppongi’s central location, however, the job issue took care of itself. 
Moreover, it alleviated some of the problems associated with modern city living 
by mixing in some suburban elements. A quarter of the compex’s total footprint 
is made up of parks, and the buildings’ roofs all possess real vegetable 
gardens. One even has a rice paddy. Consequently, the average outdoor 
temperature within its borders is 2-to-3 degrees cooler than that of the 
surrounding neighbourhoods, thus addressing theurban heat island phenomenon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2013/jan/09/delhi-mumbai-urban-heat-islands-india>
.

The complex also has its own gas turbine that reduces energy usage by 20% and 
carbon emissions by 27%. It is is self-sufficient in the event of power outages 
– essential for a facility that relies on elevators – and has 13 rainwater 
collection points; waste water is purified and reused within the complex. All 
refuse is recycled, and solar panels provide lighting with the surplus stored 
in batteries.


These features make Roppongi Hills not only environmentally responsible but 
also fairly disaster-proof – a model for how to live in a city that everyone 
knows is going to be hit by a major earthquake one of these days. The kind of 
densely concentrated wooden neighbourhood that Roppongi used to be – and the 
kind that still houses 20% of Tokyo’s population – will crumble and ignite in 
such a quake. But Roppongi Hills has set an example that has been followed 
throughout the city in a rush to build new high-rise towers that aim to be 
self-contained, self-sufficient and state-of-the-art in terms of withstanding 
disasters.

While the temblor <http://www.thefreedictionary.com/temblor> which devastated 
the northeastern region of Japan in 2011 slowed this “tower mansion” boom 
slightly, Tokyo is one of the few places that continues to attract new 
residents as the country’s overall population dwindles. Many people question 
the wisdom of this vertical orientation to buildings, but in Tokyo (and most of 
Japan) there’s no place to go but up.

The world's first skyscraper: a history of cities in 50 buildings, day 9
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/apr/02/worlds-first-skyscraper-chicago-home-insurance-building-history>
Not everyone can afford this green, disaster-resilient lifestyle, of course. 
In 2003 when Roppongi Hills was completed, the complex immediately became 
identified withJapan’s version of the 1% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/oct/14/richest-1percent-half-global-wealth-credit-suisse-report>
, and its success spawned two similar luxury complexes:Tokyo Midtown 
<http://www.tokyo-midtown.com/en/>, a few blocks to the east, and Toranomon 
Hills <https://www.mori.co.jp/en/projects/toranomonhills/>. 


When Roppongi Hills opened, high-profile IT and finance companies moved into 
its office spaces. Some of the wealthiest people in the country have lived in 
its apartments, including Takafumi Horie, founder and former CEO ofLivedoor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2006/may/27/japan.internationalnews>, the 
hugely controversial internet services firm.

Horie subsequently spent several years in jail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2007/mar/16/japan.internationalnews> for 
securities fraud, but his reputation as an iconoclast endures and is informed 
by the image attached to Roppongi Hills – a place that goes beyond the 
conventional notion of what a high-rise complex is for, while maintaining the 
unique “jerry-built” quality of the Tokyo landscape. The main difference, 
though, is that this complex has been designed to last a lot longer.


 * Which other buildings in the world tell stories about urban history? Share 
your own pictures and descriptions with GuardianWitness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/mar/23/50-buildings-great-stories-urban-history>
, on Twitter and Instagram using #hoc50 or let us know suggestions in the 
comments below  