
Like most people who find themselves homeless, Lee Davies, a 24-year-old from 
Plymouth who now sleeps rough in London, was kicked out of his home due to the 
end of an assured-shorthold tenancy. Themost recent government statistics 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/577870/Statutory_Homelessness_and_Prevention_and_Relief_Statistical_Release_July_to_September_2016_v2.pdf>
 show that a third of all households in England made homeless, 40% in London, 
were due to a landlord ending a tenancy – up from 11% of all cases in 2009. 
With the rise of private renting, the precarity of the tenure has been 
reflected in the cases councils see in their homelessness applications.

Where do we expect our homeless people to go?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/12/where-do-we-expect-our-homeless-people-to-go>
When Davies approached his local authority for help finding accommodation, he 
found little sympathy: on one occasion, he was informed that as a single young 
man he was low priority; on another advised to rent another property, despite 
the fact he had no money for a deposit; and on a third visit, told he was 
“intentionally homeless” because he could have found somewhere else to live 
after his landlord had given him notice. Finally, he gave up, relying on 
friends’ sofas – but eventually his friends’ patience ran out.

At that point, he found a novel way of finding places to sleep. “If I went on 
Grindr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/22/hook-up-apps-grindr-tinder-gay-straight-people-dating>
, I could meet men who had their own flats and offer to spend the night with 
them. Then I could have a shower, charge my phone, and go out,” he tells me. “I 
didn’t like some of the guys, but the alternative was sleeping in shop 
doorways, so it was all about weighing up the pros and cons.”

But then Davies’s phone was stolen and this lifeline was cut off. Now he has 
no way to contact friends and family, and sleeps rough in central London. “At 
least when I could still get online, I could pretend this was temporary and 
that everything was fine; but now no one knows where I am, and if they wanted 
to find me, they couldn’t.” He has bruises on his neck, from a few nights ago 
when he slept in a doorway near a cashpoint and a drunk man in a suit kicked 
him repeatedly while swearing at him.

Davies’s situation is not unique, and is becoming increasingly common. The 
government’smost recent figures, 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/503015/Rough_Sleeping_Autumn_2015_statistical_release.pdf>
 from autumn 2015, estimate that there are 3,569 rough sleepers on any one 
night in England – more than double the number in autumn 2010, when it was 
1,768. And sources told the Observer this month thatthis year’s count 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/04/rough-sleeper-numbers-homeless>
, which has only just finished, is likely to be higher again.

In cities around the country, homelessness has increased visibly, with many 
more people on the streets. The highest rates of rough sleeping are in 
Westminster, Bristol and Brighton and Hove, the government’s figures 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/503015/Rough_Sleeping_Autumn_2015_statistical_release.pdf>
 suggest. Manchester has thefourth highest rate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2016/mar/09/surge-in-rough-sleepers-outside-london>
 of street homelessness and Adam Williams, office manager atBarnabus 
<http://www.barnabus-manchester.org.uk/>, a Christian homelessness charity in 
Manchester, says the number of people requesting their services has never been 
higher than this year. “People are visibly affected when they visit Manchester 
at the moment, especially if they haven’t been here for a few years. However, 
my fear is that people will become desensitised to the situation [so many 
people sleeping rough] and that within a year it will just become a normal 
state of affairs in most people’s eyes,” he says.

Howard Sinclair, chief executive of homelessness charity St Mungo’s, concurs 
with Williams. “This year saw an alarming rise in the number of people who are 
facing the extreme dangers of sleeping rough.”

In winter, sleeping rough can mean death: the average age of death for a 
homeless woman is 43, for a homeless man 46

The charity’s report on homelessness earlier this year, Stop the Scandal 
<http://www.mungos.org/documents/7021/7021.pdf>, identified multiple reasons 
why rough sleeping remains a stubborn problem, even though all street homeless 
people should have access to a shelter. A lack of specialist mental health 
provision was the main issue raised: four out of 10 people who homelessness 
workers came into contact with had at least one mental health problem, yet 86% 
reported a lack of beds for people with mental health issues. Causes include 
funding cuts, services disappearing entirely, and rough sleepers with both 
mental health problems and substance abuse histories finding it nearly 
impossible to access services.

The report calculates that on average, local authority funding for services 
for helping vulnerable people avoid homelessness was cut by 45% between 2009-10 
and 2014-15. Last week’s local government finance settlement is unlikely to 
inspire confidence in the sector – the Local Government Association estimates 
that councils face a£5.8bn funding gap 
<http://www.local.gov.uk/web/guest/media-releases/-/journal_content/56/10180/8106439/NEWS>
 by 2020.

In winter, sleeping rough can easily mean death: the average age of death 
<http://www.crisis.org.uk/data/files/publications/Homelessness%20-%20a%20silent%20killer.pdf>
 for a homeless woman is 43, and for a homeless man 46, compared with a 
national average of 77. Last month, an unidentified homeless man wasfound dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/02/rough-sleeping-on-rise-in-birmingham-after-cuts-to-homelessness-services>
 behind Birmingham New Street station. In the same month, Birmingham council 
announced it wascutting £10m from the £24m Supporting People budget 
<http://www.birminghammail.co.uk/news/midlands-news/how-birmingham-cutting-10m-homelessness-12321857>
, designed to help homeless and vulnerable people.

Birmingham’s decision is symptomatic of the funding crisis facing local 
authorities. Persistent cuts to housing-related budgets by Oxford county 
council have led several homelessness charities in the area to warn they will 
be forced to close shelters without funding. Volunteers can only plug the gap 
partially: without targeted funding, it becomes impossible to run effective 
homelessness services. 

Once people end up sleeping rough, it is extremely difficult to gain access to 
housing: Davies cannot work or claim benefits as he has no fixed address and he 
does not have the identification documents to apply for asimple payment card 
<https://www.gov.uk/simple-payment>, can’t contact friends without turning up 
on their doorsteps and tells me he feels he “has completely dropped out of 
society”, whereas before he had a low-paid job, but a home and a small social 
safety net.

Bill Jenkins, a 38-year old, has been street homeless for two years after 
leaving his home when he broke up with his wife. When the council told him he 
wasn’t a priority, he “lost it, thought I’d ruined my entire life, just drank 
all day to calm myself down and have been sleeping rough since.” He feels that 
sleeping rough is an insurmountable obstacle to re-entering society and getting 
his life back on track.

As temperatures drop, Lily’s charity is working to keep homeless people alive 
| Frances Ryan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/08/manchester-homeless-crisis-cocktail-cuts-charities-shelter>
Last week, the Labour party said it would double the number of housing 
association homes 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/homelesshelpline/homelessness-rough-sleeping-labour-john-healey-end-rsi-rsu-a7472861.html>
 earmarked for rough sleepers in a bid to tackle the problem. And across the 
border from England, there may be a solution. The Welsh approach to 
homelessness focuses on prevention rather than forcing households to wait until 
they are homeless before being entitled to help, and does not deprioritise 
single young people like Davies: if Lee were in Wales, it’s highly unlikely 
he’d be sleeping in a telephone box each night.

Jon Sparkes, chief executive of Crisis, is wholly enthusiastic about the 
approach, which the currenthomelessness reduction bill 
<http://services.parliament.uk/bills/2016-17/homelessnessreduction.html> seeks 
to bring to English local authorities. “Prevention is better than cure, and for 
homeless people this is especially so. It has already been shown to work in 
Wales, where it has dramatically reduced the need for people to be rehoused and 
helped to reduce the amount councils spend on temporary accommodation. We now 
need similar change in England,” he says.

With cross-party support and, crucially, the financial backing to enact the 
policy’s aims, the homelessness reduction bill could make a real difference, 
although the Local Government Association, and former housing ministers Mark 
Prisk and John Healey, have warned that without millions of pounds of funding 
from central government, the aims of the bill cannot be realised. Davies’s 
immediate situation looks bleak, but he remains positive: “I’m still young, and 
some people have offered help purely because it’s Christmas. I’m spending 
Christmas weekend in a hostel, and they’ve got advisers there, so I want to see 
if I can get back on track, and back into the system. Get my life back, really.”

Some names have been changed
 