
Theresa May’s plan to implement Brexit without the authorisation of a vote in 
parliament would be “a contemporary necessity” rather than a misuse of outdated 
ancient royal powers, the attorney general said at the start of the most keenly 
awaited constitutional law case in recent memory.


Opening the government’s submission in front of the 11 justices of the supreme 
court,Jeremy Wright QC and MP  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/jul/15/jeremy-wright-barrister-attorney-general>
told the highest court in the land that royal prerogative powers were an 
essential part of the UK’s unwritten constitution and could therefore 
legitimately be used to trigger article 50.

Article 50: what is the supreme court appeal about? 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=2f00ae48-ade6-4d35-ace1-1024cc0ac8d8>
Wright argued that the high court had been wrong to rule last month that 
article 50 could only be triggered after a vote in parliament, and said that 
the EU referendum had been conducted “with the universal expectation that the 
government would implement the result”.

The attorney general was speaking in front of a Westminster courtroom so 
crowded with lawyers, journalists and members of the public that some of the 
barristers and solicitors taking part had had to sit in neighbouring courts and 
watch the hearing by live video link.

Also present was Gina Miller, the fund manager who is the lead claimant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/04/gina-miller-supreme-court-judges-brexit-case-vilified>
 in the case against the government. She was cheered loudly as she entered the 
supreme court and took a seat behind her legal team on the left-hand side of 
the court.

Protesters from both sides of the argument appeared outside the court; at 9am, 
the number of Europhile protesters outside the supreme court far outnumbered 
the Brexiters. An open top, double-decker bus carrying supporters dressed as 
judges, in wigs, capes and duelling swords parked outside. They chanted, 
“Nigel, where are you?”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fattorney-general-opens-government-supreme-court-appeal-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Attorney%20general%20opens%20government%20supreme%20court%20appeal%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fattorney-general-opens-government-supreme-court-appeal-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Attorney%20general%20opens%20government%20supreme%20court%20appeal%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fattorney-general-opens-government-supreme-court-appeal-video&media=>
Attorney general opens government supreme court appeal – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/video/2016/dec/05/attorney-general-opens-government-supreme-court-appeal-video>
Inside, Wright argued: “The foreign affairs prerogative is not an ancient 
relic, but a contemporary necessity. Including the powers to make and withdraw 
from treaties, it is a fundamental pillar of our constitution as a sovereign 
state and it is essential to the effective conduct of public business.

“The need [for governments] to maintain control of strategy and policy matters 
is clear and compelling.” Parliament is sovereign, Wright added, but it had 
chosen to limit the government’s prerogative powers “sparingly, conscious of 
the need for executive powers”.

At issue is whether the government, through its executive powers, or 
parliament, because it originally passed the 1972 European Communities Act, can 
trigger article 50 of the treaty onEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>, which formally begins the UK’s 
withdrawal from Brussels.

Supreme court sets the scene for latest twists in Brexit tale
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/05/supreme-court-sets-the-scene-for-latest-twists-in-brexit-tale>
The politically sensitive case has provoked fierce attacks on the judiciary 
and claims from some newspapers that certain justices harbour private Europhile 
sympathies. In court, the arguments have exposed gaps in the UK’s unwritten 
constitution, as rival legal teams draw on different precedent cases and wrench 
an untested consensus apart.

Wright was followed by James Eadie, the seasoned presenter of government cases 
in the courts. Developing the government’s arguments following Wright’s opening 
submission, Eadie said that powers to make war and peace have long been part of 
the government’s executive powers.

But Eadie ran into a barrage of queries from the justices on the court, 
challenging the source of the royal prerogative and the limits of its use and 
peppered his presentation with questions, observations and interruptions.

Referring to the way in which the UK entered what was then the EEC, first Lord 
Wilson and thenLord Neuberger, president of the supreme court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/dec/04/david-neuberger-brexit-judge-supreme-court-president-article-50-appeal-judgment>
, pointed out that parliament and the government had worked together in 1972. 
“If entry was the result of a joint effort, should our departure [from the EU] 
also not be so?” Wilson inquired.

The judges protect us. It’s time to stand up for them | Sarah Helm
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/05/parliament-supreme-court-judges-protest-us-brexiteers-media-war-on-judiciary>
Neuberger remarked: “Parliament did its bit in passing the 1972 act. It was 
very much a joint affair. Whereas on [the government’s] argument, our 
withdrawal will not be a joint effort “

Lord Sumption, another of the justices, intervened to point out that where 
statutory instruments are normally replaced by parliamentary legislation, 
prerogative powers are removed only by implication.

Lord Reed asked whether what happened in 1972, when the European Communities 
Act came into force, should not dictate the means of withdrawal from the EU. 
Eadie disagreed. “What we are in the process of answering is a contemporary 
legal question,” the first Treasury counsel shot back.

Precedents summoned in support of the government’s prerogative powers included 
the De Keyser case, which related to compensation claimed for military 
occupation of a London hotel during the first world war. In that instance, the 
government relied on prerogative powers to limit compensation. Also invoked 
were the commercial failure of Freddie Laker’s Skytrain and a case involving 
the Fire Brigades Union.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fsupreme-court-brexit-case-whose-prerogative-is-it-anyway%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc42ba703491df460271c5e9c7e3628dea9fb5e2b%2F0_173_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Royal%20prerogative%20takes%20centre%20stage%20as%20supreme%20court%20Brexit%20case%20opens&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fsupreme-court-brexit-case-whose-prerogative-is-it-anyway%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Royal%20prerogative%20takes%20centre%20stage%20as%20supreme%20court%20Brexit%20case%20opens&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fsupreme-court-brexit-case-whose-prerogative-is-it-anyway%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc42ba703491df460271c5e9c7e3628dea9fb5e2b%2F0_173_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Businesswoman Gina Miller, who took the original case against the government 
to the high court, was cheered on her arrival in the courtroom Photograph: Toby 
Melville/Reuters 
Earlier, the attorney general had said that parliament had not voted to scrap 
the royal prerogative when it could have done so. The 2010 Constitutional and 
Reform of Government Act introduced a series of controls on ratification of 
treaties, “but it did not seek to control the prerogative powers [of the 
government] to make it withdraw from treaties”, Wright told the packed supreme 
court.

Parliament had been “fully and consciously” involved in drawing up the 
referendum legislation, the attorney general said. “Parliament expected the 
government to act on the answer the people gave.”

“If this is all about standing up for parliament,” Wright continued, “I say 
parliament can stand up for itself. When it comes to leaving theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>, parliament has had full capacity and 
multiple opportunities to restrict the executive’s ordinary ability to begin 
the article 50 process, and it has not chosen to do so.”

As the case began, Theresa May’s official spokeswoman attacked both the Labour 
party and Liberal Democrats for failing to swing behind “the UK team” over the 
issue of Brexit. The comments from No 10 came after the spokeswoman was asked 
about the suggestion by Jeremy Corbyn and others that they would attempt to 
amend any bill on article 50 that the government introduced in the event of 
defeat in the supreme court.

Keir Starmer: UK should guarantee EU citizens' rights before talks begin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/30/keir-starmer-uk-guarantee-eu-citizens-rights-talks-brexit>
“While others are seeming to make clear that they want to frustrate the will 
of the British people by slowing down the process of leaving and trying to tie 
the government’s hand in the negotiation, the government is getting on with 
respecting what the British people decided and making a success of Brexit,” she 
said. “If you are backing the UK team, you want them to be able to go into the 
negotiation and get the best deal possible.”

Before the legal arguments began, the president of the supreme court said none 
of the parties involved in the case had asked any of the 11 justices to stand 
down, or recuse themselves, from the hearing. Stressing the court’s 
determination to assert its impartiality in the proceedings, Lord Neuberger 
said: “At the direction of the court, the registrar has asked all the parties 
involved in these proceedings whether they wish to ask any of the justices to 
stand down,” Neuberger explained.

“Without exception, all parties to the appeal have stated that they have no 
objection to any of us sitting on this appeal.”
 