
1) Saints defeat worryingly unsurprising

One of the most extraordinary turnarounds in rugby history was the manner in 
which Leinster overturned a 16-point half-time deficit in the2011 Heineken Cup 
final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/may/23/leinster-northampton-heineken-cup-final>
, which had flattered them, so comprehensively had they been outplayed by 
Northampton. At the time we marvelled at the transformation of Leinster in the 
second half, eventually triumphing 33-22, but perhaps we should have been more 
alive to the capitulation out of nowhere of the Saints. Since that day, during 
a period that has seen them crowned champions of England, reach another 
Premiership final and two European quarter-finals, they have suffered 
humiliations in every European campaign. The following season they lost 41-22 
in Castres and then 51-36 to Munster in a supposedly home tie in Milton Keynes. 
The season after that they lost properly at home to Ulster, 25-6, the most 
modest of this rollcall of indignities, but as comprehensive as any of them. 
Then it was a 40-7 humiliation at home to Leinster in the 2013-14 season, 
before Racing took over, smashing them 32-8 at Franklin’s Gardens in 2015 and 
33-3 in Paris last season. In that context, Castres’s 41-7 victory over them on 
Saturday was nothing out of the ordinary. And that is the most concerning 
aspect of all.Michael Aylwin

• Match report: Castres 41-7 Northampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/22/castres-northampton-european-champions-cup-match-report>
• Wood questions Saints’ commitment after heavy defeat at Castres 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/23/castres-northampton-tom-wood-champions-cup>

New Zealand pick three Barrett brothers in squad to tour US and Europe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/23/new-zealand-pick-three-barrett-brothers-squad-tour-us-europe>
2) Williams injury just part of the problem for Scarlets

Wales face Australia in less than two weeks still not knowing if Jamie Roberts 
and George North will be released by their clubs, but equally concerning for 
them was the ankle injury suffered by the full-back Liam Williams early in the 
defeat at Saracens. He left the ground in a moon-boot and although the Scarlets 
said that was a routine precaution, he has had ankle problems before. Williams 
is in line to start at full-back against the Wallabies despite the return to 
fitness, and the Toulon starting line-up, of Leigh Halfpenny, who missed most 
of last season with a knee injury. Williams was one of Wales’s star turns on 
the summer tour to New Zealand, especially dangerous on the counterattack, and 
Halfpenny is still feeling his way back for his club. Halfpenny started his 
career on the wing, which is where he may return for the summer series, if 
Williams is passed fit. The Scarlets missed Williams having lost their Wales 
centre Scott Williams with an ankle injury in the build-up to the game. They 
took the game to Saracens, but lacked their hosts’ cutting edge, although some 
rehearsed moves worked well. The respective benches showed how far the Welsh 
regions have fallen behind Premiership clubs in terms of financial resources 
and their prospect of a first Champions Cup success remains remote. The road to 
European recovery is long.Paul Rees

• Jones and England wait for news of Itoje hand injury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/23/eddie-jones-england-maro-itoje-hand-injury>
• Match report: Saracens 44-26 Scarlets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/22/saracens-scarlets-european-champions-cup-match-report>
• Saracens close in on European record but Goode seeks improvement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/23/saracens-scarlets-champions-cup-alex-goode>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Frugby-union-talking-points-european-champions-cup-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a6d54aa2a0cfdbcabb352373ee4f0a91f89a80f%2F67_91_3852_2312%2F3852.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rugby%20union%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20weekend's%20Champions%20Cup%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Frugby-union-talking-points-european-champions-cup-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rugby%20union%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20weekend%27s%20Champions%20Cup%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Frugby-union-talking-points-european-champions-cup-action%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a6d54aa2a0cfdbcabb352373ee4f0a91f89a80f%2F67_91_3852_2312%2F3852.jpg>
 Scarlets’ Liam Williams goes off injured during the European Champions Cup, 
Pool Three match at Allianz Park, London. Photograph: Paul Harding/PA 
3) Toulouse and Wasps put on a show despite state of the pitch

Munster lay on fitting farewell for Anthony Foley on sombre day
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/22/munster-glasgow-european-champions-cup-match-report>
Of all the things to talk about after a match like that, it’s a scandal that 
anyone should choose the state of the pitch. But it was as bad as that. The 
Wasps players were fuming afterwards about what such inadequate infrastructure 
says about the game we’re all trying to promote – and what it does to the game 
itself. And the players. Josh Bassett, in particular, has cause for complaint, 
his foot sliding across a loose piece of turf as he scored a brilliant try, 
then catching so that he twisted his knee. Who knows how long he’ll be out. 
This game was meant to have been played at Stadium Toulouse, but it was 
transferred to Toulouse’s regular home because of some virus in the turf there. 
It’s clearly catching, because the turf at the Stade Ernest-Wallon curled up 
every time anyone so much as dug a stud in. It’s incredible that the players 
managed to put on such a show despite all the reset scrums. The Stade de France 
pitch is similarly unreliable, and Montpellier’s looked horrible earlier in the 
day. Rather than ratcheting up the price of a rugby player, inflicting untold 
damage on the game elsewhere, French rugby would do well to save a few pennies 
for the state of the turf those superstars are obliged to strut on.Michael 
Aylwin

• Match report: Toulouse 20-20 Wasps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/23/toulouse-wasps-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
• Cipriani: ‘I’m enjoying my rugby, I’m in a different place now’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/22/danny-cipriani-enjoying-rugby-union-england-squad-wasps-interview>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Frugby-union-talking-points-european-champions-cup-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3945a312d897c14d626e20ef107ed752203e22d6%2F94_71_2945_1768%2F2945.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rugby%20union%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20weekend's%20Champions%20Cup%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Frugby-union-talking-points-european-champions-cup-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rugby%20union%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20weekend%27s%20Champions%20Cup%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Frugby-union-talking-points-european-champions-cup-action%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3945a312d897c14d626e20ef107ed752203e22d6%2F94_71_2945_1768%2F2945.jpg>
 Josh Bassett of Wasps dives over to score their first try against Toulouse. 
Photograph: David Rogers/Getty Images 
4) ‘Barcelona’ flop in Manchester

“Ah, but would they fancy it on a Friday night at Sale?” we were cued to ask 
when a Toulon side likened to Lionel Messi et al rocked up at the monument of 
misery that is the AJ Bell Stadium. Toulon, though, are willing rugby 
brutalists, equipped to be ugly and functional, and had motivation to respond 
to their opening-round loss. Yet in the 70 minutes for which Sale had 15 
players were on the park, in decent conditions, they mustered nul points. They 
often looked wide, where they were especially barren. “Fat boys” wandering into 
midfield can be the enemy of back play, but here the lump, Mathieu Bastareaud, 
wore 13 - the issues being gas (negligible), awareness of space (none) and 
footwork (sorry, what?). Ma’a Nonu, “a unit” in most company, looked positively 
elfin beside him but, detached from the All Blacks, as ordinary as southern 
imports can in the drearier European game. And you’ll have missed him, but 
James O’Connor, too, was apparently on the pitch. For years Toulon were less 
than the sum of their parts – owner Mourad Boudjellal’s collection of 
candy-stick cards more than real-life team – before hardening around a nucleus 
led by Jonny Wilkinson. The post-Wilkinson mob seem in search of an identity. 
In a composite XV of Friday’s teams, you could make a case for a back division 
including none of Toulon’s embarrassment of Escande, Trinh-Duc, Habana, Nonu, 
Bastareaud, O’Connor and Halfpenny. Because Toulon are not Barcelona. For the 
moment, they’re back to being the Barbarians on a bad day.Tom Bell

• Match report: Sale 5-15 Toulon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/21/sale-toulon-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>


Sport picture of the day: Simon Zebo sheds a tear for Anthony Foley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/picture/2016/oct/22/sport-picture-of-the-day-simon-zebo-sheds-a-tear-for-anthony-foley>
5) Leicester hardest to beat when they get down and dirty

Leicester’s ability to bounce back has never been in question, but they are 
having to do it more and more often. Their resolve was evident from the 
kick-off against Racing 92, but grit and guts do not get a side as far as they 
once did. A game which swivels on set-pieces is always going to be there for 
Leicester’s winning so well drilled are they in the basics, but a significant 
worry for them on the night was the departure of their Australian centre Matt 
Toomua with a knee injury after 23 minutes. He has a footballing brain to put 
him in the same wavelength as Leicester’s head coach Aaron Mauger and there was 
a sense of drift when he left the field, which prompted Mauger to bring on 
Freddie Burns 13 minutes into the second half, a decision which had a 
significant impact on the outcome. Leicester have evolved their game since 
Mauger’s arrival last season – some of their passages of play in that time were 
patented by the Barbarians – but they remain hardest to beat when they roll up 
their sleeves and get down and dirty. For all there was to admire about 
Leicester’s character under pressure, they do not look like contenders to 
succeed Saracens, their destination in the Premiership on Saturday. They are at 
the stage where they need to worry less about their style of play and more 
about putting together a sequence of results.Paul Rees

• Match report: Leicester 27-17 Racing 92 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/23/leiceister-racing-92-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
 