
1) Daly gets chance to showcase versatility

On one hand, Eddie Jones’s decision to stick with Elliot Daly on the wing 
again makes sense – he was excellent against Fiji, singled out for praise by 
the head coach, has the necessary pace and is willing to go looking for the 
ball. On the other, Semesa Rokoduguni’s omission seems harsh: before last 
Saturday Daly had not started on the wing since March 2013 and you cannot help 
but wonder how his overlooked Wasps club-mate Christian Wade might feel. But 
Daly’s versatility is clearly valued by Jones and giving him more game time 
there feels like planning for all eventualities in, with the greatest respect 
to Fiji and Argentina, matches that really matter. It also feels like the 
transitional phase in moving Daly to full-back, where he has a great deal more 
experience for Wasps and where he could well end up cementing his place in the 
England XV. Mike Brown will not give up the shirt without a fight – indeed 
Jones will relish the very fact the he won’t – but the Harlequins full-back 
will be 34 when the 2019 World Cup begins whereas Daly will be in his prime. 
Anthony Watson appeared to be the favourite to take over from Brown not so long 
ago but having spent a couple of seasons developing into England’s most lethal 
finisher, it would be a waste to restart his international education in the 
No15 jersey, especially considering Daly’s ability to run from deep.
• Robert Kitson: Daly’s pace and work-rate earn nod from Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/24/elliot-daly-eddie-jones-england-argentina-rugby>
• England warned to remain disciplined against Argentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/23/england-players-warned-remain-disciplined-argentina>

2) Will weary Argentina rouse themselves?

It is fair to say that Eddie Jones has started early. Nine days before England 
complete their autumn internationals against Australia, in what promises to be 
the toughest assignment of the series, and two days before facing Argentina, 
the head coach labelled the Pumas as “probably the second best team in the 
Rugby Championship” in what is no doubt a thinly veiled dig at the Wallabies. 
That is not to take anything away from the Pumas, who certainly did play some 
eye-catching stuff over the summer, but for the third Rugby Championship in a 
row they managed only one win and after narrow defeats by Wales and Scotland, 
they have now failed to beat one of the home nations in an autumn international 
since 2012. In short, they look tired – that Daniel Hourcade will not pick 
players based in Europe is commendable but it puts a strain on the players, 
most of whom have had long seasons with Argentina and the Jaguares. Jones has 
singled out the set piece – the bedrock of previous Argentina sides – as key on 
Saturday and he is probably right. The problem for the Pumas is that it is not 
quite the weapon it once was and England, seeking a 13th straight victory, will 
have the bit between the teeth against a side very much looking forward to the 
end of their season.

 * Laidlaw’s late penalty seals win for Scotland over Pumas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/scotland-argentina-autumn-internationals-match-report>
Wales need to think on their feet, rather than being told at half-time what to 
do | Paul Rees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/24/the-breakdown-wales-rob-howley> 
3) Inexperienced Springboks could still scare Wales


For two coaches who dare not contemplating losing on Saturday, the contrasting 
team selections by Rob Howley and Allister Coetzee are fascinating. Howley, but 
for an injury to Sam Warburton, has picked the same side that beat Argentina, 
albeit unimpressively, and while there is no Jamie Roberts, it is hardly 
experimental. Coetzee on the other hand has thrown caution to the wind and 
selected a team that – no disrespect to those players he has picked – has more 
than a hint of being a two-finger gesture at his critics. All but one of the 
starting XV will be playing in South Africa for next year’s Super Rugby 
competition while the backline is the most inexperienced the Springboks have 
selected since 1994. It is arguably the side that they should have picked, and 
properly backed, against England but Coetzee’s selection is not necessarily 
purely valedictory, even if there seems a chance he will go regardless of the 
result. Argentina did not have much joy getting in behind, or around, Wales but 
Japan most certainly did and with Faf de Klerk and Elton Jantjies chosen at 
half-back, the Springboks may fancy their chances of exploiting similar 
weaknesses in the Welsh defence. With his team selection Coetzee had also 
heaped that little bit more pressure on a Wales side who have looked anything 
but confident so far this autumn.
• South Africa go all in on youth policy for Wales match 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/24/south-africa-youth-policy-wales-autumn-international>
• Wales to pit Taulupe Faletau against South Africa after comeback 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/23/taulupe-faletau-wales-south-africa-rugby>

4) Pocock and Hooper will test Ireland’s resilience

Before Ireland’s rematch with New Zealand last Saturday, their captain, Rory 
Best, spoke of the need to back up their historic win in Chicago; to avoid what 
happened in the summer when a first ever win in South Africa was followed by 
back-to-back defeats and the series slipping through their fingers. Ireland 
gave it a damn good go but in the end the All Blacks, through methods that have 
been criticised, claimed victory and so a final autumn match against Australia 
assumes added significance. The good news for Ireland then is that CJ Stander 
is fit and how he and Sean O’Brien fare against David Pocock and Michael Hooper 
will be pivotal – a second-string Wallabies side got the better of France last 
week, largely due to the influence of the former. Dean Mumm joins the back row 
with Michael Cheika admittedly concerned by Ireland’s strength at the lineout 
but after three wins from three and a trip to Twickenham to come, Australia 
will not find it hard to motivate themselves in Dublin. Whether Ireland can 
again, after two hugely intense matches against the All Blacks in a fortnight, 
remains to be seen but as Best says, the need for consistency is clear.

 * Ireland nurse wounds after New Zealand prevail in Dublin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/20/ireland-new-zealand-match-report-autumn-internationals-rugby-union>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Frugby-union-autumn-internationals-what-to-look-forward-to-this-weekend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F87a03857f2a84e5762c06975b887f424aaaba332%2F0_91_3200_1920%2F3200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rugby%20union%20autumn%20internationals%3A%2010%20things%20to%20look%20forward%20to%20this%20weekend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Frugby-union-autumn-internationals-what-to-look-forward-to-this-weekend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rugby%20union%20autumn%20internationals%3A%2010%20things%20to%20look%20forward%20to%20this%20weekend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Frugby-union-autumn-internationals-what-to-look-forward-to-this-weekend%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F87a03857f2a84e5762c06975b887f424aaaba332%2F0_91_3200_1920%2F3200.jpg>
 David Pocock is still a formidable threat for Australia. Photograph: Benoit 
Tessier/Reuters 
5) Perenara gets a deserved chance in France

Without wishing to dwell on the legality of New Zealand’s tackling and, as 
Steve Hansen was so prickly in asking after the All Blacks’ victory in Dublin, 
whether they are a dirty side, it does not seem right that Joe Launchbury’s 
punishment for his indiscretion against Fiji was double that handed out to Sam 
Cane and Malakai Fekitoa. Not that that is New Zealand’s fault. And nor shall 
we expect the All Blacks to change their approach in France, who boast a 
monumental pack at present, in another match that will undoubtedly be physical. 
The truth is, for all the mystique that surrounds New Zealand, the endless 
superlatives to describe their talents, the All Blacks will always sail close 
to the wind. It should not come as a surprise that their players are capable of 
overstepping the mark – they may often be built up as being able to do no wrong 
but both on and off the field they are not. One of those to cross the line off 
the field, Aaron Smith, has been unable to regain his form on it of late so 
makes way for TJ Perenara against France in a change for which Hansen should be 
lauded. Not because of Smith’s off-field issues, but because he has recognised 
that a player so comfortably the best in his position in the world not very 
long ago is off the boil and his past form does not justify selection. Not 
least when Perenara – arguably the second best scrum-half in the world over the 
last 12 months – is playing as well as he is. Say what you like about the All 
Blacks’ tactics against Ireland but they sure know how to churn them out.

 * Fekitoa ensures All Blacks get their revenge against Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/ireland-new-zealand-autumn-internationals-match-report>
Steve Borthwick quietly helping to make England into a big noise
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/21/steve-borthwick-england-forwards-lions-2017>
6) Georgia need to prove themselves against Scotland

A year since Georgia’s performances at the World Cup reignited the debate over 
whether they should be allowed into, or at least closer to, the Six Nations, 
they now have a chance to make it an altogether harder argument to ignore. 
Georgia arrive with a settled side, benefiting from the continuity brought 
about by Milton Haig remaining in his post as head coach, and while they did 
feature in an autumn international two years ago, you get the feeling they are 
far better equipped to handle the occasion this year. For a start, the week 
before Ireland hammered them 49-7 at Lansdowne Road they were beaten 
comfortably by Tonga – and so were hardly in form – but this time around they 
have just beaten Samoa and really ought to have beaten Japan seven days 
previously. Their pack, led by the irrepressible Mamuka Gorgodze, is unchanged 
from the win over Samoa with only a couple of tweaks to the back line as Haig’s 
side continues to gain experience. This side includes the scrum-half Vasil 
Lobzhanidze, who became the youngest player to feature at a World Cup last 
year. They run into Scotland at the wrong time though; Vern Cotter has picked a 
strong side that includes both Gray brothers and Scotland will be buoyed after 
finally coming out of a tight finish on top, against Argentina. Haig and his 
fellow Kiwi Cotter have bet a bottle of whisky on the match but for the future 
of Georgian rugby that the stakes appear to be somewhat higher.

 * Maitland says Scotland have found x-factor to unlock defences 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/20/rugby-union-sean-maitland-scotland-found-x-factor-unlock-defences>
7) O’Shea knows Italy must build on Springboks upset

At the risk of trying to save face, having predicted a comfortable if 
uninspiring victory for South Africa last week, we have been here before. 
Granted, it was Italy’s first ever win over the Springboks but this is a South 
Africa side unravelling at a rate of knots and the Azzurri can boast wins over 
Ireland, Argentina, Scotland and France in the past eight years. The problem in 
the past has been building on these victories and Conor O’Shea is evidently 
already having an impact. There is the danger that Saturday’s win now becomes 
the yardstick against which Italy will now be judged. The first thing then, is 
for Italy to get their feet back on the ground and put a Tonga side, who edged 
past the USA last time out, to the sword. “There’s so much negativity about 
Italian rugby that this one result has changed a huge amount of people’s belief 
and perceptions,” says O’Shea. “But there is a long, long way to go before we 
can be competitive on a really regular basis. But that result will kick off a 
huge movement over here, there’s no doubt about that.” Defeat to Tonga would 
take O’Shea back to square one.

 * Italy celebrate famous first win over South Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/italy-beat-south-africa-first-time>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Frugby-union-autumn-internationals-what-to-look-forward-to-this-weekend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80372406e16c603da6e4c316dc1867f87d170616%2F33_260_2816_1689%2F2816.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rugby%20union%20autumn%20internationals%3A%2010%20things%20to%20look%20forward%20to%20this%20weekend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Frugby-union-autumn-internationals-what-to-look-forward-to-this-weekend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rugby%20union%20autumn%20internationals%3A%2010%20things%20to%20look%20forward%20to%20this%20weekend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Frugby-union-autumn-internationals-what-to-look-forward-to-this-weekend%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80372406e16c603da6e4c316dc1867f87d170616%2F33_260_2816_1689%2F2816.jpg>
 Italy celebrate beating South Africa but Conor O’Shea knows defeat to Tonga 
will take the shine off their famous victory last week. Photograph: Gabriele 
Maltinti/Getty Images 
8) Japan should end their autumn on a high against off-key Fiji

On the face of it, Fiji and Japan will lock horns on the back of losing 
matches they were expected to lose but that does not tell the half of it. 
England were beating the clock for a fair bit of the first half against Fiji, 
such was their dominance while Japan will lament an untimely missed penalty by 
the otherwise excellent Yu Tamura that may well have swung the three-point 
defeat by Japan in their favour. As Rob Howley acknowledged afterwards, Japan 
were the better side and can hope to end their autumn on a high, despite their 
poor record against Fiji over the past decade. For all that Japan have 
impressed, Fiji have been poor and while their financial problems have been 
well-documented they badly need a victory. If it were to come as it did in 
2009, when prevailing 40-39, then all the better for the neutrals but if Japan 
can reproduce the form they showed in Cardiff, it is hard to see past Jamie 
Joseph’s side.

 * Japan serve up warning to Wales in Cardiff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/20/japan-wales-south-africa-rob-howley>
9) McLean’s absence makes task harder for England women

Three matches so far for England, and all three decided by late scores - 
though last Saturday’s defeat by New Zealand was the first to go against Simon 
Middleton’s side. England can take heart from the way they played against the 
Black Ferns and in particular they way they created, if not necessarily 
finished a number of chances but while New Zealand are ranked No1 in the world, 
their task at Twickenham on Saturday gets no easier. Canada, after thumping a 
much-changed Ireland side last week, have now leapfrogged Middleton’s side into 
second in the world rankings and while England prevailed when the two sides met 
in the 2014 World Cup final, Canada ran out 52-17 winners in the most recent 
encounter in the summer. England’s task is made all the more difficult in the 
absence of Katy McLean from the matchday squad but with a couple of players on 
both sides having taken part in the Rio 2016 sevens bronze medal match, won 
33-10 by Canada, there should be some added spice.

 * New Zealand fight back to win after England threaten famous upset 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/england-women-new-zealand-women-match-report>
10) More brazen kit change cash-ins 

One can only imagine that the reason the navy blue kit worn by England last 
week retails at £90 is because it will be worn so rarely it will become a 
collector’s item. It was indeed the eighth kit worn by England – who have also 
tweaked their home strip – in the past two years. And they were not the only 
offenders. Wales squeezed past Japan in their antracite (dark grey in plain 
English) kit and now New Zealand, who never waste an opportunity to play up the 
aura of the black jersey – the kit for the World Cup was supposedly blacker 
than ever – will wear a puzzling, predominately white with black shoulders 
strip against France. The All Blacks againstLes Bleus, wearing kits that those 
names would suggest, is among the more iconic images in world rugby, provoking 
memories of their 1999 World Cup semi-final or the try from the end of the 
world. It may seem an irrelevance, and it is unlikely that the players are 
particularly bothered by it, but the fact it will not happen on Saturday is 
unfortunately further evidence of every last penny being squeezed out of this 
bloated autumn series.

 * Talking points from last week’s autumn internationals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/21/rugby-union-autumn-internationals-talking-points>
Saturday fixtures (all times GMT) 

Italy v Tonga 2.00pm


England v Argentina 2.30pm

Scotland v Georgia 2.30pm 

Wales v South Africa 5.30pm

Ireland v Australia 5.30pm

France v New Zealand 8.00pm

Sunday fixtures

Fiji v Japan 2.00pm
 