
1) Gopperth prevails at No12 in battle of England fly-halves

The early stages of the Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership> season are important ones for a 
number of eligible English fly-halves. Danny Cipriani and Henry Slade both have 
international squad ambitions and could do with nudging Eddie Jones this month 
ahead of the announcement of England’s senior squad on 30 September. Both did 
some good things – Slade’s left boot is as sweet as anybody’s in the game – 
without entirely dominating proceedings; the fly-half who had the biggest 
impact on the day was Jimmy Gopperth, playing at 12 for Wasps. It will be 
interesting to see how both go this weekend against Leicester and Saracens 
respectively, although Wasps’ director of rugby Dai Young is keen to emphasise 
it is a long season and is principally concerned with keeping both Cipriani and 
Gopperth in one piece. “You don’t want to get to Christmas with no 10s. I 
certainly can’t play there, that’s for sure”. Robert Kitson


• Match report: Wasps 25-20 Exeter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/04/wasps-exeter-premiership-rugby-union-match-report>

Sign up to the Breakdown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/18/sign-up-to-the-breakdown> 
2) Mallinder may not be a No10 but nor should he be overlooked

After a breakthrough season that culminated in England’s Junior World Cup 
triumph, Harry Mallinder has hit his first speed bump – publicly at least. Like 
his team, he started brightly againstBath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bath>, but thereafter his frustrations 
mirrored Northampton’s as his opposite number, George Ford, took the game away. 
Knowing types will say “ah, but he’s not a 10”, and that was Eddie Jones’s 
assessment recently. Perhaps Mallinder is doomed to become the latest Saint to 
suffer from the England coach’s unerring judgement. Jones was lauded for his 
tactical acumen when he hauled off Luther Burrell and Teimana Harrison before 
half-time in the first and third summer Tests respectively in Australia.

On his return, Jones’s first observation on Mallinder was: “He’s definitely 
not a 10.” It seemed a little harsh on a guy who had only just turned 20. If it 
weren’t for the fact that Dylan Hartley is his captain, a sensitive Saints fan 
might think Jones had it in for their boys. No doubt Mallinder will gravitate 
to 12 – at 6ft 5in and 17st he fits the bill physically – but for now he should 
not be shielded from playing 10 as a richly talented player who tries to make 
things happen. In that respect, he stood out inNorthampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> colours at the end of 
last season and no doubt will do so again this. More importantly, with Henry 
Slade and Ollie Devoto, England are suddenly awash with the rangy Will 
Greenwood-type playmakers that Stuart Lancaster could never find.Michael Aylwin

• Match report: Northampton 14-18 Bath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/03/northampton-saints-bath-rugby-union-premiership-match-report>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Frugby-union-talking-points-premiership-and-pro12%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6e320cf40f28cf36dea185a11577246bb3bd6ca%2F64_194_4248_2549%2F4248.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rugby%20union%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20Premiership%20and%20Pro12&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Frugby-union-talking-points-premiership-and-pro12%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rugby%20union%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20Premiership%20and%20Pro12&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Frugby-union-talking-points-premiership-and-pro12%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6e320cf40f28cf36dea185a11577246bb3bd6ca%2F64_194_4248_2549%2F4248.jpg>
 Harry Mallinder’s future may well be at No12. Photograph: David Rogers/Getty 
Images 



3) Newcastle snatch hope from jaws of defeat


It is far too early in the season to talk about moments that will define 
campaigns, but Newcastle Falcons supporters must have experienced a palpable 
sense of deja vu in the closing stages against Sale. Last season they lost five 
matches by a single score and had Dan Mugford’s late penalty gone over, another 
gut-wrenching defeat would have done nothing to alleviate concerns that another 
battle for survival was on the cards. As it was, Mugford missed and suddenly 
there is optimism at Kingston Park. Dean Richards pointedly remarked that
Newcastle <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/newcastlefalcons> “would have lost 
that game last season” and victory against a side who tend to show the kind of 
organisation and consistency – particularly at home – to which the Falcons 
should aspire suggests the optimism is justified. Kingston Park on a Friday 
night, especially in February, used to be a trip few teams relished but with 
the fit again Sinoti Sinoti and Niki Goneva – excellent on his debut against 
Sale – dazzling on the artificial pitch, it is for perhaps different reasons 
that no one will fancy the journey north this season.Gerard Meagher

• Premiership guide 2016-17: Andy Goode’s expert view on the season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/01/premiership-guide-2016-17-andy-goode-verdict>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Frugby-union-talking-points-premiership-and-pro12%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4918ff1a4f121a074f6e7eaa42e1035eff566720%2F31_91_2959_1776%2F2959.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rugby%20union%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20Premiership%20and%20Pro12&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Frugby-union-talking-points-premiership-and-pro12%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rugby%20union%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20Premiership%20and%20Pro12&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Frugby-union-talking-points-premiership-and-pro12%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4918ff1a4f121a074f6e7eaa42e1035eff566720%2F31_91_2959_1776%2F2959.jpg>
 Sale Sharks’ Byron McGuigan touches down but his side could not push for 
victory in the dying minutes. Photograph: Lee Smith/Reuters 
4) Worcester must rely on more than just attrition

Ben Te’o: ‘Some people in union love that Sam Burgess went back’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/31/ben-teo-worcester-rugby-union-league-sam-burgess>
Alex Lozowski scored 20 points on his debut for Saracens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> and while he was signed from Wasps 
as an understudy to Owen Farrell, the latter’s absence for three months of the 
season on duty with England makes him a key member of the squad. Mark McCall 
opted for Lozowski rather than more experienced 10s who were available to 
replace Charlie Hodgson, and if it will take him time to get used to the very 
different styles of Wasps and Sarries, he got into the game in the second half, 
scoring a try and helping establish greater continuity.

Fly-half has been a problem position for Worcester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/worcesterrugby> in most of their years in 
the Premiership, one they have not resolved in the close season. They were mute 
as an attacking force against the champions, confined to a few breakouts and 
making no inroads against a blanket defence. New recruit Ben Te’o provided 
their best moment, getting near to the line after picking up Billy Vunipola’s 
dropped catch, but they missed Francois Hougaard at scrum-half and Chris 
Pennell at full-back. They showed grit before fatigue set in, but the 
Premiership is now about more than attrition. Worcester’s fate will be 
determined by how they play with the ball in hand.Paul Rees

• Match report: Saracens 35-3 Worcester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/03/saracens-worcester-premiership-rugby-union-match-report>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Frugby-union-talking-points-premiership-and-pro12%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d8c3f145e07ade5514655ac1c98a283d32df608%2F0_379_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rugby%20union%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20Premiership%20and%20Pro12&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Frugby-union-talking-points-premiership-and-pro12%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rugby%20union%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20Premiership%20and%20Pro12&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Frugby-union-talking-points-premiership-and-pro12%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d8c3f145e07ade5514655ac1c98a283d32df608%2F0_379_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 Alex Lozowski scored 20 points for Saracens on debut. Photograph: Kieran 
Galvin/Rex/Shutterstock 
5) Local boy Harrison leads Leicester’s great escape

To lose at home after being 31-7 up early in the second half takes some doing. 
Gloucester’s downfall was a combination of several factors: removing their 
entire front row en masse after 48 minutes, Leicester’s superior bench and 
losing a crucial late lineout after kicking to the corner rather than going for 
goal. The Tigers, though, deserve credit for their great escape, not least the 
ponytailed Sam Harrison. It’s not often you see a specialist scrum-half shifted 
to fly-half win a match with two tries from close-range mauls plus a brace of 
nerveless conversions. “He could do with a haircut but he was awesome,” said a 
grateful Richard Cockerill. “He’s born and bred in Hinckley, he’s only ever 
wanted to play forLeicester <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> 
and he’ll play anywhere. Of all the kickers in the club to land a kick for 
31-31 I’d back him to have the minerals to do it.” RK

• Match report: Gloucester 31-38 Leicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/02/gloucester-leicester-premiership-match-report>
• Corbisiero takes front row seat as NBC shows Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/03/alex-corbisiero-nbc-aviva-premiership-rugby>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Frugby-union-talking-points-premiership-and-pro12%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa177604f5dda0792fa61d60d6c4f18813c33f396%2F76_177_1145_1431%2F1145.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rugby%20union%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20Premiership%20and%20Pro12&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Frugby-union-talking-points-premiership-and-pro12%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rugby%20union%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20Premiership%20and%20Pro12&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Frugby-union-talking-points-premiership-and-pro12%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa177604f5dda0792fa61d60d6c4f18813c33f396%2F76_177_1145_1431%2F1145.jpg>
 Friday night lights: Leicester’s Graham Kitchener is hoisted highest against 
Gloucester. Photograph: David Rogers/Getty Images 
6) Should forward passes get a more thorough examination?

Bristol ready to blood Premiership noses after seven years in wilderness
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/03/bristol-rugby-premiership-survival>
What constitutes a forward pass was a theme of the opening weekend, as it has 
been in matches in the southern hemisphere this year. It is now about the 
movement of a passer’s arms as well as hands, but the delivery from Marland 
Yarde to Joe Marchant for what turned out to a decisive score in Quins’ victory 
looked forward. The respective directors of rugby thought so, but it was 
allowed after a review. Various camera angles were used, but touch judges would 
appear to have the best view, looking along the line. A couple of try-scoring 
passes atGloucester <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gloucesterrugby> on 
Friday night looked suspect and if it becomes about hands and arms, decisions 
will become subjective with the path the ball takes irrelevant. Maybe someone 
will come up with a programme like that for lbw decisions in cricket to iron 
out inconsistencies, but until then surely a pass is forward when a player who 
is on the same line as the distributor has to reach out to grasp the ball. Is 
it down to the laws of physics or what the eyes see?PR

• Match report Harlequins 21-19 Bristol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/03/harlequins-bristol-rugby-union-premiership-match-report>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Frugby-union-talking-points-premiership-and-pro12%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d82d7b346f86025b1f2d9fb81b738d77752b6fb%2F46_99_4308_2586%2F4308.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rugby%20union%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20Premiership%20and%20Pro12&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Frugby-union-talking-points-premiership-and-pro12%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rugby%20union%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20Premiership%20and%20Pro12&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Frugby-union-talking-points-premiership-and-pro12%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d82d7b346f86025b1f2d9fb81b738d77752b6fb%2F46_99_4308_2586%2F4308.jpg>
 Newly promoted Bristol were no pushover for Harlequins at Twickenham. 
Photograph: Seconds Left/Rex/Shutterstock 
7) Townsend’s Glasgow demonstrate Pro12 qualities

Perhaps the best performance anywhere on the opening weekend of the domestic 
season came in Galway, where Glasgow inflicted Connacht’s worst home league 
loss since 2002. Stuart Hogg’s second-half try was a particular joy, the decoy 
running and angles involved a credit to the Warriors players and coaches. 
Gregor Townsend will become Scotland’s head coach next year and, on this 
evidence, Glasgow seem determined to end his tenure in style. Connacht, in 
fairness, did not look like recent Pro12 champions but Glasgow did little to 
undermine Townsend’s belief that the league is increasingly watchable. “I watch 
the Top 14 and Premiership and in terms of quality and ambition, I believe the 
Pro12 surpasses them”. RK 


• Connacht’s Pat Lam: ‘You have to give the players bullets to fire’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/02/connacht-pat-lam-rugby-pro-12>

 