
1) Saracens won’t be daunted by Toulon test

Saracens will begin the defence of their European title this week with every 
reason to be cheerful. Toulon may not have lost a European Cup tie on home turf 
but they will have to dig particularly deep to crack the toughest current 
challenge on the continent. Sarries have conceded just four tries in their six
Premiership <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership> games, remarkable 
even by their standards and even more impressive given the absence of key 
backline figures such as Owen Farrell, Alex Goode, Duncan Taylor and Chris 
Ashton. “We put them under a lot of pressure,” said a delighted Mark McCall, 
after watching his side complete their bonus point win over Wasps at Allianz 
Park. “For us to have played the first six league games and won five without 
Owen, Duncan and, latterly, Alex and Chris is a good achievement. I don’t think 
Toulon have ever lost a European Cup match at home so it’s a good challenge for 
us but, regardless of that, we’ve got to fight and scrap for everything.”Robert 
Kitson

 * Match report: Saracens 30-14 Wasps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/09/saracens-wasps-premiership-match-report>
Saracens take steady approach to Europe as Premiership clubs look to dominate
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/oct/08/european-champions-cup-saracens-toulon>
2) Jones shows true colours with ink now dry

Eddie Jones was at the Stoop before going over the road to spy on Argentina 
and Australia before England’s fixtures against them in the autumn series at 
the end of a week when he had, for the first time, not just ruffled Premiership 
feathers but plucked a good few. The December date with the Wallabies will mark 
Jones’s first anniversary as England’s head coach, and while in the first part 
of his reign, he was respectful to the clubs he has, since the signing of the 
new agreement between Premiership Rugby and Twickenham, become more critical 
and analytical.There would have been little in a match between two clubs in the 
bottom half 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/harlequins-northampton-premiership-match-report-adam-jones>
 of the table to enthuse him. It was high on energy but low on skill with 
Northampton again struggling to make an impression against opponents who did 
not miss many first-up tackles. They were especially wasteful on turnover 
possession, and while Jones has been criticised by the clubs for beasting his 
England players at a training camp in Brighton last week, he does not appear to 
see the Premiership as a vehicle to close the gap on New Zealand. Now that the 
deal is secure in a filing cabinet, a coach renowned for his single-mindedness 
is likely to become more and more spiky. The club and international worlds will 
collide with greater frequency.Paul Rees

 * Match report: Harlequins 20-9 Northampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/harlequins-northampton-premiership-match-report-adam-jones>
 * Picamoles beefs up Northampton for French test against Montpellier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/northampton-saints-rugby-louis-picamoles-champions-cup>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Frugby-union-talking-points-from-the-weekends-premiership-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a732d20ec57665cee176b1d6179bbc7f0b42357%2F0_227_3656_2193%2F3656.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rugby%20union%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20Premiership%20and%20Pro12%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Frugby-union-talking-points-from-the-weekends-premiership-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rugby%20union%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20Premiership%20and%20Pro12%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Frugby-union-talking-points-from-the-weekends-premiership-action%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a732d20ec57665cee176b1d6179bbc7f0b42357%2F0_227_3656_2193%2F3656.jpg>
 Marland Yarde in action for Harlequins against Northampton at The Stoop, where 
Eddie Jones was in the crowd. Photograph: Matthew Impey/Rex/Shutterstock 
3) Bristol playing catch-up by half-time too often

To play the perfect 80 minutes is the quest of every team. And it never ends, 
because nobody has managed it. Still, Bristol’s quest has further to go than 
most. All teams struggle to maintain intensity for a full match, and success is 
often determined by the degree to which they limit the damage in those off 
periods. Bristol are being killed by theirs. The temptation is to tut and ask 
why they didn’t play in the first half, say, the way they did in the second, as 
if they had wilfully chosen not to. When the score reads 19-0 at the break, as 
it did here, the dynamic of a match changes. However much the winning side 
demand of each other that they maintain intensity, they know they have that 
cushion, which creates just a little space for the losing side to mount a 
comeback, if they have the requisite spirit. It’s not looking good forBristol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bristolrugby>, seven points adrift of the 
rest, but the good news is that they seem to have that spirit. Also, they have 
gathered away bonus points against teams they might consider within reach and 
have not yet played any at home. The bad news is that to be so often beaten in 
the first half, when everything is equal, hints at a simple deficit in ability.
Michael Aylwin

Louis Picamoles beefs up Northampton for French test against Montpellier
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/northampton-saints-rugby-louis-picamoles-champions-cup>
 * Match report: Newcastle 19-14 Bristol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/newcastle-bristol-premiership-match-report>
4) Blackadder’s plan gives Bath more belief

The irony of Bath’s convincing 30-3 victory on Friday night was that they will 
be playing only in the European Challenge Cup this weekend while the Sharks mix 
it with the big fish in the Champions’ Cup.Sale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/salesharks> will not progress very far if 
they are as one-paced as they were at the Rec and Steve Diamond’s 
non-appearance at the post-match press conference told its own story. The 
abiding memory of the evening, though, was the fresh belief visible within Bath 
ranks, for which their new director of rugby, Todd Blackadder, deserves much 
credit. Blackadder clearly has a keen rugby brain and a half-decent plan - if 
he had a different surname it would be permissible to use the word cunning - 
but his humility is his most striking quality. Bath are enjoying their rugby 
again and the difference that makes is enormous.RK

 * Match report: Bath 30-3 Sale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/07/bath-sale-premiership-rugby-union-match-report>
5) Tait’s injury-free run testament to the Tigers

Richard Cockerill’s assertion after his side’s comfortable win over Worcester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/leicester-worcester-premiership-match-report>
 that Leicester have been dealing with players returning from international 
duty injured for 20 years, when asked about England’s recent training camp, 
struck a chord. “They come back injured and we look after them,” was his matter 
of fact statement and while Mathew Tait has not played for England since 
arriving at Welford Road in 2011, the Tigers’ have most certainly looked after 
him, restoring him to long-term fitness after a remarkable run of injuries. 
Before those injuries deprived him of that extra yard of pace Tait was one of 
those players worth the admission fee. Some speedsters thunder across the turf, 
Tait glided with effortless grace and he has reinvented himself as the most 
reliable of Leicester players, at either full-back or inside-centre. He made 26 
appearances last season and has played every minute of this campaign, 
impressing against Worcester with sharp hands, leaving the fireworks to Tonga’s 
Telusa Veainu but showing just a glimpse or two of that ability to glide. Long 
may it continue.Gerard Meagher

 * Match report: Leicester 34-13 Worcester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/leicester-worcester-premiership-match-report>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Frugby-union-talking-points-from-the-weekends-premiership-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c5a9a4d49655d1a3bda115020e9e528db573127%2F0_161_3192_1915%2F3192.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rugby%20union%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20Premiership%20and%20Pro12%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Frugby-union-talking-points-from-the-weekends-premiership-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rugby%20union%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20Premiership%20and%20Pro12%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Frugby-union-talking-points-from-the-weekends-premiership-action%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c5a9a4d49655d1a3bda115020e9e528db573127%2F0_161_3192_1915%2F3192.jpg>
 Mathew Tait, who has been an ever present for Leicester this season, is 
tackled by Worcester’s Carl Kirwan. Photograph: Matt West/BPI/Rex/Shutterstock 
6) England not to blame for injury spate

Exeter’s Rob Baxter slams England training camp after Jack Nowell injury
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/exeter-rob-baxter-jack-nowell-england-eddie-jones>
Exeter’s head coach, Rob Baxter, is not a happy man. Never mind that his side 
were poorin drawing with out-of-form Gloucester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/exeter-gloucester-premiership-match-report>
: Jack Nowell, one of the Devonians’ key players, joined Anthony Watson and Sam 
Jones on the list of England injuries. However whileBaxter’s ire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/exeter-rob-baxter-jack-nowell-england-eddie-jones>
 may be justified, its target might not be. Shortly before kick-off, Billy 
Burns and Gareth Evans joined Henry Purdy and John Afoa in Gloucester’s ranks 
of the injured – in the same week in which their former prop and record 
appearance maker Nick Wood was forced to retire through injury. None of these, 
you might have noticed, was probably on Jones’s radar. Manu Tuilagi, Dylan 
Hartley, Owen Farrell ... the list of this Premiership casualties is far too 
long to be exhaustive in a brief talking point. “England seemed to have loaded 
him more than we would have done,” said Baxter of Nowell, while Saracens’ Mark 
McCall said earlier in the week that he was flabbergasted that England arranged 
a camp less than two weeks before the start of the Champions Cup. The evidence 
suggests though, Rob and Mark, that it is those above Jones and away from the 
England team that have more to answer for.Dan Lucas

 * Match report: Exeter 27-27 Gloucester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/exeter-gloucester-premiership-match-report>
 * Exeter’s Baxter slams England training camp after Nowell injury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/exeter-rob-baxter-jack-nowell-england-eddie-jones>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Frugby-union-talking-points-from-the-weekends-premiership-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8aff27d454e5f91a818b44d017bf849c8c2b38c%2F725_42_2676_1606%2F2676.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rugby%20union%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20Premiership%20and%20Pro12%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Frugby-union-talking-points-from-the-weekends-premiership-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rugby%20union%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20Premiership%20and%20Pro12%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Frugby-union-talking-points-from-the-weekends-premiership-action%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8aff27d454e5f91a818b44d017bf849c8c2b38c%2F725_42_2676_1606%2F2676.jpg>
 Exeter players celebrate after Damian Welch’s last-gasp try earned them a draw 
against Gloucester. Photograph: David Rogers/Getty Images 
7) Could Leinster provide a strong Irish challenge in the Champions Cup?

This season’s Champions Cup could do with a strong Irish challenger and 
Leinster definitely look a team on the up. Not everything they did came off in 
a high-intensity 25-14 victory against Munster but there was enough promise 
from their young centre Garry Ringrose and scrum-half Luke McGrath to hint at 
brighter times ahead. Johnny Sexton also looks to be in a better place 
fitness-wise and they share the same pool asNorthampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints>, currently flattering to 
deceive in the Premiership. It was interesting, too, to see Stuart Lancaster 
laying down the law in the dressing room at half-time while Leo Cullen, the 
director of rugby, stood silently beside him. Lancaster has an excellent record 
when it comes to developing young talent and England’s loss may yet turn out to 
be Irish rugby’s gain.RK

 * Cheika confident Australia will have edge on European tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/09/australia-michael-cheika-bring-edge-european-tour-argentina> 