
1) Swarming Wasps may be a sign of things to come

In the modern era, back divisions don’t come much lighter on their feet than 
Wasps’ on Saturday. While we’re at it, we might throw in their back row too: 
three men in Sam Jones, Thomas Young and Guy Thompson who would each tick the 
pace box when you’re considering the balance of that department. The way Wasps 
pulledLeicester <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> into 
uncomfortable poses throughout an exhilarating encounter at Welford Road owed 
much to Wasps’ speed of foot, hand and thought.

There is a theory that the weight of the modern rugby player, which has 
increased so dramatically over the past few decades, has reached a peak – 
indeed, it may already be coming down again. Today’s players, whatever the 
size, are so powerful that they can pretty much all stop your Billy Vunipolas 
if they concentrate hard enough. According to this theory, the premium on speed 
and change of direction is rising, not to mention intelligence.Wasps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-wasps> are a case in point. Joe 
Simpson, Danny Cipriani, Jimmy Gopperth, Elliot Daly, Rob Miller, Christian 
Wade – these are players who keep you guessing. At times, they carved Leicester 
up. All power to them.Michael Aylwin


• Match report: Leicester 22-34 Wasps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/10/leicester-wasps-premiership-match-report>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Frugby-union-talking-points-from-the-weekends-premiership-action-wasps-leicester%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc066156d1ec9cab5823d79dc5b98999bc9e378ba%2F0_47_5259_3155%2F5259.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rugby%20union%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20weekend's%20Premiership%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Frugby-union-talking-points-from-the-weekends-premiership-action-wasps-leicester%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rugby%20union%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20weekend%27s%20Premiership%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Frugby-union-talking-points-from-the-weekends-premiership-action-wasps-leicester%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc066156d1ec9cab5823d79dc5b98999bc9e378ba%2F0_47_5259_3155%2F5259.jpg>
 Wasps fly-half Danny Cipriani runs with the ball during the impressive away 
victory over Leicester. Photograph: David Rogers/Getty Images 
2) Defending champions Saracens look imperious already

Champion teams are supposed to become juicy targets for their rivals, 
particularly away from home against decent opposition. Saracens’s five-star 
display in Devon blew that theory to smithereens as they scored five tries and 
beat the Chiefs even more convincingly than they didin last season’s 
Premiership final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/28/saracens-exeter-premiership-play-off-final-match-report>
. When a side does not appear to miss the likes of Owen Farrell, George Kruis, 
Duncan Taylor, Chris Wyles, Henry Fraser and the retired Charlie Hodgson it is 
reasonable to assume their squad is growing ever-stronger in all departments. 
Already there is a decent side bet to be had on when, if at all, they will lose 
this side of Christmas; even Toulon, who are in their same European pool, will 
be fearing the worst if they maintain their current focus and hunger.Robert 
Kitson

• Match report: Exeter 13-34 Saracens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/11/exeter-saracens-premiership-match-report>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Frugby-union-talking-points-from-the-weekends-premiership-action-wasps-leicester%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd11ab605fe0ed3675261e2bc3ed99e98b9e4553f%2F186_78_2626_1576%2F2626.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rugby%20union%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20weekend's%20Premiership%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Frugby-union-talking-points-from-the-weekends-premiership-action-wasps-leicester%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rugby%20union%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20weekend%27s%20Premiership%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Frugby-union-talking-points-from-the-weekends-premiership-action-wasps-leicester%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd11ab605fe0ed3675261e2bc3ed99e98b9e4553f%2F186_78_2626_1576%2F2626.jpg>
 Alex Goode watches a scrum during Saracens’ win at Sandy Park. Photograph: 
Khachfe/JMP/Rex/Shutterstock 
3) Humphreys shines for Worcester in topsy-turvy derby draw

The first draw of the Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership> season will definitely not be 
the last. The margins grow ever slimmer and when Gloucester are playing, their 
supporters have long since learned that anything is possible. They were 
fortunate here that the red card for Alafoti Fa’osiliva tilted a game that 
looked to be Worcester’s for the taking, particularly after their 21-year-old 
replacement Perry Humphreys had scored an eye-catching try, after coming on for 
a concussed Ben Te’o. Judging by the pace, athleticism and determination which 
took him past three would-be tacklers, Humphreys is very much a talent to keep 
an eye on.RK


• Match report: Worcester 23-23 Gloucester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/09/worcester-gloucester-premiership-match-report>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Frugby-union-talking-points-from-the-weekends-premiership-action-wasps-leicester%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b3ca72a518b5bf44672bdda154dd45d7c5d88de%2F0_324_3732_2239%2F3732.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rugby%20union%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20weekend's%20Premiership%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Frugby-union-talking-points-from-the-weekends-premiership-action-wasps-leicester%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rugby%20union%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20weekend%27s%20Premiership%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Frugby-union-talking-points-from-the-weekends-premiership-action-wasps-leicester%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b3ca72a518b5bf44672bdda154dd45d7c5d88de%2F0_324_3732_2239%2F3732.jpg>
 Alafoti Fa’osiliva leaves the field after being sent off for Worcester 
Warriors. Photograph: Andrew Boyers/Reuters 
4) Ashton Gate can give Bristol a base for top-flight stay

Before the start of the season, Bristol felt their prospects of staying up 
would be enhanced if they could tempt supporters through the turnstiles at 
Ashton Gate. There were more than 11,000 here for the visit of Northampton: 
while the Saints have a large travelling support, they are not the greatest 
draw card in the top flight. The attendance was almost double last season’s 
average in the Championship, but below what club officials had anticipated. 
There was an atmosphere, despite Northampton’s domination of the opening half, 
contrasting with the morgue that the Kassam Stadium became when London Welsh 
were in occupation, and the echo chamber that was the Madejski Stadium last 
season as London Irish slipped out of the top flight.Bristol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bristolrugby> have a base, but may need to 
tap their financial resources to help ensure their return to the top flight 
after seven years is not a short one. They have yet to sign a marquee player 
and while their opening two matches have been defeats, they have shown enough 
that any investment would not be short-term. The prospect of survival is not 
fanciful.Paul Rees

• Match report: Bristol 10-32 Northampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/11/bristol-northampton-premiership-match-report>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Frugby-union-talking-points-from-the-weekends-premiership-action-wasps-leicester%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f86f51f4d73dd1f72bd125c2ddad9ea99e5afea%2F0_0_4971_2983%2F4971.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rugby%20union%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20weekend's%20Premiership%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Frugby-union-talking-points-from-the-weekends-premiership-action-wasps-leicester%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rugby%20union%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20weekend%27s%20Premiership%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Frugby-union-talking-points-from-the-weekends-premiership-action-wasps-leicester%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f86f51f4d73dd1f72bd125c2ddad9ea99e5afea%2F0_0_4971_2983%2F4971.jpg>
 Bristol captain Jack Lam leads his team out in front of 11,000 fans at Ashton 
Gate. Photograph: David Rogers/Getty Images 
5) Ford dazzles to send Bath expectations soaring

George Ford endured mixed fortunes for both England and Bath last season, 
culminating in the departure of his father from the Rec. As Bath’s new director 
of rugby Todd Blackadder noted, every young number 10 “has to go through 
turbulent times” to learn, but just needs some faith from his coach. Perhaps it 
was a note to Eddie Jones. There was nothing flash about Ford’s performance 
againstNewcastle <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/newcastlefalcons>, but it 
was as close to flawless as opposition director of rugby Dean Richards could 
recall in recent times.

“Ford was outstanding, by far the best player on the pitch. He ran the show. 
That’s probably as a complete a performance as you get,” said Richards. Bath 
have often flattered to deceive but under Blackadder there are the makings of a 
mentally tough side that can show the stuff of champions. They were ruthless 
when Newcastle had Vereniki Goneva shown a (possibly harsh) yellow card, 
scoring three tries in eight minutes by half-time. At 32-0, Bath could easily 
have taken the proverbial foot off the pedal in the second half, but instead 
pressed it down even harder. As a result, four more tries followed, including 
two for Dave Attwood who was chasing an unlikely hat-trick, asBath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bath> racked up their biggest winning margin 
in the Premiership for 15 years.


“That mindset was the most pleasing thing about this performance. To keep 
going and pushing is all about mental toughness,” said Blackadder, who has set 
the bar unrealistically high in his first game in charge at the Rec. 
Expectations at a trophy-hungry club will now only sky-rocket.Matt Lloyd

• Match report: Bath 58-5 Newcastle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/10/bath-newcastle-premiership-match-report>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Frugby-union-talking-points-from-the-weekends-premiership-action-wasps-leicester%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F721d8e44eb0dd4153370c494de5ff230596fe49e%2F0_163_3744_2247%2F3744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rugby%20union%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20weekend's%20Premiership%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Frugby-union-talking-points-from-the-weekends-premiership-action-wasps-leicester%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rugby%20union%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20weekend%27s%20Premiership%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Frugby-union-talking-points-from-the-weekends-premiership-action-wasps-leicester%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F721d8e44eb0dd4153370c494de5ff230596fe49e%2F0_163_3744_2247%2F3744.jpg>
 The Bath squad huddle at the Rec after the thumping win over Newcastle. 
Photograph: Khachfe/JMP/Rex/Shutterstock 
6) Sale’s Mugford shows there is talent in the Championship

But for a slightly fortunate opening weekend win over Bristol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/03/harlequins-bristol-rugby-union-premiership-match-report>
 at Twickenham, Harlequins would have lost both of their first two games. Sale, 
on the other hand, were a missed late penalty away from defeating Newcastle and 
took full advantage of Harlequins’ second-half indiscipline to chalk up a 19-10 
home victory in Salford. Even without their former Connacht fly-half AJ 
MacGinty, missing with a strained hamstring, and the departed Danny Cipriani, 
they still had a matchwinner in Dan Mugford, late of Nottingham, who kicked 
four penalties and a conversion to make up for his last-gasp miss at Kingston 
Park. Mugford shows that there are plenty of good players in the Championship, 
for those prepared to go and look for them.RK

• Robert Kitson: Richmond are a reminder of Premiership’s unfairness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/sep/09/richmond-london-irish-championship-rugby>
 