
1) Wasps give a glimpse of rugby’s bright new dawn

Those who insist rugby will go soft under the revised high tackle 
interpretations should study the thunderous 80-minute encounter served up by 
Wasps and Leicester in Coventry. If this is what the game’s future looks like, 
sign me up. In the first half-hour Wasps attacked as if touched by the gods, or 
at least an on-song Kurtley Beale. When Beale accelerates there are few more 
exhilarating runners in the world and, with Elliot Daly and Christian Wade both 
similarly box office, it seems almost indecent that Willie Le Roux will also be 
available for the Premiership run-in. If Wasps have a weakness, however, it is 
when opposing sides slow their supply of ball down. Suddenly those dazzling 
thrusts are harder to generate and, without a tireless worker such as Joe 
Launchbury, they become more vulnerable. In Thomas Young and Tommy Taylor, 
however, they have improving young forwards of clear international potential 
and will be mighty hard to beat in a home play-off, particularly if the Ricoh 
Arena is as full as it was on Sunday when a season-best crowd of almost 28,000 
pitched up. The focus has been onLeicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> all week – and what a 
character-laden second-half the Tigers delivered – but, of the two Midlands 
clubs, it is Wasps who are better placed to achieve something special between 
now and May.Robert Kitson

 * Match report: Wasps 22-16 Leicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/08/james-haskell-wasps-leicester-match-report>
 * Haskell suffers head injury 35 seconds into comeback 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/08/england-james-haskell-head-injury-wasps-comeback>
 * Leicester at crossroads as old ways feel like wrong ones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/05/the-breakdown-leicester-tigers-crossroads>
2) Munster’s perfect farewell sets up thrilling shootout

Munster’s win at Racing 92 was a near-perfect tribute to Anthony Foley. Ronan 
O’Gara, the Racing coach and former Munster fly-half, wore a “Foley 8” shirt 
before the match in a particularly touching gesture, and it could perhaps only 
have been improved had the thus-far pointless home side turned up. In fairness 
to Racing, few sides in Europe would beat Munster in this kind of form and, in 
a match rescheduled afterFoley’s untimely death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/16/anthony-foley-munster-ireland-rugby-union>
, the men in red put in a performance for their former coach to be proud of, 
easing to a bonus-point win. The French team, to give them their due, marked 
the occasion fittingly with big-screen tributes in memoriam. The result lifts 
Munster to the top of pool one with 16 points and, with Racing on their radar 
once again in two weeks’ time, qualification for the quarter-finals should be a 
cakewalk from here. Next week they make the trip to Scotstoun, where Gregor 
Townsend’s thrilling Glasgow Warriors await for what could end up a shootout 
for top spot and the chance of a home quarter-final. Both sides are flying high 
in the Pro12, playing some of the best rugby seen by any side in that 
competition for a couple of years now. The reverse fixture at Thomond Park, a 
comfortable 38-17 win for the home side, was a bit of a damp squib in terms of 
being a contest. This time, both should be close to full strength and going all 
out for the win; it has the ingredients to be a modern European classic between 
two sides who will enrich this competition the further they go in it.Dan Lucas

 * Match report: Racing 92 7-32 Munster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/munster-anthony-foley-racing-92> 
 * Anthony Foley: a Munster legend to his core 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/16/anthony-foley-munster-man-ireland-death>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ftalking-points-from-the-weekends-premiership-and-european-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd46a06281894db1217213ff4fd4b352f4ea69cb2%2F0_124_4129_2478%2F4129.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rugby%20union%20weekend%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20Premiership%20and%20Europe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ftalking-points-from-the-weekends-premiership-and-european-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rugby%20union%20weekend%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20Premiership%20and%20Europe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ftalking-points-from-the-weekends-premiership-and-european-action%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd46a06281894db1217213ff4fd4b352f4ea69cb2%2F0_124_4129_2478%2F4129.jpg>
 Munster players form a huddle during a minute’s applause for the coach Anthony 
Foley, who died in October. Photograph: Stephen McCarthy/Sportsfile via Getty 
Images 
3) Saracens use pack power to hang on with 14 men

A common theory is that a yellow card is worth seven points to the opposition. 
When Saracens saw their prop Richard Barrington sent off 11 minutes in against 
Exeter, they had six full 10-minute periods to play. They immediately conceded 
10 in two minutes, but after that the Chiefs scored a solitary penalty as 
Saracens, likeBristol against Worcester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/26/bristol-worcester-premiership-match-report-rugby>
 on Boxing Day and England against Argentina in November, overcame an early red 
card and avoided defeat. Football has a history of teams winning after having a 
man sent off, but in rugby union the loss of a player has tended to be a 
greater handicap, especially when teams operate with seven forwards. Sarries 
responded to Barrington’s red card by immediately bringing on another prop and 
playing with eight forwards. Saracens had established an early dominance up 
front, which they maintained; they messed up Exeter’s lineout delivery and they 
secured penalties at the breakdown to make the contest even territorially. It 
was hard to tell which team was playing a man short and it may be that a 
side-effect ofthe new tackle laws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/05/newcastle-bath-rugby-union-premiership-anthony-watson-dean-richards>
 is that teams become more adept at moving the ball and taking advantage of 
space behind. There is, in the short-term at least, likely to be an increase in 
the number of red cards for dangerous tackles and the test is whether the 
authorities will leave decisions to referees, who have access to replays, or 
use the wider net of the citing system. Brad Barritt, who went high on Geoff 
Parling a second before Barrington, will be a test case this week. He was 
fortunate not to receive a yellow card, but if the citing officer judges he 
should have seen red, it will mark the outlawing of a challenge above the line 
of the shoulders, even if it starts below, and more teams will have to prepare 
for playing with 14 men for longer than 10 minutes.Paul Rees

 * Match report: Saracens 13-13 Exeter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/saracens-exeter-premiership-match-report>
 * What are the new laws and will they make a difference? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/06/world-rugby-new-tackle-laws-what-are-they>
Saracens’ Juan Figallo: draw with Exeter was like win and whole team played 
part
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/08/saracens-juan-figallo-draw-exeter-like-win>
4) New laws cause concern for players and officials

“If you do it right it’s happy days; if you get it wrong, it’s see ya later.” 
That was the matter-of-fact summary of the new environment the players are 
having to operate in, as offered by Teimana Harrison, Northampton’s flanker. We 
were mercifully free of any controversy in this match, with Andrew Jackson 
refereeing the tackle sensibly. Which is not to say we couldn’t have had some. 
Harrison himself clashed heads with Jason Woodward, the latter concussed, when 
he went for a bear-hug-type tackle. It may not have been quite illegal, but, as 
a tackle made by an upright player, it’s exactly the kind we know to carry the 
greatest risk of concussion. Olly Robinson, the Bristol captain, argued that 
there should have been a penalty underWorld Rugby’s revised sanction system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/06/world-rugby-new-tackle-laws-what-are-they>
. Accidental incidents have a minimum sanction of a penalty and reckless ones 
(ie when the tackler “knew or should have known” that there was a risk of 
making contact with the head) a yellow. By the latter yardstick there should 
have been a yellow in this match, when Mitch Eadie went high on George North. 
He was only penalised, which presumably meant Jackson considered the height of 
his tackle to be an accident. It’s difficult to hit a 6ft 4in winger above the 
shoulders by accident, but equally a yellow would have seemed much too harsh 
for what was harmless contact. Meanwhile, we saw two yellows in the game 
between the Scarlets and Ulster for similar types of tackle. The first 
prevented a try, so was fair game, but the second would never have elicited a 
card before these new sanctions. “I think it’s not right,” said Harrison. “If 
it’s a blatant swinging arm to the face, fair play, it deserves to be a red or 
a yellow, but if it’s just a slip-up I don’t think there’s any harm in just a 
penalty or something.”Michael Aylwin

 * Match report: Northampton 32-26 Bristol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/northampton-bristol-premiership-rugby-match-report>
 * Robert Kitson: new tackle law could be big-bang moment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/03/new-tackle-law-rugby-union-world-rugby>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ftalking-points-from-the-weekends-premiership-and-european-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff45fdfd9abe9aa0cec9911587b18ec00464a7971%2F0_121_4213_2919%2F4213.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rugby%20union%20weekend%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20Premiership%20and%20Europe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ftalking-points-from-the-weekends-premiership-and-european-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rugby%20union%20weekend%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20Premiership%20and%20Europe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ftalking-points-from-the-weekends-premiership-and-european-action%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff45fdfd9abe9aa0cec9911587b18ec00464a7971%2F0_121_4213_2919%2F4213.jpg>
 Bristol’s Mitch Eadie, left, was perhaps fortunate to escape a yellow card for 
a tackle on George North. Photograph: Stephenson/JMP/REX/Shutterstock 
5) Marler injury adds to Jones’ England woes

John Kingston was optimistic that Joe Marler’s calf injury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/harlequins-joe-marler-england-injury-six-nations>
 will have cleared up in time for the Six Nations but with England’s opener 
less than four weeks away, it will be of concern to Eddie Jones nonetheless. 
Mako Vunipola will certainly be missing against France at Twickenham, leaving 
Jones with limited options at loosehead prop. Ellis Genge was not named in 
either the training or Elite Player Squad while Nathan Catt is uncapped, 
leaving Wasps’ Matt Mullan as the only likely candidate should Marler’s calf 
injury, suffered against Gloucester last month, persist. It was enough to 
prevent him from taking part in England’s training camp in Brighton last week 
and is just one of a raft of problems in the pack, with question marks over 
Chris Robshaw, George Kruis and Joe Launchbury (andnow James Haskell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/08/england-james-haskell-head-injury-wasps-comeback>
), Billy Vunipola also absent and Dylan Hartleyset to begin the Six Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/14/dyland-hartley-banned-six-weeks-available-six-nations-rugby-union>
 with very little game time. Jones says he views such a lengthy injury list as 
an opportunity but last year’s grand slam was founded on a vastly improved 
scrum and Marler’s fitness problems are therefore a headache for the head coach.
Gerard Meagher

 * Match report: Harlequins 29-26 Sale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/harlequins-sale-sharks-premiership-match-report>
 * Eddie Jones: Six Nations can be world’s best tournament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/eddie-jones-england-six-nations-bonus-points>
Sale’s Denny Solomona gives Diamond hope despite narrow loss at Quins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/08/denny-solomona-scores-every-time-sale-steve-diamond-harlequins>
6) Richards rebuilding Newcastle and his reputation

As Dean Richards can testify, sometimes in life you get what you deserve and 
the Newcastle side he has spent the past few seasons fashioning into a 
respected force certainly did on Friday night. Richards’s reputation lay in 
tatters after he wasgiven a three-year ban from rugby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/21/dean-richards-newcastle-rugby-ban>
 for his pivotal role in the Bloodgate scandal at Harlequins in 2009. But he 
guided the Falcons to promotion to the Premiership in 2012-13, his first season 
in charge , and although it has taken time, Newcastle finally look capable of 
more than just mere survival. During Bath’s visit on Friday they displayed the 
kind of resilience that characterised Richards’ own playing career, grinding 
out a famous victory courtesy of two late tries from Mark Wilson and Ben 
Harris. Say what you like about Richards, and many have since that gory 
sequence of events which began with the Harlequins wing Tom Williamsbiting into 
a fake blood capsule 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/jul/20/harlequins-fined-heineken-cup>, 
but Newcastle’s six wins from 13 Premiership games this season suggest that 
fights with relegation may be a thing of the past.Ross Heppenstall

 * Match report: Newcastle 24-22 Bath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/06/newcastle-bath-premiership-rugby-match-report>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ftalking-points-from-the-weekends-premiership-and-european-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5029be764710214f9d200d45ef2657a8aa765fb5%2F345_585_3093_1856%2F3093.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rugby%20union%20weekend%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20Premiership%20and%20Europe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ftalking-points-from-the-weekends-premiership-and-european-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rugby%20union%20weekend%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20Premiership%20and%20Europe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ftalking-points-from-the-weekends-premiership-and-european-action%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5029be764710214f9d200d45ef2657a8aa765fb5%2F345_585_3093_1856%2F3093.jpg>
 Newcastle prop Jon Welsh tries an unconventional chip over Bath’s Anthony 
Watson. Photograph: Chris Lishman/REX/Shutterstock 
7) Worcester must shape up or ship out

10th, 12th, 11th, 10th, 12th, 11th, 10th, 11th: these are Worcester’s 
finishing positions in their past eight Premiership seasons. Considering how 
heavily the Warriors have been bankrolled by Cecil Duckworth, the lack of 
improvement since their all-time best finish of eighth, now more than a decade 
ago, is startling and the supporters deserve credit for their seemingly eternal 
patience. Just beyond the mid-point of this season they are well and truly 
embroiled in a three-way battle to avoid the drop yet again and, between them, 
Sale and Bristol it is the Midlands team whose situation looks the most 
perilous. Their form is not as bad as Sale’s – the Sharks have lost nine on the 
trot – and they remain above Bristol by a point, but the manner of their 55-19 
thrashing at the hands ofGloucester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gloucesterrugby> (the Premiership’s most 
maddeningly inconsistent team?) was among the sorriest performances of any side 
this season. Bristol, on the other hand, were vibrant and unlucky at Franklin’s 
Gardens – never an easy place to go, even this season – while the feeling is 
that Sale’s young and talented squad will, under Steve Diamond’s tutelage, be 
alright in the end. Put bluntly, it is difficult to see what Carl Hogg’s side 
are bringing to the Premiership party: Worcester is the most picturesque town 
to visit in the division, but this is all that is stopping the Warriors from 
being to rugby what Sunderland are to football.Dan Lucas

 * Match report: Gloucester 55-19 Worcester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/gloucester-worcester-premiership-match-report> 