
1) Tigers show their teeth just in time

Martin Castrogiovanni’s outburst 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/dec/07/martin-castrogiovanni-leicester-richard-cockerill-toulon>
 following Leicester’s victory over Toulon, regarding his departure from 
Welford Road, should ensure a lively return encounter in France on Saturday. 
The Tigers were outscored by two tries to one but the timely return of their 
favoured front row helped them win a glut of penalties which Owen Williams 
turned into 18 points. It was also no coincidence that Ben Youngs was back to 
his buzzing best at scrum-half, having a platform to orchestrate the game from. 
They will need to secure at least a bonus point in a tight group that is 
unlikely to see the runner-up progress to the last eight, but Leicester are 
still missing their main ball-carriers and another penalty count in their 
favour is likely to be required.Paul Rees

• Castrogiovanni: They made it look like I went for the money 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/dec/07/martin-castrogiovanni-leicester-richard-cockerill-toulon>
• Castrogiovanni and sport’s great rants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/dec/08/martin-castrogiovanni-five-onslaughts-on-par-with-italy-prop-tirade>
• Leicester 25-21 Toulon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/dec/07/leicester-toulon-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fdec%2F08%2Fleicester-toulon-european-rugby-champions-cup-video-highlights&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F12%2F8%2F1418037851269%2Fcrop_KP-49943_640.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Leicester%20victorious%20against%20Toulon%20in%20European%20Rugby%20Champions%20Cup%20-%20video%20highlights&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fdec%2F08%2Fleicester-toulon-european-rugby-champions-cup-video-highlights>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Leicester%20victorious%20against%20Toulon%20in%20European%20Rugby%20Champions%20Cup%20-%20video%20highlights&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fdec%2F08%2Fleicester-toulon-european-rugby-champions-cup-video-highlights&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F12%2F8%2F1418037851269%2Fcrop_KP-49943_640.jpeg>
2) The Gallic shrug is galling to see

As we watched Sale hammer away at Saracens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> until the dying seconds, their 
European campaign all but over even if they did manage to snatch the win, 
discussion inevitably turned to the contrast with Montpellier, who capitulated 
at home to Bath the night before. Or Castres, more competitive admittedly but 
well beaten at home by Wasps. Or a host of French teams this weekend in the 
Challenge Cup, which without the carrot of qualification for the main event 
looks a hopelessly undervalued tournament already. We thought the days of the 
French rolling over when unmotivated were over. Discussion turned to what could 
be done about it. There have been attempts in the past to punish sides for 
fielding weakened teams – Sale were cautioned for it in the last round of the 
Premiership in 2012. But this goes beyond that. Montpellier’s squad is so 
strong that their side on Friday was perfectly credible. It’s just that they 
clearly couldn’t be bothered, even though they had more points than Bath going 
into the game. The French attitude to Europe has improved but it seems we’ll 
always come back to this, the Gallic shrug. Less gifted the Anglo-Saxons may be 
but at least they try. Michael Aylwin

• Sale 15-19 Saracens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/dec/06/sale-saracens-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>

3) Munster need more of a spark

Munster will need all their powers of recovery to emerge from a pool that 
includes the last two beaten finalists in the European Cup. Clermont became the 
first French club to win at Thomond Park in the tournament after backing up a 
flying start with resolute defence at the end, when Munster are usually at 
their most dangerous. Top 14 sides have been known to be easily distracted away 
from home but Clermont’s determination was marked from the outset and the way 
the forwards celebrated neutralising a driving maul early in the second-half 
said everything about their focus.Munster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/munster> lacked an attacking spark and will 
need more than bonus points from their trips to Clermont and Saracens to take 
their customary place in the quarter-finals.Paul Rees

• Munster 9-16 Clermont Auvergne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/dec/06/munster-clermont-auvergne-european-rugby-championship-report>




4) Quins enjoy rapid transformation

The most striking aspect of Quins’ victory over Leinster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leinster> was the difference a week makes. 
They were all over the shop in Bath the previous Friday, their pack shoved 
backwards almost into the River Avon. Suddenly, in Twickenham against an 
all-international Irish front five, they were outstanding at scrum-time with 
Joe Marler adding to his fast-growing reputation opposite Ireland’s 
first-choice tight-head, Mike Ross. Chris Robshaw, having put in huge shifts 
for England in all four of their November Tests, also looked like he had never 
been away on his 200th appearance for the club. “One of the most incredible men 
I have ever had the privilege to work with,” said Conor O’Shea, referring to 
Robshaw in the match programme. Stamina-wise, there are certainly few to match 
the England captain.Robert Kitson

• Harlequins 24-18 Leinster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/dec/07/harlequins-leinster-european-champions-cup-match-report>

5) Glasgow will fancy chances at home to Toulouse

Glasgow’s run of wins came to an end against Toulouse but the four-times 
champions still have to visit Scotstoun on Saturday before anything can be 
anywhere near settled in an increasingly volatile Pool 4 where Bath suddenly 
become contenders. They now face Montpellier, probably minus their coach Fabien 
Galthié, after winning 30-5 in France while knowing a five-point win might make 
January an interesting month. By thenToulouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/toulouse> should have at least one 
recognised fly-half in place and Glasgow will certainly have addressed the poor 
discipline which cost them dear at the weekend.Mike Averis

• European Champions Cup roundup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/dec/07/wasps-castres-european-rugby-champions-cup>

6) Ospreys capitalise on Racing’s lack of chic amid huff and puff

There is no questioning the individual qualities of Racing Métro’s forwards. 
The prop Eddy Ben Arous runs like the wind and Dimitri Szarzewski remains 
spectacularly dedicated to tackling. But they love doing things collectively 
even more: scrummaging and above all the driving maul. What is missing from 
their repertoire is any complementary chic. From nine to 10 and from 12 to 15, 
they all run, to say the least, robustly but Marc Andreu, a nippy and darting 
11, hardly touched the ball. The diet is protein-heavy and there is more than a 
suspicion that they cannot keep going for 80 minutes. Against the Ospreys they 
took the third quarter off for a blow, allowing Rhys Webb, Dan Biggar and 
Justin Tipuric to show what might happen if theOspreys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ospreys> forwards could win their fair share 
of front-foot possession. The period shone a little light into a generally 
overcast match. The threat is that the Ospreys’ away day in Paris could be 
ruined by a storm pouring from the dense clouds of collective might.Eddie Butler

• Ospreys 19-19 Racing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/dec/06/ospreys-racing-metro-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>

7) Wasps buzzing after Castres triumph

Wasps leave Adams Park next Sunday possibly on something of a high. Their 
five-point win at Castres gives some hope of progressing from Pool 2 and will 
remind fans that the last time they won at the Stade Pierre Antoine they went 
on to become the 2007 champions – the last English club to take the title. That 
might be a little ambitious this time but at the very least it should put a few 
more backsides on seats at the Ricoh in late January when Wasps complete their 
pool programme against another double champion, Leinster. Not bad for a side 
which surprised a few by beating Stade Français in the play-offs.Mike Averis

• Treviso 15-38 Northampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/dec/06/european-rugby-champions-cup-roundup>
• Ulster 24-9 Scarlets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/dec/06/ulster-scarlets-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
 