
England must not play Fiji at their own game

With Billy Vunipola declared fit to start against Fiji, it is little surprise 
that Eddie Jones delayed naming his starting XV by 24 hours. Leavingthe Wales 
match 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/29/england-wales-international-match-report>
 – the day afterthe Premiership final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/28/saracens-exeter-premiership-play-off-final-match-report>
 – aside, Vunipola has started in every game under Jones and while he is not 
the only player to do so, he is the most important.A leaner, meaner Vunipola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/16/tonga-twickenham-billy-mako-vunipola-england-saracens>
, making carries in areas that hurt the opposition, has been the bedrock of 
Jones’s side and without himEngland would have needed to find other means 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/17/england-injuries-fiji-autumn-internationals>
 of breaking the gain line. His selection though means there is just one change 
in the pack and another chance for Teimana Harrison to stake his claim as 
England’s No7 while behind the scrum, perhaps more by circumstance than design, 
Jones’s lineup genuinely excites. Elliot Daly’s selection on the wing does not 
hurt England’s firepower and with Alex Goode at full-back, facing the side 
against whom he dazzled on his first home start four years ago, the hosts 
should have the capacity to play with real swagger. The concern, with two 
fly-halves already on the pitch, is that - much like in the first half against 
Uruguay last year - England look to throw the ball around from the outset and 
are not direct enough. It is hard however, to see Jones, who has been at pains 
to point out that he does not want his side to take Fiji on at their own game, 
allowing that to happen.


England’s Billy Vunipola passed fit to start Test against Fiji
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/18/billy-vunipola-england-rugby-union-fiji>
• Rokoduguni’s return offers England impact against his native Fiji 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/16/england-fiji-samesa-rokodugini-autumn-internationals>

Ryan’s golden touch could bolster Fiji

Should Fiji find themselves on the wrong end of a hiding on Saturday, very few 
people in the world of rugby, save perhaps Eddie Jones, stand to benefit. 
Nemani Nadolo commands attention for his size of course but unless they are 
vastly improved from their defeat by the Barbarians last week, England are in 
danger of running up a cricket score. Fiji need no more motivation than seeing 
Hughes and Rokoduguni line up opposite them and while it is clear that they 
will have their moments, rugby would benefit greatly if the visitors can put up 
more of a fight than South Africa last week. Step forward Ben Ryan, another who 
needs no extra motivation and who has reportedly been in camp with Fiji this 
week. Ryan left the RFU in 2013 after a difference of opinion with Rob Andrew 
and proceeded to guide Fiji to Olympic sevens gold over the summer. He has 
since left that role and as one of the brightest young coaches around he is 
keen to return to XVs coaching in some form. Should more of his midas touch rub 
off on Saturday, he will have no shortage of offers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Frugby-union-autumn-internationals-england-fiji-ireland-all-blacks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05e0b1a8acb09a620db0e1967a782dafd5a766bb%2F0_4_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rugby%20union%20autumn%20internationals%3A%20what%20to%20look%20forward%20to%20this%20weekend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Frugby-union-autumn-internationals-england-fiji-ireland-all-blacks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rugby%20union%20autumn%20internationals%3A%20what%20to%20look%20forward%20to%20this%20weekend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Frugby-union-autumn-internationals-england-fiji-ireland-all-blacks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05e0b1a8acb09a620db0e1967a782dafd5a766bb%2F0_4_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Ben Ryan, seen here at the Hong Kong Sevens rugby tournament in 2014 with 
Fiji, left the RFU in 2013. Photograph: Tyrone Siu/Reuters 

• Ben Ryan on life after Rio: ‘Base Fiji in Cornwall – they would love it 
there’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/04/ben-ryan-fiji-rugby-rio-olympics-nba-premiership>

Clean sweep of Fijian flyers in Paris more evidence of talent drain

Three Fijian wingers at Twickenham then, but a clean sweep of four in Paris – 
and a fifth on the Australian bench to boot – as Noa Nakaitaci and Virimi 
Vakatawa square off against Sefanaia Naivalu and Henry Speight with Taqele 
Naiyaravoro in reserve for the Wallabies. In a week when the player drain from 
Fiji and other Pacific Islands has come under increased scrutiny, it is a quite 
remarkable statistic and is demonstrable proof why the residency rule needs to 
be addressed. It also makes you wonder what Fiji could achieve with the mooted 
Super Rugby franchise and the subsequent financial incentives for their players 
to stay that would bring, even if the Fijian union claims it has no knowledge 
of such a plan. With the rules as they are however, all five will take to the 
field in Paris on Saturday and showcase their considerable skills in what 
should be an absorbing contest. Australia are still on course for a first grand 
slam since 1984, just, after their one-point win over Scotland but have left 
out Israel Folau, Michael Hooper, Bernard Foley and the captain Stephen Moore. 
France meanwhile, have their tails up after cruising past Samoa but for all 
that both sides boast considerable fireworks out wide, the back-row battle may 
be pivotal. The Wallabies do not have Hooper but do still have Pocock and Sean 
McMahon and if they can have their usual impact at the breakdown then France, 
who have effectively picked three No8s again, may struggle.

• Paul Rees: player exodus threatens international rugby and European unions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/17/europe-south-africa-slide-australia-international-rugby-union-reckoning>


Ireland playing for a place in history

New Zealand coach Steve Hansen insists All Blacks are underdogs in Dublin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/17/new-zealand-coach-steve-hansen-insists-all-blacks-underdogs-ireland-rugby-union>
Billed as the sequel but what is in effect the third part of the trilogy 
between Ireland and New Zealand, it has all the ingredients to live up to its 
billing.Ireland’s victory in Chicago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/05/ireland-new-zealand-rugby-union-report>
 was remarkable for many reasons but chief among them was that it was 
thoroughly deserved. There was no clinging on or going into shells – Ireland 
imposed themselves on the All Blacks, executed superbly and denied their 
opponents the kind of unstructured possession on which they thrive. Doing it 
again will be even harder but on the plus side, Conor Murray is fit to take his 
place alongside Jonathan Sexton. Both were outstanding in Chicago, particularly 
Murray who always seems to raise his game against New Zealand. The same can be 
said of Sean O’Brien, who did not agree that he was not quite 100% fit to play 
in Chicago but returns, after an outing against Canada last week, to replace 
Jordi Murphy. It is the only change Joe Schmidt makes from the XV to start at 
Soldier Field and if O’Brien plays anything like he did in Dublin three years 
ago he will more than warrant his place. Ireland have no reason to be cowed or 
pay deference to New Zealand but very few sides beat the All Blacks twice in a 
row. Schmidt’s chosen XV are playing for their place in history.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Frugby-union-autumn-internationals-england-fiji-ireland-all-blacks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3cb67f582c1b3763c5d9ad3c9bd0bfe873acfc8f%2F79_193_4410_2647%2F4410.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rugby%20union%20autumn%20internationals%3A%20what%20to%20look%20forward%20to%20this%20weekend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Frugby-union-autumn-internationals-england-fiji-ireland-all-blacks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rugby%20union%20autumn%20internationals%3A%20what%20to%20look%20forward%20to%20this%20weekend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Frugby-union-autumn-internationals-england-fiji-ireland-all-blacks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3cb67f582c1b3763c5d9ad3c9bd0bfe873acfc8f%2F79_193_4410_2647%2F4410.jpg>
 Jonathan Sexton takes on Beauden Barrett, left, and Sam Cane during Ireland’s 
win over New Zealand at Soldier Field in Chicago. Photograph: Brendan 
Moran/Sportsfile via Getty Images 
• What chance a Soldier Field sequel for Ireland against the All Blacks? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/15/ireland-all-blacks-soldier-field-dublin-new-zealand>
• Ireland coach Joe Schmidt warns players of New Zealand backlash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/13/ireland-coach-joe-schmidt-warns-players-new-zealand-backlash>

Whitelock and Retallick will be revved up for revenge mission

New Zealand’s Steve Tew: ‘We will not change our culture overnight’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/17/new-zealand-rugby-steve-tew-culture>
Injuries in midfield aside, the back division picked for the All Blacks’ 
revenge mission has a similar feel to that which lost in Chicago. Anton 
Lienert-Brown and Malakai Fekitoa both start on Saturday – neither did at 
Soldier Field but both Ryan Crotty and George Moala are injured leaving Steve 
Hansen with little choice. And so despite hinting at changes that would include 
some of the side thattrounced Italy last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/12/italy-new-zealand-autumn-internationals-match-report>
, the only one out of choice Hansen appears to have made behind the scrum is 
selecting Israel Dagg ahead of Waisake Naholo. Up front however, two names 
stand out. The front row is the same as two weeks ago, as is the back row, but 
the returns of Sam Whitelock and Brodie Retallick strengthen New Zealand 
immeasurably. Ireland’s first-half ascendancy owed much to their ability to 
disrupt the All Blacks’ lineout but Whitelock and Retallick will not let 
standards slip in Dublin and both bring so much more to New Zealand around the 
park. New Zealand must be vastly improved from their performance two weeks ago 
to exact revenge but with these two in the boiler room it is a safe bet they 
will be.
• New Zealand coach Steve Hansen insists All Blacks are underdogs in Dublin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/17/new-zealand-coach-steve-hansen-insists-all-blacks-underdogs-ireland-rugby-union>
• New Zealand’s Steve Tew: ‘We will not change our culture overnight’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/17/new-zealand-rugby-steve-tew-culture>

Wales to rely on conservatism against Japan

It has been mooted for a while now but Rob Howley’s decision to swap Liam 
Williams and Leigh Halfpenny is an interesting one nonetheless. Williams’ form 
is well-documented – he is comfortably Wales’ standout back since the World Cup 
– and Halfpenny is still readjusting to the international arena. The hope is 
that he does return to his 2013 standards but he is not there yet judging by 
his two autumn performances so far and one can only keep fingers crossed that 
his injury problems have not left a permanent mark. Howley’s team selection 
shows 10 changes from the win over Argentina but still has its conservative 
elements. Size can be the only justifiable explanation for picking Alex 
Cuthbert with the 18-year-old Keelan Giles set to win his first cap from the 
bench and you cannot help but feel the recalls of Jamie Roberts and Dan Lydiate 
are counterintuitive if Wales are looking to demonstrate a more expansive, 
attacking outlook. Perhaps the most interesting selection of all though is that 
of Cory Hill for a first start in the second row. It has been a position of 
strength for Wales in the Warren Gatland era but Alun Wyn Jones and Luke 
Charteris are the wrong side of 30 and Bradley Davies gets there in January. 
Jake Ball has proved the best of the rest but some more young blood in the 
second row would be a welcome addition indeed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Frugby-union-autumn-internationals-england-fiji-ireland-all-blacks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8dd624fdb7ae50e0c27cb43ff38da020448a8452%2F0_240_3725_2234%2F3725.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rugby%20union%20autumn%20internationals%3A%20what%20to%20look%20forward%20to%20this%20weekend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Frugby-union-autumn-internationals-england-fiji-ireland-all-blacks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rugby%20union%20autumn%20internationals%3A%20what%20to%20look%20forward%20to%20this%20weekend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Frugby-union-autumn-internationals-england-fiji-ireland-all-blacks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8dd624fdb7ae50e0c27cb43ff38da020448a8452%2F0_240_3725_2234%2F3725.jpg>
 Leigh Halfpenny is still re-adjusting to international rugby after his injury 
problems. Photograph: Andrew Boyers/Reuters 

• Rob Howley calls up six Lions for Wales Test against Japan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/17/wales-rob-howley-lions-japan-autumn-internationals-rugby-union>
• Tier-two nations closing gap on top countries, says Charteris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/15/wales-luke-charteris-tier-two-nations-closing-gap-japan>

Scotland can make a Six Nations point against Pumas

We are talking small mercies but at least Scotland do not have to wait months 
to get anotherheart-wrenching defeat by Australia out of the system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/12/scotland-australia-autumn-internationals-match-report>
. And if they play like they did for the most part against Australia, they 
should overcome Argentina – particularly if the fly-half Finn Russell performs 
as he did against the Wallabies. The absence of Richie Gray is a blow but his 
brother Jonny was outstanding last week – his work-rate is quite incredible. 
The problem is that they face a side who, while very much looking like they 
need their season to end, are unlikely to be as poor as last time out against 
Wales – but Vern Cotter’s determination to leave the Scotland job on a high is 
obvious and with crucial world ranking points up for grabs, more of the same 
from his side should see them home. Whisper it quietly but a comprehensive win 
on Saturday and Scotland can consider themselves very much in contention to at 
least compete for the Six Nations title.
• Vern Cotter hails Scotland’s ‘complete performance’ despite late defeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/13/vern-cotter-huw-jones-scotland-australia-autumn-internationals>

Hourcade to kick Argentina into shape

Cotter will have seen how Sam Warburton and co negated the running threat of 
Argentina’s powerful forwards, leaving Martin Landajo and Nicolás Sánchez to 
feed off scraps last week and it was evident that the Pumas, and Daniel 
Hourcade admitted as much afterwards, were not able to adapt to the 
slowed-paced nature of northern hemisphere rugby. The problem for Scotland is 
that Argentina have had another week to do exactly that and Scotland’s superior 
ability out wide to that of Wales may actually work to the Pumas’ advantage. 
Against Wales, unable to make any inroads through the highly rated but well 
shackled Facundo Isa, Argentina looked to the skies through Juan Martín 
Hernández and it simply did not work. Again Hourcade acknowledged that his side 
kicked the ball too much and so in what promises to be among the most 
entertaining contests this week, expect both sides to play with attacking 
intent. Hourcade will also expect improvements up front where Wales got the 
upper hand and so it is surprising to see Ramiro Herrera keep his place at 
tighthead in favour of Enrique Pieretto, who had a considerable impact off the 
bench in Cardiff.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Frugby-union-autumn-internationals-england-fiji-ireland-all-blacks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35cdf78f148e991345626ed68ddc7d2db4a36f4c%2F0_177_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rugby%20union%20autumn%20internationals%3A%20what%20to%20look%20forward%20to%20this%20weekend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Frugby-union-autumn-internationals-england-fiji-ireland-all-blacks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rugby%20union%20autumn%20internationals%3A%20what%20to%20look%20forward%20to%20this%20weekend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Frugby-union-autumn-internationals-england-fiji-ireland-all-blacks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35cdf78f148e991345626ed68ddc7d2db4a36f4c%2F0_177_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Argentina head coach Daniel Hourcade admitted that his side kicked too much 
against Wales. Photograph: Paul Harding/PA 

• Match report: Wales 24-20 Argentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/12/wales-argentina-autumn-internationals-match-report>

Boks to rely on power against Italy

Three changes for South Africa, but only two in terms of personnel, and the 
return of Bryan Habana along with the introduction of Nizaam Carr at openside, 
hardly suggests a major overhaul of how the Springboks will approach a match 
they simply cannot afford to lose. It is unlikely that they will – Italy will 
not be able to live with South Africa’s power – although Conor O’Shea’s men are 
unlikely to ship 10 tries as they did to New Zealand’s second string last time 
out. South Africa stand little to gain from applying forward pressure and 
hoping to run in a few late tries but that seems precisely their intention. 
Perhaps the fact that their ambitions amount to ensuring that, having just lost 
a winning streak against England, the 12-match run against Italy, who have 
never beaten the Springboks, extends to 13 demonstrates just how short of 
confidence Allister Coetzee’s side is. For O’Shea meanwhile, another defeat 
beckons but the Irishman is an eternal optimist and should not begin to be 
judged until the Six Nations. “For me, the glass is always half-full,” he says. 
“If we stick to our plan, the results will follow. If we don’t, they won’t.”


• Allister Coetzee faces growing to-do list to transform South Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/13/allister-coetzee-south-africa-england-to-do-list>

Katy Mclean and Emily Scarratt to start for England against New Zealand
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/17/katy-mclean-emily-scarratt-england-women-new-zealand-rugby-union>
Scaratt’s return timely for England

Cap No60 for Emily Scarratt, more than two and a half years since her 50th, as 
England, now up to second, face the world No1 side on Saturday. Of all the 
players England’s XVs side has missed during the preoccupation with sevens, it 
is perhaps Scarratt’s whose absence has been most keenly felt. Concussion has 
denied her the chance to face France and Ireland but Scarratt finally returns 
for her first XV appearance since the summer of 2015 at outside-centre. That is 
not say Claire Allan has not performed well in absence, producing some 
penetrating runs against France in particular, but Scarratt was the standout 
performer in the World Cup final two years ago and her class is undoubted. 
England have been scratchy in their two recent victories and New Zealand will 
pose a much sterner test so Scarratt’s return is timely for Simon Middleton’s 
side.
• Mclean and Scarratt to start for England against New Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/17/katy-mclean-emily-scarratt-england-women-new-zealand-rugby-union>
 