
1) Outlook bright for burgeoning England – on and off the field

England hint at attacking riches to rival pomp of Woodward era in defeat of 
Fiji
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/20/england-fiji-autumn-internationals>
If England can perform for 80 minutes the way they currently are playing in 
patches they have the potential to rip anyone apart. The highlight of 
Saturday’s nine-try victory was the sense of burgeoning promise behind the 
scrum but Joe Launchbury and Mako Vunipola were also excellent once again and 
the home side, who ended up being skippered by Billy Vunipola, proved too good 
for what was effectively Fiji’s best available side. Only four of England’s 
starting pack were actually born in England but, under Eddie Jones, there is a 
shared esprit de corps and clear-eyed sense of purpose that their next two 
opponents, Argentina and Australia, will do well to withstand. Jones is also 
cheerfully taking aim at assorted other targets, from New Zealand’s dominance 
of the world player of the year awards (“The Kiwis run everything, mate. When 
you run everything, you’ve got a good chance of winning”) to the Lions head 
coach (“I’m not Warren Gatland. I don’t look like him, he’s got a few kilos on 
me”) and a currently sluggish Welsh side. “Wales were obviously complacent 
again,” said Jones. “They shouldn’t be winning by three points against a 
Japanese team that has seven or eight new caps and guys coming out of company 
rugby. You or I could play company rugby.” The days of England being perceived 
as dull on or off the field are long gone.Robert Kitson

• Rokoduguni’s flying England return only adds to frustration for drained Fiji 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/19/england-fiji-rokoduguni-twickenham>
• England 58-15 Fiji: How they rated at Twickenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/how-they-rated-england-fiji-players>
• England register record win against Fiji but defence is cause for concern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/england-fiji-autumn-internationals-match-report>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Frugby-union-autumn-internationals-talking-points%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff7e8cd2023a873fe6698721353ae0c439250fde%2F0_82_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rugby%20union%20autumn%20internationals%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20latest%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Frugby-union-autumn-internationals-talking-points%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rugby%20union%20autumn%20internationals%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20latest%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Frugby-union-autumn-internationals-talking-points%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff7e8cd2023a873fe6698721353ae0c439250fde%2F0_82_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 Billy Vunipola captained England to their 58-15 win over Fiji at Twickenham. 
Photograph: Tom Jenkins for the Guardian 
2) Blame rugby’s administrators for brutality, not All Blacks

Ireland nurse wounds after New Zealand prevail in bruising encounter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/20/ireland-new-zealand-match-report-autumn-internationals-rugby-union>
All the talk afterwards – well, most – was about the brutality of the contest, 
and the legality or otherwise of the All Blacks’ approach to physicality. Which 
is a great shame, given the sublime nature of their skills. Certainly, some of 
it didn’t look good. They trod – or smashed – a fine line and generally got 
away with it. Malakai Fekitoa, Dane Coles and Sam Cane could each have seen red 
on another day. But those blaming the All Blacks are missing the point. Rugby 
is rife with this approach, and rugby is rife with head injuries. The sport is 
being betrayed by its administrators, who choose to tackle outcome, not cause, 
directing referees to show red cards to those guilty of high tackles, instead 
of taking steps to stop the high tackles in the first place. It is akin to 
allowing an irresponsibly high speed limit and simply increasing the 
punishments when the inevitable accidents ensue. Teams will always practise the 
“hit” to the chest for as long as it is legal. It is a tactically sound policy, 
increasing the chances of dislodging the ball and sending the attacker back 
whence he came. It’s also popular with the rest of us, just as those in the 
Colosseum found entertainment in other people’s pain. But it is dangerous, 
because it will always go wrong. The threshold for a high tackle must come down 
to below chest height. It’s time to do away with the “big hit”.Michael Aylwin

• Malakai Fekitoa ensures All Blacks get their revenge against Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/ireland-new-zealand-autumn-internationals-match-report>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Frugby-union-autumn-internationals-talking-points%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F838fff623680ceeed2e5c555e5cee40c705793da%2F0_0_3310_1986%2F3310.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rugby%20union%20autumn%20internationals%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20latest%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Frugby-union-autumn-internationals-talking-points%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rugby%20union%20autumn%20internationals%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20latest%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Frugby-union-autumn-internationals-talking-points%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F838fff623680ceeed2e5c555e5cee40c705793da%2F0_0_3310_1986%2F3310.jpg>
 Ireland’s Robbie Henshaw is tackled by New Zealand’s Sam Cane. Henshaw left 
the field injured as a result of the challenge. Photograph: Niall Carson/PA 
3) Argentina’s loss of momentum could be Scotland’s gain

Argentina’s defeat of Ireland at last year’s World Cup and their encouraging 
performances in this year’s Rugby Championship raised hopes that they are 
turning into a more consistent international force. Yet single-score defeats to 
Wales and Scotland this month suggest that a long, hard season has taken its 
toll. Scotland’s captain, Greig Laidlaw, made no mistake with the late, late 
penalty that turned a 16-16 draw into a 19-16 win and the Scots were good for 
the victory in difficult conditions. While a win is always welcome, this one 
may be more so than usual as it put Scotland into eighth place in the world 
rankings, leapfrogging the Pumas, which would mean a favourable draw for the 
2019 World Cup if they could maintain it until May. Before that, though, comes 
the Six Nations, which is unlikely to offer the Scots an easy ride as they 
attempt to hang on to that ranking. Argentina next face a trip to Twickenham on 
Saturday, where they will face Eddie Jones’ still-improving England. It will be 
interesting to see if they stick to their newish commitment to free-flowing 
rugby, or whether some of their old hard-driving pragmatism creeps back.Edward 
Gibbes

 * Scotland steal victory over Argentina thanks to Greig Laidlaw’s late penalty
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/scotland-argentina-autumn-internationals-match-report>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Frugby-union-autumn-internationals-talking-points%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ce0a904cf0fc0ad81237bcfe73b6d87a048a0f8%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rugby%20union%20autumn%20internationals%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20latest%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Frugby-union-autumn-internationals-talking-points%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rugby%20union%20autumn%20internationals%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20latest%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Frugby-union-autumn-internationals-talking-points%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ce0a904cf0fc0ad81237bcfe73b6d87a048a0f8%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Greig Laidlaw, Finn Russell and John Barclay are all smiles after a late 
penalty sealed victory over Argentina. Photograph: Jane Barlow/PA 
4) Japan’s sleight of hand merits recognition

Japan serve up warning to Wales in advance of South Africa challenge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/20/japan-wales-south-africa-rob-howley>
As Eddie Jones pointed out from Twickenham, the fact that six of the Japan 
starting XV had a maximum of two caps and that there were fewer than 30 on 
their entire bench only serves to highlight Wales’s deficiencies further. A 
new-look second row, no Michael Leitch – not to mention the coaching input of 
Steve Borthwick and Marc Dal Maso – and the well-documented teething problems 
for the Super Rugby franchise, the Sunwolves, make it clear that Japan have not 
found building on last year’s World Cup performances easy. Jamie Joseph is now 
making progress towards 2019, however, and he has unquestionable talent on his 
hands. The back three of Kotaro Matsushima, Akihito Yamada and Kenki Fukuoka 
all displayed a sleight of hand and fleetness of foot rarely seen in the 
northern hemisphere. Ayumu Goromaru, the full-back who commanded so much 
interest during the World Cup, was absent, playing for Toulon rather than on 
international duty, but the truth is he is not in the side on merit, even when 
you consider Lomano Lemeki was missing through injury. Rob Howley spoke 
afterwards of how he hoped that any youngsters in the capacity crowd will have 
gone home inspired by the late drama of a fly-half nailing a drop goal to win 
the match. One can only hope that Japan’s handling skills did not go unnoticed 
either.Gerard Meagher

 * Wales are run close by inspired Japan before late Sam Davies drop goal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/wales-japan-autumn-internationals-match-report>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Frugby-union-autumn-internationals-talking-points%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69849b1fb82d36fe3ed7e645ea27b097396639a4%2F28_45_3077_1847%2F3077.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rugby%20union%20autumn%20internationals%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20latest%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Frugby-union-autumn-internationals-talking-points%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rugby%20union%20autumn%20internationals%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20latest%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Frugby-union-autumn-internationals-talking-points%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69849b1fb82d36fe3ed7e645ea27b097396639a4%2F28_45_3077_1847%2F3077.jpg>
 Japan’s Kotaro Matsushima is tackled by Wales’ Jonathan Davies at the 
Principality Stadium in Cardiff. Photograph: David Davies/PA 
5) South Africa’s stuttering form could bode well for Wales 

After last week’s defeat to England, South Africa’s captain Adriaan Strauss 
damned the victors with faint praise, saying: “The English I don’t think play 
high-risk rugby [but] they are very clinical and effective with what they do.” 
Perhaps the increasingly hapless Strauss and his team-mates should have a more 
appreciative look at the video of that game after their error-strewn 
performance in losing to Italy for the first time in 13 matches on Saturday. 
For all the structural problems facing the game in South Africa, and for all 
that the Italian defence was superb in their 20-18 victory, the Springboks’ 
lack of precision and their predictability in attack were inexcusable for a 
side ranked No4 in the world. Italy and their new coach, Conor O’Shea, 
conversely, have something tangible to build upon and in Carlo Canna an 
increasingly reassuring presence around whom to build. Next up for South Africa 
is a stuttering Wales side who have squeaked past Argentina and Japan in their 
past two matches by less than a score each time – form that would usually make 
them ripe for a Boks pummelling. This time, though, perhaps the order of things 
is changing and Wales can look forward to a less demanding afternoon.Edward 
Gibbes

 * Italy celebrate famous first win over sorry South Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/italy-beat-south-africa-first-time>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Frugby-union-autumn-internationals-talking-points%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e975abe80fa4aff9bfd8c228db6572a8ef85275%2F0_146_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rugby%20union%20autumn%20internationals%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20latest%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Frugby-union-autumn-internationals-talking-points%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rugby%20union%20autumn%20internationals%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20latest%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Frugby-union-autumn-internationals-talking-points%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e975abe80fa4aff9bfd8c228db6572a8ef85275%2F0_146_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 South Africa captain Adriaan Strauss is brought to the turf in Rome on another 
disappointing day for the Springboks. Photograph: Gabriele Maltinti/Getty Images
6) Red Roses blooming again


Simon Middleton, the England women’s coach, lamented the “points we left on 
the pitch” after his side had been beaten 25-20 by New Zealand at the Stoop on 
Saturday. It is certainly no disgrace to lose to the world’s leading side but 
Middleton will have sleepless nights this week, agonising on the one that got 
away. Early in the second half England were 10 points clear of New Zealand but 
they missed too many opportunites, particularly in the first half, against a 
side that took theirs ruthlessly after the interval (sound familiar?). The 
England women’s team suffered a decline after their World Cup win two years ago 
but now look in good shape for the next World Cup next year. In backs such as 
Emily Scarratt, Fiona Pocock, Danielle Waterman and Lydia Thompson they have 
real try-scoring threats, but what a pity they couldn’t take their chances to 
cut down the Black Ferns.Ian Malin

 * New Zealand fight back after England threaten famous upset at the Stoop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/england-women-new-zealand-women-match-report>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Frugby-union-autumn-internationals-talking-points%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad0a0358e7519cde25bd2de9070d1d519b6046ea%2F0_64_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rugby%20union%20autumn%20internationals%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20latest%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Frugby-union-autumn-internationals-talking-points%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rugby%20union%20autumn%20internationals%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20latest%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Frugby-union-autumn-internationals-talking-points%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad0a0358e7519cde25bd2de9070d1d519b6046ea%2F0_64_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 Rochelle Clark, centre, came on for England but could not prevent a New 
Zealand comeback in the second half. Photograph: Tom Jenkins for the Guardian 
7) Problems mount for France but outlook bright for Australia 

Wallabies question scrum tactics despite bruising win over France
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/20/wallabies-question-scrum-tactics-despite-bruising-win-over-france>
Some positives for France – not least a dominant front row – but they fact 
that they were unable to put away a largely second string Australia side in 
Paris is a cause for concern, particularly with New Zealand next up. They may 
have cruised past Samoa in their first autumn match but the Pacific Islanders 
are too far down the rankings for it to impact and, with Scotland’s victory 
over Argentina, France are in genuine danger of slipping out of the top eight 
come December. Six Nations performances have hardly been particularly 
impressive in recent years while Scotland and Italy appear resurgent andLes 
Bleus have to travel to Twickenham, Dublin and Rome next spring. Suddenly the 
All Blacks’ visit takes on added significance. For Australia, on the other 
hand, everything appears rosy. Tevita Kuridrani scored a superb try in a 
hard-fought victory in which Michael Cheika rested a lot of players, even if 
Bernard Foley was a late recall for Quade Cooper and pivotal to his side’s 
performance. David Pocock was similarly influential and the Wallabies go into 
the final two legs of their European tour still in the hunt for a clean sweep 
of five wins from five matches. They may have to improve their scrummaging to 
get the better of Ireland and England though.Gerard Meagher

• Wallabies question scrum tactics despite bruising win over France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/20/wallabies-question-scrum-tactics-despite-bruising-win-over-france>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Frugby-union-autumn-internationals-talking-points%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff803b2d956ab6dd797e2d6361fd7753648ac5397%2F0_174_4252_2552%2F4252.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rugby%20union%20autumn%20internationals%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20latest%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Frugby-union-autumn-internationals-talking-points%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rugby%20union%20autumn%20internationals%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20latest%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Frugby-union-autumn-internationals-talking-points%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff803b2d956ab6dd797e2d6361fd7753648ac5397%2F0_174_4252_2552%2F4252.jpg>
 David Pocock, seen here France’s Noa Nakaitaci, was magnificent in Australia’s 
25-23 victory in Paris. Photograph: Michel Euler/AP  