
When George Chuter headed to the bar at Welford Road after a match, he would 
mix with the Leicester players of the 1950s and 60s and note their replacement 
body parts and aching limbs. “The degradation their bodies suffered in a much 
less impactful era brings it home to you what we’ve got coming,” he says now, 
two years on from the end of an 18-year rugby career of 440 matches that dates 
back to the dawn of the professional era.

England rugby squad’s workload puts welfare at risk, warns players’ union
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/05/england-rugby-union-squad-workload-players-welfare>
“I’m under no illusions. You have a great career, you have a great time – and 
it is a great career – but the human body can’t take that sort of punishment 
and come away scot-free. If you want to get to the top level you’ve got to make 
sacrifices. And it’s not just your time, or a bag of chips – it’s sacrificing 
your long‑term health. You want to have that time in the sun. But unfortunately 
it’s a deal with the devil.”

The precise terms of this Faustian pact are yet to be revealed. No one knows 
what the long-term impact is of a career in professional rugby union but it is 
becoming increasingly likely that few, if any, professional careers will match 
Chuter’s for longevity. It is a career, though, poignant for the sabbatical he 
took in 2000, long before the All BlacksRichie McCaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/richie-mccaw> and Dan Carter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/dan-carter> made it fashionable. “It had got 
to the stage where I was mentally tired. Bored, in some ways. Once your head 
gives in, your body won’t be far behind.”

Chuter had been among the first wave of youngsters in the professional era, 
before he walked away for six months as a disillusioned 23-year-old. Sixteen 
years on, the production line supplying professional rugby with its prime 
assets from the schools and academies bears a calibre of athlete better primed 
than ever for the rigours of what awaits – and better able to dish them out. The
Rugby Football Union <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rugby-football-union>, 
Premier Rugby and the Rugby Players’ Association continue to invest in ensuring 
today’s players are fit for purpose, physically and emotionally, now and for 
the future. Everything is laid on – a programme to eat, train and sleep by; GPS 
units to monitor their every step and collision; daily questionnaires by which 
to assess their emotional health; personal development officers to help them 
improve as people.

It’s sacrificing long‑term health. You want to have that time in the sun. But 
unfortunately it’s a deal with the devil.
George Chuter 
And yet they continue to labour under the demands of a season that in this 
part of the world remains bewildering and brutal. This season is a one-off but 
its peculiarities have laid bare some of the strengths and weaknesses inherent 
in the regular structure. The World Cup meant the start of the Premiership was 
delayed by six weeks. On the plus side, it afforded clubs the luxury of a 
lengthy off-season to prepare their players and put them through their “MOTs”, 
asConor O’Shea, the Harlequins director of rugby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/25/conor-oshea-italy-head-coach-mike-catt>
, puts it – by which he means the fixing of bodies with operations and rehab 
they cannot find the time for during the season itself. “A four-month 
pre-season is what every player should have,” he says.

The corollary of that, though, is that the season itself has been crammed into 
six fewer weeks than normal. The testimony of one and all, now that we are 
coming to the end of the slog, is that it has been “brutal”. The loss of the LV 
Cup has been felt keenly. It has allowed no slack for directors of rugby to 
rest frontline players and, just as importantly, to give opportunities to those 
others who languish unused.

“It’s not just the physical toil of the season,” says Christian Day, the 
Northampton lock and chairman of the Rugby Players’ Association. “You have the 
mental toil as well. You’ll have guys who are playing 15 to 20 games on the 
bounce who might not be playing many minutes but they’re involved in every 
training session. If you’re having a bad season you might be involved in a lot 
of dark times, which really will take its toll.”

It is commonly accepted that players are faster and more powerful than ever 
before, even if there are signs the average weight is levelling off now, or 
even coming down. Stuart Hooper, the Bath lock who retired last month after a 
career almost as long as Chuter’s, cites this as the most obvious change in his 
16 years as a professional. He believes careers will become shorter – although 
not so much because of premature injury, more because of the quality of athlete 
emerging from the academies, which further increases the pressure in an 
environment already short on give.
Injury days. 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/apr/2016-04-29T15:15:14/embed.html>
 Injury days. 
Adam Grainger, a performance scientist of more than 10 years at Sale, Wasps 
and Saracens, corroborates this. “We’re dealing with better specimens nowadays 
as a starting point than we were 10 years ago. Training science is better 
nowadays.” With the use of the GPS units in the back of the players’ shirts, he 
can put some numbers on the physical demands they face on the field. In a 
typicalPremiership <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership> match, the 
distance covered by a player may range from 4km (for a prop, say, replaced on 
50 minutes) to 8km. You might expect more than 400 impacts greater than 9G in 
any given game and around 30 greater than 13G.

Figures such as these are being fed by all the clubs into a new body, set up 
at the start of this season by the RFU, Premier Rugby and the RPA, known as the 
Sports Science Advisory Group, whose mission is to monitor the relationship 
between the “load” players endure, both on and off the field, at the club and 
at home, and their performance on match day. It is an enormous and 
unprecedented undertaking, and it will take years to compile and process the 
data.

Mark Lambert, the Harlequins prop and RPA vice-chairman, sits on that 
committee. “For me what came out of those sessions was frustration.Everyone can 
see that the game is stretching its players. There is an intention to improve 
that but, as with all things, it’s going to take time.”

There is evidence, however, that stretching themselves is actually the best 
way for players to avoid injury. Simon Kemp, the RFU’s chief medical officer, 
chairs the Injury Surveillance Project, which has been running the rule over 
the Premiership for 14 years. Some believe that the load on players ought to be 
mitigated by universally applied laws regulating the amount of contact clubs 
are allowed to put their players through in training, as happens in the NFL. 
Kemp’s findings contradict this theory. “The optimal training load for a squad 
is high-intermediate,” he says. “If you don’t do enough training your injury 
risk increases, as if you do too much. At individual clubs there is very 
sophisticated management of player load on an individual basis. There do seem 
to be players who can sustain a high training and match load without running 
into problems.”

Finding out who those players are, though, is a dangerous game. The competing 
priorities on everyone – from player to medic to director of rugby to chairman 
to fan to agent to TV executive – are relentless.

“There has to be give in so many areas,” O’Shea says. “One solution could be 
to have a progression of competitions, say, from Premiership to Europe to Six 
Nations but that means moving things – and we can’t because there are things 
that are sacrosanct, etc, etc. The other side of that, though, is that if the 
[players’] salaries keep on going up – and they are rocketing – you have to 
play games to get the money.”

My grandfather worked down a coal mine. Would I prefer to do what I’m doing 
and risk long-term health problems? Yeah.
Dan Cole 
It is the players who suffer from those competing demands. Dan Cole’s 2012-13 
season has become legendary among the playing collective. People shake their 
heads when they discuss the 41 matches he played that British & Irish Lions 
year. The following season he was out for nine months because of a bulging disc 
in his neck, which needed to be replaced.

The man himself concedes it was not a coincidence. “Honestly? It probably 
wasn’t. But I don’t think many boys would turn down a Lions tour. If you knew 
the consequences beforehand, you’d still go for it because of what it is.”

Many legislators see Lions tours as a menace, a six-week slog beyond the 
jurisdiction of those who try to regulate the load on players – yet, of course, 
too popular and prestigious for players, fans or corporations to countenance 
sacrificing. Those lucky enough to make the 2017 tour will pay for it with a 
two-year schedule that will test the players and those who patch them up as 
never before. England went into camp for the World Cup at the end of June last 
year. The third Test in Australia this summer is at the end of June. That is 12 
months of “stuff”, as Cole endearingly puts it. He is on 30 matches this season 
and counting. Then after a few weeks they are back into another full season 
with the small matter of that Lions tour to New Zealand at the end of it.

There is nobody in English rugby who thinks it is a sensible schedule but it 
will be embraced because that’s how rugby players are. Cole says: “My 
grandfather worked down a coal mine and broke his back when the pit collapsed. 
Would I prefer to do what I’m doing and risk long-term health problems? Yeah. I 
know what I’ve signed up for. You can’t be protected against everything. I’d 
prefer this to what my grandfather did. If I didn’t want to do it, I wouldn’t.”

It is the kind of rousing, selfless attitude on which rugby prides itself. 
Increasingly, though, the sport is recognising the need to protect such 
characters from themselves. Cole is nine years into his professional career. If 
he were his old mate Chuter, he would be only halfway through. But the days of 
a career as long as that are almost certainly over.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmay%2F05%2Frugby-union-brutal-reality-elite-player-welfare%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8b3b0163e0ecfe4bae6f1505070c98a3e9c51a1%2F531_94_2191_1315%2F2191.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rugby%20union%E2%80%99s%20brutal%20reality%3A%20the%20physical%20and%20mental%20toll%20of%20an%20elite%20playing%20career%20%7C%20Michael%20Aylwin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmay%2F05%2Frugby-union-brutal-reality-elite-player-welfare%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rugby%20union%E2%80%99s%20brutal%20reality%3A%20the%20physical%20and%20mental%20toll%20of%20an%20elite%20playing%20career%20%7C%20Michael%20Aylwin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmay%2F05%2Frugby-union-brutal-reality-elite-player-welfare%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8b3b0163e0ecfe4bae6f1505070c98a3e9c51a1%2F531_94_2191_1315%2F2191.jpg>
 The Leicester and England prop Dan Cole, right, played 41 matches in 2012-13. 
Photograph: David Rogers/Getty Images  