
In a city of high-rise apartment blocks and vast, teeming traffic arteries, 
tranquility is at a premium in Moscow. For that reason, many rich Russians have 
been drawn in recent years to Patriarch’s Ponds, a quiet area of pretty art 
nouveau buildings set around the eponymous pond (once there were three, now 
there’s only one) right in the centre of the city.

The area has been at the forefront of the new Moscow that has appeared over 
the past few years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jun/08/is-the-moscow-experiment-over-gorky-park-sergei-kapkov-alexei-navalny>
, packed with teeming cafes and bars, fashion boutiques and delicatessens. But 
as the area gets so popular that on weekend nights it overflows with outsiders 
visiting its bars and restaurants, the rich residents have complained that the 
influx is ruining their special area. Others say it was the rich new residents 
themselves who altered the area’s Soviet-era charm.

Gentrification <https://www.theguardian.com/cities/gentrification> in Moscow 
takes on rather a different form to other major cities, mainly due to the 
nature of the Soviet experience. A century ago, the city saw uniform 
de-gentrification, as the aristocracy was kicked out of juicy property in 
central Moscow after the Bolshevik revolution. The art nouveau mansions of 
Patriarch’s Ponds were turned into embassies, while the handsome blocks of 
spacious apartments belonging to merchants were stripped out and turned into 
kommunalki (communal apartments), in which several families would share a big 
flat, one to a room.

Evgeny Asse, a 70-year-old architect who has lived on Patriarch’s Ponds since 
1948, in an apartment block designed by his father, also an architect, recalled 
that in the 1950s, the district was far from glamorous.

“There were quite a lot of hooligans around. It wasn’t until the 1960s, when 
some new brick blocks were built for the Soviet elite, that it started to 
become more prestigious,” he says.

“Of course it was always a pretty area but there was none of the high life you 
have now,” says Yulia Eybogina, who spent her early years in a communal 
apartment in the district, between 1987 and 1993. “My mother remembers that the 
other people in the flat would tell us when on a particular day sugar or other 
products would be available, and we’d head off to queue for them.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fruined-by-locusts-the-moscow-area-that-got-too-cool-too-quickly%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f299deb971ae723e9b7d6479d2d380e66922881%2F0_336_5608_3365%2F5608.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ruined%20by%20%E2%80%98locusts%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20Moscow%20area%20that%20got%20too%20cool%2C%20too%20quickly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fruined-by-locusts-the-moscow-area-that-got-too-cool-too-quickly%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ruined%20by%20%E2%80%98locusts%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20Moscow%20area%20that%20got%20too%20cool%2C%20too%20quickly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fruined-by-locusts-the-moscow-area-that-got-too-cool-too-quickly%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f299deb971ae723e9b7d6479d2d380e66922881%2F0_336_5608_3365%2F5608.jpg>
 A century ago, the area around Patriarch’s Ponds was ‘de-gentrified’ in the 
Bolshevik revolution. Photograph: Pavel L Photo and Video/Shutterstock 
During the 1990s, a gentrification of sorts took place across the whole of the 
central area of the capital, as businessmen bought up kommunalki from their 
multiple owners, offering each of the families their own place to live 
somewhere on the outskirts of town and recreating the huge, luxurious 
apartments that had once existed before the Soviets kicked out their initial 
inhabitants. While few residents of kommunalki preferred them to living in a 
whole apartment, they did promote a kind of social integration that is now lost.

“The whole essence of kommunalka life meant you didn’t live with the same kind 
of people,” Asse explains. “Doctors and engineers could live with construction 
workers; everything was all mixed up. There was something quite good about 
that, and that mix is what we are losing now, when we see much more separation 
and segregation of the classes.”

Slowly, Patriarch’s Ponds became the province of business people and the 
wealthier creative elite – even billionaires.

“It’s an island of Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> in 
Russia. You feel free, you feel like you’re in the west. But then at the same 
time it’s like the old, real Moscow out of Bulgakov’s novels,” says Sophie 
Shevardnadze, a television chat show host and the granddaughter of the previous 
Soviet foreign minister, who has lived in the area for a decade.

It is not unusual to see a Lamborghini parked outside an edgy hipster bar

While not everyone can afford to live in Patriarch’s Ponds, the area has 
become a magnet for different kinds of people. Hipsters and creative types work 
from cafes on the ponds, wealthy housewives shop for designer clothes and 
healthfoods, and nouveaux riches come to drink at the bars. On a Friday night, 
it is not unusual to see a Lamborghini parked outside an edgy hipster bar. In 
London terms, the area became Hoxton, Primrose Hill and Knightsbridge, all 
rolled into one.

This summer, the neighbourhood had an extraordinary atmosphere – walking down 
Malaya Bronnaya street at midnight on a Friday or Saturday, there were Italian 
restaurants where people perched on steps on the street eating a risotto, and 
dozens of bars where people spilled into the street, drinking cocktails and 
laughing until the early hours. Hardly a week went by without a new trendy 
eatery or bar opening up.

This was something new for Moscow – and it caused irritation among the 
residents, who suddenly found their quiet neighbourhood turned into Moscow’s 
main party drag. A roundtable discussion with wealthy local residents in the 
lifestyle magazine Afisha drew ire from other Muscovites this summer, as they 
referred to the newcomers as “locusts” and complained that the area’s 
“high-class” atmosphere was being ruined.

Shevardnadze says her own irritation was nothing to do with class, but simply 
that the quiet area she had moved into had suddenly become a party district.

The bubble that turned into a tide: how London got hooked on gentrification
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/sep/24/the-bubble-that-turned-into-a-tide-how-london-got-hooked-on-gentrification>
“People were smashing things up until 6am outside my windows. When I moved in 
it was a residential area with a few cute restaurants. This is not what I 
signed up for,” she says.

Police have since intervened, demanding most bars and restaurants close by 
11pm, unusual for a city where life goes on round the clock.

“You have a confrontation now between two classes in the area,” says Asse; 
“the new hipsters with their energy, and those rich people who paid good money 
and want to live in a quiet area. But they also bought here, and not somewhere 
quiet outside town, because they wanted somewhere with energy, and that’s the 
paradox.”

Are you experiencing or resisting gentrification in your city? Share your 
stories in the comments below,through our dedicated callout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/sep/19/city-resist-gentrification-displacement>
, or on Twitter using #GlobalGentrification
 