
Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> has found the first flight 
recorder from a military plane that crashed into the Black Sea killing all 92 
on board, the defence ministry said, amid unconfirmed reports that authorities 
had grounded all aircraft of the same type.


 The recorder, one of several reported to be on board, contains information 
that could help investigators identify the cause of Sunday’s crash, which 
killed dozens of Red Army Choir singers and dancers en route to Syria to 
entertain Russian troops in the run-up to the new year.

 Investigators have so far said that pilot error or a technical fault, rather 
than terrorism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/26/russia-plane-crash-massive-search-for-bodies-in-black-sea>
, were most likely to have caused the Tupolev-154 to crash into the sea.

 The first black box, which was founded by a remote-controlled underwater 
vehicle at a depth of about 17 metres (55ft) and 1,600 metres (one mile) from 
the resort of Sochi, will be sent to a defence ministry facility in Moscow for 
analysis.

The defence ministry said in a statement on Tuesday that the flight recorder 
did not sustain considerable damage. The ministry says experts will need to 
clean the black box in distilled water before they begin to retrieve data from 
it.

 “During the night during the [search operation] … a further five fragments of 
the plane were found,” the ministry said. They included pieces of fuselage and 
engine fragments.

 The Interfax news agency cited an unnamed source as saying Russia had 
grounded all TU-154 planes until the cause of Sunday’s crash became clear. 
There was no official confirmation.

 The defence ministry said the downed jet, a Soviet-era plane built in 1983, 
had last been serviced in September and underwent more repairs in December 2014.

 Russian pilots say the TU-154 has a reasonably good safety record, though 
leading Russian commercial airlines have long since replaced it with 
western-built planes. The last big TU-154 crash was in 2010 when a Polish jet 
carrying the then-president Lech Kaczynski and much of Poland’s political elite 
went down in western Russia killing everyone on board.

 Interfax, citing a law enforcement source, said a second flight recorder had 
also been found in the wreckage of Sunday’s crash, but not yet raised to the 
surface.

 The defence ministry said search and rescue teams had so far recovered 12 
bodies and 156 body fragments.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fvladimir-putin-orders-investigation-into-plane-crash-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vladimir%20Putin%20orders%20investigation%20into%20plane%20crash%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fvladimir-putin-orders-investigation-into-plane-crash-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Vladimir%20Putin%20orders%20investigation%20into%20plane%20crash%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fvladimir-putin-orders-investigation-into-plane-crash-video&media=>
Vladimir Putin orders investigation into plane crash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/26/vladimir-putin-orders-investigation-into-plane-crash-video> 