
Boris Johnson has said the west lacks a viable military strategy in Syria, and 
that Russia could be guilty of war crimes if it has been involved in thebombing 
of civilian targets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/22/overnight-airstrikes-rebel-held-aleppo-kill-syrians>
.

Despite the admission about strategy, the foreign secretary said there was no 
appetite for a different military course, arguing that the best way to force 
Moscow to draw back would be to shame the country in the court of public 
opinion.

Johnson was speaking on The Andrew Marr Show on BBC1 on Sunday as the UN 
security councilprepared to meet again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/24/aleppo-siege-tighten-bashar-al-assad-water-two-million>
 to discuss the Russian-backed bombing of Aleppo.

Of the Russian president, Vladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin>, he said: “Putin’s regime is 
not just handing Assad the revolver; he is in some instances firing the 
revolver. The Russians themselves are actually engaged.”

But Johnson admitted that the west had failed to have a viable military 
strategy, since 2013 to put pressure onRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>.

That year, the British parliament and other western countries decided not to 
take military action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/aug/30/cameron-mps-syria> against 
the Syrian president, Bashar al-Assad, despite evidence that he had been using 
chemical weapons against civilians.

The US president, Barack Obama, said at the time that the use of such weapons 
would be a red line for his government.

'Is this civilisation?' ask residents as Aleppo reels from relentless shelling
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/23/aleppo-residents-syria-russia-airstrikes>
Johnson said: “If you say to me the west is too impotent, I would have to 
agree. I would have to agree that, since we took those decisions in 2013, when 
those red lines were crossed, we have not really had a viable military 
response, or any kinetic response to what is going on. I don’t think there is 
any real appetite for such a thing.”

His remarks are a rare acknowledgement that the west has no effective plans to 
constrain Russia or Assad inSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>.

Some have been calling for actions ranging from a western-imposed no-fly zone 
in northern Syria to closer monitoring of Syrian military activity by British 
warships off the coast of the country, and even the bombing of Assad’s military 
runways.

Johnson said Britain was taking the lead in tightening sanctions, but that 
that the one thing the Russians responded to was adverse global public opinion.


“They are in the dock of the court of international opinion. They are guilty 
of making the war far more protracted and far more hideous, and yes, when it 
comes up, the bombing of civilian targets, we should be looking ... to see if 
the targeting is done in the knowledge they are wholly innocent civilian 
targets, [because] that is a war crime,” he said.

“A war crime is defined as when you attack a civilian target in the knowledge 
that it is a civilian target.”

This week at the UN in New York, the UK and other western countries failed to 
reach an agreement with the Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, on the 
terms of a renewed ceasefire in Aleppo. Russian and Syrian warplanes are 
continuing to assault rebel positions in the east of the city,resulting in 
water shortages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/24/syrian-military-bombardment-of-aleppo-enters-third-day>
 and multiple deaths.

The security council meeting on Syria came as France, the UK and the US, among 
others, said their patience was not infinite.
 