
Vladimir Putin has signalled “mission semi-accomplished” in Syria as Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> announced the start of a withdrawal 
of forces, beginning with the departure from the Mediterranean of a naval group 
led by the Admiral Kuznetsov aircraft carrier.

“In accordance with the decision of the supreme commander of the Russian armed 
forces, [President] Vladimir Putin, the Russian defence ministry is beginning 
the reduction of the armed deployment toSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>,” the military chief, Valery 
Gerasimov, said.

Expert opinion is divided over whether the Kuznetsov’s journey to the 
Mediterranean 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/20/russian-fleet-could-pass-through-the-channel-as-early-as-thursday-night>
 in October added anything militarily beyond a symbolic show of naval force.

John Kerry blames Britain for derailing Obama's plan for intervention in Syria
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/05/john-kerry-us-syria-intervention-plan-britain-obama>
Putin ordered a reduction in his forces in Syria on 29 December, coinciding 
with the start of a ceasefire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/29/syrian-government-and-rebels-have-signed-ceasefire-agreement-says-putin>
 brokered by Turkey and Russia. The fragile pact, which excludes Islamic State 
and the al-Qaida-linked Fateh al-Sham, is designed to pave the way for peace 
talks in Kazakhstan later this month aimed at bringing an end to Syria’s 
six-year conflict.

The Russian president previously announced a partial withdrawal of Russian 
forces in March 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/14/vladimir-putin-orders-withdrawal-russian-troops-syria>
, only to increase their presence again as fighting intensified. But it is 
likely this time around that Putin feels his Syrian ally and counterpart, 
Bashar al-Assad, is militarily, if not politically, secure.

Russia still has sufficient air defence capabilities with the S-300 and S-400 
systems deployed in Syria.

Moscow launched a bombing campaign in Syria in September 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/30/russia-launches-first-airstrikes-against-targets-in-syria-says-us>
, helping to turn the tide in favour of Assad. By the turn of the year, only 23 
Russian soldiers had been killed, according to official figures, defying US 
administration predictions that Moscow would become bogged down in a quagmire.

Syrian regime forces targeting Aleppo were aided by Russian firepower on land 
in Syria and off the coast in the Mediterranean.

Troops loyal to Assad finally ousted rebels from the city last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/14/iran-aleppo-syria-shia-militia> 
in their biggest victory in more than five years of fighting, paving the way 
for the Kremlin to launch a fresh push for a political solution to the conflict.

Many rebel fighters and western diplomats claimed it was Iranian-backed 
artillery as much as Russian air power or Syrian ground forces that made the 
regime’s siege of Aleppo impossible to stop. The ongoing presence of 
Iranian-backed forces in Syria has led Turkey to warn that the Astana talks are 
in jeopardy.

Fighting in Syria is set to continue, notably in the north-western province of 
Idlib. Opposition fighters from Aleppo and other towns where sieges have been 
lifted have been sent to the province and the Assad regime said on Thursday it 
was ready for an open battle with opposition forces there.

East of Idlib, in Raqqa province, Kurdish-led forces said yesterday that they 
had taken control of a castle on a hilltop overlooking a strategic town held by 
Islamic State, less than 20 miles from the militant group’s de facto capital of 
Raqqa city. The advance also brings the Syrian Democratic Forces within four 
miles of the strategic Tabqa dam and town.

Isis is also fighting the Syrian army in Deir al-Zor province and near the 
city of Palmyra, which Isis seized for a second time in December.

There has also been fighting between the Syrian government and opposition 
groups in the Barada valley north of Damascus, disrupting the water supply to 
millions of people living in or around the Syrian capital. Government aircraft 
dropped at least 10 barrel bombs in the area on Friday, the Syrian Observatory 
for Human Rights said.

The UN’s humanitarian adviser for Syria, Jan Egeland, said on Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/05/syria-conflict-leaves-millions-of-damascus-residents-with-limited-access-to-water>
 it was impossible to tell if disruption to water supplies had been caused by 
Syrian government bombardment or rebel sabotage, but warned both sides that 
targeting water sources constitutes a war crime.


On Friday Unicef said there was “a major concern” about the risk of waterborne 
diseases among children, who were bearing the brunt of collecting water for 
their families. “A Unicef team that visited Damascus yesterday said that most 
children they met walk at least half an hour to the nearest mosque or public 
water point to collect water,” a spokesman said in comments carried by Reuters 
. “It takes children up to two hours waiting in line to fetch water amid 
freezing temperatures.”
 