
Trump’s alleged Russia ties cast shadow on confirmation hearings

Donald Trump’s picks to lead the CIA and the Department of Defense both 
sounded warnings over Russia’s growing global ambitions during their 
confirmation hearings before the Senate on Thursday. Mike Pompeo, Trump’s 
choice for CIA director, sided with intelligence officials who accuse Moscow of 
attempting to skew the US election. His comments came amid an increasingly 
bitter row between Trump and US intelligence agencies. James Mattis, Trump’s 
nominee for secretary of defense, told the Senate armed services committee that
Russia had “chosen to be a strategic competitor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/12/james-mattis-mike-pompeo-confirmation-hearings-russia>
, an adversary in key areas”. Meanwhile, Eric Swalwell, the ranking member of 
the CIA subcommittee of the House permanent select committee on intelligence, 
has called for an independent bipartisan commission to investigate Russian 
influence on the US election. The commission was needed “to set the record 
straight on what happened, and to recommend how best to protect ourselves from 
now on”,Swalwell writes for the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/12/we-need-independent-commission-russia-hacking-now>
. Trump’s inauguration is next Friday, though some have already begun to wonder 
what happens now and tospeculate as to whether he could be impeached 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/12/donald-trump-russia-dossier-what-happens-next>
.

Donald Trump’s alleged ties with Russia overshadow confirmation hearings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/12/mike-pompeo-cia-nominee-senate-hearing-trump-russia>

Justice department to review FBI’s handling of Clinton email inquiry

The justice department’s office of the inspector general announced it would 
investigate the FBI’s handling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/12/justice-department-fbi-review-james-comey-hillary-clinton-emails>
 of an investigation into Hillary Clinton’s personal email server from her 
tenure as secretary of state. The review would include an examination of 
whether FBI director James Comey violated policy or procedure when he sent 
Congress notification about new evidence his department had discovered,11 days 
before the presidential election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/28/fbi-reopens-hillary-clinton-emails-investigation>
. Comey later publiclyconceded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/06/fbi-director-hillary-clinton-email-investigation-criminal-james-comey>
 that none of the new material was pertinent to the investigation, which had 
concluded that Clinton was not criminally responsible for the use of the 
personal server but had been “extremely careless” in her handling of sensitive 
information.

Justice department to review FBI’s conduct in Clinton email inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/12/justice-department-fbi-review-james-comey-hillary-clinton-emails>

WhatsApp backdoor allows snooping on encrypted messages


Facebook claims no one can intercept WhatsApp messages, not even the company 
and its staff, ensuring privacy for its billion-plus users. But new research 
shows that the company could in fact read encrypted messages due to the way 
WhatsApp has implemented its end-to-end encryption protocol. Privacy 
campaigners said the vulnerability was a “huge threat to freedom of speech” and 
warned it could be used by government agencies to snoop on users who believe 
their messages to be secure. Read our breakdown of how this may affect you:
Should I be worried about the WhatsApp encryption backdoor? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/jan/13/whatsapp-encryption-backdoor-snooping-signal>

WhatsApp backdoor allows snooping on encrypted messages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/jan/13/whatsapp-backdoor-allows-snooping-on-encrypted-messages>

Trump risks ‘war’ over South China Sea access

The US risks a “large-scale war” with China if it attempts to blockade islands 
in the South China Sea, Chinese state media has said, adding that if recent 
statements become policy when Donald Trump takes over as president “the two 
sides had better prepare for a military clash”. During his confirmation 
hearing, Rex Tillerson, Trump’s nominee for secretary of state, said China’s 
“access to those islands … is not going to be allowed”. He did not specify how 
the US would block access but experts agreed it could only be done bya 
significant show of military force 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/12/no-access-rex-tillerson-sets-collision-course-beijing-south-china-sea>
.

Trump risks ‘war’ with Beijing if US blocks access to South China Sea, state 
media warns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/13/trump-risks-war-with-beijing-us-blocks-access-south-china-sea-state-media>

Obama gives US intelligence greater access to warrantless data on foreigners

In one of his final acts on national security, Barack Obama has permitted US 
intelligence and law enforcement agencies far greater access to raw 
communications data warrantlessly collected on foreign targets, alarming 
privacy advocates. Under an executive order, the CIA, FBI and other security 
agencies will be able to access unfiltered surveillance aimed at foreigners 
abroad, before information identifying or revealing Americans they may be in 
contact with gets censored out.

Obama gives US intelligence greater access to warrantless data on foreigners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/12/obama-us-intelligence-greater-access-warrantless-data-foreign-targets>


Support the Guardian’s fearless journalism


Never has America needed fearless independent media more 
<http://click.mail.theguardian.com/?qs=459321946e415b12582921e8c24a8bd1742ea936a2899be565fa57f54568cd44>
. Help us hold the new president to account, sort fact from fiction, amplify 
underrepresented voices, and understand the forces behind this divisive 
election – and what happens next. Support the Guardian bybecoming a member 
<http://click.mail.theguardian.com/?qs=459321946e415b128f2234dac2a5837d533f2698192ef2caf3b853674fb0d8a1>
 or making acontribution 
<http://click.mail.theguardian.com/?qs=459321946e415b120d4724d9af6c4fe4c9ea0a020c3ef1bd2aa02d3c042741e0>
.

Obama ends longstanding Cuban immigration policy

Obama is ending a longstanding immigration policy that allows any Cuban who 
makes it to US soil to stay and become a legal resident, a senior 
administration official said Thursday. The repeal of the “wet foot, dry foot” 
policy is effective immediately, according the official. The decision follows 
months of negotiations focused in part on getting Cuba to agree to take back 
people who had arrived in the US.

Obama ends ‘wet foot, dry foot’ policy for Cuban immigrants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/12/obama-ends-cuba-immigration-policy-wet-foot-dry-foot>

A surprise for Joe Biden

Obama awarded vice-president Joe Biden with the Presidential Medal of Freedom, 
the highest US civilian honor, on Thursday. The president presented a 
teary-eyed Biden with the award in honor of Biden’s “faith in your fellow 
Americans, for your love of country and a lifetime of service that will endure 
through the generations”.

Barack Obama surprises Joe Biden with Presidential Medal of Freedom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/12/barack-obama-joe-biden-presidential-medal-of-freedom>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fjoe-biden-presidential-medal-of-freedom-obama-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Joe%20Biden%20surprised%20with%20Presidential%20Medal%20of%20Freedom%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fjoe-biden-presidential-medal-of-freedom-obama-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Joe%20Biden%20surprised%20with%20Presidential%20Medal%20of%20Freedom%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fjoe-biden-presidential-medal-of-freedom-obama-video&media=>
Joe Biden surprised with Presidential Medal of Freedom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/12/joe-biden-presidential-medal-of-freedom-obama-video>
Disney reportedly looking to use Carrie Fisher’s digital image

Disney is negotiating with Carrie Fisher’s estate for the rights to use the 
actor’s digital image in future Star Wars films, according to reports. The 
actor’s likeness as a young Princess Leia was digitally rendered in the final 
frames of the film Rogue One – presumably with her permission. Reports have 
said Fisher, who died last month, was expected to play a significant role in 
future films.

Disney negotiating with Carrie Fisher’s estate for rights to her digital image 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/13/carrie-fisher-disney-negotiating-for-digital-rights-star-wars>

Why are the San Diego Chargers moving to LA?

The San Diego Chargers will be leaving the city where they have played for the 
last 56 years and heading to Los Angeles. “They are doing this because the 
politicians and voters in San Diego did not give Chargers owner Dean Spanos the 
same golden gift Atlanta and Seattle and all the other capitulating 
municipalities gave their ridiculously wealthy teams’ owners,” Les Carpenter 
writes.

San Diego refused to be bullied by the NFL and billionaire owners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/12/san-diego-chargers-los-angeles-move-nfl-owners>


And finally ... homework criticized for dating instructions

An assignment from a Utah high school directed students to “go on a date” and 
gave separate instructions for boys and for girls, telling girls to be 
“feminine and lady-like” and not to “waste” a boy’s money. The assignment has 
been criticized as promoting gender stereotypes and being noninclusive for LGBT 
students.

Utah dating homework tells girls: be ‘feminine’ and ‘don’t waste his money’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/12/utah-dating-homework-gender-bias-highland-high-school>
 