
From a distance, the common lime trees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/aug/23/plantwatch-lime-tree-linden-summer-nectar>
 are a rich orangey colour. This looks wrong. The autumn leaves of these trees 
are buttery and the last of them blew down a month ago. The limes have a 
curious russet foliage, just like the coating of rust on the fallen leaves in a 
spring issuing from ironstone under the Short Woods a few miles north of here. 
The rusty limes look oddly out of time, as if frozen in an arrested autumn when 
all about them winter trees stand darkly naked.

On a closer look, the limes are not still holding leaves at all but are full 
of bracts and seeds. The bracts are small, oblong, modified leaves, pale and 
almost transparent when they open in spring, like solar panels on a satellite 
above the dangling cyme of two to seven flowers.

The flowers are hermaphrodites and honey-scented, drawing swarms of bees in 
June. Once pollinated, the flowers produce seeds as little furry grey nutlets, 
slightly grooved, with a pointy end. When they detach, the bracts become 
propellers, spiralling the seeds down to earth like some kind of steampunk 
device. Except these haven’t. Holding on to their bracts and seeds, long after 
the leaves have gone, has changed their character as the iron trees catch the 
winter light.

Common or European lime, Tilia x europaea is a hybrid between the small-leaved 
lime,T cordata 
<https://www.woodlandtrust.org.uk/visiting-woods/trees-woods-and-wildlife/british-trees/native-trees/small-leaved-lime/>
, and the large-leaved lime, T platyphyllos 
<https://www.woodlandtrust.org.uk/visiting-woods/trees-woods-and-wildlife/british-trees/native-trees/large-leaved-lime/>
. Both parent species grow on Wenlock Edge and, although there are naturally 
occurring hybrids, these rusty ones are cultivated varieties planted about a 
century ago.

The common limes are masting – having a year of super-abundant seed bearing. 
Some think this is a strategy of proliferation by setting the most seed in 
years of fewest predators. Others see it as a response to the weather. Whatever 
the reason, it’s all in vain. These seeds will never break their dormancy, 
never germinate, never be a lime forest in waiting. Until they fall to the 
hungry ground, these hopeless satellites on iron wings dream on.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>
 