
Slavisa Jokanovic has urged the Fulham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fulham> owner, Shahid Khan, to keep hold 
of Ryan Sessegnon and strengthen the squad for a new-year promotion push.

Sessegnon became one of the youngest scorers in FA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> history – at 16 years and 235 
days – with the winner in Fulham’s 2-1 third-round victory at Cardiff.

Fulham’s early morning trip to Cardiff: whose bright idea was that?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/fulham-fans-up-in-arms-against-morning-fa-cup-tie-in-cardiff>
It was the second time Cardiff had witnessed the promise of Sessegnon, who was 
born in May 2000, as he scored his first senior goal against them in August. On 
that occasion he became the youngest scorer in both Championship and Fulham 
history aged 16 years and 94 days.

Five months on and Sessegnon showed his predatory instincts once more, even if 
Barrow’s Sean Cato’s effort against Rothwell in 2011 makes him the youngest 
FA Cup goalscorer at 16 years and 25 days.

The England Under-17 international has been linked to the Premier League’s big 
guns, with Arsenal, Liverpool, Manchester City, Manchester United, and 
Tottenham Hotspur all reportedly showing interest in the Wandsworth-born 
product.

“He’s very good for the project of this football club, he’s one of the most 
talented teenagers in England,” Jokanovic said.

“I am sure that he is going to be a very important player for us in the 
future. But he’s only 16 years old, we have to be careful with him, and I 
prefer not to talk so much about Ryan Sessegnon. He’s a very intelligent kid, 
he’s working very hard and has to keep going.”

John Terry sees red, but comfortable Chelsea ease past Peterborough
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/08/chelsea-peterborough-united-fa-cup-match-report>
The Florida-based Khan, owner of the Jacksonville Jaguars team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/jul/12/fulham-takeover-shahid-khan-jacksonville>
 in the National Football League, is one of the wealthiest businessmen in the 
United States.

Jokanovic wants Fulham to invest in the January transfer window and push on 
with the Cottagers close to the play-off picture. Fulham are in 10th place 
after a slow start to the season, but winning their game in hand would move 
them to within three points of the top six.

Asked what he expected of the January transfer window, Jokanovic replied: “It 
depends on our ambition. I want Ryan Sessegnon, I want one striker and I want 
one defender.

“We have to try to push the team in the top six. We are past the first third 
of the season and we have in front of us 20 days still [of the window].

Of Fulham’s win, he said: “I am pleased with this win because we moved the 
ball well and played with patience. We scored two goals and did enough for 
third goal.”

Plymouth hold out against Klopp’s young Liverpool to earn FA Cup replay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/08/liverpool-plymouth-argyle-fa-cup-match-report>
Both managers resisted the opportunity to field entirely second-choice XIs in 
the run-up to crucial Championship fixtures, although Neil Warnock said his 
hand had been forced on the Cardiff team selection.

Jokanovic kept faith with eight of the Fulham team defeated by Brighton & Hove 
Albion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/02/fulham-brighton-hove-albion-championship-match-report>
 at Craven Cottage last week. Chris Martin, however, was again absent despite 
the manager’s insistence that the on-loan Scotland striker will not return to 
his parent club Derby County.

Warnock made five changes from the side who defeated Aston Villa on Monday, 
and he admitted he was unwilling to risk players who were nursing injuries. 
“It’s a sad aspect when you play a weakened team like I have done today,” the 
Cardiff manager said.

“The FA Cup is a great competition but there are other priorities now. A club 
like ours cannot afford to go down. We have to make sure we stay up and Bristol 
City on the horizon is a vital game for us. But today has answered a few 
questions that we do need reinforcements when we have players out.”

A paltry crowd of 5,199 turned up with many home fans preferring to shun the 
11.30am kick-off. The early start time on a Sunday made it difficult for Fulham 
supporters to travel to south Wales on public transport.

The game was also broadcast live on BBC Wales and Warnock said: “I thought the 
crowd would be smaller than it was when I saw the kick-off time.”
 