
Australia’s richest woman, Gina Rinehart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/23/farming-families-confirm-rival-offer-to-gina-rineharts-bid-for-s-kidman-and-co>
, will attempt to persuadethe Kidman cattle empire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/10/gina-rinehart-launches-joint-365m-bid-for-kidman-cattle>
 that her offer is still superior, despite being trumped over the weekend by an 
all-Australian consortium that made a higher bid.

A group of four wealthy graziers, known as BBHO, made a $386m bid to acquire 
100% of S Kidman & Co, bettering by $21m the offer by mining boss Rinehart and 
her Chinese partner, Shanghai CRED.

Rinehart and her bid partner have the right to match it.

Tom Brinkworth, Sterling Buntine, Malcolm Harris and Viv Oldfield say that, 
under their offer, Kidman would stay totally Australian owned, won’t require 
approval from the Foreign Investment Review Board and would triple the size of 
the cattle herd marketed under the Kidman name.

“The four families comprising the consortium are deeply committed to honouring 
and preserving the Kidman heritage and brand, which will continue under the 
stewardship of highly regarded and successful Australian graziers,” Buntine 
said on Sunday.

Earlier this month, Rinehart lodged a $365m Australian-majority bid for 67% of 
S Kidman and Co, with the Chinese-owned Shanghai CRED to hold the other third. 
That requires Foreign Investment Review Board approval.

An earlier bid this year from a Chinese-led consortium was scuttled by the 
treasurer,Scott Morrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/scott-morrison>.

Gina Rinehart's $365m bid for S Kidman and Co welcomed by Barnaby Joyce
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/10/gina-rinehart-launches-joint-365m-bid-for-kidman-cattle>
To mitigate against that, the Rinehart bid excludes an area up to 26,000 
hectares that is close to the politically sensitive Woomera weapons testing 
range.

A spokeswoman for Rinehart’s company, Hancock Prospecting, said another local 
buyer had been lined up for that land and therefore the real difference in 
value between the bids was only $1m to $2m.

She also argued the BBHO consortium was no guarantee of getting state 
government approvals and needed to get pastoral leases transferred.

The crossbench senator Nick Xenophon said BBHO should be the successful bidder.

 Xenophon said the BBHO bid came from “families with great depth of experience 
and commercial acumen in running cattle empires and they have a plan to grow 
Kidman”.

“Where there is a credible, 100% Australian bid then it would be unforgivable 
for the federal government not to approve a 100% local bid,” he said.

S Kidman and Co, founded in 1899, is Australia’s largest private landholder 
with properties covering 101,000 square kilometres across three states and the 
Northern Territory.
 