
Saúl Ñíguez’s second-half strike gave Atlético Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/atleticomadrid> a 1-0 win at home to Las 
Palmas on Saturday, their first victory in four games in all competitions.

He lashed a loose ball into the top corner from outside the box to break the 
deadlock in the 59th minute and bring welcome relief to Atlético after a week 
in which they all but dropped out of the title race and lost the goalkeeper Jan 
Oblak to injury.

Saúl came close to giving Atlético the lead in the first half but saw his 
driven shot clatter against the post, while down at the other endLas Palmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/laspalmas> defender Mauricio Lemos let 
fly from some distance and struck the crossbar.

Kévin Gameiro wasted a clear chance to strike before the break but tried in 
vain to pass to strike partner Antoine Griezmann and it was then up to Saúl to 
score Atletico’s first goal in four games and their first in December.

“This goal comes at the right time in what has been an up-and-down season so 
far,” he said. “It helped the team win and it brings confidence.”

Villarreal ended a three-month spell without an away win in all competitions 
by coasting to a 3-1 victory at Sporting Gijon to tighten their grip on fourth 
spot.

The visitors went ahead in the 12th minute through Jonathan dos Santos’s 
thumping drive and Nicola Sansone doubled the advantage in the 20th by stabbing 
in Alexandre Pato’s goal-bound shot from close range.

Sansone returned the favour for Pato in the second half by laying on the pass 
for the Brazilian to round off Villarreal’s first win on the road since they 
beat Malaga on 10 September.

Sporting got a late consolation goal through Carlos Carmona.

Villarreal are fourth on 29 points and are guaranteed to finish the year in 
the Champions League places.

Barcelona host Espanyol on Sunday hoping to eat into Real Madrid’s six-point 
lead at the top, with Zinedine Zidane’s side absent from league action this 
week owing to playing in the Club World Cup final against Kashima Antlers.
 