
Labour’s mayoral candidate Sadiq Khan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sadiq-khan> has called on the government 
to make all property ownership in London transparent.

The MP for Tooting has demanded ministers put an end to individuals using 
anonymous off-shore tax havens to buy up houses and land.

Wanted: 'muscular, interventionist' London mayor to boost 'build-to-rent'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/feb/29/wanted-muscular-interventionist-london-mayor-to-boost-build-to-rent>
The call will draw attention to the property deals involving his Conservative 
rival, Zac Goldsmith. The MP for Richmond’s family trusthas used offshore 
vehicles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/mar/22/budget-2012-zac-goldsmith-estate-stamp-duty-changes>
 to own properties.

Khan told The Guardian: “I’m deeply concerned about reports of dirty money 
flooding into London’s property market and it’s high time the government made 
all property ownership inLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> 
transparent so we can see exactly who owns what. What have those using 
anonymous off shore tax havens got to hide?”

 Off-shore companies, primarily based in tax “safe havens” such as the Cayman 
Islands, can purchase property in London without having to disclose their 
owners.

 This allows owners to remain anonymous, giving cover to money coming from 
illegal sources – leading to concerns of London property being used for money 
laundering. Recent estimates suggest there are 36,300 properties in London 
registered to off-shore companies.

 The total value of the properties is estimated to be £122bn but it could be 
much higher as, due to a loophole in the law, many transactions are not 
recorded by the Land Registry.

 Khan is calling on the government to change the law and clamp down on money 
laundering to:

 * ensure all foreign companies are as transparent as UK companies over their 
ultimate beneficial ownership (ie the names of the individual owners) if they 
wish to hold property titles in the UK 
 * ensure that anti-money-laundering checks are also carried out by estate 
agents on the purchaser, not just the seller

 * pursue those who break the rules and make sure they face proper punishment 
and sanctions

 In July 2015 David Cameron promised to clamp down on “dirty money” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jul/28/david-cameron-fight-dirty-money-uk-property-market-corruption>
 entering London’s property market on a visit to Singapore. But since then 
progress has stalled, with little mention by the government.

 Khan said: “I’m worried London is becoming the go-to destination for the 
world’s dirty money and it’s being sunk into London’s property market. 
Londoners who are struggling to scrape together a deposit will be shocked that 
dirty money is flooding into the city, unchecked and anonymously, causing 
prices to rise even [more quickly].

“The prime minister went all the way to Singapore to say he was going to do 
something about this problem but since then he’s gone totally silent. It’s high 
time all property ownership in London was made transparent so that we can see 
exactly who owns what and put a stop to the city’s property being used for 
money laundering.”

Zac Goldsmith discloses £10m in income and capital gains since 2010
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/22/zac-goldsmith-10m-income-capital-gains-tax-returns>
A trust set up by Goldsmith’s late father, James, owned a £7m 543-acre Devon 
estate via a Cayman Islands company called Ranger Investments. It also owned a 
£7.7m home in Richmond bought in 2007 through a Cayman Islands-based company 
called Holmead Investments Ltd. Goldsmith had use of both homes.

The trust is “blind” which means that the MP has not made any decisions about 
property purchases. His current residence in Barnes, south-west London, is not 
owned by an offshore vehicle. There is no suggestion that he has used the 
ownership structure to avoid any charges himself and he says has always paid 
the duty on all of his UK properties in full.

Goldsmith is still under pressure to come clean about his former non-domiciled 
tax statusdespite releasing his tax returns last month. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/22/zac-goldsmith-10m-income-capital-gains-tax-returns>
 He has been asked to explain how much tax he avoided between 1997 and 2010 
when he gave up his non-dom status.

Housing minister Brandon Lewis, said that Khan’s proposals would lead to fewer 
homes being built in London because investment would be “choked off”.

“Khan should stop his divisive gimmicks, designed only to score partisan 
points, and start explaining how he plans to fill the £1.9bn black hole in his 
spending plans,” he said.
 