
Rows about the finances of Transport for London (TfL) were prominent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/may/02/london-mayor-who-says-sadiq-khans-fare-freeze-figures-cant-add-up>
 during this year’selection campaign 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/zac-versus-sadiq.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 and also a bit odd. For years, Conservatives had claimed that the large and 
powerful mayoral agency is a bloated bureaucracy in need of ruthless trimming, 
yet there was the Tory candidate – a Mr Goldsmith, you might recall - insisting 
that it could not cope with its fares being frozen for four years, while Labour 
man Sadiq Khan was pledging to transform it into a paragon of enterprise and 
efficiency.

Seven months on from Khan’s big win, the first TfL business plan of his 
mayoralty has appeared 
<http://content.tfl.gov.uk/board-20161215-item09-tfl-business-plan.pdf>. The 
sums are there on paper. So are Khan’s ambitious promises. Political opponents, 
naturally, say neither add up, withTory AM Keith Prince 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/people/assembly/keith-prince> worrying that the 
number crunching bites too deeply into TfL’s reserves and even using the word 
“socialist” to describe them - on Her Majesty’s BBC too! He also points out, 
quite correctly, that borrowing is going to soar.

Certainly, Khan is pushing the principle of “less from more”, embraced by his 
predecessorBoris Johnson <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> as an 
exacting and yet bracing austerity obligation, into adventurous new territory. 
TfL’s income is in a pincer squeeze, as the government’s operational grant is 
phased out and Khan’s fares policy means less coming in than would have been 
the case had he allowed them to rise by inflation or more.

In round numbers, TfL says it will have £3.5bn less from those sources over 
the next five years but that £4bn of savings will more than make up for it, by 
shedding expensive staff, renegotiating contracts and merging departments. Its 
annual budget is £11.5bn. “We are driving efficiency through the biggest ever 
overhaul of our organisation,” writes TfL commissioner Mike Brown in his 
foreword.

Meanwhile, the network’s capacity to move people around, both above ground and 
below it, needs to go on enlarging as London’s population booms. The opening of 
Crossrail – the Elizabeth Line – in 2018 will create more space and bring in 
more money too, but the then TfL commissioner Sir Peter Hendypredicted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davehillblog/2013/mar/15/peter-hendy-london-transport-government-funding>
 way back in March 2013 that “it will be immediately full”.

Rising passenger numbers and trips in general will bump revenues up too - by 
38% by 2021, TfL predicts - including on the buses, though be warned that the 
numbers of journeys made on London’s busesfell by 3.6% 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/quarterly-bus-statistics-april-to-june-2016>
 in the year to June.Green Party AM Caroline Russell 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/people/assembly/caroline-russell/more-about> has 
welcomed a£770m commitment to cycling 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-london-38206830>, but says she fears that 
without measures to reduce the number of cars, “less space on the roads thanks 
to new measures for cycling and walking means buses will be stuck in traffic”. 
Congestion isn’t good for anyone’s business, including TfL’s.

In the longer term, TfL has plans to increase the frequency of trains on the 
Underground and to bring forward the Bakerloo Line extension by two years to 
2029. More immediately, it is stressing its own importance as a facilitator of 
economic growth, stimulating employment and development. Brown writes that this 
benefits not only Londoners but also “the entire country”.

It is, perhaps, a measure of government incoherence over dealing with 
withdrawal from the European Union that transport minister Chris Grayling has 
ditched the deal to hand control of Southern and other suburban rail services 
to TfL, infuriating evenLondon fellow Tory politicians 
<http://www.mayorwatch.co.uk/london-and-se-rail-users-deserve-better-than-to-be-used-as-political-pawns/>
. Giving the capitalmore autonomy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/oct/15/theresa-may-brexit-strategy-could-depend-on-giving-london-more-autonomy>
 couldusefully assist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/nov/24/london-and-the-chancellors-2016-autumn-statement>
 with propping up the UK economy in the uncertain years ahead. And should 
Khan’s transport budgets start to come unstuck, maybe bailing him out will be 
thought worth it. Like it or not, Leave Nation cannot afford to let Remain City 
fail.

The new draft Transport for London business plan is here 
<http://content.tfl.gov.uk/board-20161215-item09-tfl-business-plan.pdf>. 

 