
Bit by bit, Sadiq Khan’s formula for changing London’s housing landscape is 
coming into view. A little more was sketched in on Wednesday. Answeringquestions
 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/moderngov/documents/s59136/04%20MQT%20Priority%20Order.pdf>
 from Labour AM Tom Copley about his long-term goal of making 50% of all new 
homes in London “genuinely affordable”, Khan, as is now his habit, warned that 
“we won’t fix the housing crisis overnight” but went on: “I’m going to raise 
the level of affordable housing by using my planning powers alongside investing 
the funding available and the release of public land. In terms of planning, my 
team are currently developing supplementary planning guidance – SPG – to 
increase the numbers of affordable homes delivered through the planning system.”

We’ve already seen him exercise those planning powers. Last month, Khan 
approved plans 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/press-releases/mayoral/mayor-boosts-affordable-homes-at-old-oak>
 for the first large housing development on the vastOld Oak and Park Royal 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/about-us/organisations-we-work/old-oak-and-park-royal-development-corporation-opdc/about-opdc-0>
 site in west London after the number of “affordable” homes was bumped up from 
200 to 242 – from 33% of the total of 605 to 40%, with the possibility of 
raising that to 50% if sufficient profits are produced in the future. More 
recently, to the east, heapproved the masterplan 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/press-releases/mayoral/mayor-approves-up-to-10000-new-homes-in-barking>
 for the hugeBarking Riverside <http://barkingriverside.co.uk/> regeneration 
after the “affordable” proportion of the possible 10,000 new homes there was 
upped from 28% to 35%. Provision for a possible subsequent hike to 50% is built 
in there too.

Those were substantial tweaks to big bits of London housing arithmetic that 
had been lined up for a big tick from Boris Johnson. But it’s the draft SPG, 
expected in October, that will formally set the tone of the new mayoral 
administration on housing delivery. Khan explained that it has to be written 
“within the context of the policies in the current London Plan”, the 
legally-binding master policy blueprint for the development of the capital’s 
land. He intends to change thePlan 
<http://www.london.gov.uk/what-we-do/planning/london-plan>, but acknowledged 
he’ll be bound by the present version “for the foreseeable future”, which could 
mean three years - that’s how long it took Johnson to produce a replacement for 
Ken Livingstone’s.

Khan said that this constraint means “I cannot set a target for affordable 
housing”. This might come as a surprise - there have beenreports 
<http://www.insidehousing.co.uk/khan-plans-35-affordable-housing-policy/7016293.article>
 that a 35% affordable “benchmark” for all new private housing schemes could be 
included in the SPG. But a target and a benchmark are not the same. Khan said 
that in drafting the SPG he was “exploring an innovative new approach, whereby 
if applicants voluntarily meet an agreed level of affordable housing, they 
could benefit from a faster and more certain planning process”.

He stressed that “this level has not been finalized or announced”, though 35% 
seems unlikely to be far wide of the mark. But the operative word in all of 
this seems to be “voluntarily”. SPGs do not (and cannot) introduce new planning 
policies, but they serve toelaborate on or sharpen existing ones 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/what-we-do/planning/implementing-london-plan/supplementary-planning-guidance>
.

The current London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> Plan policy on 
affordable housing requires only the “maximum reasonable” to be supplied as 
part of each individual private development. Khan is hoping to incentivise 
developers to maximise what they deem “reasonable” by effectively telling them 
that if they are prepared to meet the affordable level he sets down in the SPG, 
he will help to speed them on their way.

Copley asked if this therefore meant that developers who didn’t accept the 
“affordable” housing levels he had in mind would find their assessments of a 
scheme’s financial viability coming under close scrutiny from him. Khan’s 
response? “Not an unfair summary of where we’re going”. A team of viability 
boffins is being recruited for such tasks.

City Hall later elaborated: “Developers may opt to meet new minimum affordable 
housing thresholds to fast-track their applications”. So for “benchmark” read 
“thresholds” (the plural may or may not be significant. I’m told there’s still 
a bit of a fine-tuning to be done).

The other angle on all this is that Khan’s affordable levels/thresholds are 
being designed to bring more clarity, speed and consistency to the planning 
application process. Recent controversies over viability assessments - inEarls 
Court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2014/oct/16/earls-court-questions-of-viability>
 andSouthwark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jun/25/london-developers-viability-planning-affordable-social-housing-regeneration-oliver-wainwright>
, for example - have centred on concerns that well-resourced developers get the 
better of boroughs in negotiations over the amount of affordable housing they 
supply as part of the deal. Yet some developers say that they could do without 
the grief viability wrangles entail. So there’s a trade-off to be proffered 
brewing here: in return for higher affordable yields Khan will provide a more 
straightforward planning environment and preferential treatment for the 
obliging.

There is a long way to go before that 50% goal starts to be met. For example, 
Khan confirmed to Copley that doing so is going to mean hitting more than 50% 
affordable on publicly-owned land, such as TfL’s - no small task. But be glad. 
What we’re seeing the start of in Khan’s City Hall is a more rigorous approach 
to property market regulation, which is what planning policy is for. His Tory 
critics warn that it can only make things worse, but Khan hopes he’s got the 
key players onside. Their responses to the SPG will be enlightening.

 