
The mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, has attacked foreign investors for using 
homes in the capital as “gold bricks for investment” following aGuardian 
investigation that revealed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/24/revealed-foreign-buyers-own-two-thirds-of-tower-st-george-wharf-london>
 the UK’s tallest residential skyscraper is now more than 60% foreign-owned and 
is under-occupied.

Facing questions from the London Assembly for the first time since he was 
elected mayor, Khan warned that building thousands of new homes a year inLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> to solve the housing crisis would mean 
nothing if “they are all bought by investors in the Middle East and Asia for 
use as second homes or they sit empty”.

The London skyscraper that is a stark symbol of the housing crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/24/revealed-foreign-buyers-own-two-thirds-of-tower-st-george-wharf-london>
He said: “The Guardian’s front page today is an example of the consequences of 
the last eight years of being obsessed by numbers rather than [building] the 
right sorts of homes.”

The investigation revealed that homes in The Tower, a 50-storey skyscraper at 
St George Wharf in Vauxhall, which opened in 2013, had been sold to more than 
130 foreign buyers including a Russian billionaire, the former chairman of a 
defunct Nigerian bank and a Kyrgyz vodka tycoon. None of the 214 flats in the 
tower are classed as affordable, although it was built as part of a wider 
development that included 30% low-cost comes.

The shadow housing minister, John Healey, said the building had become “a 
symbol of the housing crisis” in which new homes are sold abroad as investments 
and left largely empty while fewer and fewer young people can afford to buy or 
rent in the city. He said that it “fuels people’s anger and sense of injustice”.

Khan announced he wants to try to persuade foreign investors to instead put 
their money into helping build affordable homes through a new agency, Homes for 
Londoners, which plans to build new municipal housing with backing from public 
and private money.

“Nobody is against people investing in London trying to get a good rate of 
return,” he said. “The issue is using our homes as gold bricks for investment. 
People may want to invest in the wholesale side of building homes. That is in 
stark contrast in buying homes off-plan as an investment which are left empty.”

He revealed that just 13% of the homes given planning consent in London last 
year were affordable and attacked Boris Johnson’s record, warning: “This 
appalling legacy will be a millstone around the necks of hard-pressed Londoners 
for years to come.”

Planning consent for the Tower, where flats have sold from £560,000 at the 
bottom end to £51m for the five-storey penthouse, was originally granted by 
John Prescott when he was Labour’s deputy prime minister in 2005. His decision 
went against the wishes of the local council and the planning inspector, and 
was attacked as “an appalling mistake” by the former Tory cabinet minister Lord 
Baker, who predicted in 2005: “In that great tower, there will be no social 
affordable housing. It is all for the alphas.It is all for the toffs.” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/24/st-george-wharf-tower-london-luxury-pads-emblematic-housing-crisis>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fsadiq-khan-condemns-foreign-investors-london-homes-gold-bricks-housing-policy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F525a63164fc6aa06807aee5e95f4e60dfea4ab2a%2F0_236_5160_3095%2F5160.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sadiq%20Khan%20condemns%20foreign%20investors'%20use%20of%20London%20homes%20as%20'gold%20bricks'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fsadiq-khan-condemns-foreign-investors-london-homes-gold-bricks-housing-policy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sadiq%20Khan%20condemns%20foreign%20investors%27%20use%20of%20London%20homes%20as%20%27gold%20bricks%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fsadiq-khan-condemns-foreign-investors-london-homes-gold-bricks-housing-policy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F525a63164fc6aa06807aee5e95f4e60dfea4ab2a%2F0_236_5160_3095%2F5160.jpg>
 Sadiq Khan at his first mayor’s questions on Wednesday. Photograph: Dan 
Kitwood/Getty Images 
Responding to the revelations that so much of the tower had been sold off and 
was underused, Prescott told the Guardian it was “deplorable”.

“I was hoping that we were providing housing for housing,” he said. “We didn’t 
envisage that it would be given over to people investing inLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>. I had no power to stop it on the 
grounds of who was going to occupy it.”

Conservative MP Bob Blackman, who sits on the Commons communities select 
committee, which scrutinises housing policy, said the fact that the five-storey 
Tower penthouse was owned by an oligarch who had not yet lived there was 
ridiculous.

Blackman said it might now be time to consider a policy demanding buyers of UK 
properties commit to living in the UK for more than 90 days a year.

Ken Livingstone, who also backed the scheme when he was mayor of London, said 
he had no idea so many foreign buyers would be seeking to deposit money in 
London property.

He described the international buy-up as appalling. “I was very keen to get 
foreign investment into London, but that was in terms of constructing 
developments and creating new jobs, not flogging them off to people who just 
keep them there in case there is a coup and they have to flee,” he said.

“If I was mayor now, I would put compulsory purchase orders on empty homes. 
Either you live in it or sell it. The more empty properties there are, the more 
it hypes up the overall house price level.”

But representatives of the property industry defended the scheme and insisted 
there was a vital need for international investment.

“Upfront foreign investment is key to bringing forward a lot of these 
developments,” said Steve Turner, spokesman for the Home Builders Federation. 
“Their investment ultimately leads to an increase in overall housing supply, 
including affordable homes. There is affordable housing in this development, 
but it is just in this particular tower that there isn’t. The foreign funding 
for this tower will directly lead to the developer’s ability to provide 
affordable housing.”

A spokesman for the developer, St George, said it was wrong to focus only on 
the makeup of the Tower’s ownership. “St George has a wide range of homes under 
construction in London, in nine developments providing 9,300 homes, with 2,403 
of these being affordable to buy or rent,” he said.

“The whole of the St George Wharf site was developed at considerable risk and 
after it lay empty for decades. St George committed to construction of the 
Tower in the recession, after the banking crash, when other sites across London 
were being mothballed. The Tower was an important signpost to the development 
of Nine Elms from Vauxhall, with the widerNine Elms development 
<http://nineelmslondon.com/> due to create 25,000 permanent jobs over the next 
10 years.”
 