
The mayor of London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> has warned the 
government that its “hard-headed, hard-nosed, hard Brexit approach” is reckless 
and will cause the loss of millions of jobs, not just in the financial district 
but across the UK.

Sadiq Khan <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sadiq-khan> told business 
leaders that the vote for Brexit did not mean the government needed to choose a 
route of “economic self-sabotage” and urged Theresa May to approach the UK’s 
departure from the EU with more pragmatism.

“If the proper agreements aren’t negotiated, there will be serious knock-on 
impacts with jobs and billions of revenue lost – something that would hit the 
entire country, not just London,” Khan told a City of London Corporation 
banquet at the Museum of London on Thursday evening.

“My motivation is not about protecting old City institutions just for the sake 
of it or presenting a London-centric approach. It’s about protecting our 
country’s economy – protecting jobs, promoting growth and safe-guarding 
prosperity for the next generation,” he said.

London business chief: we will find a way through Brexit, but government must 
help
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/oct/18/london-business-chief-we-will-find-a-way-through-brexit-but-government-must-help>
The mayor expressed concern that the UK could end up without access to the 
single market – a so-called hard Brexit that blocks the ease with which British 
businesses deal with the remaining 27 members of the EU.

“If the government continues with a reckless hard-headed, hard-nosed, hard 
Brexit approach, and we end up losing access to the single market that helps 
make our financial services industry a world leader, the impact would ripple 
out far and wide,” Khan said.

Khan spoke alongside Mark Boleat, policy chairman of the City of London 
Corporation local authority. Boleat acknowledged that it is inevitable that 
jobs will be lost.

“To the extent that some activities will no longer be able to be conducted 
from London, there needs to be suitable transition arrangements so that there 
is not unnecessary harm to employment and the economy generally,” Boleat said.

“And it is not a question of the number of jobs being lost in the UK being 
matched by jobs gained elsewhere in the EU 27. It is already apparent that the 
biggest beneficiary of any job losses in the UK will be New York, and some 
employment will simply stop as the volume of business can no longer be 
supported by the higher costs.”

Khan also warned that Brexit could actually lead to businesses being more 
likely to move to New York, Singapore and Hong Kong than to other cities in 
Europe. Sir Jon Cunliffe, deputy governor of the Bank of England, has also 
warned thatremaining EU members may not catch the fallout from the City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/12/lost-city-business-brexit-unlikely-to-go-to-eu-rivals-cunliffe-bank-of-england-new-york>
.

On the 30th anniversary of the “big bang” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/23/anniversary-of-big-bang-on-the-lse-tinged-with-post-brexit-anxiety>
 – the measures brought in by Margaret Thatcher to revolutionise the City – 
Khan cited figures showing that banking, finance and professional services 
contributed £190bn to the UK economy – almost 12%.

“Yes, the country voted for Brexit. And of course, that means we’ll be leaving 
theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>. But that doesn’t mean 
unnecessary economic self-sabotage. The government doesn’t have a mandate to 
jeopardise our economy or the prosperity of millions of people in London and 
across the country,” said Khan.

The London mayor wants the UK to retain access to both the single market – 
perhaps with so-called passporting rights – and also protecting the working 
rights of EU citizens already working in the City.

Financiers have been concerned not just about the deal that will be negotiated 
once article 50 is triggered but also whether their staff will be welcomed in 
the UK, particularly after the home secretary, Amber Rudd,raised the idea of 
companies disclosing the proportion of foreigners that they employ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/05/government-faces-backlash-from-business-leaders-over-foreign-workers>
.

The chancellor, Philip Hammond, has insisted that the issue with immigration 
is not with “highly skilled and highly paid bankers, brain surgeons, software 
engineers”. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/06/hammond-acts-to-reassure-city-and-wall-street-on-brexit>
 