
The London mayor has accused the government of “abandoning passengers” on 
Southern <https://www.theguardian.com/business/southern> rail, on a morning 
when hundreds of thousands of commuters suffered fresh chaos as the impact of a 
train drivers’ overtime ban hit home.


Sadiq Khan <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sadiq-khan> called on the 
rail unions to cancel strikes planned for next week but strongly criticised the 
government for “washing their hands of the crisis”.

He said: “The ongoing chaos on Southern rail services is a total disgrace that 
is badly failing commuters who just want to get to work and back. The unions 
should cancel the strikes and get back around the negotiating table, but the 
government are washing their hands of this crisis and abandoning commuters in 
the process.”

Despite three days of strikes called by conductors in the RMT union coming to 
an end on Thursday night, the effect of theAslef union’s overtime ban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/28/southern-train-drivers-vote-overwhelmingly-favour-strike-action-rail-uk>
 brought widespread disruption on Friday.

Southern said there were delays and cancellations across all of its routes, 
including the main Brighton line into Victoria. Gatwick Express services 
between Brighton and the airport did not run, and many metropolitan trains were 
cancelled. Some branch lines on the coast have been closed indefinitely.

Commuters reported arguments and chaos at major hubs such as East Croydon, 
where commuters were unable to board some of the remaining Southern services 
due to overcrowding.

Desperate commuters, it’s time for a rebellion the government can’t ignore | 
Polly Toynbee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/08/commuters-rebellion-government-cant-ignore-southern-rail>
Southern’s operating company, Govia Thameslink Railway, on Thursday failed to 
secure an injunction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/08/court-rejects-bid-to-prevent-southern-train-drivers-industrial-action>
 to stop Aslef’s industrial action going ahead. A high court judge rejected its 
claims that the action infringed rights enshrined in European law.

A full strike by drivers on Tuesday, Wednesday and Friday next week is 
expected to stop all Southern trains from running, while the knock-on effects 
of the action will also curtail services on Monday and Thursday. Another full 
week of strikes looms in January.

Khan contrasted the ongoing strikes on Southern – in its long-running dispute 
over changes to the roles of conductors and drivers – with his success in 
averting two strikes planned on theLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> Underground this week.

But his policy of engaging with the unions has been rejected by the transport 
secretary, Chris Grayling, who this weekoverturned plans to allow Transport for 
London (TfL) to take over the running of commuter trains into the capital 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/06/transport-for-london-plans-ditched-chris-grayling-sadiq-khan>
. It was later revealed thatGrayling had opposed the plans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/07/chris-grayling-accused-of-putting-politics-over-people-in-rail-letter-leak>
, approved by his Conservative predecessor, Patrick McLoughlin, because he did 
not want a Labour mayor to be running the parts of the network currently 
franchised to the likes of Southern.

Khan pointed out that the number of days lost to strikes on the TfL 
underground network had fallen by 92% since his election. He said that 
situation on Southern showed once again why commuter rail lines, including 
Southern, Southeastern and South West Trains, should be devolved toTfL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/tfl>.

He said: “The chaos on the government-run Southern services this week is in 
stark contrast to TfL – who successfully persuaded the unions to call off their 
planned strike on the underground through engagement and negotiation.

“It is absolutely clear that commuters would suffer from fewer strikes if TfL 
controlled these routes, and fares would be more affordable – with our 
four-year freeze on all TfL fares.”‎

Khan has urged London commuters to lobby Grayling to reverse his decision to 
stop TfL taking over the inner parts of the franchises. A Conservative MP on 
the Southeastern commuter route, Bob Neill, called for Grayling’s resignation 
in the wake of the move, saying the transport secretary had “done a great deal 
of harm to London commuters who would have benefited significantly”.
 