
Sale’s own players revealed to the head coach, Steve Diamond, that the club’s 
wing Tom Arscott allegedly leaked information to Bristolbefore their 24-23 
Premiership defeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/01/premiership-roundup-sale-bristol-worcester-harlequins>
 on New Year’s Day, with Diamond saying: “I have never come across anything 
like this before.”

Arscott was suspended by the club on 4 January and Diamond said he will face 
an internal investigation and a Rugby Football Union inquiry following the 
complaint made bySale <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/salesharks> on Monday 
night.

Diamond said he had not been aware of the issue until his own squad reported 
it to him. “The only bit of information I’ll give is that the squad came to me 
with the problem – I knew nothing about it but I reacted to my senior players 
coming to me,” he said. “I don’t think it’s altered our performances; we’re a 
good set of lads and the squad asked me what we should do and we had to go down 
this route.

Related: Growing popularity of sevens demands it be given the respect it 
deserves | Robert Kitson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/17/rugby-sevens-growing-popularity-rio-olympics-tom-mitchell>

“He’s been suspended, and when we get the date for the hearing we’ll have a 
disciplinary with the lad. I’ve never come across anything like this before; if 
you do your own analysis you don’t need the information really, and in the same 
breath there’s an element of trust and loyalty you need to have.

“Team information is sacrosanct to what happens within the club and I think 
words to that effect are within a contract: passing on information is 
forbidden.”

Arscott’s brother, Luke, is a Bristol player and was on the bench at the 
AJ Bell Stadium, but Diamond stressed that they do not consider theBristol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bristolrugby> player to be part of any 
incident. “There’s no suggestion from us that’s the case,” the head coach said.

Diamond also stated he is confident that the club will have no case to answer 
regarding a possible breach of concussion management protocol relating to the 
back-row TJ Ioane.

Ioane appeared to be concussed during the 30th minute of Sale’s 29-26 
Premiership defeat at Harlequins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/13/sale-concussion-management-investigation-tj-ioane>
 on 7 January, but remained on the pitch and completed the match.

That led to the RFU confirming a panel would convene to assess the incident, 
but Diamond is confident Sale can prove they were correct in keeping Ioane on 
the field. He said: “They’ve got an independent body with a doctor and two 
rugby people and we’ve got to answer the questions they ask which we’re 
confident of doing, as we know our players better than anyone.

“We’d be well up there with HIA [head injury assessment] occurrences and 
looking after people. We’re confident all our ducks are in a row. We’re putting 
our information together; I don’t think it’s too much to worry about to be 
honest.” Diamond also said the club have not held discussions with the Bath 
fly-half, George Ford, over a move to Sale next season – and admitted it looks 
like the England international could now remain at the Recreation Ground.

Sale have been linked with Ford since it was reported the fly-half activated a 
clause in his contract which could allow him to end his deal a year early.

“We’ve been trying to get hold of the agent but they’re difficult to get hold 
of,” he said. “We can’t talk to him anyway because he’s not out of contract.” 
When asked if he felt Ford may stay with Bath, Diamond replied: “It looks like 
it.”
 