
The Greens senator Peter Whish-Wilson has referred the salmon farming giant 
Tassal to the Senate for a potential breach of parliamentary privilege after 
allegations on Four Corners that the company attempted to influence a Senate 
inquiry witness.

The referral comes after allegations made during a Four Corners program 
<http://www.abc.net.au/4corners/stories/2016/10/31/4564542.htm> that Tassal 
wrote toWarwick Hastwell 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-03-23/concerns-raised-over-planned-expansion-of-salmon-farming-in-tas/6341488?pfmredir=sm>
 of Dover Bay Mussels to warn him against making disparaging statements at a 
hearing.

Tassal’s chief executive, Mark Ryan, told Four Corners there was a 
confidentiality deed put in place so “[Hastwell] was limited to what he could … 
say”.

Tasmania marine heatwave hits seafood industry and puts some species at risk
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/22/tasmania-marine-heatwave-salmon-global-warming-climate-change>
“So again, if he wanted to front the Senate inquiry, then as long as he didn’t 
talk about confidential information as part of that deed … you know I can’t 
stop people from doing things in life,” Ryan told Four Corners.

The Senate president, Stephen Parry, one of only four Tasmanian Liberal 
parliamentarians, will decide whether to refer the matter to the privileges 
committee.

In the past, Hastwell had spoken out against salmon farming practices which he 
claimed 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-03-23/concerns-raised-over-planned-expansion-of-salmon-farming-in-tas/6341488?pfmredir=sm>
 had driven him out of business in Dover, Tasmania. He made a submission toa 
Senate inquiry into aquaculture which held hearings in 2015 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-08-21/senate-inquiry-backs-tasmania's-salmon-industry/6716076>
.

Tassal, one of the large salmon farmers in the region, denied it was 
responsible but reportedly signed a deal to buy Hastwell’s mussel leases. In 
the deal, Hastwell alleged he agreed not to speak publicly about the matter 
again and not to speak disparagingly about Tassal.

Hastwell said he had agreed to the deal because he could not afford to walk 
away from the business with nothing. But when Hastwell was listed to speak at 
the inquiry, hislawyer allegedly received an email 
<http://www.abc.net.au/4corners/stories/2016/10/31/4564542.htm> from Tassal. 


“We remind your clients of their obligations not to make disparaging 
statements whether in relation to the Senate enquiry or to the media or 
otherwise,’ the email reportedly said.


Canada approves sale of genetically modified salmon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/19/gmo-salmon-approved-canada>
Four Corners reported that a day later, Tassal allegedly wrote again 
“attempting to withdraw the deal completely because it may be construed as 
contravening Senate inquiry rules”. Tassal has also denied this allegation.


After Whish-Wilson’s referral, the Senate president will decide whether the 
matter should go to the privileges committee for a determination.

“The parliament has strong powers to protect the integrity of its process and 
especially in relation to the protection of witnesses,” Whish-Wilson said.

“It is critical that witnesses can provide evidence to Senate inquiries 
without constraint. I am concerned by the allegation that Tassal may have 
sought to constrain a witness in what they could or couldn’t present to a 
Senate inquiry.”

Guardian Australia contacted Tassal for comment.

On Thursday, a statement appeared on the Tassal website, sighted by Guardian, 
which said at no time did Tassal “demand or request Mr Hastwell not to make a 
submission to, or to not appear before the Federal Senate Standing Committee on 
Environment and Communications in relation to the regulation of the fin-fish 
aquaculture industry in Tasmania (Senate inquiry)”.

The statement said: “Tassal and Dover Bay Mussels (Mr Hastwell) entered into 
an agreement for Tassal to acquire Dover Bay Mussels’ leases in 2015.

Toxic 'red tide' in Chile prompts investigation of salmon farming
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/17/chile-red-tide-salmon-farming-neurotoxin>
“The sale agreement contained a confidentiality clause and a non-disparagement 
clause, which are standard clauses for agreements of this kind. Mr Hastwell was 
represented by ER Henry Wherrett and Benjamin with respect to the sale 
agreement.

“At no time did we ever discourage Mr Hastwell from attending the Senate 
inquiry. We note Mr Hastwell made a written submission to the Senate inquiry.”

The statement was taken down later on Thursday afternoon. Tassal has been 
contacted for comment regarding the referral and the removal of the statement.

The Parliamentary Privileges Act states 
<http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consol_act/ppa1987273/s12.html>: “A 
person shall not, by fraud, intimidation, force or threat, by the offer or 
promise of any inducement or benefit, or by other improper means, influence 
another person in respect of any evidence given or to be given before a House 
or a committee, or induce another person to refrain from giving any such 
evidence.”
 