
Early last month, India’s most beloved action hero, Salman Khan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/salman-khan>, finally met a foe he couldn’t 
thwart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/06/bollywood-star-salman-khan-found-guilty-over-hit-and-run-crash>
. Thirteen years after his SUV veered off the road and crushed three homeless 
men sleeping on the steps of a bakery in the upscale Mumbai suburb where he 
lives – killing one of them – Judge DW Deshpande of the Mumbai Sessions Court 
told him: “You were driving the car without a licence, and you were under the 
influence of alcohol.”


Khan was convicted of culpable homicide and awarded a five-year prison 
sentence – although that wasswiftly suspended 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/may/08/salman-khan-suspended-jail-sentence-special-treatment-for-bollywood-stars>
 pending his forthcoming appeal. Fans who gathered outside the court and Khan’s 
home lamented the verdict, with one even threatening to set himself ablaze. 
Fellow film stars went on TV and social media to proclaim their solidarity.


Charudutt Acharya, a scriptwriter and director, watched the sympathetic 
messages stream down his social media feeds, and wondered why all the voices 
were “with” Khan, and never the men he had killed or maimed. So in an
impassioned status message 
<http://scroll.in/article/725988/i-am-a-hit-and-run-survivor-film-director-charudutt-acharyas-chilling-account>
, Acharya recounted how he too had been the victim of a hit-and-run 16 years 
before, not far from the site of Khan’s crash.

A rich young woman had, he said, floored the accelerator instead of the brake, 
causing her car to “pounce like a tiger” on the fragile auto-rickshaw he was 
in. The vehicle flipped over, and Acharya’s thigh was shattered. The young 
woman saw the bloody mess she’d caused, and fled the scene.

“A hit can happen due to various reasons including elevated levels of alcohol 
in the blood,” Acharya wrote last month. “But a run happens when there are 
elevated levels of inhumanity and arrogance in the blood. A run happens when 
there is confidence in a corrupt system to back you up.”

His message went viral. It was yet another reminder of the dangerousness of 
India’s roads, and the systemic gridlock that stands in the way of that 
situation ever changing. Of the 1.24 million road fatalities that occur every 
year across the world,more than a tenth 
<http://www.who.int/violence_injury_prevention/road_safety_status/2013/country_profiles/india.pdf?ua=1>
 take place in India. One person dies in a road accident in the country every 
four minutes. In absolute numbers, this represents a grisly worldwide record – 
and one that’s rising every year.

A hit can happen due to various reasons ... but a run happens when there are 
elevated levels of inhumanity in the blood
Charudutt Acharya  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F04%2Fsalman-khan-bollywood-indian-cinema-road-traffic-safety-conviction-hit-and-run%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F3%2F1433353476565%2Fa94b54b3-2f39-4191-a286-5e65c07d19df-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Salman%20Khan%20has%20been%20convicted%2C%20but%20are%20India's%20roads%20any%20safer%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F04%2Fsalman-khan-bollywood-indian-cinema-road-traffic-safety-conviction-hit-and-run%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Salman%20Khan%20has%20been%20convicted%2C%20but%20are%20India%27s%20roads%20any%20safer%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F04%2Fsalman-khan-bollywood-indian-cinema-road-traffic-safety-conviction-hit-and-run%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F3%2F1433353476565%2Fa94b54b3-2f39-4191-a286-5e65c07d19df-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The verdict was front-page news throughout India on 6 May. Photograph: Ajit 
Solanki/AP 
Hit-and-runs are not represented in the traffic fatality figures. Police data 
on them is patchy, since many take place late at night andoften 
<http://injuryprevention.bmj.com/content/14/6/360.short> go unreported 
<http://deepblue.lib.umich.edu/bitstream/handle/2027.42/61504/102019.pdf>. The 
conviction rate on such cases is as low as 5%, according to an analysis of 
1,000 cases across the country by the road safety advocacy groupSaveLife 
Foundation <https://www.facebook.com/savelifefoundation>.


But efforts are being made to reverse these depressing trends. Deven Bharti, 
Mumbai’s joint commissioner of police (law and order), is hoping to boost that 
conviction rate with thelong-overdue installation 
<http://www.mumbaimirror.com/mumbai/others/Mumbai-to-install-6000-CCTV-cameras-by-2016/articleshow/47312312.cms>
 of 6,000 CCTV cameras across the city’s roads next year. “Most hit-and-runs 
happen late at night, and there are no witnesses,” he says. “So the culprits 
get away scot-free.”

Worse, crashes are often more serious because cars manufactured for the Indian 
market don’t currently have to adhere to minimum safety standards for crash 
tests, air bags, anti-lock braking systems and other issues. Last March, two of 
India’s best-selling car models were subject to independent crash testing by the
Global New Car Assessment Program <http://www.globalncap.org/global-ncap/>: both
scored zero 
<http://www.globalncap.org/iihs-status-report-tests-show-how-cars-sold-in-india-fall-short-on-safety/>
 for occupant safety on a scale of 1–5, and were judged so structurally unsound 
that the addition of an airbag would be pointless.

In May, the government announced 
<http://articles.economictimes.indiatimes.com/2015-05-14/industry/62165606_1_new-cars-indian-cars-norms>
 that new cars manufactured from October 2017 would need to adhere to minimum 
safety norms, while existing models had a further 12 months after that to put 
out upgrades. That’s too little too late, according to road-safety advocates – 
as is theprogressively 
<https://www.dropbox.com/s/afxl37q324bbd7e/RTSB_PenaltyComparison.pdf?dl=0> 
watered-down 
<http://www.ibnlive.com/news/india/road-transport-safety-bill-a-timeline-from-june-2014-to-present-1000302.html>
draft Road Safety and Transport Bill <http://morth.nic.in/showfile.asp?lid=1616>
 which, in the course of four versions, did away with the setting up of an 
independent road-safety regulator, stringent penalties for manufacturers who 
produced faulty vehicles and failed to recall them, andhigher fines 
<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/Ministry-dilutes-penalties-proposed-in-road-safety-bill/articleshow/46751781.cms>
 for dangerous traffic violations. Which means that the bill only really
contents itself 
<http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/india-s-draft-road-safety-bill-focuses-more-penalty-and-technology>
 with technological solutions such as speed guns and cameras to catch culprits.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F04%2Fsalman-khan-bollywood-indian-cinema-road-traffic-safety-conviction-hit-and-run%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F3%2F1433353862072%2F4f30eb40-1ca6-4495-90b8-a97948dbc667-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Salman%20Khan%20has%20been%20convicted%2C%20but%20are%20India's%20roads%20any%20safer%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F04%2Fsalman-khan-bollywood-indian-cinema-road-traffic-safety-conviction-hit-and-run%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Salman%20Khan%20has%20been%20convicted%2C%20but%20are%20India%27s%20roads%20any%20safer%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F04%2Fsalman-khan-bollywood-indian-cinema-road-traffic-safety-conviction-hit-and-run%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F3%2F1433353862072%2F4f30eb40-1ca6-4495-90b8-a97948dbc667-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Traffic clogs the Delhi-Gurgaon Expressway during rush hour. Photograph: 
Gurinder Osan/AP 
Even that will become purely ornamental if, as activists fear, a fifth 
iteration of the draft gets passed. This one, which is not currently on the 
Transport Ministry’s website, threatens to hustle all these provisions into the 
“rules” section of the Act, which means that none of them will be legally 
enforceable.

And anyway, urban transport experts say these measures let the biggest of all 
the culprits go scot-free: India’s urban infrastructure. Despite the media’s 
fixation on rich absconders and assorted villains who “weaponise”their SUVs 
<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/bengaluru/Killer-SUV-driver-still-dodges-cops/articleshow/12337034.cms>
, most perpetrators of hit-and-runs are in factprivate taxi drivers 
<http://www.mumbaimirror.com/mumbai/crime/Pavement-dweller-killed-as-car-runs-over-him-on-SCLR/articleshow/47208240.cms>
 and poortruck drivers 
<http://www.dnaindia.com/mumbai/report-speeding-trailer-turns-turtle-crushes-28-year-old-bpo-executive-2071462>
 charging down expressways leading in and out of the city. “Almost all road 
crashes are blamed on driver error,” says Binoy Mascarenhas, a road safety 
expert withEmbarq India <http://embarqindia.org/>, “though infrastructure is 
[often] a significant contributor.”

One example of this poor design, Mascarenhas says, is that expressways in India
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> are constructed with drains between 
the opposing carriageways, instead of crash barriers or rumble strips that 
would alert drowsy or distracted drivers when they veer off-course. Since 
highways facilitate speedy late-night driving by long-distance commuters who 
are likely to be fatigued, that’s “dangerously unforgiving design”. “Why just 
hold drivers culpable,” Mascarenhas says, “and not road designers?”


The purveyors of India’s urban infrastructure reserve their most unforgiving 
punishments for pedestrians and cyclists. Footpaths, when they exist, are 
vanishingly small or chock-full of encroachments and debris. Wispy bicycles and 
hulking buses are consigned to the same narrow lane, while current 
infrastructure policy remains fixated onbuilding flyovers for cars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/nov/27/poor-transport-planning-mumbai-traffic-bedlam>
 andskywalks for pedestrians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/nov/27/mumbai-skywalks-are-these-elevated-paths-ugly-caterpillars-or-precious-public-space>
 – despite being immensely unpopular, as numerousstudies 
<http://www.jurnalteknologi.utm.my/index.php/jurnalteknologi/article/view/4292> 
have shown 
<http://www.iosrjournals.org/iosr-jmce/papers/AETM'15_CE/1/7-CE-163.pdf>.


That’s why Indian pedestrians are so often seen ducking under median road 
barriers to dart across multi-lane highways, while cyclists are forced to 
struggle up flyovers. It doesn’t tend to work out so well: these vulnerable 
road users 
<http://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/Delhi/cyclists-and-pedestrians-account-for-over-half-of-all-road-fatalities/article5260213.ece>
 account for more than half the total number of road accident deaths in the 
country.

“Motorists in India are not sensitive to the demands of other road users,” 
explains Harish Bhaijal, a high-ranking police officer who used to be in charge 
of traffic in Mumbai. “The kind of taunts you hear when you ride a bicycle ... 
[Improving] infrastructure will take its own sweet time – but in the meantime, 
there must be a budget to educate road users.”

Confusingly, some of that education should probably go to the city bystanders, 
who often react to hit-and-runs by assaulting the driver rather than rushing to 
the victim’s aid.Piyush Tewari 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/ashoka/2013/12/01/piyush-tewaris-six-word-story-saving-road-accident-victims-through-bystander-care/>
, founder of the SaveLife Foundation, recounts its tragic origin story. In 
2007, Tewari’s cousin was crossing a road in Kanpur in central India, when a 
speeding van knocked him down. “I later found out that the public gathered 
together to beat up the driver,” Tiwari says, “while my cousin bled to death on 
the side of the road, pleading for help.”

'Nobody cycles across Mumbai.' But why?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/dec/17/cycling-central-mumbai-traffic-india-megacity>
This, and the lack of effective trauma care in Indian hospitals, helps to 
explain whymore than half <http://bioline.org.br/request?is06066> of Indian 
road-crash victims die from treatable injuries. Tewari soon found out that even 
bystanders who wanted to help his cousin weredissuaded from doing so 
<http://www.grsproadsafety.org/sites/grsp.drupalgardens.com/files/201307/SaveLife_FullReport.pdf>
 by all that was likely to follow: being forced to wait at the hospital until 
the police arrived; being made to pay for treatment; getting harassed by the 
police; and becoming embroiled in prolonged court proceedings for years. His 
organisation has attempted to remedy that by drafting a bill to protect Good 
Samaritans,introduced in Parliament 
<http://articles.economictimes.indiatimes.com/2014-12-15/news/57072331_1_emergency-care-samaritan-law-good-samaritan>
 last December.


But organisations such as Tewari’s face a Sisyphean task, since each of the 
factors that make India’s roads unsafe – car design, road construction, 
licensing and training drivers, vigilant patrolling, enforcing traffic laws and 
penalties for offences, and trauma care – are governed by a different 
department.

“About 7 to 10 actors are responsible for all this, and they either don’t 
work, or work in silos,” Tewari says. “But we’re pushing for a total overhaul 
of the current framework – because nothing less than that will work.”

 