
You may never have heard of Lepeophtheirus salmonis, and you’re unlikely to 
have spotted one, because they are usually less than 1.5cm long, but the humble 
sea louse is creating waves that are about to wash on to your dinner plate.

Balanced on blinis, tucked into bagels or crafted into sushi, salmon has 
become an everyday luxury in the UK. But fans of seafood may be forced to take 
it off the menu as prices are expected to soar because of a surge in sea lice 
hitting production.

Wholesale salmon prices leapt as much as 50% last year after severe problems 
in Norway andScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> with the tiny 
parasites, which feed on the blood and tissue of salmon. The problem followed a 
supply shortage caused by a deadly algae bloom in Chile, the world’s second 
biggest producer of farmed salmon.

Global supplies of Atlantic salmon fell nearly 9% last year and are expected 
to fall during the first half of this year as lice problems worsen, according 
to fish industry analysts at the Norwegian bank Nordea.

The top five salmon farms in Norway <https://www.theguardian.com/world/norway>
, the world’s largest producer of salmon, produced 60,000 tonnes less fish than 
expected last year, about a 6% drop, according to Nordea.

In Scotland, production dropped 4% to 171,722 tonnes in 2015. It was forecast 
to improve last year but the target is unlikely to be reached because of the 
sea lice andamoebic gill disease 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amoebic_gill_disease>, a potentially fatal 
illness caused by another parasite, which arrived in the UK five years ago.

Both pests have become more common on fish farms in recent years, with experts 
blaming warming sea temperatures associated with climate change. The parasites– 
a tough marine cousin of the wood louse – attach themselves to the skin, fins 
or gills and feed on the fish.

One major international producer, Marine Harvest, said the volume of salmon it 
produced in Scotland had slumped by 16%, or 1,500 tonnes, in the summer, partly 
because it accidentally killed 175,000 fish while trying to treat them for lice 
using a device called a thermolicer.

The device, which immerses fish in a warm bath, is one of a number of methods 
fish farmers are trying to control sea lice as an alternative to chemicals. 
Other methods include the hydrolicer, which bathes fish in fresh water, and 
employing “cleaner fish” such as wrasse and lumpsuckers, which eat the lice.

New legislation on the control of lice comes into force in Scotland this year, 
after a similar move in Norway, where farmers are trying tarpaulin “skirts” 
around the upper parts of sea cages containing the salmon in a bid to stop sea 
lice larvae from getting in – or out.
 Sea lice found on a Chum salmon caught in the Puntledge river in Courtenay, 
British Columbia, Canada.
 Photograph: Alamy 
Lance Forman, owner of H Forman & Son, a smoked salmon curer which supplies 
several major supermarkets, said he had been forced to put prices up three 
times last year as the cost of the Scottish farmed salmon had gone up as much 
as 100%.

“It’s been crazy,” agreed Scott Unwin, of Bobbys Fish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/fish>, a Billingsgate trader. He 
estimated that prices had gone up by as much as 50% in the past four to six 
months and said supplies were short. “I’ve been at Billingsgate 30 years and 
I’ve never seen it so bad,” he said.

Forman said prices in supermarkets had risen by only about 17% in the past 
year because suppliers and retailers had absorbed some costs rather than pass 
them all on to shoppers.


“There’s also shrinkflation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/18/lighter-way-to-enjoy-maltesers-mars-shrinks-sharing-bags-by-15>
. Shops know customers only want to pay £4 for a pack and so rather than put 
the price up they make the packet size smaller,” he said.

Industry analysts say price rises have been slow to filter through to 
supermarket shelves because fish is generally bought on six- to 12-month 
contracts and salmon is one of a basket of items targeted in the supermarket 
price war with discounters Aldi and Lidl. Major supermarkets keep prices down 
on luxuries such as salmon, especially at Christmas, to try to tempt shoppers 
through their doors.


But signs are emerging that prices are now on the way up. Morrisons  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/10/morrisons-enjoys-some-remarkable-christmas-cheer>
highlighted the pressure on salmon prices last week while market research firm 
Kantar Worldpanel pointed to fish prices as a key contributor tothe first 
period of food price inflation since September 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/10/prices-oxo-bisto-mr-kipling-pound-brexit-premier-foods>
.

• This article was amended on 18 January 2017. An earlier version said Chile 
was the world’s biggest producer of farmed salmon, and Norway the second 
largest. This has been corrected to say Norway is the world’s largest producer, 
and Chile the second biggest.
 