
Malcolm Turnbull has scaled up his attack on Labor senator Sam Dastyari, 
describing the senator’s expenses scandal as a “cash for comment” moment that 
must be explained by Labor.

The former Speaker Bronwyn Bishop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bronwyn-bishop> has also rounded on 
Dastyari, calling for the senator to be sacked and saying the political left 
and right must be treated similarly in Australia.

Turnbull said on Friday that Dastyari was clearly wrong to ask a China-linked 
company to pay a debt of his, but then his subsequent public statements about 
theSouth China Sea <https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-china-sea>, which 
put him at odds with the Australian government’s and Labor’s foreign policy 
position regarding China, were “extraordinary”.

“This is almost unprecedented,” Turnbull said on Friday. “He has to explain, 
is the Labor party’s foreign policy for sale? Was this cash for comment?”

On political donations, Canberra is sleepwalking into its own integrity crisis 
| Katharine Murphy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/01/on-political-donations-canberra-is-sleepwalking-into-its-own-integrity-crisis>
Dastyari is under fire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/01/on-political-donations-canberra-is-sleepwalking-into-its-own-integrity-crisis>
 for asking a private company, the Top Education Institute, to cover a travel 
budget bill worth $1,670.82, incurred by his office.

The company is a private education provider, run by businessman Minshen Zhu, 
with links to the Chinese government.

The Coalition has increased its attacks on Dastyari following reports he 
pledged to respect China’s position on the South China Sea 
<http://www.afr.com/news/sam-dastyari-pledges-to-support-china-on-south-china-sea-beside-labor-donor-20160831-gr5mwk>
 at an election campaign press conference for the Chinese community in June.

The government has been under intense pressure since Thursday evening when it 
lost votes on the floor of the House of Representatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/01/labor-wins-votes-in-lower-house-to-force-coalition-to-debate-banking-inquiry>
 after Labor moved to bring a motion calling for a banking royal commission.

The government was caught flat-footed by the move, and Turnbull has since 
excoriated the three Coalition ministers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/02/malcolm-turnbull-excoriates-ministers-who-left-parliament-early-on-thursday>
 who left his government vulnerable by leaving the chamber early.

Bronwyn Bishop castigated Dastyari on Friday, along with the response of the 
left to the revelations of his behaviour.

“We have one rule for those on the left, and a different rule for those on the 
right,” Bishop told Sky News on Friday.


“Senator Dastyari should be sacked from his position ... this a scandal, but 
in the parlance when it’s the left it’s just a mistake, so you can apologise 
and that’ll be fine, but it’s never enough on the right.

“It’s time we have the same standards applied to the left as applies to the 
right.”

Bishop was forced to tender her resignation as Speaker of the House of 
Representatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/aug/02/brownyn-bishop-resigns-as-speaker-tony-abbott-announces>
 in August last year after it was revealed she had used taxpayer dollars to 
charter a $5,227.27 helicopter flight from Melbourne to Geelong so she could 
attend a Liberal party fundraiser in November 2014.

It took her weeks to apologise for the act.

She dug in her heels on the use of public money to attend the weddings of two 
colleagues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/29/bronwyn-bishop-scrutiny-expenses-flight-another-wedding>
, Sophie Mirabella and Teresa Gambaro, insisting they were “within the 
guidelines”, but offered to repay the money because she acknowledged it was not 
“a good look”.

On Friday, Turnbull said the joint standing committee on electoral matters 
would soon review “the whole question” of campaign finance in Australia, as it 
does after every election, but he hinted at areas for reform that he may want 
to consider.

“There are powerful arguments, for example, to say that donations to political 
parties should only be made by Australians on the electoral roll,” he said.

“So you would eliminate companies, you’d eliminate unions. The difficulty you 
face is however – and you’d eliminate foreigners obviously – the difficulty you 
face though, is that increasingly political campaigns are not being waged by 
political parties, but by unions, by groups like GetUp.

Malcolm Turnbull 'excoriates' ministers who left parliament early on Thursday
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/02/malcolm-turnbull-excoriates-ministers-who-left-parliament-early-on-thursday>
“So if you limit donations to political parties, but leave third parties, you 
know, it could be a corporation, it could be a corporate association, it could 
be a union, to spend then the system is even less balanced than it is now,” he 
said.

But he stressed that questions about campaign finance were obviously different 
from the issue of Dastyari taking money from a China-linked company to pay off 
his own debts.

“This is a man that has lambasted banks, lambasted businesses, tried to be the 
great champion of freedom and honesty and openness and condemned corruption 
everywhere ... [and got] $1,600 from a Chinese donor which, as you’ve said, has 
associations and connections with the Chinese government,” Turnbull said.

“Then at the same time as this was going on, he took a completely different 
approach to the South China Sea issue, both to the Australian government and 
the opposition, and said that he supported China’s claims in the SouthChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> Sea and that Australia should support 
it.”
 