
None of Wales’s management team, never mind the players, was alive when the 
men in red last defeated the All Blacks, in 1953, but more disconcerting than 
that long losing run before this month’s three-Test tour to the land of the 
World Cup holders is a recent loss of form.

Wales’s defeat to England last Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/may/29/wales-tactically-stale-display-against-evolving-england>
 at Twickenham, when they were outscored five tries to one, meant they 
travelled to Auckland with three victories in eight Tests, all against the 
sides who finished in the bottom half of this year’s Six Nations.

“We know there is definite room for improvement and we have probably not hit 
the heights since 2014 when, although we did not finish well in that year’s Six 
Nations, we had some really good performances culminating in Ireland at home,” 
saysSam Warburton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sam-warburton>. “It has 
been hit and miss since then.

England, Ireland and Wales prepare for telling tours | The Breakdown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/02/wales-england-ireland-tours> 
“In most campaigns, we will deliver at least one really good performance but 
we failed to in the recent Six Nations. We enjoyed really good years in 2012 
and 2013, and while I do not think we have gone backwards since then, we need 
to find another gear in New Zealand and that is well within our capability. I 
think we might have stolen the championship this year but for England’s massive 
improvement and they have real depth now, as they showed last Sunday.”

Since Warren Gatland took over as head coach eight years ago, it has rarely 
paid to write Wales off and New Zealand, playing their first matchsince winning 
the World Cup final against Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/31/new-zealand-australia-rugby-world-cup-final-match-report>
 at Twickenham seven months ago, will not, at a time when they have to replace 
a core of experienced players and leaders, including Richie McCaw, Dan Carter 
and Conrad Smith.

“It has been way too long since we last beat New Zealand,” says Warburton, who 
is hoping to play in Saturday’s first Test after five weeks out of action with 
a shoulder injury the captain sustainedin Cardiff Blues’ defeat to Ospreys in 
late April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/30/sam-warburton-injury-cardiff-blues-ospreys-wales>
. “Our record against them is disappointing and, on my list of things to 
achieve, beating the All Blacks is one. Once would not be enough, and I would 
not make a song and dance about it if we did defeat them because you would be 
making out there is a big gap with them.

“The aim has to be emulate the England team of 2003, who beat them a few times 
[in fact twice], and this tour is an amazing opportunity for us. I never go 
into a game not believing we can win it and if I heard any one of our players 
saying they did not feel we could defeat the All Blacks I would tell him he was 
not the right person to be on the tour.

“Mindset is half the battle in professional sport. New Zealand will be massive 
favourites: they have been the best team in the world for a long time and they 
will be the best we have faced for a few years, but the prospect of victory is 
what motivates you. New Zealand might have lost experience, but they never lose 
talent and their strength in depth is scary. It is an amazing rugby country and 
the 2011 World Cup there was my best rugby experience.”

Warburton hopes to be fit for the first Test at Eden Park, a ground where New 
Zealand have not tasted defeat since 1994, in the amateur era. He was told when 
he suffered the injury playing for Cardiff Blues against Ospreys that he would 
be out for six weeks and with Dan Lydiate ruled out of the tour after suffering 
an injury against England, Wales need their captain back.

“I knew I would not play against England and my target has always been the 
first Test,” he says. “I went into the Six Nations in February without much 
rugby, but I was coming back from a lower limb injury then and it is different 
this time because I have been able to take part in rugby sessions and have had 
the legs run off me for the last five weeks. It will feel strange not facing 
Richie McCaw, but they have Sam Cane who is one of the world’s best opensides 
and sums up just how strong rugby in New Zealand is.”
 