
For the second successive weekend Wales posted a record score against the All 
Blacks in New Zealand, scoring three tries against the world champions for the 
first time since 2003.

The margin of defeat for Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/18/new-zealand-wales-match-report> 
was cut to 14 points, another record in New Zealand, yet still they failed to 
halt a run of 28 defeats against the All Blacks. However, they have another 
chance to end their 63‑year wait for a victory in Dunedin on Saturday.

Wales are craving the lessons they are learning from playing against the 
world’s best team in their own back yard. They could not have asked for a 
tougher summer tour and they are loving it.

New Zealand seal series win over Wales thanks to speedy Beauden Barrett
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/18/new-zealand-wales-match-report> 
Sam Warburton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sam-warburton>, the Wales 
captain, said: “It was a great feeling at half-time and we physically felt 
good. But then we made one, two or three mistakes and they scored three tries. 
That was a huge swing and they really grew after that. But we showed we can 
keep playing for the 80 minutes - it is just they are ruthless when you make a 
mistake.

“There is no psychological barrier to get over, they are just a damn good 
side. You have to take your hat off to them.

“When they had to score tries they capitalised on our mistakes. And they don’t 
just punish you with three points, it is usually seven. That’s the difficult 
thing, making sure you are squeaky [clean] in your defence for a long time. I 
was guilty of making a mistake in defence with Aaron Smith, something I would 
never normally do, but I did and so I’ll put my hand up.

“That gave away 60 yards of territory which led to a try. I won’t make that 
mistake again. The systems we have got are working and it is just down to 
individual mistakes, one of which I made.”

Two tries in the final few minutes brought Wales back into a game in which 
they were drawing 10-10 at half-time. Those scores from Liam Williams and 
Jonathan Davies enabled them to cut the gap to 14 points, a record for a Welsh 
team against the All Blacks in New Zealand.

The Wales head coach, Warren Gatland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/warren-gatland>, said: “I am pretty proud of 
that performance. There were two or three key moments in the game – we lost a 
couple of lineouts and we didn’t look after Aaron Smith off a kick-off – and 
that’s the difference between us and them – they are clinical and ruthless.

“We’ve always said that the longer we are together the better we get and the 
big stat for me this week is that we’ve gone from 41% territory and possession 
last week to 58% this week – that’s a massive number for us against the All 
Blacks and is something we’ve never done before.

“If we tidy up those small moments it is an arm wrestle right to the end. We 
are creating chances and the players have learned from tonight and last week - 
you simply can’t coach experience.”
 