
Sam Warburton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sam-warburton> is expected to 
be fit for Wales’ opening Test against New Zealand. The Wales captain has been 
recovering from a shoulder injury that threatened his participation in Auckland 
on 11 June, when Wales begin a three-match tour.

Dan Lydiate will have surgery this weekend on the shoulder injury that has 
ruled him out of the same tour. The Ospreys flanker suffered the injury while 
captaining his country in thedefeat against England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/may/29/wales-tactically-stale-display-against-evolving-england>
 at Twickenham last weekend. The 28-year-old has had to skip Wales’ summer 
commitments and could face three months out.

“Dan sustained a significant injury to the joint in his right shoulder caused 
by an impact during the England game,” said the Ospreys physiotherapist, 
Anthony Carter. “He’s been seen by Richard Evans, shoulder specialist at Spire 
Cardiff, who confirmed the shoulder requires stabilisation via surgery, after 
which there is an expected rehab period of 12-14 weeks.”

Ellis Jenkins was called up to replace Lydiate. Wales were already without the 
wing Alex Cuthbert and the flanker Justin Tipuric through injuries.

Warren Gatland <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/warren-gatland> said New 
Zealand will be just as fearsome despite the loss of their star men. The All 
Blacks face Wales in their first Test series for over a decade without their 
former captain, Richie McCaw, and the World Rugby player of the year, Dan 
Carter. The centres Ma’a Nonu and Conrad Smith are also absent after their 
moves to France, forcing Steve Hansen to freshen up his squad.

But Gatland, who played 17 non-international matches for the All Blacks, 
reckons they are still a force to be reckoned with. The Wales coach said: “You 
could describe it as being pretty arrogant if I talk about weakness in an All 
Blacks team. Sometimes there are young, exciting, talented players coming 
through who are a little bit inexperienced. What you might say is weakness is 
players potentially on their way up, not as experienced as some other players 
who left. There is definitely real quality there. There isn’t going to be 
weakness, there are going to be players who haven’t had the same time together 
in the same combinations.

“If that’s perceived as weakness take it how you like but there is never any 
weak All Black team as far as I’m concerned.”

Sonny Bill Williams has committed his future to New Zealand rugby but will not 
face Wales after choosing to play sevens at the Olympic Games in Rio. The 
Crusaders midfielder Ryan Crotty is their most experienced centre with 15 caps 
but Hansen could throw the uncapped Seta Tamanivalu into the backline.

The All Blacks started slowly against Georgia on the way to winning the World 
Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/oct/31/new-zealand-v-australia-rugby-world-cup-final-live>
 and Gatland is hoping Wales can catch them cold in the first Test at Eden Park.

He said: “It’s going to be tough, but we’re not here just to make up the 
numbers, and we’re not here to start the rebuilding phase of New Zealand rugby 
either. We’ve looked at when the All Blacks have been rusty and I’ve said to 
our players to have a look at the Georgia game at the World Cup in Cardiff. 
There were a lot of mistakes made and they were obviously ring-rusty.They got 
better as the tournament went along.

“We’ve just got to go out there and make sure we start well and play well and 
stay in the fight against them. We know how dangerous they are, but like every 
team when you put them under pressure hopefully there is some small hint of 
vulnerability.”
 