
Sam Warburton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sam-warburton> issued a 
warning to Wales’s rivals in this year’s Six Nations when he stating that there 
was much more to come from him and his team-mates.

The Cardiff Blue back-row told the BBC: “Historically we get better as the 
tournament goes on, which is a positive as we were slow out of the blocks last 
week [in the16-16 draw in Dublin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/feb/07/ireland-v-wales-six-nations-2016-live>
]. It was a much better performance this week.”

Warburton was very complimentary of the Scots, who pushed the home side to the 
limit, saying: “ We had to work hard and if people were surprised by that they 
shouldn‘t have been. Credit to Scotland they were fantastic and certainly don’t 
deserve to be zero for two.

“We all saw how Scotland played in the World Cup and we knew it would be a 
challenge. It is going to be a really toughSix Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sixnations> this year.”

Martyn Williams, the former Wales captain, was relieved to see his side seal 
the game with a 27-23 victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/13/wales-scotland-six-nations-match-report>
 and was particularly impressed with Jamie Roberts and described his 
performance as “monumental”.

Wales’ George North scores try to ensure Six Nations loss for Scotland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/13/wales-scotland-six-nations-match-report>
He enthused: “Jamie was virtually unstoppable from two or three metres out. He 
was monumental last week in Dublin and again today. He is a huge force for 
Wales.”

Roberts, the Wales centre, said the Scots defence deserved much praise as they 
created the biggest headaches for Wales. He told the BBC: “It was a good game 
of rugby today. Scotland defended well and they put us under a bit of pressure. 
A win’s a win, but fair play to Scotland to play until the end. The support 
here is incredible and it’s an absolute privilege to play here.”

The major turning point for Wales came in the 70th minute when George North 
carved open what had been an obdurate Scottish defence until that point. The 
Northampton Saints winger was delighted with his match-winning try but admitted 
it wasn’t all pretty to watch. He said: “Sometimes you have to play ugly to get 
the game won and we did just that when we had to. We had to dig very deep. 
Having gone in three points down at half-time there was a lot of pressure on us 
when we came out. The boys showed a lot of quality to come out and win as they 
did.”

Looking forward to their remaining games in the Six Nations he added: “The way 
we played today we can improve on some things. We need to be more clinical in 
certain areas, and we know where they are.”

Greig Laidlaw, the Scotland captain, was understandably disappointed but took 
some positives from the game. The Gloucester scrum-half, scorer of three 
penalties and a conversion, observed: “We are getting closer. We are doing so 
many good things but a couple of soft moments cost us. We need to improve on 
the lineout.”
 