
“I’ve got all sorts of ambitions,” Sam Warburton says on an autumnal morning 
in Cardiff as the turning of the leaves and a creeping chill in the air 
concentrates his mind. These can be beautiful days, full of different colours 
and moods, but the changing seasons are also strangely warming. The looming 
heat of battle, with the autumn internationals starting on Saturday when Wales 
play Australia, inspires Warburton –the clear favourite to lead the Lions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/23/wales-sam-warburton-british-irish-lions-captain-new-zealand>
 in New Zealand next summer.

“Everyone sets goals and I’ve probably got five left I still want to achieve,” 
the 28-year-old Wales captain says. “I would love to win a league title with 
Cardiff Blues – the club I’ve always played for. I’d also love to win another 
Six Nations [after Wales and Warburton won a grand slam in 2012and the 2013 
championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/mar/16/wales-england-six-nations>] 
because I’ve realised how hard it is. In the last three years we’ve come so 
close but haven’t managed another title. The 100-cap milestone is the next 
goal. I’m on 67. That’s something I will always chase. And then I’d love to 
play in another World Cup and Lions tour. I’m not saying I’m going to achieve 
all those things but when I come into training, I have thought: ‘What are you 
really chasing?’ I’d love to do those five things before my career is over.”

A desire to achieve grand ambitions burns inside Warburton but he is also one 
of the nicest men in sport. He has been tempted to leave his home club and the 
often fractious Welsh game but it is significant that, in listing his five 
grand aims, Warburton should start with a local dream. “I’ve always said I’d 
find it more rewarding to stay and battle it out to win one trophy with the 
Blues rather than go to a more successful club and perhaps win a few,” 
Warburton says as he looks over the Arms Park, having just signed a new dual 
contract committing himself to club and country. “I feel like I owe it to 
Cardiff because I’ve been contracted here since I was 16. I’ve been an employee 
12 years – which is such a long time. So that would be really rewarding.”

Warburton’s Blues bond is obvious but barring injury or an unexpected loss of 
form, it seems likely he will be Warren Gatland’s choice to captain the Lions. 
Is Gatland keeping in close touch with him? “No. I haven’t really spoken to 
Warren since we were in New Zealand [with Wales last summer]. We had a meeting 
as a squad before he was announced as Lions coach at the Vale hotel. It was a 
quick debrief of the tour for an hour – and then we went back to our regions 
and there’s been no contact since then.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fsam-warburton-world-cup-wales-british-irish-lions-new-zealand%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F991d4b1b5514e16f0e1fce5a8c3f6af328b9bebc%2F0_297_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sam%20Warburton%3A%20%E2%80%98You%20watch%20telly%20with%20everyone%20else%20to%20see%20if%20you%E2%80%99re%20in%20Lions%20squad%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fsam-warburton-world-cup-wales-british-irish-lions-new-zealand%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sam%20Warburton%3A%20%E2%80%98You%20watch%20telly%20with%20everyone%20else%20to%20see%20if%20you%E2%80%99re%20in%20Lions%20squad%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fsam-warburton-world-cup-wales-british-irish-lions-new-zealand%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F991d4b1b5514e16f0e1fce5a8c3f6af328b9bebc%2F0_297_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 Wales and British and Irish Lions coach Warren Gatland with Sam Warburton 
during last year’s Rugby World Cup. Photograph: Gabriel Bouys/AFP/Getty Images 
Wales played well in patches in New Zealand and were ahead in the first Test 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/11/new-zealand-wales-first-test-match-report>
 at half-time – and level on pointsduring the interval of the second Test 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jun/18/new-zealand-v-wales-second-test-live>
. They still lost the series 3-0 as New Zealand gathered momentum during the 
long run of victorieswhich culminated in a world record 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/oct/22/bledisloe-cup-australia-vs-new-zealand-live-wallabies-action>
 when, two Saturdays ago, the All Blacks won their 18th consecutive Test.

“We had good possession and territory and scored tries,” Warburton remembers. 
“Three in the second Test [and two in the first]. You can score tries against 
New Zealand but they have the best attack in the world by a considerable 
margin. In hindsight, there is some consolation other teams are finding them 
difficult to contain. I guess we can look back and think maybe our performances 
were better than we initially thought. They’re playing tier-one nations away 
from home and they get to that hour mark …”

Warburton shakes his head. “I’m not sure what is going on. They just go up 
another gear. It was difficult this summer but we’ve seen them do that against 
Australia, Argentina and South Africa.”

Can Warburton feel the increased power of New Zealand in the second half? 
“It’s weird. Half-times have been really positive. You go out for the second 
half really confident you can kick on. But there will be a few mistakes and 
they’ll score a try. Maybe those mistakes get made because you are fatigued and 
the transition from attack to defence is more difficult. New Zealand are the 
world’s best counterattackers so you make two or three errors and the game’s 
gone.

“I made one myself in the second Test. It was from a kick-off and Aaron Smith 
threw a dummy and I bought it <https://youtu.be/vBtgQ8xLOj0?t=7m>. I’ve never 
made that mistake before. They scored a try and I have to put my hand up for 
that one. It was an uncharacteristic mistake and the same thing happened to a 
couple of other players. Their bench had a fantastic impact as well. It’s crazy 
to think how many good players New Zealand have got.”

I find it easy to talk about the 2013 tour because you’ve done it. With 2017 
you don’t want to jinx yourself.

Warburton approaches the likelihood of leading the Lions with sensible 
caution. “Any Lions tour would be great,” he says, “but after this one it’s 
South Africa [in 2021]. I’ll be 32 then and the Lions are going to the most 
physical rugby country in the world. I don’t even know whether I’m going to be 
playing international rugby at that age – never mind a Lions tour. So this [New 
Zealand] tour is the one. But it’s difficult because you have no idea, when it 
comes to selection. You watch Sky Sports with everyone else in Britain to find 
out if you’re in that squad. You haven’t got a clue.”

Surely the captain is always called by the head coach before the squad is 
announced? “I presume the captain will get a phone call,” Warburton says. “That 
happened to me in 2013 but the rest of the squad had to watch the telly. It’s 
really difficult because you don’t want to get your hopes up in case you don’t 
get picked. So I’m looking ahead and there is a Wales tour this summer to Fiji, 
Samoa and Tonga. In my head I’ve been thinking that would be an awesome tour. 
That’s what you’re aiming for and everything above that would be a bonus.”

There is a fascinating mix at work here. In the midst of counting off five 
lofty ambitions which would complete his legacy as a great rugby player, 
Warburton chooses to suggest his immediate objective is to make the Welsh tour 
of the Pacific Islands. I point outthat the last time we met 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/nov/04/wales-sam-warburton-south-africa>
, not long after he captained the Lions on their series-winning tour of 
Australia in 2013, he had admitted he was already looking ahead to New Zealand.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fsam-warburton-world-cup-wales-british-irish-lions-new-zealand%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc07192c674a8791fac4c94f44043843401fe7c06%2F0_13_3300_1980%2F3300.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sam%20Warburton%3A%20%E2%80%98You%20watch%20telly%20with%20everyone%20else%20to%20see%20if%20you%E2%80%99re%20in%20Lions%20squad%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fsam-warburton-world-cup-wales-british-irish-lions-new-zealand%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sam%20Warburton%3A%20%E2%80%98You%20watch%20telly%20with%20everyone%20else%20to%20see%20if%20you%E2%80%99re%20in%20Lions%20squad%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fsam-warburton-world-cup-wales-british-irish-lions-new-zealand%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc07192c674a8791fac4c94f44043843401fe7c06%2F0_13_3300_1980%2F3300.jpg>
 Alun Wyn Jones, who captained the British and Irish Lions side for the series 
decider against Australia, celebrates victory with injured skipper Sam 
Warburton in Sydney in 2013. Photograph: William West/AFP/Getty Images 
“I find it easy to talk about the 2013 tour because you’ve done it,” he 
admits. “With 2017 you don’t want to jinx yourself. But 2013 was awesome and 
it’s amazing when you’re in the team huddle and you see that quality of player 
around you. It’s an honour just to be in the same circle as those players. It’s 
special because of that reason.”

Warburton’s reluctance to talk about his probable role in New Zealand is 
understandable. Just as he needs to shun complacency, Warburton is wary of the 
way in which injury can derail even the most determined players. He has been on 
the sidelines after needing surgery to repair a fractured cheekbone he suffered 
on 1 October and will still not be fit to face Australia.

A recent list of Warburton injuries suggests that, over the past nine years, 
he has endured 19 serious blows. But he now downplays their severity. “Some of 
those have only been for a few weeks. But, yeah, I’ve had five operations – a 
knee, both shoulders, two on my face. The knee was only two months and the 
facial ones have been weeks. The two shoulders have kept me out longest but I 
had nerve problems. There was also the hamstring, with the Lions [in 2013], 
which kept me out for a good three months. But some players have missed a whole 
season. God, I don’t want this to happen to me – but say your ACL goes? You can 
write off nine months straight away. So I feel fortunate.”

His face still shows the wounds from his latest operation. “I don’t mind the 
odd battle scar,” he says, thinking about his return to the pitch. “The next 
few weeks I’ll probably have the old Mervyn Davies headband on just to protect 
it a little. So I’ll rock a bit of a 70s look.”

In a possible homage to the great “Merv the Swerve” there has been talk that 
Warburton might switch from openside flanker to No8 to replace the injured 
Taulupe Faletau. “I haven’t had that conversation with anyone. I’ve only heard 
that my name is apparently in discussions about No8. I don’t know. I played 
there in the under-19s and under-20s and my first game for the Blues was at 
eighth-man. I don’t know how I would fare now as I’d be one of the smaller No8s 
in world rugby. You’re looking at 108kg plus nowadays. So I’d have to bring 
something different.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fsam-warburton-world-cup-wales-british-irish-lions-new-zealand%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4cd6e23a7ca803b6ca891aa6d1cdd75acf3ba396%2F0_175_4594_2756%2F4594.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sam%20Warburton%3A%20%E2%80%98You%20watch%20telly%20with%20everyone%20else%20to%20see%20if%20you%E2%80%99re%20in%20Lions%20squad%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fsam-warburton-world-cup-wales-british-irish-lions-new-zealand%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sam%20Warburton%3A%20%E2%80%98You%20watch%20telly%20with%20everyone%20else%20to%20see%20if%20you%E2%80%99re%20in%20Lions%20squad%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fsam-warburton-world-cup-wales-british-irish-lions-new-zealand%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4cd6e23a7ca803b6ca891aa6d1cdd75acf3ba396%2F0_175_4594_2756%2F4594.jpg>
 Wales have not beaten Australia in their previous 11 attempts and defeating 
the Wallabies is one box captain Sam Warburton would ‘really like to tick’. 
Photograph: Ben Evans/Huw Evans Agency 
Warburton was once a reluctant leader, but he now relishes the fact that Rob 
Howley, who is in overall charge while Gatland devotes himself to the Lions, 
has already named him as Wales captain for next year’s Six Nations. “Rob asked 
me and I said: ‘Of course.’ I’ve always said my one concern about being named 
captain is that I never want to become complacent. I always want that fear of 
not being selected. But one thing about being in the back row it doesn’t mean 
that you’re guaranteed to play 7. You’ve still got to prove your worth.”

The last years of a rugby player’s career are also difficult. How long does 
Warburton, who became a father for the first time last summer, expect to keep 
playing as he chases his remaining ambitions? “You’re the first person to ask 
me that, which is strange because it’s been going through my head. I’ve always 
wondered. I’d love to get to the 2019 World Cup. It would be amazing to play 
three World Cups. All the top players have that longevity and I admire everyone 
who manages to do that because you realise how hard it is to play international 
rugby that long.

“Form, injuries and competition with other players make it extremely 
difficult. But it’s something I’d love to emulate and I’m working very hard 
towards it. That’s one of the five big goals. After that 2019 crossroads who 
knows what I will do. But here’s hoping I get to tick off most of them before 
we reach that point.”
 