
Playing at blindside flanker lacks six appeal for Sam Warburton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sam-warburton>. The Wales captain is too 
much of a team man to say so but, since moving from openside at the start of 
the Six Nations, his turnover rate is down and the balance the team have had in 
the back row for the last five years has been compromised.

The established unit of Warburton, Dan Lydiate and Taulupe Faletau, Lions Test 
starters all, was broken up forthe trip to Dublin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/07/ireland-wales-six-nations-match-report>
 earlier this month with the first twojust back from injury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/01/sam-warburton-wales-ankle-injury-six-nations-ireland>
. Justin Tipuric, an openside who has been in exceptional form for Ospreys, was 
chosen ahead of Lydiate and retained for the following week’smatch against 
Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/13/wales-scotland-six-nations-match-report>
.

George North strikes as Wales turn up the power to sink Scotland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/13/wales-scotland-six-nations-match-report>
Lydiate, who twice came off the bench, was released to Ospreys to play against 
Edinburgh to help him regain match fitness. When the Wales coaches meet on 
Tuesday to consider the team to face France at the Principality Stadium on 
Friday night, the back row will take up much of their time, not least the 
question of whether they are making the most of their captain, one of the 
leading players in the world at the breakdown.

“It does not bother me who I play alongside,” Warburton says. “Toby [Faletau] 
has to play at No8, but you can chop and change the rest of us, which is a nice 
luxury to have. I would say Toby should be the first name on the team sheet, 
one of the most gifted players I have been in the same team as. In our team, 
there is competition for places across the board, but Toby is out there on his 
own, one of the three best No8s in the world with Sergio Parisse and Kieran 
Read.

“We have identified the need to get more turnovers and we have worked on that. 
One difficulty at the moment is that referees are really hot on guys competing 
on the floor for the ball. On two occasions I have gone for the ball on the 
floor and been penalised for putting my hands past it. They have been tough 
calls and it puts you off competing for the ball on the floor. Officials, 
particularly when refereeing Wales, have been extremely strict on that.

“Sometimes you think you are not getting any rewards and might have to look 
towards another tactic and I am trying to work out ways of how I can get 
turnovers. If I am picked, I am going to go a lot harder on the floor and go 
back to what I am really good at. I know I have to up that side of my game.”

Playing on the blindside reduces Warburton’s opportunities to force turnovers, 
not least after a scrum when the ball tends to be moved to the other side of 
where he is positioned. Tipuric is a different mould as an openside, more of a 
link player with the handling and passing skills of a back.

“I say no,” replies Warburton when asked if his presence on the blindside was 
behind his reduced turnover count, “but I know there is certain work that has 
to be done if you play No6. You can’t defend as wide: normally you like to get 
on the fly-half and try to get into a wider channel where there is more chance 
of a turnover. I know the dirty work has to be done, such as defending driving 
mauls, and that takes it out of your legs when you go into phase play to try 
and get a turnover. I have the same mindset and look for turnovers, but I know 
I have to do other things otherwise as a team we are not going to be where we 
should be. Playing at seven gives you a slightly freer role in phase play where 
you can put yourself in a position to win a turnover.

“I have been missing a bit of match fitness. I am not as sharp as I was in the 
World Cup; Warren and the coaches know that. I had one game for the region 
before the Ireland game which I found tougher than normal, even though I got 
through the match. We have had a week off and I have worked on fitness. I know 
that I will be 5% or 10% better each game I play and I have had three now. The 
more games you play, the easier it is to play an international. The Pro 12 does 
not have the same intensity. There is definitely more to come from me. I may be 
captain, but that does not make me a shoo-in for selection. I want to go into 
team meetings not knowing if I am going to be starting for sure. I like that 
news to be broken so I feel I have earned it.”

Leigh Halfpenny has been in the Wales camp this past week, giving the lowdown 
on France’s players 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/18/leigh-halfpenny-wales-france-six-nations>
 from the injured full-back’s experience with Toulon. Warburton had the chance 
to make the same move two seasons ago, but opted to become the first player to 
sign a dual contract with his region and the Welsh Rugby Union.

“I went to Toulon and looked at their training facilities, met the club owner; 
he was a nice guy, quite chilled. I was seeing whether I wanted to play there, 
and realised I would be happiest at home, where I would play my best rugby and 
get looked after. I was chatting to my wife and she said I could go to France 
and have a nice lifestyle and get paid a lot more than here, or stay at home 
with the family and get a dog. That appealed to me more than moving out there.”

Wales have not lost in the third round of the Six Nations since 2010, when 
they facedFrance on a Friday night in Cardiff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/feb/26/wales-france-six-nations>. “We 
have a good recent record against them, but I have never found games against 
the French easy,” Warburton says. “They have made a winning start, and while we 
drew with Ireland, we know if we win our next three games we will win the 
championship.

“We are seen as the favourites on Friday and that is the mentality we will 
have. I do not like the defeatist attitude of going into games as underdogs.”
 