
Samsung heir Lee Jae-yong is to be questioned as a suspect in a South Korean 
bribery case that led to thepresident’s impeachment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/01/park-geun-hye-impeached-south-korea-president-corruption-allegations-fabrication>
, prosecutors have said.

Lee Jae-yong, the electronic group’s vice-chairman, will be summoned to face 
questions by investigators looking into whether Samsung bribed a jailed 
confidante of PresidentPark Geun-hye 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/park-geun-hye>, said Hong Jong-seok, a 
spokesman for the special prosecutor team investigating the case.

South Korea scandal explained: six key points on the cronyism claims engulfing 
the president
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/nov/02/south-korea-explainer-park-guen-hye-six-key-points-scandal-choi-soon-sil>
Hong said possible favours include getting the government’s backing on a 
controversial Samsung merger in 2015 that was opposed by minority shareholders. 
Lee and members of his family were the biggest beneficiaries of the merger of
Samsung <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/samsung> C&T and Cheil 
Industries.

Prosecutors are expected to question Lee on Thursday regarding why Samsung 
sent corporate funds to Choi Soon-sil, the jailed confidante, including buying 
costly horses for her daughter, who was on the national dressage team.

When Lee appeared at a public hearing last month, he told lawmakers that he 
was not aware of the decision to fund Choi’s daughter. He also denied Samsung 
had tried to win favours through the funds.


Lee, the only son of Samsung’s ailing chairman and a grandson of the company’s 
founder, acknowledged that it was “inappropriate” but “inevitable” to send 
money to Choi. He did not elaborate further.

Samsung Group did not immediately respond to an email on Wednesday seeking 
comment.

Two Samsung executives, including a man known as Lee’s mentor, were questioned 
in the case earlier this week.

Park’s powers have been suspended since 9 December, when South Korea’s 
opposition-controlled parliament voted to impeach her over the scandal. Her 
trial is being held at the constitutional court to decide whether she will be 
permanently removed from power.
 