
Chris Ashton faces a suspension running into months rather than weeks after 
being cited for two separate incidents of biting and an almost certain end to 
his international career. The Saracens and England wing will appear before a 
disciplinary panel in London on Tuesday night to answer a chargethat he bit the 
Northampton prop Alex Waller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/17/chris-ashton-alex-waller-eddie-jones-allianz-park-mark-mccall-saracens>
 on Saturday during the Premiership match at Allianz Park in the 24th minute 
and did so again 60 seconds later.

Waller has not been cited for the incident involving Ashton when he appeared 
to put his hand across the lower part of the wing’s face, or two others in the 
second half when he tackled Jamie George to the ground off the ball and the 
hooker had to break his fall with his left arm and then had a meeting of heads 
as the pair grappled on the floor. He complained to the referee, Greg Garner, 
at the time, and Garner told him the matter would be reviewed after the match. 
It was taken up by the citing commissioner, Mike Rafter, who brought the 
charges against Ashton.

In a statement the Rugby Football Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rugby-football-union> said: “Chris Ashton 
will appear before an RFU disciplinary panel charged with acts contrary to good 
sportsmanship. The Saracens wing is alleged to have bitten Alex Waller of 
Northampton on two separate occasions.”

Ashton will appear before a three-member panel chaired by Philip Evans QC. The 
low entry point for a player found guilty of biting is 12 weeks, which can be 
cut by up to half if there are mitigating circumstances, such as a guilty plea, 
contrition and a previously good disciplinary record. Ashton does not have the 
latter having beenbanned for 10 weeks in January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/20/chris-ashton-banned-10-weeks-miss-six-nations-england-saracens>
 for making contact with the eye area of the Ulster centre Luke Marshall and
received a four-week suspension at the end of 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/dec/06/chris-ashton-banned-hair-pulling-brawl>
 for pulling the hair of the Leicester wing Alesana Tuilagi.

Rugby union: talking points from the weekend's Premiership action
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/sep/19/rugby-union-talking-points-from-the-weekends-premiership-action>
He was sent to the sin-bin five times in his first season with Saracens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> in 2012-13, picking up a one-match 
ban. The panel will have to decide whether to treat the charges as one or 
separately; if the latter and Ashton was found guilty, they would be able to 
run the suspensions concurrently or consecutively. The top‑end suspension 
starts at 24 weeks, the sanction given to the Bath prop Kevin Yates for a 
biting incident in 1998.

On Saturday, the Northampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> director of rugby, Jim 
Mallinder, said that Waller had complained at half-time that he had been 
bitten. As well as the video evidence, the disciplinary panel will investigate 
whether there were any marks on the prop’s arm or hand.

That Waller was not cited for the contact he made with Ashton’s face as the 
pair lay on the floor will make a defence of provocation harder to argue. The 
TV footage during the game showed Waller’s hand going across Ashton’s mouth and 
not near the wing’s eyes and Ashton, who was wearing a gumshield, making a 
forward movement with his head. Only one incident was replayed.

The Saracens director of rugby, Mark McCall, defended his player after the 
game, saying: “I have heard the accusation but did not see what happened. This 
will run its course and I suppose there is a good chance Chris will be cited. I 
would be very surprised if Chris bit Alex Waller.”

A long suspension would almost certainly end the international career of 
Ashton, who won the last of his 39 caps in 2014. He was named in January in the 
first squad of England’s head coach, Eddie Jones, but his ban following the 
European Champions Cup match against Ulster ruled him out of the Six Nations 
Championship.He was not chosen for England’s summer tour to Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/may/23/chris-ashton-eddie-jones-england-australia-saracens-three-test-tour>
 andthe wing declined a place on the Saxons trip to South Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/24/chris-ashton-england-saracens-rugby-union>
.

England’s elite squad will be announced by Jones at the end of the month and 
having failed to make the 45-man training squad announced in July Ashton was 
not expected to be recalled.
 