
Saracens <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> have signed a timely 
reinforcement in the Scotland second-row Kieran Low on loan from Glasgow until 
the end of the season. The 24-year-old joined Glasgow in the summer but made 
the last of his three appearances in October. Low has Premiership experience 
having played 43 times for London Irish.

“We are delighted to be able to bring in a player of Kieran’s calibre to 
Saracens at this point of the season,” said the director of rugby, Mark McCall. 
“He is an international-quality lock forward who has plenty of Premiership 
experience. With a few injuries and the expectancy that we will lose a few 
second-row forwards during the Six Nations, we are very happy to be able to 
bring Kieran into the group.”

Low, who has five caps, will link up with Saracens in time for Saturday’s 
top-of-the-tablehome match with Leicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/29/leicester-saracens-jean-de-villiers-manu-tuilagi-richard-cockerill>
.Glasgow’s head coach, Gregor Townsend, said: “This is a good opportunity for 
Kieran to get game-time in the Premiership and we wish him all the best at 
Saracens.”

The Wales and Ospreys <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ospreys> scrum-half 
Rhys Webb has signed a national dual contract with the club and the Welsh Rugby 
Union. The 27-year-old, who has made 122 appearances for the region and scored 
five tries in 16 games for Wales, joins his regional and international 
team-mate Dan Biggar in re-signing an NDC.

Webb, who suffered a foot injury for Wales in a World Cup warmup game against 
Italy in September and has not played since, welcomed the security the contract 
gives him as he continues his rehabilitation.

Leicester believe they can inflict a first defeat of the season on Saracens
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/29/leicester-saracens-jean-de-villiers-manu-tuilagi-richard-cockerill>
He said: “I’m over the moon to have been able to re-sign an NDC. With this 
security I can concentrate on my rehab without any distractions, knowing I can 
put all my efforts into getting back out on to the pitch in the coming months 
and doing what I love doing the most, which is playing for the Ospreys.

“It’s flattering to know there’s interest out there but this is my home region 
and I want to do all I can for the Ospreys, continuing to develop and, 
hopefully, play well enough to continue being selected for Wales.”

Andrew Millward, Ospreys’ rugby general manager, said: “It’s excellent to see 
Rhys becoming the second player to commit his future to playing within Wales 
for the Ospreys by re-signing a national dual contract following on from Dan 
Biggar earlier this month.

“Rhys is another homegrown player who takes enormous pride in representing his 
region and, like Dan, has risen in prominence over the last 12 to 18 months, 
meaning their services have been in great demand.”

England appoint Ian Peel as scrum coach for Six Nations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/29/england-ian-peel-scrum-coach-six-nations> 