
They thought it was all over at half-time. Saracens led 23-6 having taken the 
initiative from the start and, in their sure, inimitable way, applied pressure, 
physical and mental, until a side competing in their first major final appeared 
to crack. Only one side,Wasps in 2004, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2004/may/31/rugbyunion.premiership200304> 
had won the Premiership final having been behind at the interval but Exeter, 
who when the play-offs were introduced were well adrift of the top flight, 
revel in adversity and a showpiece that had been played in black and white 
burst into glorious technicolour.

Exeter <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/exeter> finished with salvaged 
pride, but cursing the weak footprint they left in the opening half: they 
missed regulation tackles in conceding soft tries in the 33rd and 37th minutes. 
The more overwhelming disappointment, however, was that by then a team renowned 
for its resolve and resourcefulness had not fired an attacking shot – overcome 
by the opposition more than the occasion.

Saracens beat Exeter 28-20 to claim Premiership title – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/may/28/saracens-v-exeter-premiership-final-live>
It took Exeter until the second half, after the refuge of the dressing room, 
to take play through phases and pressure defenders. Their few attacks in the 
opening period tended to go wide where passers were spooked by the tendency of 
Saracens’ outside backs, led by Duncan Taylor, to rush up quickly and make any 
pass to the wide outside hazardous. So the Chiefs tended to cut back inside, 
into the arms of a suffocating defence behind the gainline and making a series 
of tame kicks that allowed Alex Goode to showcase his counterattacking threat.

After the break, the scrum-half Will Chudley sniped and committed defenders 
around the breakdown.Saracens <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> had 
to step in defensively and Exeter achieved width. If their first try came from 
an old favourite, a penalty kicked to touch and a maul driven over the line 
with Jack Yeandle carrying the ball for five metres, their second came from a 
move they were unable to fashion earlier.

Exeter twice secured quick ball from the breakdown and Henry Slade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/09/exeter-henry-slade-broken-leg-comeback>
 exploited a half-gap to free Phil Dollman. The full-back’s pass to Jack Nowell 
looked premature but the England wing cut back to ensure he could not be 
tackled head-on and had the strength to force his way over the line for his 
fifth try in four matches.

There were only three points between the teams then but the Saracens team did 
not need a tutorial from their coaches and regained control, if not by much, in 
the final quarter.

Eddie Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/26/eddie-jones-england-australia-squad-the-breakdown>
 was among the crowd on the eve of the friendly Wales here. The player the 
England head coach was paying the closest attention to was Slade, a centre 
Jones feels can help the national side develop an unstructured game. He wanted 
evidence that the Chief could kick as well as pass.

Slade had his chance 19 minutes in after Exeter won a turnover and quickly 
moved the ball left. He was on the wing, positioned in front of Jones, and 
kicked towards the Saracens 22 with their full-back Goode struggling to get 
into position. But the ball came off the side of his boot and went directly out 
of play in a half that did not suggest he would be lining up in England’s 
midfield in next month’s first Test against Australia.

Slade twice missed a tackle on Chris Wyles who, after taking a long, 
suspiciously forward-looking pass from Owen Farrell on the Exeter 10-metre 
line, stepped out of two tackles and then left Slade on the floor as the centre 
forlornly tried to make his second attempt count. The try put Saracens 20 
points ahead, and when the Chiefs fought back after the break, his knock-on as 
he looked to improvise 35 metres out left his side with an empty quiver.

Saracens had started with the assurance of a team used to winning. A 10-phase 
move in the opening 90 seconds led to Farrell’s first penalty when Olly 
Woodburn, anxious to see the ball, kicked it out of a ruck. And after Maro 
Itoje had ended Exeter’s first attack, winning a penalty, Farrell doubled his 
side’s lead and it was not until the 24th minute that Exeter mustered a 
response through the boot of Gareth Steenson.

Saracens make their experience count to expose young Chiefs of Exeter | 
Michael Aylwin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/may/28/saracens-experience-exeter-billy-vunipola-premiership-final>
Saracens were not flawless: Goode, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/28/saracens-mark-mccall-alex-goode-england-exeter-rob-baxter>
 another England squad player Jones has reservations about, dropped his first 
two high kicks, although he was a constant threat when he did secure possession 
and scored the game’s decisive try five minutes from time before being named 
man of the match, while Itoje lost a lineout and later gave away a couple of 
penalties as Exeter increased the tempo.

But their comeback came too late. Like Wales here last March, Exeter were 
unable to fix problems on the wing. A year ago, Bath lost to Saracens in the 
final after trying to take them game to a team renowned for its defence and 
making mistakes. Exeter’s errors were defensive: Wyles’s try should have been 
stopped, while Taylor’s four minutes before came from a move that started in 
Saracens’ half when a weak kick to Goode handed the full-back time to send 
Schalk Brits on a run.

Saracens’ Mark McCall says Alex Goode must start in England first Test
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/28/saracens-mark-mccall-alex-goode-england-exeter-rob-baxter>
The hooker saw Woodburn and Mitch Lees standing in front of him on halfway and 
took a line through them, helped by Woodburn blocking himself off by getting on 
the wrong side of Mako Vunipola. When Brits was brought down on Exeter’s 22, 
the ball was moved quickly and Taylor had a free run to the line.

A feature of the opening half was the ability of Saracens to turn territory 
into points. Their first three visits to Exeter’s 22 resulted in penalties from 
Farrell, but Steenson scored the final points of the half with a penalty and 
after the break the Chiefs got on top up front, fortified by a new front row 
and Chudley’s probing. Lesser teams than Saracens would have fallen over rather 
than wobbled but, with Charlie Hodgson on the field for his final appearance, 
they secured the game when Marcelo Bosch and Chris Ashton created Goode’s try 
to seal a Premiership’s club’s first league and European Cup double for 12 
years.

Saracens Goode; Ashton, Taylor (Bosch 73), Barritt (capt), Wyles; Farrell 
(Hodgson 68), Wigglesworth (De Kock 73); M Vunipola (Barrington 64), Brits 
(George 51), du Plessis (Figallo 51), Itoje, Kruis, Rhodes (Wray 54), Fraser 
(Hamilton 70), B Vunipola.Tries Taylor, Wyles, Goode. Cons Farrell 2. Pens 
Farrell 3.

Exeter Dollman; Noewell, Slade, Whitten (Campagnaro 67), Woodburn (Short 54); 
Steenson (capt), Chudley (Lewis 64); Moon (Hepburn 46), Cowan-Dickie (Yeandle 
46), Williams (Francis 46), Lees, Parling (Welch 63), Ewers, Salvi (Horstmann 
60), Armand (Salvi 64).Tries Yeandle, Nowell. Cons Steenson 2. Pens Steenson 2.

Referee Wayne Barnes Attendance 76,109 Game rating 7/10
 