
Toulon had never lost at home in the Champions Cup, but neither had they met a 
team so markedly their superior asSaracens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens>. On a balmy October day on the 
Mediterranean, the scoreboard had a barmy look at half-time with the holders 
leading 25-6 against the team that had won the tournament in the three previous 
seasons. The French side mustered a comeback of sorts but, on the sunniest of 
days, they were a shower.

‘It was a performance that had everything’ says Saracens’ Mark McCall
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/15/saracens-toulon-> 
Saracens were worth every point of their lead, having outsmarted their wooden, 
ageing opponents from the kick-off. There was something obsolescent aboutToulon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/toulon> who looked an unfamiliar collection 
of individuals, no matter how expensively assembled, rather than a team, 
churning out the expected moves and too easily surprised.

Saracens have played consistently well in recent years, but never as 
impressively as this, at the home of the most successful club in Europe this 
decade. Despite the fine weather, the match between two heavyweights could have 
been a repeat ofMay’s final between Saracens and Racing 92 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/14/saracens-racing-92-european-rugby-champions-cup-final-match-report>
 in Lyon: a no-risk trial of strength.

Toulon were geared up for it, but, from the opening moments, after the hosts 
made a hash of the kick-off, Saracens widened the point of their attacks, often 
passing to the second man out rather than the first. They found space rather 
than the arms of a defender and their first try, after eight minutes and 
shortly after Leigh Halfpenny had matched Owen Farrell’s early penalty, 
resulted from the defence being stretched on both sides of the field.

Billy Vunipola’s break on the left wing was halted with some difficulty, but 
when Saracens swept the ball to the right Toulon kept hoping someone would 
straighten the line. No one did and a fluent bout of passing gave Sean Maitland 
just enough space to touch down in the corner before Halfpenny and Ma’a Nonu 
forced him into touch. It took the TMO a few minutes to rule in the Scotland 
international’s favour, with the replays highlighting the dexterity needed to 
get the ball down in time.

Five minutes later, Farrell’s short pass sent Jamie George through a gap and 
Richard Wigglesworth was in support to run unopposed to the posts and the first 
quarter had not ended when Farrell, making his first appearance for four months 
afterback and hip problems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/28/england-dylan-hartley-owen-farrell-saracens-northampton>
, made it 18-3 with his second penalty.

The stunned crowd watched in disbelief and dismay as Halfpenny dropped a 
routine pass from Duane Vermeulen, having failed to move closer to the No8, who 
had signalled his intention to get rid of the ball and François Trinh-Duc 
wasted his side’s first move of note by finding the touchline rather than a 
frustrated Bryan Habana on the left wing.

Saracens were rampant in all areas, with Maro Itoje stealing lineouts, Schalk 
Burger forcing turnovers and Juan Figallo on top of Florian Fresia in the 
scrum. Toulon were devoid of inspiration and although Halfpenny’s second 
penalty for Itoje’s high tackle showed a flicker of life the half ended with 
the visitors’ third try.

Farrell, who at no time showed the merest speck of rust in his general play or 
kicking from the tee, threaded Mako Vunipola through a half-gap and more crisp 
passing, with space rather than contact again sought, created an overlap for 
Chris Wyles. The champions’ 19-point lead was in no way inflated.

The expected response from Toulon after the interval came, but not quickly. 
Halfpenny and Farrell exchanged penalties and Saracens had a man advantage for 
10 minutes when Nonu, like Habana struggling to contain his impatience, was 
sent to the sin-bin for a high tackle.

European Champions Cup: Connacht celebrate return by stunning Toulouse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/15/european-champions-cup-rugby-roundup-connacht-toulouse>
Saracens went for a bonus point try, but when Barritt was penalised for a high 
tackle on review the game started to shift. Toulon started to take play through 
phases, even if they were not going anywhere, but when Itoje saw yellow for 
slowing down the ball at a ruck the home side rumbled a lineout to the line and 
the prop Levan Chilachava woke up the crowd.

There was more urgency about Toulon now. Nonu wasted one counterattack when 
holding on to the ball rather than kick ahead for Habana to chase and Habana 
himself was caught by Wigglesworth having appeared to be free. Wigglesworth 
stayed down after making the tackle and when the centre Marcelo Bosch needed 
treatment in the same move, leaving his side with 12 men on their feet, Toulon 
managed to work an overlap and Habana had his try.

At the point of greatest danger, Saracens held firm, even though nine minutes 
from time Burger became the third player to be sent to the sin-bin. Toulon had 
given what they had and a bonus point went along with their home record when 
Habana conceded a penalty that Farrell turned into three more points to give 
him 16 for the afternoon.
 