
Chris Ashton has been suspended for 13 weeks after a three-strong disciplinary 
panel meeting in London on Tuesday night upheld one charge ofbiting during 
Saracens’ victory over Northampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/19/saracens-chris-ashton-alleged-biting-cited>
 on Saturday but threw out a second. The England wing, who has the right to 
appeal, will be free to play again on 19 December.

Ashton was cited for biting the arm of the Saints prop Alex Waller twice in 
one minute in the first-half of the match. He denied both charges, which meant 
that when he was found guilty of the first count there were no mitigating 
factors to reduce his suspension from the lower-end estimate of 12 weeks. He 
was given an extra week becausehe was banned for 10 weeks in January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/20/chris-ashton-banned-10-weeks-miss-six-nations-england-saracens>
 for putting his hand near the eye area of an opponent.

Players’ interests must be at heart of any new timetable for world rugby | 
Robert Kitson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/sep/20/rugby-union-calendar-world-rugby-test-schedule>
Ashton was represented by a lawyer at the RFU hearing which lasted for nearly 
five hours. Had he been found guilty on both counts, he would have faced a ban 
of at least 26 weeks. His latest lay-off means that he has no chance of being 
named in England’s elite squad next week.

“Having considered detailed evidence the panel concluded that during the 
course of a ruckChris Ashton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chris-ashton> 
bit the arm of Alex Waller at a time that Mr Waller was attempting to clear him 
out,” said the chairman of the panel, Philip Evans QC. “The panel concluded it 
was a low-end entry point aggravated by his previous record.”

Saracens <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> will stand by their 
player. “What I am hearing is absolutely not the Chris Ashton I know,” said the 
club’s chairman, Nigel Wray. “I very much hope that Chris is not forced out of 
English rugby because he is a very well-liked and respected member of our 
family, one of the hardest workers in the game. I am not a lawyer, but if this 
were a legal matter the case would not come to court.”

The implication was that the 29-year old Ashton would, once his suspension was 
completed, look at finishing his career in France or return to rugby league 
having left Wigan for Northampton in 2007.

“Chris has been incredibly stressed and anxious about the repercussions of 
this,” said theSaracens <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> director 
of rugby, Mark McCall, on Tuesday.
 