
A Saudi Arabian-led coalition has admitted it bombed a funeral in Yemen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/yemen> last weekend, killing at least 140 
people and wounded about 600, and said “wrong information” was to blame.

The coalition’s investigations team said an unnamed party had provided 
intelligence that Houthi rebel leaders were in the packed hall in Sana’a where 
the funeral was being held on 8 October.

Saudi Arabia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia> has been 
targeting the rebels for more than 18 months after intervening in Yemen’s civil 
war to support the government.

The unnamed party claimed the site was a legitimate military target, according 
to astatement issued by the team on Saturday <http://www.spa.gov.sa/1548647>. 
The air operation centre in Yemen, it added, directed a “close air support 
mission” to target the site without approval from the coalition’s command.
SPAENG (@Spa_Eng) 
Press Statement by the Joint Incidents Assessment Team (JIAT) on the Great 
Hall Incident in Sana'a.#SPAGOV <https://twitter.com/hashtag/SPAGOV?src=hash>
https://t.co/Wyg8MHuTRV <https://t.co/Wyg8MHuTRV> pic.twitter.com/V053yt8Ztd 
<https://t.co/V053yt8Ztd>
 <https://twitter.com/Spa_Eng/status/787237045244686336> October 15, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Spa_Eng/status/787237045244686336> 
“Because of non-compliance with coalition rules of engagement and procedures, 
and the issuing of incorrect information, a coalition aircraft wrongly targeted 
the location, resulting in civilian deaths and injuries,” the investigations 
team said.


“Appropriate action ... must be taken against those who caused the incident, 
and ... compensation must be offered to the families of the victims.”

Airstrikes on Yemen funeral kill at least 140 people, UN official says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/08/saudi-led-coalition-airstrike-hit-yemen-funeral-officials-say>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fsaudi-led-coalition-admits-to-bombing-yemen-funeral%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40ddc130295cb47c51df9d36530f42ff00eaa8a0%2F0_234_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Saudi-led%20coalition%20admits%20to%20bombing%20Yemen%20funeral&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fsaudi-led-coalition-admits-to-bombing-yemen-funeral%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Saudi-led%20coalition%20admits%20to%20bombing%20Yemen%20funeral&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fsaudi-led-coalition-admits-to-bombing-yemen-funeral%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40ddc130295cb47c51df9d36530f42ff00eaa8a0%2F0_234_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 A man injured during the Saudi-led air strike. Photograph: Mohamed 
Al-Sayaghi/Reuters 
The coalition had initially denied that it was behind the bombing. 

UK accused of blocking UN inquiry into claim of war crimes in Yemen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/24/yemen-britain-human-rights-inquiry>
The UK will present a draft resolution to the UN security council next week 
calling for an immediate ceasefire in Yemen, after an earlier text condemning 
the funeral bombing was rejected by Russia as not strong enough.

The US-backed coalition, which accuses Houthis of being Iranian proxies, has 
come under heavy international pressure to investigate the bombing. Human 
Rights Watch said in a report on Thursday that the bombing constitutes an 
apparent war crime and said remnants of a US-made bomb were found at the site.

Along with arms, the US provides the coalition with logistical support and 
mid-air refuelling of its warplanes. The White House has said it will 
immediately review its assistance to the Saudi-led coalition, explaining that 
such assistance was not a “blank cheque”.

Why Yemen conflict has become another Syria
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/10/why-yemen-conflict-has-become-another-syria>
More than 6,700 people have been killed in Yemen since the coalition first 
intervened – nearly two-thirds of them civilians – according to the United 
Nations.

The deadly airstrikes on the funeral caused a wave of counter-attacks against 
both US and Saudi targets.


A US navy destroyer off the coast of Yemen came under attack twice in recent 
days from areas under Houthi control. In response, US forces destroyed three 
radar installations in Houthi-controlled ports on Thursday, in thefirst direct 
US involvement in the war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/13/us-enters-yemen-war-bombing-houthis-who-launched-missiles-at-navy-ship>
 in Yemen.

The Houthis denied firing at the destroyer and accused the US of using the 
attack as a justification to become directly involved in the conflict.

More than 100 people who were injured in the funeral hall bombing have been 
allowed medical evacuation to seek treatment outside of Yemen, a government 
official said.
 