
Saudi Prince Turki al-Faisal has rejected the idea of sharing the 
administration of the annualhajj <https://www.theguardian.com/world/hajj> 
pilgrimage with other Muslim nations, saying Riyadh considers it “a matter of 
sovereignty” and a “privilege”.

The senior member of the Saudi royal family spoke to The Associated Press in 
the wake of mounting criticism of last month’s disastrous crush of pilgrims  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/09/hajj-stampede-death-toll-hits-1453>
outside the holy city of Mecca, which killed over 1,400 people, according to an 
AP count.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fsaudi-prince-says-kingdom-will-remain-in-charge-of-hajj-after-deadly-stampede%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5e8aff185f1dbd4bcf1ca8b20e1235b8b8ce5ac1%2F0_0_4975_2984%2F4975.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Saudi%20prince%20says%20kingdom%20will%20remain%20in%20charge%20of%20hajj%20after%20deadly%20stampede&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fsaudi-prince-says-kingdom-will-remain-in-charge-of-hajj-after-deadly-stampede%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Saudi%20prince%20says%20kingdom%20will%20remain%20in%20charge%20of%20hajj%20after%20deadly%20stampede&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fsaudi-prince-says-kingdom-will-remain-in-charge-of-hajj-after-deadly-stampede%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5e8aff185f1dbd4bcf1ca8b20e1235b8b8ce5ac1%2F0_0_4975_2984%2F4975.jpg>
 Saudi ambulances arrive with pilgrims who were injured in a stampede at the 
hajj in September. Photograph: Mohammed Al-Shaikh/AFP/Getty Images 
Other figures put the death toll at more than 1,500, making it the deadliest 
annual pilgrimage on record. Saudi Arabia’s Health Ministry officials puts the 
death toll at 769.

Saudi Arabia’s <https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia> regional rival 
Iran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran>, which lost the largest number of 
pilgrims, has accused the kingdom of mismanagement and called for an 
independent body to oversee the hajj.

Iran’s death toll of 465 is the highest announced by any country thus far. 
Egypt’s Foreign Ministry said on Sunday that the death toll among Egyptians 
climbed from 165 to 177, with 64 still missing.

The Saudi royal family derives enormous prestige and legitimacy from being the 
caretakers of the hajj and Islam’s holiest sites in Mecca and Medina. King 
Salman, in line with past Saudi monarchs, holds the title of “Custodian of the 
Two Holy Mosques” in reference to the Grand Mosque in Mecca and the Prophet 
Muhammad’s first mosque ever built in Medina.

Oversight of these holy places and the hajj “is a matter of sovereignty and 
privilege and service,” Prince Turki said.

“The kingdom over the years, having gotten over the awful times when pilgrims 
couldn’t guarantee their travels to the hajj in the old days and all the other 
factors of disease and crowds and housing and so on, we’ll not give up that 
privilege or that distinction of being the servants of the two holy places,” he 
said.

“The people of Mecca are the ones who know best the territory of Mecca and you 
can’t take that away from the people of Mecca.”

Turki is the most senior Saudi royal to comment publicly on the Iranian 
criticism. He is currently chairman of the Riyadh-based King Faisal Center for 
Research and Islamic Studies, named after his late father.

The prince served for more than two decades as head of intelligence in the 
kingdom, and has held ambassador posts in Britain, Ireland and the U.S. His 
brother, Prince Khalid al-Faisal is currently the governor of Mecca.

The hajj pilgrims died in September when large crowds converged down a narrow 
street in the area of Mina, just outside Mecca. As thousands of pilgrims headed 
down narrow streets in Mina, they converged on another large crowd, causing 
people to trip over one another, fall and suffocate in a chaotic crush that 
lasted for more than an hour, according to survivors. The street where the 
crush took place is surrounded by iron gates, behind which are tents for 
pilgrims.

The tragedy took place around a mile (1.6 km) from a multi-million dollar 
facility built by the Saudi government to ease congestion and deadly accidents 
during a ritual where Muslims throw pebbles at three columns in a symbolic 
stoning of the devil. The pilgrimage, which all able-bodied Muslims are 
required to perform once in a lifetime, is a chance for believers to wipe away 
past sins.

The Jamarat complex in Mina is an example of the many projects the kingdom has 
undertaken to make the pilgrimage safer.Saudi Arabia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia> has spent billions of dollars 
and undertaken massive construction projects to ease the hajj for the world’s 
Muslims, and the last serious loss of life had occurred nine years ago.

This year, the hajj drew around 2 million people from more than 180 countries 
to Islam’s holiest site in Mecca, the cube-shaped Kaaba to which Muslims around 
the world pray toward and circle during pilgrimages.

Within hours of the stampede, Iran’s Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayatollah-ali-khamenei>had accused Saudi 
Arabia of “mismanagement.” Iran’s President Hassan Rouhani suggested 
“ineptitude” on the part of Saudi authorities.

Scores of Iranians protested against the kingdom outside the Saudi Embassy in 
Tehran, and Iranian lawmakers and clerics called on the Organization of Islamic 
Cooperation to manage the hajj. Iran’s state prosecutor has vowed to “pursue 
the trial of (the royal family) Al Saud” through international courts for the 
deaths in this year’s hajj.

“I think they’re trying to make political capital out of this, which is 
unfortunate,” Turki said, adding that “human suffering should not be a tool for 
political shenanigans.”

“It’s a recurring record that is played over and over again by Iranian 
leaders.”
 