
The Wales and Scarlets <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/scarlets> wing Harry 
Robinson has said he is “utterly devastated” after he was forced to retire from 
rugby because of injury.

Robinson, 23, sustained a serious neck injury at the end of last season that 
required surgery. Although surgery was successful the wing,who was capped three 
times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jan/18/warren-gatland-wales-harry-robinson>
 for his country, has now confirmed his retirement following a lengthy battle 
to resume playing regional rugby.

London Irish’s likely relegation need not be all doom and gloom | Dean Ryan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/apr/28/london-irish-likely-relegation-premiership>
“I am utterly devastated and it is a very, very bitter pill to have to 
swallow,” Robinson said. “During a game at the end of last season I suffered a 
significant neck injury that subsequently needed serious neck surgery.

“It came as a huge shock to hear the surgeon explain that it was unlikely I 
would ever return to play professional rugby. This was not a prognosis that I 
wanted to believe or accept.

“Following successful surgery to ensure that I was at no greater risk of 
making my injury and condition worse, I was determined to come back to play 
again for the Scarlets. It is difficult to accept that I will never do this 
again.

“I have worked so hard over the last 10 months to return to full fitness and 
regain the functionality I had before the injury. It is with great regret that 
I have been unable to do this. As it has turned out, the consultant was correct 
with his initial assessment of my injury and the ultimate impact on my career.

“While I am devastated, I count myself very lucky and enormously privileged. I 
have had a fantastic six years as a professional rugby player with both Cardiff 
Blues and Scarlets. I have travelled all over the world at every age grade, 
with Wales sevens and the Wales squad.

“New challenges lie ahead of me now and I will embrace these with the 
commitment and dedication I have learnt over the years as a player.”

Robinson made his Wales debut against the Barbarians in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jun/02/rugby-union-wales-rugby-union-team>
, scoring a try, then started both Tests on Wales’s tour of Japan a year later.
 