
This extract is based on the testimony of George Omona, bodyguard to Joseph 
Kony <https://www.theguardian.com/world/joseph-kony> during three years with 
the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA), as told to Ledio Cakaj. In a foreword to the 
book, Cakaj says: “George opened upabout some of the brutality he had 
experienced, as well as some he had carried out. I believe there is a lot more 
he has kept to himself, partly because of shame I imagine, but mostly because 
of fear.” 

At the end of 2008, the LRA was forced out of Garamba national park in the 
Democratic Republic of the Congo <https://www.theguardian.com/world/congo> 
(DRC), and by May 2009 Kony had decided to move, with his family and personal 
security unit, to Central African Republic (CAR).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fscars-body-soul-joseph-kony-bodyguard-when-the-walking-defeats-you-ledio-cakaj-book-extract%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb0f81b20f5a40c7f3662f8fabe6619f5b9d9a07a%2F0_0_1630_2551%2F1630.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Scarred%20body%2C%20scarred%20soul%3A%20life%20as%20Joseph%20Kony's%20bodyguard%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0book%20extract%20%7C%20Ledio%20Cakaj&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fscars-body-soul-joseph-kony-bodyguard-when-the-walking-defeats-you-ledio-cakaj-book-extract%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Scarred%20body%2C%20scarred%20soul%3A%20life%20as%20Joseph%20Kony%27s%20bodyguard%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0book%20extract%20%7C%20Ledio%20Cakaj&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fscars-body-soul-joseph-kony-bodyguard-when-the-walking-defeats-you-ledio-cakaj-book-extract%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb0f81b20f5a40c7f3662f8fabe6619f5b9d9a07a%2F0_0_1630_2551%2F1630.jpg>
Kony divided the 800 men, women and children bound for CAR into four groups. 
Sam’s group, which included George, travelled with Kony, often doubling as his 
security. George was happy to stay in Sam’s unit but the walk was as terrible 
as ever. Perpetually tired, sore, hungry and thirsty, he thought of nothing but 
rest, food and water. The only distraction from the hunger was the intense ache 
of his shoulders sagging under the heavy weight of the goods he carried.


He was genuinely worried about staying alive as people around him dropped like 
flies. It was even worse for Congolese civilians, who were killed each time the 
fighters came across them during the journey. The usual excuse was that the 
Congolese could inform the army of the LRA’s whereabouts if left alive, but 
George thought that it really made little difference what the Congolese would 
do if set free. Everyone in his group was too focused on their own survival to 
contemplate anything but walking and finding food and water. Killing seemed 
normal, another act in the struggle to stay alive.

It had been 10 days since the group started walking to CAR, and for the past 
48 hours there had been no water in sight. Some women and children fainted from 
dehydration, and beatings by the guards did not revive them. People’s faces 
were dry and painfully wrinkled. Kony finally gave orders for all to stop and 
sent out water patrols. George was part of one of the patrols and he headed 
west with a group of 12 armed men and 10 abductees carrying empty containers 
the Acholis calljerekan. After a few hours’ walk the group heard the welcome 
sound of a stream nearby.

Approaching the river, George heard what he thought were human voices and 
motioned to the patrol to stop. Together with the armed fighters he slowly 
approached the stream, where he saw four Congolese men fishing with long spears 
and nets. The holies [how the LRA fighters referred to themselves] jumped out 
of the bush and caught the fishermen, who were terrified at the sight of the 
strange armed men. Without talking, one of the holies made a sign to the 10 
abductees to kill the fishermen. The abductees, who wielded machetes and 
sticks, bludgeoned the fishermen to death while George and the rest of the 
armed fighters drank water. George kept drinking, stopping only to breathe and 
stare at the bodies of the fishermen that twitched as life left them. The water 
tasted really good.

George said a quick prayer after the abductees drank and then filled their 
containers. “Thank you God for allowing us to find this water,” he said, as 
everyone kneeled in prayer next to the battered bodies of the Congolese. After 
filling the jerry cans, the group quickly returned to the main position where 
the rest of the people waited. When news of the group’s return with water 
spread, everyone started to run in the direction of the stream; “Like bush 
pigs,” George thought.

After people had filled their water containers the group resumed walking. A 
few days later they came across some large swamps. Walking across the muddy 
land was tough. People kept getting stuck in the sludge, their gumboots 
providing little protection. The combination of wetland and mosquitoes made 
people’s feet sore and covered in blisters. Once on the other side of the 
swamp, Kony ordered a herb to be collected in the forest which his wives mixed 
with some secret ingredient, making a concoction that the holies were told to 
smear on their sore feet.

Polline Akello: 'Joseph Kony commanded someone to look after me … I was lucky' 
| Liz Ford
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/oct/09/polline-akello-joseph-kony-lords-resistance-army-uganda>
George put some of the mixture on his feet and felt better. He was impressed 
with Kony’s knowledge of plants and remedies. Many believed Kony could even 
cure Aids. Kony said that it was Lakwena, the Holy Spirit, who had told him the 
secrets of the medicinal plants. He also said that Lakwena would periodically 
instruct him to forbid the consumption of certain foods like cows, pigs, honey 
or yams. Those who disobeyed such orders and were caught faced the ultimate 
penalty of 500 strokes of the cane, which meant certain death.

No one had survived 500 strokes but at the end of April, during the walk to 
CAR, one woman came close. As the group approached the border, people had woken 
up to realise that a woman was missing. Usually night camps were overseen by 
guards keeping watch to ensure no one escaped. But given the levels of 
exhaustion, it was no surprise the night guards had fallen asleep or were far 
from alert. Many thought the woman was probably hiding nearby, too tired to 
walk, waiting for the group to leave. Every escape attempt was treated 
seriously, particularly if it occurred in Kony’s group, as he regarded 
defections as personal affronts. A number of armed men combed the area around 
the camp. Kony had already started walking early that morning – he never waited 
for anybody – and the other commanders called off the search soon after, 
wanting to catch up with the general. Kony set a terrifying pace when marching 
and was nearly impossible to catch once he had gone too far ahead.

As the fighters returned, a young girl screamed from inside the forest. It was 
another abductee who had gone to urinate when she felt someone grabbing her 
from behind the bush where she had squatted. The missing woman tried to make 
her stop yelling, begging her not to tell, but the terrified girl had already 
given her up. Fighters ran toward the two and dragged the woman in front of 
Otto Agweng, the chief security officer. What he lacked in physical stature, 
Agweng made up in brute force. With the exception of a few senior commanders, 
everyone feared Agweng and his penchant for ordering terrible beatings for the 
smallest of infractions.

Joseph Kony cannot be swept under the carpet, warns DRC priest turned activist 
| Mark Tran
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2013/nov/06/joseph-kony-drc-abbe-benoit-kinalegu>
Agweng questioned her for a while. She answered in broken Luo that she had 
wanted to escape as she was too tired to continue walking and feared she would 
die of exhaustion. She shook and asked for mercy, promising that she would 
never again try to leave. Her body was swollen from beatings by the men who 
first caught her and her hair and clothes were dusty from being dragged by her 
feet in front of Agweng. He said he would not kill her because she was just a 
stupid woman and ordered she be beaten. Four hundred strokes on her back, 
bottom and thighs. If she were to make a sound she would be shot. A fighter 
holding a loaded gun stood over her as two others beat her with sticks.

George witnessed how she absorbed the beating without crying or touching her 
back, a violent spectacle, the likes of which he had rarely witnessed before. 
He did not know whether it was the level of brutality or her ability to 
withstand it without making a sound that made such an impression, but he was 
uncomfortable and angry. “It is one thing to make a mistake and pay for it,” he 
thought, “but these experiences scar the heart and soul as well as the body.”

After the 400 lashes were administered the woman could not lift herself off 
the ground. George helped her stand and walked her to the stream. She crawled 
into the water and washed herself. A few minutes later she walked slowly to the 
place she had spent the night, gathered her belongings and loaded up everything 
on her head. She walked at the back of the group, often falling to the ground 
but always getting up to continue walking. George was certain she would die 
from her wounds but she did not. Later that day she managed to keep pace with 
the group, walking in complete silence. Her resolve impressed the holies, who 
spoke about it for days. Ever since, the place where she was beaten was known 
to all asoddo miyangweny, the Luo term for 400 lashes.

 * When the Walking Defeats You: One Man’s Journey as Joseph Kony’s Bodyguard 
<https://www.zedbooks.net/shop/book/when-the-walking-defeats-you/forthcoming/>, 
written by Ledio Cakaj with a foreword by former UN force commander Roméo 
Dallaire, is published by Zed Books (£12.99).  