
A school in arctic Norway <https://www.theguardian.com/world/norway> is facing 
criticism for taking five-year-old children on an outing to view the slaughter 
and skinning of reindeer at a nearby farm.

 The criticism appeared on Facebook after the school posted photographs of 
eight children looking at reindeer, a culled animal hanging above a pool of 
blood, a child dragging bloodied pelts in the snow and children in their 
snowsuits tossing bits of animal carcasses into a container.

Dag Olav Stølan, head of the Granstubben Barnehage school, said the day trip 
on Tuesday was designed to teach the children about the indigenous Sami, who 
live in northern Norway and are often involved in reindeer herding.

Hundreds of thousands of reindeer roam freely across the region and provide 
work for those in the country’s sparsely populated northern wilderness.

“There are many reindeer outside,” Stølan said on Friday, speaking by 
telephone from the school near the city of Steinkje, 320 miles (515km) north of 
Oslo. “This is not the first time we have done it.”

“It is important to show where the meat comes from,” he said, adding that “we 
will do it again”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fschool-under-fire-over-trip-for-five-year-olds-to-see-reindeer-slaughter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2178a7a1e98b7ac2914dbffb12137f71404c8a0e%2F0_0_730_920%2F730.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=School%20under%20fire%20over%20trip%20for%20five-year-olds%20to%20see%20reindeer%20slaughter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fschool-under-fire-over-trip-for-five-year-olds-to-see-reindeer-slaughter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=School%20under%20fire%20over%20trip%20for%20five-year-olds%20to%20see%20reindeer%20slaughter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fschool-under-fire-over-trip-for-five-year-olds-to-see-reindeer-slaughter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2178a7a1e98b7ac2914dbffb12137f71404c8a0e%2F0_0_730_920%2F730.jpg>
 A child gets out of a truck filled with pelts at a reindeer farm in Henning, 
Norway. Photograph: AP 
The school has had previous outings to see pigs being slaughtered at other 
nearby farms.

Stølan said once parents had agreed to let their children participate, school 
employees talked to the children about the farm before and after the outing.

Teacher Therese Johnsen told the local daily Trønder-Avisa that none of the 
children had reacted negatively.

Negative reactions, however, did come on the school’s Facebook wall, where 
some people accused the school of “making sure we get more psychopaths among 
us” and said “people who are killing animals are not far away [from] killing 
human beings”.

Public dissections of animals are common in Scandinavia. In October 2015, a 
Danish zoo faced criticism and online protests for publicly dissecting a lion 
in front of children.

The Copenhagen zoo, meanwhile, made international headlines a year earlier 
when itkilled a giraffe because it was unsuitable for breeding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/09/marius-giraffe-killed-copenhagen-zoo-protests>
, then dissected it and fed it to lions in front of visitors, including 
children.

 