
Fragments of what appear to be burnt debris found on a beach in Madagascar 
could lead to a breakthrough in the case to solve howMalaysia Airlines flight 
MH370 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia-airlines-flight-mh370> 
vanished more than two years ago.

Discovered by American independent investigator Blaine Gibson – who has 
previously found other parts that wereconfirmed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/10/mh370-search-two-more-pieces-of-plane-debris-found-in-madagascar>
 to be from MH370 – the material is the first to show signs of exposure to heat 
or fire.

“If they are confirmed as MH370 and if the fire was before the crash, this is 
significant evidence of what caused the plane’s demise,” Gibson, who has been 
hunting for the aircraft for more than a year, told the Guardian by phone.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fscorched-debris-missing-mh370-plane-fire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42888cde58388cad9af20293184a370b622b5598%2F0_0_4176_2827%2F4176.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Scorched%20debris%20could%20suggest%20missing%20MH370%20plane%20suffered%20fire&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fscorched-debris-missing-mh370-plane-fire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Scorched%20debris%20could%20suggest%20missing%20MH370%20plane%20suffered%20fire&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fscorched-debris-missing-mh370-plane-fire%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42888cde58388cad9af20293184a370b622b5598%2F0_0_4176_2827%2F4176.jpg>
 Blaine Gibson after a meeting with the Australian Transport and Safety Bureau 
in Canberra this week. Photograph: Mark Graham/AFP/Getty Images 
However, he warned it was too early to draw firm conclusions – or even to know 
if the debris is from the missing plane. The parts, found by a local fisherman 
in southeast Madagascar, near Sainte-Luce, could have been burned after the 
crash once they washed ashore, he said.

Gibson flew to Australia this week to hand over the articles, along with three 
other pieces of suspected debris, to the Australian Transport Safety Bureau 
(ATSB) to analyse whether they came from the Boeing 777, which went off radar 
in March 2014.

Search for MH370 may be extended by Australia if funding can be found
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/19/search-for-mh370-may-be-extended-by-australia-if-funding-can-be-found>
“We don’t know yet if it is from MH370. I think it is,” he said.

The ATSB said the Malaysian government was responsible for the investigation 
and “therefore is responsible for the analysis of all possible MH370 debris”.


It confirmed that Gibson handed over the new finds on Monday and the agency 
was “seeking advice from Malaysian authorities regarding how they would like to 
proceed”.

The Malaysian department of civil aviation said in a statement published 
<http://www.themalaymailonline.com/what-you-think/article/process-must-take-its-course-on-possible-mh370-debris-department-of-civil-a>
 in local media on Tuesday that “any debris found will be analysed and examined 
in Canberra”.

It added: “At this juncture, it is too premature to certify the debris is 
indeed from MH370.”

The ATSB has previously analysed several pieces of debris and concluded that 
four of them were “almost certainly” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/12/mh370-two-new-aircraft-fragments-almost-certainly-from-missing-plane>
 from the missing plane. It is currently investigating asuspected wing flap 
that was found on Pemba island 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/25/malaysia-airlines-flight-370-possible-wreckage-found-on-tanzanian-island>
, Zanzibar, in June, but has not yet released its findings.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fscorched-debris-missing-mh370-plane-fire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F671e5759ef0ab849f2090f2c78bcfc1b8f2022ac%2F0_0_1439_929%2F1439.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Scorched%20debris%20could%20suggest%20missing%20MH370%20plane%20suffered%20fire&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fscorched-debris-missing-mh370-plane-fire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Scorched%20debris%20could%20suggest%20missing%20MH370%20plane%20suffered%20fire&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fscorched-debris-missing-mh370-plane-fire%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F671e5759ef0ab849f2090f2c78bcfc1b8f2022ac%2F0_0_1439_929%2F1439.jpg>
 Debris found by Blaine Gibson in Sainte-Luce appears to show scorch marks to 
both sides. Photograph: Blaine Gibson 
Gibson, whose private search is self-funded, described the items as shattered 
composite panels with hexagonal honeycombing inside. Both had evidence of 
blackened singeing and burning to off-white paint on both sides.

He said he believed the parts were likely to be from an internal section of 
the plane, such as the cabin or cargo area, rather than a structural piece 
involved in flying, such as the wing.

The ATSB is conducting a deep-sea sonar search but may halt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/19/search-for-mh370-may-be-extended-by-australia-if-funding-can-be-found>
 the operation by the end of this year if the current search area of 120,000 sq 
km (46,000 sq miles) in the southern Indian ocean does not uncover the aircraft.

MH370 pilot's flight simulator plotted course over southern Indian Ocean
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/28/mh370-pilot-flight-simulator-plot-course-southern-indian-ocean>
The operation to find MH370, which had 239 people on board, has cost AU$160m 
(US$122m) so far.

There are myriad theories as to how the plane disappeared. An onboard fire 
prior to the crash makes at least one of these –speculation that the pilot 
crashed the plane on purpose 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/28/mh370-pilot-flight-simulator-plot-course-southern-indian-ocean>
 – less likely.

The ATSB has conducted drift modelling to examine the effects of sea currents 
and wind on any wreckage.

In July last year, a flaperon was found on Réunion Island 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/03/reunion-debris-flaperon-malaysia-airlines-flight-mh370-confirmed>
 off the coast of Madagascar. It was the first piece to beformally identified 
<http://a%20piece%20of%20aircraft%20wing%20found%20on%20the%20shore%20of%20r%C3%A9union%20island%20in%20the%20indian%20ocean%20has%20been%20formally%20identified%20as%20part%20of%20the%20wreckage%20of%20malaysia%20airlines%20flight%20mh370%2C%20a%20french%20prosecutor%20has%20said./>
 as part of the MH370 wreckage.
 