
Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> stands to gain significant 
levels of independence over farming, fisheries and areas of industrial policy 
if it can strike the right deal with UK ministers after Brexit, the Scottish 
parliament has been told.

Prof Alan Page, an expert on public law at Dundee University, told MSPs 
investigating the impact of leaving the EU 
<http://www.parliament.scot/parliamentarybusiness/CurrentCommittees/100259.aspx>
 that Holyrood would be free to fix a minimum price for alcohol. That policy 
has been held up in the courts for four years by the whisky industry using 
European law.

Scotland could also pursue its own industrial investment policies free from EU 
rules restricting state aid after Brexit, subsidising or boosting some 
industries to protect employment, he said.

Sturgeon 'gobsmacked' by lack of answers to basic Brexit questions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/14/nicola-sturgeon-gobsmacked-lack-of-answers-to-basic-brexit-questions>
Holyrood would be able to decide its own fisheries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/29/scotlands-fishing-industry-welcomes-decision-to-leave-the-eu>
, farming and pollution policies, and control all food safety and agricultural 
funding rules for genetically modified foods, because these areas are already 
devolved to Scotland but currently overseen by the EU, Page said.

It could introduce stricter or more wide-ranging rules on climate change 
policy than the rest of the UK, as long as that did not undermine the UK’s 
international duties. Other experts warn Scotland would need to be flexible on 
foreign fishing quotas in Scottish waters to avoid damaging UK trade deals.


The advice will be seized on by opposition parties, particularly the Tories, 
and a handful of Scottish National party MSPs – including the former health 
secretary Alex Neil, now pressing the Scottish government to maximise the 
“Brexit dividend”.

Neil said Page’s report did not mention Holyrood’s opportunity to take on VAT, 
which raises £8.3bn a year in Scotland. EU rules heavily restrict the rights of 
member states to change VAT rates and also ban Holyrood from setting its own 
rates.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fscotland-gain-greater-independence-brexit-holyrood-told%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57234bfb67c1245bc8b171b13a988d5cc715c3f3%2F0_200_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Scotland%20could%20gain%20greater%20independence%20via%20Brexit%2C%20Holyrood%20told&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fscotland-gain-greater-independence-brexit-holyrood-told%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Scotland%20could%20gain%20greater%20independence%20via%20Brexit%2C%20Holyrood%20told&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fscotland-gain-greater-independence-brexit-holyrood-told%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57234bfb67c1245bc8b171b13a988d5cc715c3f3%2F0_200_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Fraserburgh in Scotland. Britain’s exit from the EU could give Scotland the 
freedom to decide its own fisheries policy, MSPs heard. Photograph: Murdo 
Macleod for the Guardian 
Neil said: “Glaring out throughout this report is the massive political 
opportunity for the Scottish parliament to use Brexit not just to ensure we get 
control over all EU competencies that we should control, but to actually use 
this exercise to get additional powers.”

Nicola Sturgeon, the first minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/23/nicola-sturgeon-to-appoint-brexit-minister>
, has not yet set out any clear shopping list of new powers for Holyrood and is 
instead campaigning on issues such as insisting the UK has to retain its 
membership of the EU single market on similar lines to Norway, and protect 
migrants’ rights of residence.

Many commentators caution that taking on these new powers will require a 
further increase in Holyrood’s budgets from the UK government, to replace the 
hundreds of millions of EU farming, structural and university research grants
Scotland would lose after Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/28/scottish-farms-face-losing-millions-subsidy-after-brexit>
.

Page said repatriating many of these powers would need both the Scottish and 
UK governments to agree on common standards in many areas, to avoid conflicts 
with trade partners and with the UK’s international legal obligations in areas 
such as climate policy and the environment.


There were also subtle but significant dangers to Holyrood’s authority if UK 
ministers used secondary legislation totranspose EU laws into British 
legislation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/01/theresa-may-to-propose-great-repeal-bill-to-unwind-eu-laws>
, Page told Holyrood’s culture, tourism, Europe and external affairs committee, 
which is investigating the impact of Brexit on the devolved parliament.

Theresa May, the prime minister, said on Sunday she planned to transpose all 
EU legislation into UK law when her governmentrepeals the 1972 European 
Communities Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/02/theresa-may-great-repeal-bill-eu-british-law>
. Scottish ministers would need to watch carefully to make sure that did not 
take away existing powers, Page said.

“In my view, this represents a significant potential gap in the framework of 
Scottish parliamentary control over UK law making in the devolved areas, which 
the Scottish parliament should be alert to the need to close should UK 
ministers be given the power to revise EU law in the devolved areas,” he said.

The professor said Brexit would still leave Westminster and the UK government 
in control of the bulk of EU powers, including over trade, free movement of 
workers and employment law, banking and services within the UK.

It was likely, he said, that the Scotland Act, which sets out Holyrood’s powers
 <http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2016/11/section/13/enacted>, would need 
to be overhauled to clarify the extent of the Scottish parliament’s autonomy 
and the need for UK approval after Brexit.

Ministers will also need to invest heavily in new regulators and expertise in 
many of these areas, to take on policy areas currently controlled by the EU.

Jackson Carlaw, the deputy leader of the Scottish Conservatives, said there 
was a risk that if Scotland was too out of step with the UK on some areas, it 
would damage trade deals. Even so “there are tremendous opportunities without 
the EU being a controlling authority, for the Scottish parliament to have much 
more control over many of the areas which come back to the UK”, he said.
 