
An injury-time strike from the substitute Chris Burke’s gave Ross County a 
point in theirScottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> game against 
Partick Thistle at Firhill.

The midfielder Sean Welsh scored with a penalty in the 24th minute and the 
hosts appeared set for their first Premiership winsince the opening day of the 
season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/06/celtic-dundee-partick-motherwell-scottish-premiership>
. However, in the fifth of nine added minutes for an injury to Jags defender 
Liam Lindsay, Burke – on for Marcus Fraser just after the hour mark – fired in 
a shot from 14 yards to make it 1-1, with the home side hanging on in the final 
moments.

Lonsana Doumbouya rescued a late point for Inverness as he scrambled the ball 
home with four minutes left againstKilmarnock. Souleymane Coulibaly’s 
seventh-minute penalty looked to have settled an uneventful match in Killie’s 
favour, only for Doumbouya to force the ball over the line in the closing 
stages to earn the hosts a 1-1 draw.

It was largely a forgettable game of football, with both teams struggling to 
create clear-cut chances and ultimately a point apiece was probably a fair 
reflection of the quality on show.

In the Championship, Hibs moved three points clear at the top after Neil 
Lennon’s team produced an improved second-half performance againstDunfermline 
to turn a 1-0 deficit into a deserved 3-1 win. Dundee United climbed to second 
place in the league after they ground out a victory againstDumbarton. United 
took the lead through an own goal from Gregor Buchanan, with William 
Edjenguélé’s left-footed shot making it 2-0. Robert Thomson pulled a goal back.

In one of the more notable results in the Scottish Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup> second round, the Lowland 
League side Hawick Royal Albert beat Berwick Rangers of League Two 3-2.
 