
Stewart Regan, the chief executive of the Scottish FA, has said he was 
“shocked and appalled” by the scenes that marred the conclusion of the 
country’s Cup final.

Hibernian and David Gray stun Rangers to make Scottish Cup history
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/21/rangers-hibernian-scottish-cup-final-match-report>
After Hibernian’s stoppage-time winner in a 3-2 win over Rangers, making their 
firstScottish Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup> triumph 
since 1902, thousands of the Edinburgh club’s fans invaded the pitch. Those who 
goaded the Rangers support were involved in on-field brawls and the Ibrox club 
claimed that several of their players and staff were also assaulted.

Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> did not receive their 
runners-up medals in public. Hibs were denied what would have been a 
traditional lap of honour after police horses had been utilised to clear the 
pitch.

“It was truly shocking, appalling,” said Regan. “When you have 20,000 [Hibs] 
fans and some come on to the pitch, it is very difficult to stop the sheer 
numbers. What should have been an historic, memorable Scottish Cup final will 
now, sadly, be remembered for all the wrong reasons.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F21%2Fhibernian-rangers-scottish-cup-pitch-invasion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0808ccac527d79f0ae3a7c9cfc6595222d331050%2F0_84_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Scottish%20FA%20chief%20%E2%80%98shocked%20and%20appalled%E2%80%99%20as%20crowd%20trouble%20mars%20Cup%20final&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F21%2Fhibernian-rangers-scottish-cup-pitch-invasion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Scottish%20FA%20chief%20%E2%80%98shocked%20and%20appalled%E2%80%99%20as%20crowd%20trouble%20mars%20Cup%20final&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F21%2Fhibernian-rangers-scottish-cup-pitch-invasion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0808ccac527d79f0ae3a7c9cfc6595222d331050%2F0_84_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 Fans clash on the Hampden Park pitch. Photograph: Ian MacNicol/Getty Images 
Regan, who will instigate a full investigation, confirmed the final had been 
placed at the SFA’s highest possible security level, with more than 1,000 
police officers and stewards deployed at the national stadium.

Ch Supt Kenny MacDonald said: “We understand that feelings run high at these 
events and fans want to celebrate their team’s win, however the reckless 
behaviour of fans entering the pitch is totally unacceptable and inexcusable. 
This created a significant safety issue.

“This action led to an outbreak of disorder between rival fans on the pitch. A 
dedicated investigation team is being set up to identify those who have carried 
out these acts of disorder and violence.”

In a statement, Rangers said: “Rangers players and staff were assaulted by 
these fans who invaded the pitch and in the interests of their safety could not 
return to the pitch for the medal presentation.

“There can be no place for the violent behaviour witnessed at the end of the 
final and Rangers fully expect the Scottish Football Association and Police 
Scotland to launch an investigation to find out where security measures failed.”

Alan Stubbs, the Hibs manager, said: “I wish all the fans had left the pitch 
so we could celebrate it properly. Everyone’s safety is the most important 
thing. I can understand the euphoria that surrounded it. I don’t condone it, 
but I understand it.”
 