
Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>’s embattled transport 
minister has apologised to passengers who have had “a bad experience on our 
railways” while insisting ScotRail had learned lessons as he made an emergency 
statement to Holyrood hours after Glasgow commuters faced severe disruption 
because of a damaged overhead power line.

Humza Yousaf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/nov/21/modern-rail-network-scotland-long-overdue>
, the Scottish government’s minister for transport and the islands, has come 
under increasing pressure in recent months as acatalogue of delays, 
overcrowding and disruption 
<http://www.heraldscotland.com/news/14912080.Kezia_Dugdale_tackles_First_Minister_on_ScotRail_performance/>
 caused by major works from the Dutch-operated franchise has caused chaos 
across the country.

Delivering an emergency statement on Wednesday afternoon, Yousaf was accused 
by critics of trying to avoid scrutiny while political attention was focused on 
the chancellor’s autumn statement in Westminster.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fscotlands-transport-minister-apologises-to-rail-travellers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24d89473cd170c3826a2532d6af8087e0e4de3eb%2F336_93_1453_1814%2F1453.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Scotland's%20transport%20minister%20apologises%20to%20rail%20travellers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fscotlands-transport-minister-apologises-to-rail-travellers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Scotland%27s%20transport%20minister%20apologises%20to%20rail%20travellers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fscotlands-transport-minister-apologises-to-rail-travellers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24d89473cd170c3826a2532d6af8087e0e4de3eb%2F336_93_1453_1814%2F1453.jpg>
 Humza Yousaf was accused of being out of touch. Photograph: Andrew 
Cowan/Scottish Parliament/PA 
Yousaf, considered a rising star of Nicola Sturgeon’s administration, had been 
mocked asout of touch 
<http://www.heraldscotland.com/news/14921345.Transport_Minister_accused_of_fresh_gaffe_ahead_of_emergency_ScotRail_statement/>
 after claiming earlier this week that Scottish travellers were not 
experiencing a poor service in comparison with the rest of the UK, while train 
drivers’ union Aslef last week called for him to be sacked.

The minister was then accused of trying to deflect attention from his own 
performance by announcing during a television interview on Sunday that he 
planned to invite unions and other political parties to talks on setting up a 
public sector train operator.

Yousaf told Holyrood that while he did not intend to underplay the slide in 
service quality, overall performance for the last year – since Dutch firm 
Abellio took over the franchise – had been 89.8%, higher than the current UK 
average of 87%.

He told MSPs: “The actions we are taking and the long-term transformation we 
have planned underlines this government’s commitment to improving the service 
received. That is why I instructed an improvement plan.”

ScotRail was ordered to produce a performance improvement plan in September 
after punctuality and reliability fell below expected standards. Abellio took 
over the franchise last year on a 10-year, £6bn contract that includes a break 
clause that Yousaf has said he would consider invoking.

Yousaf added: “We have accelerated £16m to upgrade key junctions, track and 
signalling equipment, for example at Glasgow central station. This week, points 
and circuits are being renewed at Cowlairs and Dunblane, while £14m is being 
spent to improve fleet reliability.


“Overcrowding is frustrating, that is why, from mid-December, we have 
introduced more services to and from Inverness and are finalising details to 
provide more carriages on peaktime service on the Borders Railway.”

The minister added that he stood by his invitation to discuss a not-for-profit 
bid for the franchise at a later date.

But he faced further criticism as he set out a series of actions and 
investments, including 200 extra carriages by 2019 and 70 new electric trains 
from 2017 on the main Edinburgh–Glasgow route, none of which amounted to new 
announcements or involved fresh funding.

Scottish Labour’s transport spokesperson, Neil Bibby, said: “Humza Yousaf had 
lots of promises to make about the future but very little to say about what 
action he was taking to deliver a better service for passengers now. What the 
minister announced today will do little to placate passengers facing a 
miserable commute this side of Christmas.”

Calling on the minister to publish his improvement plan in full and make a 
commitment to when services would get better, Bibby added: “The facts are that 
Humza Yousaf demanded an improvement plan and then ScotRail services have 
become worse. His handling of the rail crisis has seen him fall out with 
Abellio, Network Rail and the transport unions.”

Abellio also hit back at suggestions that it was profiting from poor services. 
It made public an email it had sent to Bibby, which read: “All of that money 
has been reinvested in the franchise, so you will understand our frustration 
that this fact is occasionally misrepresented. The notion that money is somehow 
being spirited to the Netherlands is not true and we will robustly challenge 
any suggestion to the contrary.”

Mike Connelly of Abellio UK told Bibby that the firm was dealing with a legacy 
of underinvestment and attempting to keep people moving at the same time. He 
added: “We believe it is unrealistic to expect the scale of infrastructure 
investment and modernisation to be undertaken (the largest of its kind since 
Victorian times) with little or no disruption to the travelling public.”
 