
Liam Boyce scored a first-half double as Ross County moved into the top six of 
theScottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> with a 3-2 win over 
local rivalsInverness Caledonian Thistle.

The result ended a series of five successive wins in Dingwall for Inverness.

Boyce ensured County’s Highland rivals ended the year on the bottom of the 
league table after he scored either side of Carl Tremarco’s 28th-minute header 
for Inverness.

Martin Woods extended the hosts’ advantage just after the hour mark and a late 
close-range finish from Alex Fisher gave Inverness hope of salvaging a draw 
before County saw the game out.

Partick Thistle passed up the opportunity to be in the top-six before the 
winter break as they were held to a frustrating goalless draw at home to
Kilmarnock.

Kris Doolan had two goals disallowed for offside on his 300th appearance for 
the home side. He was also denied by a stunning save from the Killie 
goalkeeper, Jamie MacDonald.

The visitors could have earned three points when Florent Bojaj missed from 
close range, Souleymane Coulibaly placed a header wide and Stevie Smith struck 
a shot straight at goalkeeper Tomas Cerny. It leaves Lee Clark’s men without a 
victory in six games while Thistle’s point comes on the back of wins over Ross 
County andDundee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/28/celtic-ross-county-rangers-st-johnstone-scottish-premiership>
.

Marcus Haber inspired Dundee to a comfortable 3-0 Tayside derby win over St 
Johnstone at Dens Park.

First-half goals from Faissal El-Bakhtaoui and Kostadin Gadzhalov and an own 
goal from the Saints captain, Steven Anderson, ensured St Johnstone’s five-game 
unbeaten run came crashing to an end. That meant they missed the opportunity to 
draw level on points with Hearts in fourth position.

Louis Moult headed a late equaliser to earn 10-man Motherwell a 1-1 
Lanarkshire derby draw withHamilton at the SuperSeal Stadium. Motherwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/motherwell> were in the ascendancy in the 
opening passages of play but had midfielder Lee Lucas sent off for a two-footed 
tackle on Massimo Donati in the 27th minute.

Hamilton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hamilton> made their numerical 
advantage count in the 54th minute when Alex D’Acol headed in Ali Crawford’s 
cross but Moult stunned Accies in the closing seconds.

In the Championship, Hibernian beat Falkirk 2-1 to go a point clear of Dundee 
United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundeeunited> with goals from 
Jason Cummings and Kris Commons’ free-kick with three minutes remaining. The 
Hibs manager, Neil Lennon, confirmed the signing of the released Preston winger 
Chris Humphrey.

Dundee United relinquished their lead at the top with a poor showing and a 1-0 
defeat atDumbarton. A first-half cross-come-shot from Mark Docherty evaded the 
Tangerines’ goalkeeper, Cammy Bell.
 