
Goals from Greg Kiltie and Craig Slater in five second-half minutes boosted 
Kilmarnock’s survival hopes as they moved out of the relegation play-off place 
with a fine 2-0 victory againstMotherwell at Fir Park.

Under the charge of the interim manager, Lee McCulloch, Kilmarnock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/kilmarnock> threatened the Motherwell 
goal at regular intervals but had to wait until the 56th minute to take the 
lead when Stevie Smith’s deep cross from the left set up Kiltie to knock the 
ball home from six yards. Motherwell lacked creativity and a series of poor 
set-piece deliveries further blunted their attack. And Mark McGhee’s side were 
soon exposed again as Slater broke from the halfway line following a Josh 
Magennis lay-off and decided to go all the way himself, running at the 
Motherwell back four before making space to strike into the bottom corner from 
18 yards.

Motherwell, who swapped places with Kilmarnock as a result, now need to lift 
themselves for a visit to bottom clubDundee United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundeeunited> on Tuesday.

Eji Kawashima’s late heroics rescued a 0-0 draw for Dundee United against 
Hamilton at New Douglas Park. With four minutes remaining the Japan goalkeeper 
dived to his right to stop Ali Crawford’s penalty and ensure a tight contest 
finished level.Hamilton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hamilton> were 
then reduced to 10 men in injury-time when a late challenge on striker Billy 
McKay earned Michael Devlin a second yellow card.

The new signing Michael O’Halloran scored seven minutes from time to spare 
Rangers’ blushes as they were held to a surprise 1-1 draw by the Championship 
strugglersAlloa Athletic at Recreation Park. Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> dominated the contest, but were 
profligate in front of goal and were punished when Jason Marr broke the 
deadlock for the bottom side with a header from a Burton O’Brien corner.

The Rangers manager, Mark Warburton, sent on his three substitutes – Billy 
King, Nicky Clark and Kenny Miller – in search of an equalising goal, which 
duly arrived when former St Johnstone man O’Halloran met a low cross from the 
right by James Tavernier. The Wasps held on gallantly for a point but remain 
nine points off the last safe spot.
 