
Unemployed Scots taking part in newly devolved, voluntary work programmes will 
not face sanctions, after the Scottish government wonits battle with Westminster
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/05/scottish-government-tries-exempt-scots-having-benefits-stopped>
 to exempt those taking part from having their benefits stopped or reduced.

The Scottish government’s minister for employability and training, Jamie 
Hepburn, welcomed this as “a great relief to individuals who have had to cope 
with this unnecessary stress and harm in the past”.

Hepburn said: “I am delighted that the Scottish government can give people an 
assurance that they will not be sanctioned through our employment programmes. 
We can now show that our programmes are an opportunity and not a threat.”

The newly devolved welfare powers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/01/scottish-government-to-set-up-benefits-agency-to-streamline-welfare>
, which were agreed under the Scotland Act, allow Scottish ministers to design 
their own employment services for disabled people and those at risk of 
long-term unemployment, beginning in April 2017. These transitional 
arrangements will be made before a full Scottish programme of employment 
support launches in April 2018.

Although sanctions will still be Westminster’s preserve, Hepburn has been 
pressing the UK government to clarify its position on whether Scots taking part 
in work programmes could be exempt because of the voluntary nature of the 
schemes. According toresearch by the Scottish Greens 
<https://greens.scot/scotland-against-sanctions>, 80,000 sanctions have been 
issued to people on employment programmes in Scotland since 2010.

Social security, not benefits: Scotland to ponder words of welfare
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/29/social-security-not-benefits-scotland-to-ponder-words-of-welfare>
Hepburn added: “While we won’t have the powers to prevent people from being 
sanctioned by the UK government, we can make sure we take a distinctly Scottish 
approach through our employment programme.”

The work and pensions secretary, Damian Green, confirmed the Scottish 
exemption in a letter to the convener of Holyrood’s social security committee, 
Sandra White, on Tuesday.


Reiterating his belief that conditionality and sanctions “contribute to a 
fairer society” and are “an important part of our benefits system”, Green said 
that the Department for Work and Pensions would make referrals to the devolved 
programmes on a voluntary basis, meaning that a sanction would not be applied 
for failure to attend or participate.

Green wrote: “DWP does, however, remain interested to see how the Scottish 
government will achieve delivery of an effective system which both secures 
value for money, and provides successful outcomes for those at risk of 
long-term unemployment, where engagement is on a purely voluntary basis.”

Last month, Hepburn said his government “doesn’t want to facilitate the UK 
government’s sanctions regime” when he met a group of single parents at the 
Edinburgh offices ofOne Parent Families Scotland <http://www.opfs.org.uk/>. 

He said he was planning work programmes that were voluntary and took into 
account the complexity of individual circumstances, after hearing the parents 
describe sleepless nights under threat of sanction and the practical 
difficulties of finding even entry-level jobs that were compatible with 
childcare.

Marion Davis, head of policy at One Parent Families Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, welcomed the result, saying: “We are 
very pleased that the Scottish government has taken a stand against benefit 
sanctions that force many single parents into low-paid and poor-quality work.

 “But there are still tens of thousands of single parents who are not in paid 
work and facing the risk of being sanctioned. They don’t need the threat of 
destitution to get them into work but need flexible and affordable childcare 
and better paid work.”
 