
A couple of miles outside St Andrews, the Eden Mill whisky distillery has been 
part of the Fife landscape for more than 200 years. It was founded by the Haig 
family and the whisky still bears their name. After 50 years, though, the 
distillery was shut down and converted into a paper mill.

And so it remained until 2012, when Fife businessman Paul Miller decided to 
return the site to its former glory. His small team of distillers are now 
famous locally for their pale, chocolate and crystal malt whiskies – which are 
matured for several years in wooden casks before they are ready to drink.

Therein lies the rub. Because despite its deep heritage, it’s not whisky 
that’s driving the sales growth, but gin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/aug/19/scotland-gin-trail-tourism-glasgow-edinburgh-shetland>
.

Scottish heritage helped build the whisky business. Now it’s payback time | 
Ian Jack
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/05/scottish-heritage-edwin-landseer-whisky-business-diageo-monarch-of-the-glen>
In fact, sales of the latter are proving so good that Christmas sales of 
scotch, a quintessentially festive drink, may well be surpassed by gin for the 
first time.

“When we started out we thought whisky, we didn’t really give gin a second 
thought,” Miller said. “But then gin happened.”

Across Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> independent whisky 
distillers increasingly favour gin over whisky because it’s quicker and easier 
to make, and gives them a faster return.

The way gin has muscled in on scotch in its heartland is telling. Some 70% of 
the gin consumed in the UK is made in Scotland, even though many people think 
of it as an English drink. In 2010 gin sales, at £774m a year, were about half 
those of scotch. Today, both are worth about £1.2bn, though by 2020, gin is 
predicted to soar to more than £1.5bn while scotch sales will stay flat, 
according to Euromonitor.

“Whisky is fantastic and my distillers love making it,” Miller said. “But with 
gin, they love the fact that what they are creatingcan be in a box for Christmas
 <http://www.edenmillstandrews.com/of-st-andrews/> within weeks. They don’t 
have to wait three or four years for what may or may not be the marginal 
difference they make to the whisky product.”

Miller’s gin now sells more than all his whisky products put together, making 
up 80% of total sales. Gin brought in almost £4m this year, and Miller expects 
that to double in 2017.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fscottish-distillers-new-formula-for-success-gin-whisky%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6c1f24cb991fba88f927bfad0d5903c4cc1296d%2F0_248_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Scottish%20spirits%20are%20soaring%20(but%20it%E2%80%99s%20gin%2C%20not%20whisky)&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fscottish-distillers-new-formula-for-success-gin-whisky%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Scottish%20spirits%20are%20soaring%20%28but%20it%E2%80%99s%20gin%2C%20not%20whisky%29&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fscottish-distillers-new-formula-for-success-gin-whisky%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6c1f24cb991fba88f927bfad0d5903c4cc1296d%2F0_248_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
 Scott Fergusson, head distiller at Eden Mill, is working on a gin for 
Christmas called ‘chestnuts roasting on an open fire’. Photograph: Wattie Cheung
“Gin was in the right place at the right time”, said Jonny Forsyth, a drinks 
analyst at Mintel, who says boutique brands such as Eden Mill have reinvented 
the market for it. “They’ve come up with a much more contemporary packaging and 
by using botanical ingredients they also appeal to young people who are really 
interested in natural products.”

Older brands are having to adapt. Gordon’s, for example, which is owned by 
drinks giant Diageo, has revamped its bottle for the first time in 15 years. 
Stephanie Jordan, who manages Diageo’s Tanqueray gin, acknowledges that smaller 
brands have shaken up the market, but is not overly worried by the competition. 
“You get some juniper essential oils and a few other things. You pretend you’re 
a chemist and Bob’s your uncle, you’ve made gin”, she said. “Often there isn’t 
even distillation involved, which is why so many brands can be launched.”

Jordan believes that half the gin brands coming to market will not be able to 
survive. Scotch, by contrast, has incredibly strict regulation “which means you 
don’t get people making it in their garages”.

But is she missing the point? Scott Fergusson, Eden Mill’s head distiller, 
thinks formerly hardened whisky makers are enjoying their foray into gin, and 
that won’t stop any time soon. “With whisky, there’s such a long lead-in time. 
There’s a process, there are ingredients, and you cannot deviate,” said 
Fergusson, who graduated from St Andrews University with a first in physics.

“Distillers love making gin because it’s almost the reverse. I spend lots of 
time thinking about recipes that will work, you’re free to experiment and you 
can taste the effects in a matter of days. So if it needs a bit more pepper, 
for example, you can change the results quickly. It’s made the job much more 
fun.”

Fergusson is working on a gin for Christmas called “chestnuts roasting on an 
open fire”. “It captures the consumer in a way that’s not just a cheesy 
gimmick. It’s authentic,” he said.

Visitors will be able to decide for themselves when the gin is available for 
tasting during special Christmas distillery tours.

Both in England and across Scotland, the whisky trail used to be the big lure, 
especially over the festive season. But this year 20,000 visitors have flocked 
to Eden Mill to see the gin being made, and there is a waiting list for the 
Christmas tour.

Online, Eden Mill is selling about 500 boxes a day of its “12 gins of 
Christmas” gift box. “I’d love to say that we cleverly thought all this 
through, but we didn’t,” said Miller. “We just happened to be in a good place 
to do it.”
 