
A 88th-minute penalty from Kane Hemmings earned Dundee a hard-fought draw with 
Motherwell in the Scottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> at Dens Park.

Mark McGhee’s Motherwell <https://www.theguardian.com/football/motherwell> led 
the contest for over an hour and were on course to move within a point of 
Dundee with first-half goals from Chris Cadden, thanks to Marvin Johnson’s 
assist, and Stephen Pearson superb solo effort. With Paul McGowan’s goal for 
Dundee after six minutes sandwiched inbetween.

Pearson’s goal especially stood out, with the former Derby midfielder 
collecting the ball and bursting through the home defence before firing past 
Scott Bain in the Dundee goal for his seventh goal of the season. But Paul 
Hartley’sDundee <https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundee> dug in for their 
point and Hemmings dashed Motherwell’s hopes when he struck with an 88th-minute 
spot-kick after Cadden had fouled Kevin Holt inside the box.

With the point, Hartley’s team climbed above Inverness into sixth position in 
the Premiership table.

The games between Inverness and Hearts and Partick versus Dundee United were 
postponed due to adverse weather conditions.

A second-half header from Carlton Morris gave Hamilton a 1-0 win over 
relegation rivalsKilmarnock at Rugby Park and applied more pressure on the 
Kilmarnock <https://www.theguardian.com/football/kilmarnock> manager, Gary 
Locke.

Morris connected with an Ali Crawford corner to secure the three points for 
Hamilton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hamilton>, their second win in 
17 games took them four points ahead of Kilmarnock.

The home side had few real chances although Kris Boyd did hit the crossbar 
with a free-kick after 65 minutes.

Gary Locke’s side, who were jeered off the pitch by their home fans at the 
final whistle, remain in the relegation play-off position, 11 points clear of 
basement team Dundee United.

Locke’s job is already in jeopardy after being well beaten by United last 
Saturday.

In the Championship, the on-loan midfielder Billy King scored a late winning 
goal on his debut as leadersRangers snatched a dramatic 1-0 win against Falkirk 
at Ibrox.

The last meeting between the two teams was an entertaining encounter at the 
Falkirk Stadium, with Peter Houston’s Falkirk side coming out winners with a 
2-1 win. But goal opportunities were at a premium in this game due to the 
blustery conditions.

The 21-year-old Hearts winger King made a surprise six-month loan switch to 
Ibrox this week and celebrated the move when he met a James Tavernier cross 
with a stoppage-time diving header to earn his new side three points.

Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> had appeared to be 
heading towards their first game without scoring under Mark Warburton but 
King’s winner moves them eight points clear of their nearest rivals Hibernian, 
who were in League Cup semi-final action.

It was a blow for Houston’s disciplined Falkirk team, whose title hopes appear 
to be over having now fallen 10 points behind Rangers.
 