
Anyone following the celebrity "news" cycle is aware by now that Scout Willis, 
daughter ofBruce Willis <https://www.theguardian.com/film/brucewillis> and Demi 
Moore, has been waging a topless twitpic campaign to protest Instagram's "no 
female nipples" policy and the patriarchyen générale. Because what better way 
to stick it to the man than by showing him your boobs?

It all started about a week ago when Instagram suspended Ms Willis's account 
<https://twitter.com/Scout_Willis/status/471809921986863104> because she posted 
a photo of a sweatshirt she'd designed called the "babe bomber" 
<https://twitter.com/Scout_Willis/status/469648264573509632> which features, 
yes, a photo of two babes showing off their enviable fashion tits. Scout was 
annoyed, and said so. She thenmade a new Instagram account 
<https://twitter.com/Scout_Willis/status/471137651958239232> for the express 
purpose of posting "beautiful, artistic nudes", changing her middle name to 
"Areola" in solidarity with said nudes. "Let's just see how long they let me 
stay this time," shetweeted 
<https://twitter.com/Scout_Willis/status/471137764000669697>. (It didn't take 
long.)

Since then, Scout has taken to the less oppressive environment of Twitter to 
vocally protest Instagram and American prudishness under a simple hashtag:
#FreeTheNipple <https://twitter.com/hashtag/FreeTheNipple?src=hash>. She even 
took to the streets of New York City 
<https://twitter.com/Scout_Willis/status/471420788872982528>, topless, to 
demonstrate just how absurd it is thatwomen are (technically) allowed to go 
nude in the Big Apple 
<https://twitter.com/Scout_Willis/status/471419680755036160> but not on the big 
photo-sharing site. She pointed out how hypocritical it is that people are 
allowed to post images ofdrugs 
<https://twitter.com/Scout_Willis/status/468795475337154560> and violence 
<https://twitter.com/Scout_Willis/status/471271518211948545>, as well as images 
<https://twitter.com/Scout_Willis/status/471308386160492544> that seem to 
objectify <https://twitter.com/Scout_Willis/status/471272644990758912> women, 
so long as there are no female nips present. Fellow Instagram refugee Rihanna 
hasvoiced her support <https://twitter.com/rihanna/status/471788131973222400>, 
among others.

"Now that every1 is listening, let's talk about root of what is happening 
here, stop sensationalizing and talk about what's really at stake," Scouttweeted
 <https://twitter.com/Scout_Willis/status/472007060947996672>. "It's so much 
bigger than @instagram 
<https://twitter.com/Scout_Willis/status/472008571388190720> now ... This is 
about helping women <https://twitter.com/Scout_Willis/status/472008859415224320>
 feel empowered to make personal choices about their bodies not dictated by 
what society says is decent."

Whose apps? Our apps!

But does "freeing the nipple" actually help with any of that? As someone who 
oncewalked around topless 
<http://www.theawl.com/2011/06/get-a-load-of-the-frederick-law-olmsteds-on-her> 
in Central Park ostensibly as a means of testing out New York's law but mainly 
because I thought it was funny (and because my bosses offered me a sizeable 
bonus), I feel qualified to say: eh, probably not.

Do we live in a society that's simultaneously sex-obsessed and puritanical? 
Why, yes. Could the United States stand to work on some of these issues? Sure! 
It would be great if the virgin/whore dichotomy would just realize it's drunk 
and go home.

But can this type of protest – one that mainly involves showing off a body the 
male gaze is likely to enjoy – ever be terribly subversive on this (or any 
other) front? And how high on feminism's list of priorities should "the right 
to be topless in every corner of public space" be, especially when the internet 
already seems to devote quite a bit of bandwidth to that?

When I did my stunt piece, I got a ton of fan mail from "top free" groups 
whose reason for existing was to free the female breast from its patriarchal 
shackles. They applauded my bravery, which I thought was funny. I don't think 
it's all that brave or feminist for someone like me – a young, white, 
cisgender, able-bodied, acceptably curvy woman with a history of getting nude 
for money – to move through the relatively safe environment of Central Park and 
to take her top off for some photos. There's a certain level of privilege there.


That is a criticism that's been leveled at many topless and/or sexy 
protestors, from European groupFemen <https://www.theguardian.com/world/femen> 
to the Slutwalk to Peta – and one that carries some water.


When your protest results in images that look like they could be in Playboy, 
is there any way to distinguish the progressive from the status quo? I think 
this applies doubly when the images are an end unto themselves and not merely a 
means of drawing attention to a more serious cause. At least the members of 
Femen are using their boobs to protest important stuff, like oppressive 
dictatorships and female genital mutilation! But then again, the members of 
Femen have been accused of intervening in cultures that are not their own in 
ways that are less than respectful.


One group’s pitfalls aside, I hope that as Scout Willis gets older, she 
realizes that feminism is about collective rights and not just a very 
privileged kind of self-expression – and devotes her considerable mouthpiece to 
causes that are more, well, political. There's nothing wrong with nipples, but 
they're hardly the only entities that need freeing.

 