
In a small room in a two-storey pebbledash building on a cul-de-sac in Neath, 
south Wales, eight people are poring over worksheets, children’s dictionaries 
and cookbooks. Split into pairs, the group, in their 40s and 50s, are reading 
short passages aloud, discussing them, and spelling out words they find 
difficult. The adult literacy class is run as part of theCommunities First 
scheme 
<http://gov.wales/topics/people-and-communities/communities/communitiesfirst/?lang=en>
: a £300m anti-poverty initiative launched in Wales in 2001, which, in 52 local 
“clusters”, provides a range of services for local residents, from health 
advice and support, to parenting classes and new skills workshops.

Damage done by cuts and sanctions brings Oxfam to Wales | Dawn Foster
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/23/damage-cuts-and-sanctions-oxfam-wales-austerity>
But in mid-October, Carl Sargeant, the Welsh government’s communities 
secretary, said he “was minded to phase out” the flagship scheme and wanted a “
new approach 
<http://gov.wales/newsroom/people-and-communities/2016/new-approach-needed-to-build-resilient-communities/?lang=en>
 to meet the challenges of the future”, stating “Communities First was launched 
15 years ago, and has supported many people in some of our most deprived 
communities. In that time, however, our economy and society have been through 
huge changes.” Sargeant said that funding would be redirected to focus on the 
most deprived, and has launched anonline questionnaire 
<http://gov.wales/newsroom/people-and-communities/2016/161024-building-resilient-communities/?lang=en>
 to gather the views of Welsh residents. The move comes at a time when towns 
like Neath fear losing vital funding in the aftermath of Brexit.

For Val Davies, the announcement was a devastating blow. The 48-year-old came 
to the scheme two years ago, after fleeing her abusive partner and going into 
hiding. “I left school and I couldn’t read or write – so the state let me down 
then. And the jobcentre couldn’t help me at all. This is the only place that 
has helped – and now it’s closing, they’re letting me down again.”

People find Communities <https://www.theguardian.com/society/communities> 
First either through referrals from jobcentres, GPs or the Citizens Advice 
Bureau, through word of mouth, or through advertised drop-in activities. As 
well as classes and activities, it runs a busy welfare rights advice drop-in 
that has helped many people claim benefits they are entitled to and fill in the 
necessary forms, and informs people of their rights at work.

The public understand Communities First because it’s being delivered direct to 
them – not through bureaucratic layers

Volunteers are crucial to Communities First: in Neath, more than 300 are 
involved with the scheme, many of whom are unemployed and came to the scheme 
for help, before getting involved in teaching skills, or gaining experience to 
work in the voluntary sector. David Edwards, Neath Communities First cluster 
manager, says it has 25-30 volunteers working on the scheme, helping to run 
courses or providing one-to-one help in the literacy and computing classes. In 
the Neath cluster, several hundred people a month attend different sessions – 
and a recent jobs fair held by Communities First in the town attracted over 500 
people.

The scheme fills in gaps in service provision that the jobcentre and advice 
centres don’t usually provide. Rather than endlessly referring people on to 
other services, attendees often join one class or session, and progress through 
several others, building confidence and getting a clearer idea of their own 
strengths.

Davies initially joined a walking group run by Communities First, aimed at 
boosting health and encouraging isolated people to socialise, but then started 
attending the reading groups after the Neath centre staff learned of her
literacy problems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jul/26/adult-skills-inequality-theresa-may-further-education>
. For Davies, Communities First isn’t just about getting the necessary skills 
to find a job. “It’s helped my confidence massively, and now I can actually 
think about getting a job. But if it goes, I don’t know what I’ll do,” she 
says. “And it’s not just people like me, it’s future generations in this 
community.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fwales-poorest-regions-communities-first-scheme-scrapped%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8fc0d3f92134db902e78aa373d02cb93e56a00cf%2F36_223_5680_3408%2F5680.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20body%20blow%20for%20Wales%E2%80%99s%20poorest%20regions%20%7C%20Dawn%20Foster&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fwales-poorest-regions-communities-first-scheme-scrapped%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20body%20blow%20for%20Wales%E2%80%99s%20poorest%20regions%20%7C%20Dawn%20Foster&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fwales-poorest-regions-communities-first-scheme-scrapped%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8fc0d3f92134db902e78aa373d02cb93e56a00cf%2F36_223_5680_3408%2F5680.jpg>
 A literacy class at the Melin Advice Centre in Neath Photograph: Dimitris 
Legakis/Athena Pictures 
But the scheme has been criticised for costing too much. In 2012, the 
programme was reorganised to focus on the most deprived “clusters” – most of 
which are in south Wales, especially around the valleys. Even so, last year the 
Welsh government paid local councils £31.7m in ringfenced Communities First 
funding. Neath Port Talbot borough council got £1.7m to split between three 
clusters – Neath, Afan and Western Valley. Anevaluation 
<http://gov.wales/statistics-and-research/evaluation-communities-first/?lang=en>
 for the Welsh government in 2015 found that “the programme is displaying a 
high degree of fidelity to its intended model of delivery” and that the focus 
on the most deprived areas was effective; but it also highlighted concerns 
about both austerity and the ability to attract qualified staff to run the 
local programmes.

Announcing the decision to consider scrapping Communities First, Sargeant 
said: “I am not convinced that continuing to focus on 52 small areas is the 
most effective way to deliver forWales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales>.”

“It’s going to be devastating, it’s going to cause a huge impact,” says John 
Warman, Neath’s mayor and a councillor for the ward the centre is based in. 
“There’s a lot of people who’ve been left behind. They might have missed out on 
education in schools; they’ve lost confidence and they’ve lost motivation. It’s 
vitally important that we don’t neglect those people, that we make sure those 
people are not left behind, and give them motivation and confidence for the 
future.” He points to official labour market statistics which show that31% of 
Neath residents aged over 16 have no qualifications 
<https://statswales.gov.wales/Catalogue/Community-Safety-and-Social-Inclusion/Communities-First/DemographicIndicators-by-CommunitiesFirstCluster>
, compared to 26% across the whole of Wales. The area is, indeed, very 
deprived: it had thelowest male life-expectancy rate 
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/lifeexpectancies/bulletins/lifeexpectancyatbirthandatage65bylocalareasinenglandandwales/2015-11-04>
 in England and Wales in 2013, andmore than a quarter 
<http://www.nomisweb.co.uk/reports/lmp/la/1946157394/report.aspx?town=neath#tabeinact>
 of the local working-age population don’t have jobs, compared to the British 
average of 22%.

The Welsh government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/welsh-assembly-government> has promised 
to replace Communities First with alternative initiatives to combat poverty, 
but Edwards is sceptical. “How do you deliver something so interconnected 
without those links? You need people to be engaged and Communities First is 
completely embedded in these communities. If you make a new programme you need 
to get people on it, and it’s the engagement of staff and volunteers that makes 
that happen,” Edwards warns. ”I think one of the most devastating aspects of 
poverty is the poverty of ambition. People lose the understanding of what’s 
even possible. That’s one of the things we help them with – to see there are 
possibilities. That’s not something you can do in one intervention, it means a 
relationship that’s built up over a period of time.”

The fallout from Brexit may also worsen poverty: a linked scheme, Communities 
for Work 
<http://gov.wales/topics/people-and-communities/communities/communities-for-work/?lang=en>
, has European money attached to it, and staff on the scheme are managed by 
Communities First employees. Communities for Work is based in Neath’s local 
library, which is struggling financially – the closure of both Communities 
First and the withdrawal of EU funding would mean the loss of rental income for 
the library. Many schemes are also run out of existing community buildings and 
help make them viable, and staff are fearful of the wider impact of both the 
Brexit negotiations and the Communities First decisions.

“I’m stunned by the [referendum] result,” says Warman. “We’ve always had to 
fight for every penny in Westminster. We know there will be money coming in 
from the assembly, but they are dependent on what they get from Westminster. So 
it will have a big effect on Neath and Port Talbot.”

Edwards and Warman have been told relatively little about the future, other 
than that there is a plan to offer a nine-month period of substantially reduced 
services, but to keep the best aspects of Communities First, although it’s 
unclear how this will be decided or judged.

“It will create a huge void in the community. The public understand 
Communities First because it’s being delivered direct to them. Not through 
bureaucratic layers with people just reading about it in the paper and never 
seeing the effect on their lives,” says Warman. “The public can see it, access 
it, and understand it: don’t take that away from them.”

Some names have been changed
 