
In tech circles, alongside words such as “scaleable” and “the gig economy”, 
you often hear the phrase “tech for good” bandied around. Sometimes it’s a 
fairly innocuous but ultimately toothless concept, essentially denoting the 
idea that technology has the potential to be a driver for positive social 
change but not doing very much about it. Other times it can take on a more 
creepily utopian tone, suggesting that should the world more closely represent 
the shiny libertarian enclaves of Silicon Valley, the world’s problems would be 
solved. And sometimes – just sometimes – it does what it says on the tin.

Sea Hero Quest: the mobile phone game helping fight dementia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/16/sea-hero-quest-the-mobile-phone-game-helping-fight-dementia>
A new game, designed to test spatial navigation, appears at first glance to do 
just that.Sea Hero Quest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/16/sea-hero-quest-the-mobile-phone-game-helping-fight-dementia>
, which involves navigating a boat through choppy waters, contains a diagnostic 
test for the early signs ofAlzheimer’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/alzheimers> disease. The game has now been 
played by more than 2.4 million people – which the team behind the game say 
makes it the largest dementia study in history.

It’s now set to be adapted for use in a clinical setting – data could be fed 
back to clinicians, allowing for earlier diagnosis, better understanding of how 
medication is working for a particular patient and a more accurate and precise 
measurement of a patient’s decline. It could even be incorporated into NHS 
programmes.

This, it goes without saying, is initially incredibly attractive. 
Understanding and managing an illness or being alerted when you’re at risk 
simply through the daily use of an app sounds simple, easy and most of all 
useful. Could this not be a genuine use of tech for good, rather than the banal 
and empty proclamations often heard from CEOs and founders?

In theory, yes. In practice: maybe not.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fsea-hero-quest-game-medical-researchers-alzheimers-privacy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F409fdeb711286d19e19bfe0685eee0a133a984e1%2F0_1858_2732_1639%2F2732.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sea%20Hero%20Quest%20is%20of%20huge%20benefit%20to%20medical%20researchers.%20So%20what%E2%80%99s%20the%20catch%3F%20%7C%20Emily%20Reynolds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fsea-hero-quest-game-medical-researchers-alzheimers-privacy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sea%20Hero%20Quest%20is%20of%20huge%20benefit%20to%20medical%20researchers.%20So%20what%E2%80%99s%20the%20catch%3F%20%7C%20Emily%20Reynolds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fsea-hero-quest-game-medical-researchers-alzheimers-privacy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F409fdeb711286d19e19bfe0685eee0a133a984e1%2F0_1858_2732_1639%2F2732.jpg>
 More than 2.4 million people have downloaded Sea Hero Quest to their phones. 
Photograph: The Sea Hero Quest/PA 
As with any health data-driven project, it comes with stipulations. A recent 
study 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/01/facebook-target-mental-health-data-online>
 in Lancet Psychiatry suggested that data gathered on Facebook could provide a 
“wealth of information” about mental health, with a series of language analysis 
and facial emotion recognition algorithms providing “insights into offline 
behaviours”. This, too, sounds great. Having your health monitored and managed 
through the passive use of technology you probably already use – what more 
could you want?

But there are a number of concerns here: primarily, the safety of private 
health data. The addition of a private company in the latter study may make it 
feel different: a towering behemoth such as Facebook obviously feels more 
threatening than something set up for and run by clinicians. But to not have 
the same reservations just because the data was being sent to scientists would 
be incredibly naive.

What could Facebook target next? Our mental health data | Emily Reynolds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/01/facebook-target-mental-health-data-online>
Science, much like technology, is often presented as objective, reasonable 
fact, without mentioning the very obvious caveat that it is conducted by human 
beings, who are often neither reasonable nor objective.Multiple studies 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4496034/> about statistical 
analysis are useful to recall here – the results of such analyses may seem 
completely objective, but often reflect the preconceived biases of those 
conducting them. That’s not to say that would be the case with Sea Hero Quest, 
of course: just that the results of such research can be fallible.

And it’s also important to remember that, should the Conservative party have 
its way, the NHS may be in the hands of several, separately operated and 
privately owned companies before too long. This adds further complications: who 
would have access to our health data? How would they use it? How would data be 
efficiently and safely communicated across different companies? Would their 
data protection processes be cohesive? Would they be meticulous enough to 
protect our most private, personal data? The idea of having your phone feed 
data to a central NHS database sounds great in principle, but these questions 
would need to be answered before that could safely become a reality.

In an ideal world, tech would be utilised to help us to diagnose and treat 
illnesses: anything that can efficiently and effectively help people manage 
long-term or life-threatening conditions can only be a good thing. Similarly, 
the idea of a NationalHealth <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> 
Service that is genuinely innovative, that uses new ways to help people and 
that has a strong grasp on data security while it does so is incredibly 
appealing. Unfortunately, as with most utopian ideas, you’re left wondering 
whether it might just be too good to be true.
 