
I will have some of dat green juice.” Sean Paul has barely stepped over the 
threshold of Westlake Recording Studios, located in the sprawl of West 
Hollywood, when he politely makes the request. Knowing of Paul’s life-long love 
affair with marijuana, his muse for many a club hit over the years, I presume 
this is a smoke-free way to enjoy the herb. But when Ritchie his security guard 
comes back moments later, it is with a cold-pressed kale concoction in hand.

That’s quite the clean-living transformation, I remark. Sean Paul grins and 
leans back, relaxed, against a grand piano. Gone are his signature cornrows 
(or, later, his not-so-signature mohawk), and he has given up smoking weed due 
to asthma. It turns out that I wasn’t far wrong after all. “Oh, I still like to 
get high, it helps with the creativity,” he says. “Except now I just have it in 
tea.”

Sean Paul: Tomahawk Technique – review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/mar/29/sean-paul-tomahawk-technique-review>
Life has clearly changed since the early 2000s, when Sean Paul Henriques 
brought the booty-bouncing rhythms of dancehall out of the Kingston clubs and 
onto the world stage. The Jamaican artist was once the go-to man for dancefloor 
dynamite, songs that urged us all to “shake that booty non-stop, when the beat 
drops just keep swinging it”. Get Busy, Gimme The Light, the Beyoncé-featuring 
Baby Boy, Breathe with R&B singer Blu Cantrell – these songs became 
commonplace, at carnival, in a bougie Chelsea bar or a suburban Oceana club. 
Back then he was among the world’s pop elite.

But while his 2002 album Dutty Rock launched dancehall into the mainstream, 
musical tastes inevitably moved on. And though Paul himself has been critical 
of some ofdancehall’s homophobic content 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jun/06/jamaica-music-anti-gay-dancehall-homophobia>
, there was outcry over the derogatory lyrics of contemporaries likeBeenie Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2004/aug/17/advertising.arts> and Elephant 
Man <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2004/dec/10/gayrights.popandrock>. Soon 
the genre fell out of favour and out of the charts. Paul’s 2005 followup The 
Trinity was popular among fans but panned by critics, and he recalls his fade 
from global fame a little remorsefully.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fsean-paul-drake-kanye-dancehall-bieber%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46d6aa24a5ef38166f2b52211e729c0defb9abee%2F0_84_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sean%20Paul%3A%20'Drake%20and%20Bieber%20do%20dancehall%20but%20don't%20credit%20where%20it%20came%20from'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fsean-paul-drake-kanye-dancehall-bieber%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sean%20Paul%3A%20%27Drake%20and%20Bieber%20do%20dancehall%20but%20don%27t%20credit%20where%20it%20came%20from%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fsean-paul-drake-kanye-dancehall-bieber%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46d6aa24a5ef38166f2b52211e729c0defb9abee%2F0_84_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Paul and Beyoncé in 2003. Photograph: Dimitrios Kambouris/WireImage 
“Since about 2009, I was fighting that worry that I wasn’t relevant no more,” 
he says, as we sit in the windowless womb of a studio. “It does stress you out 
at times. I was like, ‘I was up here and now I’m nothing to people.’” His last 
album, 2014’sFull Frequency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/feb/16/sean-paul-full-frequency-review>
, sold fewer than 5,000 copies in the US. In 2015, the Grammy award-winning 
performer left his label and became an independent artist for the first time in 
a decade.

Over the past year, however, dancehall has been dutty wining its way back into 
the worldwide consciousness. Diplo, long in debt to dancehall’s digital 
rhythms, brought them to an even wider audience as Major Lazer. Last year,
Lazer’s track Lean On <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YqeW9_5kURI> became the 
most streamed single of all time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/12/spotify-most-streamed-track-all-time-major-lazer-lean-on>
, albeit one that’s since been given the dubious title of “tropical pop”. Then 
cameJustin Bieber’s mega-hit Sorry <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fRh_vgS2dFE>
, which teamed a skeletal dancehall beat with pure pop and was a accompanied by 
dancehall moves in the dancing video. Never one to be left out, Drake openly 
drew on dancehall throughoutViews From The Six 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/29/drake-views-review-hip-hop-king-tightens-grip>
. Dancehall talent Assassin, meanwhile, made his mark both onKanye’s Yeezus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/jun/17/kanye-west-yeezus-review> and, 
more recently,Kendrick Lamar’s To Pimp A Butterfly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/mar/22/kendrick-lamar-to-pimp-butterfly-review-fearless-in-scope>
.

Dancehall distraction: the club night uniting South Sudan's youth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/07/dancehall-distraction-the-club-night-uniting-south-sudans-youth>
It’s an international resurgence that Sean Paul has witnessed with both 
amusement and scepticism. He’s even detected dancehall influences in artists 
who might be considered unlikely adopters of Jamaican riddims. “You can 
definitely hear it in Taylor Swift,” he says. “You know that song…?” He 
launches into a high-pitched rendition of the chorus ofShake It Off 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nfWlot6h_JM>. “See, there’s definitely 
dancehall in there.”

One thing was for sure, though: if dancehall was coming back, so was he. Sean 
Paul still lives in Jamaica, but we meet in LA because this is where he has 
come to work on his new album. The surprise success of Cheap Thrills, his 
recent chart-topper with one-woman pop hit machine Sia– which not only 
reacquainted the star with the top of the charts but also landed Sia her first 
Billboard number one – has spurred him to finish his new material quickly. As 
the 43-year-old says himself, no one is better placed to “bring back some 
authentic dancehall”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnYh-n7EOtMA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnYh-n7EOtMA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnYh-n7EOtMA&media=>
He is outspoken about the new generation of artists who’ve appropriated the 
sound of dancehall without acknowledging its roots. “It is a sore point when 
people like Drake or Bieber or other artists come and do dancehall-orientated 
music but don’t credit where dancehall came from and they don’t necessarily 
understand it,” he says, shaking his head. “A lot of people get upset, they get 
sour. And I know artists back in Jamaica that don’t like Major Lazer because 
they think they do the same thing thatDrake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/drake> and Kanye did – they take and take 
and don’t credit.”

While Paul says he’s a fan of Drake (“I love some of his songs but I don’t 
think he’s the best rapper”) the bashment hooks and patois phrases used in 
Views From The Six are seen by Paul as less of a homage to dancehall and more 
of an exploitation. He’s not alone. In May, respected dancehall figure Mr Vegas 
openly attacked Drake as a fake for not fully crediting his Jamaican influences.

Sean Paul: 10 of the best
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/sep/24/sean-paul-10-of-the-best>
A major problem, Paul adds, is that many of the authentic dancehall artists in 
the Caribbean who gain popularity online can’t get visas to travel in the US, 
both to tour and work with producers, because they have convictions on their 
records. Onecrossover artist Popcaan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jun/28/popcaan-dance-hall-kingston>, 
for example, who appeared on Views From The Six and has also worked withJamie xx
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/jun/04/jamie-xx-in-colour-sam-smith-dance-music-snobbery>
, has, according to Billboard, struggled to work in America because of past 
marijuana-related offences.

Sean Paul is equally dismissive of “tropical house”, a music genre which began 
as a way to describe the soft, Balearic-infused synth of DJs like Kygo but has 
since been attached to tracks which clearly draw from dancehall. Rolling 
Stone’s review of Rihanna’s Work described it as “a tropical house-flavored 
track featuring Drake” while a Wall Street Journal article described how 
Bieber’s What Do You Mean? was pioneering the “Caribbean, beach-party vibe” of 
tropical house in the mainstream. It’s no surprise that the genre has been 
accused of whitewashing Jamaican influences out of popular music.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fsean-paul-drake-kanye-dancehall-bieber%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6e85fa0e5ff3352f046b1989f606f0d34ad2be6%2F0_251_3837_2302%2F3837.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sean%20Paul%3A%20'Drake%20and%20Bieber%20do%20dancehall%20but%20don't%20credit%20where%20it%20came%20from'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fsean-paul-drake-kanye-dancehall-bieber%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sean%20Paul%3A%20%27Drake%20and%20Bieber%20do%20dancehall%20but%20don%27t%20credit%20where%20it%20came%20from%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fsean-paul-drake-kanye-dancehall-bieber%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6e85fa0e5ff3352f046b1989f606f0d34ad2be6%2F0_251_3837_2302%2F3837.jpg>
 Paul in the studio. Photograph: Bampson 
But Paul does acknowledge that major label artists have adapted the dancehall 
sound for current tastes, and those are styles he has to look to, too, if he 
wants relevancy again. “Dancehall is back but this time it’s also infused with 
Afrobeat, with hip-hop, with trap, and that’s fine with me,” he says. “Sure, I 
would like what we do in Jamaica, that authentic dancehall, to be on top, but 
it simply isn’t. So I want this album to bridge that gap.”

Over the past year, he’s penned more than 200 tracks, both on his own and in 
collaboration with musicians and producers back in Jamaica, and recruited a 
series of starry producers, such as Blood, who was behind Bieber’s Sorry. 
There’s a track withWiz Khalifa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/apr/16/wiz-khalifa-see-you-again-breaks-record-most-spotify-streams>
 as well as another with one of this year’s breakthrough pop stars, yet to be 
announced. It doesn’t sound too far off familiar Sean Paul territory, only with 
more EDM drops.

Paul’s attitude is more one of pragmatism than puritanism when it comes to 
making sure this album repeats his successes of a decade ago. He’ll seemingly 
work with anyone who is up for it. “I just worked withClean Bandit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/may/27/clean-bandit-new-eyes-exclusive-album-stream>
, and another English pop group… what are they called?” There is an awkward 
pause as he tries to remember. “Oh yeah,Little Mix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/05/little-mix-get-weird-review-no-growing-up-for-candy-coloured-pop-stars>
.”

The one constant is Paul’s ole purpose to make people dance: he’s the first to 
admit he makes party music because it was one of the few levellers he had as a 
child. Growing up in a middle-class suburb in Kingston, Paul was just 13 when 
his dad was sentenced to 15 years in jail for drugs offences. As a result, his 
mum worked two jobs to keep the family afloat.

The playlist - reggae, dancehall and soca: Face T, Popcaan, Farmer Nappy and 
more
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/22/the-playlist-reggae-dancehall-and-soca-face-t-popcaan-farmer-nappy-and-more>
“Music provided a sense of equality with everyone, and a release on the 
weekends when I didn’t think about dad in prison, or mum having to struggle, or 
me feeling like an outcast,” he says. “It was just like, ‘This song is fucking 
dope, and that girl’s hot, let me wine on her.’ That’s what I want my music to 
keep doing.”

Now that he’s married, and with a baby on the way, Sean Paul may no longer be 
the lothario we once knew (“South American girls, Europe girls, Harlem girls, 
Jamaica girls, Down Under girls” – he really did love us all), but his talent 
for getting bodies sweaty on a dancefloor has not softened. As Blood takes to 
the desk and begins blasting out one of the new beats recorded in Jamaica, the 
urge to shake that thing is undeniable, no matter that we’re in a cramped 
studio. And that, right there, is why we still need Sean Paul.

Sean Paul performs at Bestival, Isle of Wight, 11 Sep 
<http://www.bestival.net/>, and Electric Ballroom, NW1, 13 Sep 
<http://electricballroom.co.uk/sean-paul/>
 