
The names are not quite equal in fame. This spring the National Gallery is 
putting on an exhibition calledMichelangelo and Sebastiano 
<https://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/whats-on/exhibitions/the-credit-suisse-exhibition-michelangelo-sebastiano>
. You may have heard of Michelangelo. He carved David, painted the ceiling of 
the Sistine Chapel and did a few other things. In Paolo Sorrentino’s brilliant 
TV drama The Young Pope, a copy of hisLast Judgement 
<https://maitaly.files.wordpress.com/2011/04/michangello-lastjudgment-b.jpg> 
formed a sinister backdrop to Jude Law’s pontifical pronouncements; 
Michelangelo is a god of art. But who is Sebastiano, and why has he got a joint 
exhibition with one of the greatest artists who ever lived?

He is Sebastiano del Piombo 
<https://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/artists/sebastiano-del-piombo> (about 
1485-1547), the great nearly-man of the Italian High Renaissance. He was almost 
one of the very greatest Venetian painters, then moved to Rome where was he was 
overshadowed by Raphael and dominated by Michelangelo. Perhaps personal modesty 
held him back; perhaps he was not quite driven enough to compete in an age of 
intense artistic individualism. Yet his paintings offer tantalising evidence of 
true genius.

Sebastiano’s art veers between sensuality and spirituality, the service of sex 
and God. He was a member of the most provocative and risky avant-garde movement 
in Renaissance Europe, a band of rebel painters who spent their nights partying 
with prostitutes – but then he dramatically changed course to serving the Pope 
as a Vatican bureaucrat.

His title “del Piombo” – “of the lead Seal” – refers to a lucrative clerical 
office he was awarded byPope Clement VII 
<https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pope_Clement_VII#/media/File%3ARaffael_040.jpg>
 in 1531. It effectively ended his career as an artist, as well as obliging him 
to become a friar in spite of being a husband and father. This is not the kind 
of career path that makes for a satisfying artistic biography, yet in his youth 
Sebastiano was a revolutionary.
 Sexually charged drama... The Daughter of Herodias, 1510. Photograph: 
Heritage Images/Getty Images 
The provocation of his early art still shines through in his painting Salome, 
also known as The Daughter of Herodias (1510). A young woman, very obviously 
painted from life, turns towards us from a window that is filled with a 
blue-hilled north Italian landscape. Her eyes smoulder, her long hair falls 
against a bare upper back. The fact that she is holding the grey severed head 
of John the Baptist adds a dark menace to the sexually charged drama of this 
portrait – for it is a portrait of an unknown woman pretending to be Salome.
 Saint Louis of Toulouse, decoration from an organ door, ca 1509. Photograph: 
F Ferruzzi/De Agostini/Getty Images 
Its sense of reality is what makes it so haunting. At this time, in the first 
decade of the 16th century, Sebastiano was one of a group of young Venetian 
painters who were breaking all the rules. Instead of working to commission, 
mostly for the church, they painted oil canvases for sale, to decorate private 
homes. Giorgione, leader of the group, invented a new kind of sexualised 
portrait with his 1506 paintingLaura 
<https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Laura_(Giorgione)#/media/File%3AGiorgione_-_Young_Woman_(“Laura”)_-_Google_Art_Project.jpg>
, and the young Titian joined in with paintings like his erotic come-onBust 
Portrait of a Woman <https://www.nortonsimon.org/art/detail/F.1965.1.028.P> in 
the Norton Simon Museum, still sometimes attributed to Giorgione.

Sebastiano’s Salome is a great example of this genre, and like the others it 
probably portrays a Venetian courtesan. Stories told by Vasari about 
Giorgione’s love life, together with contemporary testimony about Titian 
sleeping with his models, suggest these artists not only painted courtesans but 
slept with them too.

So why did Sebastiano abandon the fun of Venice for the severity of papal 
Rome? Partly for money. The commissions on offer in Rome to decorate palaces 
and chapels were the star jobs of the age. He was courted by Agostino Chigi, 
the Pope’s banker, doubtless with offers of immense wealth. Yet there was 
another reason to leave Venice. In 1510 Giorgione died of plague, and an era 
seemed to end. Sebastiano lost his friend and perhaps his greatest inspiration.

He mourns Giorgione in the first painting he did in Rome (pictured top). It is 
a farewell to Venice, as well as the dead painter. The Venetian skyline is 
gorgeously shown in a romantic, elegaic light. A gathering of nudes – for 
Giorgione revolutionised the art of the nude – mourn the beautiful Adonis whose 
body lies by the lagoon (Giorgione died on a quarantine island in the lagoon). 
Like Titian’s Concert Champêtre, painted at about the same time, this is a 
tender elegy in paint for the handsome, sensual artist.

Something died in Sebastiano too. Whatever can be said for his religious art – 
his painting of St Louis of Toulouse 
<http://www.wga.hu/html_m/s/sebastia/organ3.html> is a bizarrely, beautifully 
glamorous portrait of a man in holy vestments that could easily be a costume 
design for The Young Pope – his art in Rome soon lost direction. His early, 
strong artistic personality fades. The talent is there, but the character is 
weak.

This was how Michelangelo came to use his friend Sebastiano for his own ends. 
This once-daring artist had become so passive that he was happy to create a 
huge religious painting on Michelangelo’s advice, and making direct use of 
Michelangelo’s designs. The Raising of Lazarus (1517-19) is finely coloured, 
swarming with figures – and a massive bore.Michelangelo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/michelangelo> helped Sebastiano 
create it for one reason, to put Michelangelo’s rival Raphael in his place. The 
idea was to show the Pope that Raphael’s classicised religious paintings, the 
talk of all Rome at the time, were not so special after all.
 A massive bore? The Raising of Lazarus. Photograph: The National Gallery 
As a matter of fact, the painting they were competing with – Raphael’s 
Transfiguration 
<https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transfiguration_(Raphael)#/media/File%3ATransfigurazione_(Raffaello)_September_2015-1a.jpg>
 – is much greater than The Raising of Lazarus. This was Michelangelo at his 
worst, such a fanatically competitive individual that he wanted to crush young 
Raphael by any means necessary. He just needed to be patient. Poor Raphael 
would be dead by 1520, and Michelangelo would live on to enjoy his solitary 
fame.

Sebastiano was caught in the middle, a minor character, his artistic 
personality crushed between titanic egos. So he became Sebastiano del Piombo, 
and ended his days drawing his Vatican salary, still dreaming perhaps of Salome 
by the window.
 