
Will the public ever find out the truth about the latest allegation 
surrounding the activities of undercover police officers?

This month, Caroline Lucas <http://www.carolinelucas.com/cl.html>, Britain's 
only Green MP, aired an allegation that undercover policeman Bob Lambert 
planted an incendiary device which set fire to a High Street store. The device, 
whoever planted it, caused damage totalling £340,00 to theDebenhams 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/debenhams?INTCMP=SRCH> store.

The allegations originated from Geoff Sheppard, one of the activists who was 
convicted of setting fire toDebenhams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/debenhams> as part of an animal rights 
campaign to stop the store selling fur. Lambert has strongly denied the claim.

The allegations were made in a parliamentary debate (a transcript can be found 
here 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201213/cmhansrd/cm120613/halltext/120613h0001.htm#12061355000002>
). We publishedthis story <http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2012/jun/13/police> on 
the allegations, along with a more in-depth articlehere 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2012/jun/13/police-spies-animal-rights> and a 
videohere 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/video/2012/jun/13/animal-rights-firebombing-police-spy-video>
.

Also worth looking at is a Newsnight piece here 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b01jxx2d> (the coverage starts about 25 
minutes into the programme).

By any measure, the allegation is startling and serious, and the public should 
know whether it is true or not. So who is investigating?

The answer to that question is typically opaque. It seems that it is the Met 
police which is "reviewing" whether one of its (former) officers did do it. The 
public is however not allowed to know that officially.

The position is this – last October, Bernard Hogan-Howe 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/bernard-hogan-howe>, the Metropolitan police  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/metropolitan-police>commissioner, announced that 
Scotland Yard 
<http://www.mpa.gov.uk/downloads/committees/mpa/111027-transcript.pdf> had set 
up an internal review into the deployment of undercover police officers in 
political groups between 1968 and 2008. It followed a series of disclosures 
about the undercover infiltration.

Since then, the Met has added little to Hogan-Howe's statement that the review 
was "assessing various issues arising from covert deployments" and was "a 
complex process due to the time elapsed and the nature and volume of the 
material and the inherent sensitivity of issues involved".

Nominally a Deputy Assistant Commissioner (initially Mark Simmons) was in 
charge of the review. However the day-to-day work of the review is being 
conducted by the Met's Directorate of Professional Standards – in everyday 
language, the section within the Met which examines allegations of misconduct 
involving its officers.

The Met says it will not confirm or discuss which specific allegations are 
being looked at in this review. The rationale for that stance is, the Met says, 
the standard police policy to neither confirm nor deny which officers have 
worked undercover. Therefore it will not say if that review is examining the 
latest allegation that Lambert planted the device which set fire to Debenhams. 
The Met gave the same response when asked if the review encompassed the 
disclosure thatLambert and another undercover police officer secretly fathered 
children with political campaigners 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2012/jan/20/undercover-police-children-activists> 
they had been sent to spy on and later disappeared completely from the lives of 
their offspring.

All the Met will say is that officers involved in the review met Caroline 
Lucas after she highlighted the allegations and that "she has been updated and 
her concerns have been discussed". Lucas said she met the head 
<http://www.carolinelucas.com/assets/files/localparties/brighton/pdf/Weekly%20news%20bulletin,%2018%2006%2012.pdf>
 of the directorate, Commander Peter Spindler, who told her that the Met had 
"extended their ongoing review in light of points raised in the debate".

For those seeking to hold the police to account, this is worrying for two 
reasons.

Firstly, this appears to be a review of 40 years of undercover operations 
covering serious allegations of misconduct, but the public is being told 
nothing about what is going on.Like all the other 11 inquiries 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/undercover-with-paul-lewis-and-rob-evans/2011/nov/02/undercover-police-officers-inquiries>
 set up following disclosures surrounding the police spies, it is being held 
behind closed doors, with no input from those who were affected by the spying. 
It is a far cry from an over-arching full public inquiry which many including
former DPP, Ken MacDonald 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2011/oct/27/met-police-activists-fake-identities>
, have called for, but there are no prizes for guessing what the authorities 
would prefer.

Secondly, the review appears to have quite a low status. Even the Met does not 
describe it as an inquiry or investigation, merely a review. It is not serious 
enough to warrant supervision by theIndependent Police Complaints Commission 
<http://www.ipcc.gov.uk/en/Pages/default.aspx>. Instead the IPCC is taking a 
hands-off approach. The IPCC has agreed that if the Met review comes across any 
serious misconduct or possible criminality, the Met should notify the IPCC. 
Other than that, the IPCC has no involvement, and the Met is left up itself to 
decide whether to report itself.

Is it too cynical to think that these arrangements do little to command public 
confidence and trust?
 