
Two self-driving buses have rolled out on to the public roads of Helsinki, 
Finland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/finland>, alongside traffic and 
commuters, in one of the first trials of its kind.


The Easymile EZ-10 electric mini-buses, capable of carrying up to 12 people, 
will roam the open roads of Helsinki’s southernly Hernesaari district in a 
month-long trial, negotiating traffic for the first time.

“There’s no more than a handful of these kinds of street traffic trials taking 
place, if that,” Harri Santamala, test project lead and Metropolia University 
of Applied Sciences project manager,told Yle 
<http://yle.fi/uutiset/helsinki_rolls_out_driverless_bus_pilot/9099541>.

The wider trial follows a successful pilot on closed roads in the neighbouring 
town of Vantaa during a housing fair.

Finland has become a hotbed of automated technology development and testing 
because, unlike most of the rest of the world, Finnish law does not require 
vehicles on public roads to have a driver. This has cut a lot of the red tape 
encountered by many other firms and research groups looking to test autonomous 
vehicles on public roads in the US andEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.
Automated Bus (@AutomatedbusFI) 
After my girls, 6 & 8 y tested route, adults were allowed. This week we're 
driving mornings, come for test#SOHJOA 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/SOHJOA?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/KFOXrf6Q64 
<https://t.co/KFOXrf6Q64>
 <https://twitter.com/AutomatedbusFI/status/762618807122792448> August 8, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/AutomatedbusFI/status/762618807122792448> 
The city traffic will provide challenging scenarios for the buses to overcome, 
as they have to keep pace with commuters and other road users, who may not be 
predictable. The buses have a maximum speed of 40km/h but will travel at an 
average speed of 10km/h, making them unusually slow-moving vehicles during 
non-gridlocked times.

The automated buses are being seen as possible an extension of Finland’s 
public transport system, moving commuters into higher-volume transport systems 
where costs of alternative transport have proved prohibitive, rather than 
replacing all human-driven buses.

Helsinki is two years into its 10-year plan to make car ownership pointless 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/jul/10/helsinki-shared-public-transport-plan-car-ownership-pointless>
 through point-to-point “mobility on demand” systems, but operating such a 
system has proven difficult. The smart municipal bus service, Kutsuplus, which 
integrated a system similar to Uber and other app-based ride hailing service, 
was shut down after a year due to costs and the low volume of passengers, 
according to the city.

It is hoped that small automated buses could fill that niche where 
human-operated transport has proved inefficient with municipal funds.

Self-driving vehicle trials are also set to go ahead on public roads of the 
UK, includingautomated lorries on the M6 
<https://www.theguardian.com/international>, small public transport pods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/feb/11/driverless-cars-roll-out-trials-uk-roads>
 and driverlessVolvo SUVs in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/27/volvo-test-self-driving-cars-london-2017>
.

 * Driverless bus trial in Netherlands is first on public roads 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/28/driverless-bus-trial-in-netherlands-will-be-first-on-public-roads>
 