
With more musicians making repeat rounds on the festival circuit to recoup the 
losses from shrinking album sales, a singular experience can distinguish one 
music festival from a growing sea of others. This was abundantly clear to Omar 
Afra, who has owned and run the Houston music festival Free Press Summer Fest 
for nine years. “We’re glad that festivals have given a lot of bands social 
revenue,” he toldthe Dallas Observer this month 
<http://www.dallasobserver.com/music/day-for-nights-omar-afra-on-how-he-landed-aphex-twins-first-us-performance-in-23-years-8972057>
. “That said, we don’t want any of those bands that are playing every other 
festival. We want to create special moments that you wouldn’t otherwise see.”

Björk on sexism: 'Women in music are allowed to sing about their boyfriends'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/21/bjork-sexism-open-letter-music-industry-facebook>
Enter Day for Night, his new festival that closed its second installment last 
weekend. Day for Night actually offers a few different singular experiences in 
a single package: there was RZA and the Jesus and Mary Chain and a rare US 
appearance byAphex Twin <https://www.theguardian.com/music/aphex-twin> on huge 
indoor and outdoor stages, alongside the streaming, oozing, flashing beams of 
light of various digital art installations scattered through the darkness of a 
cavernous, abandoned mid-century post office – “a Berlin raver’s dream”, 
according to Day for Night curator and multimedia artist Alex Czetwertynski.

His goal “was to integrate art into the festival as a founding concept, not as 
an add-on”, he says. Large-scale sculptural installations have already invaded 
the music festival grounds of Austin’sSXSW 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/sxsw>, New York’s Panorama, and the grand 
desert spectacle of Coachella, which this year presented its largest artworks 
yet. (Festival art director Paul Clemente told the LA Times that he needs to 
push the limits of his “epic art experience” because pictures of Coachella “end 
up to be the iconic images and memories people have from that year”.)

But rather than objects in space, Czetwertynski sought works that better 
integrated into the festival scene, tapping artists and musicians that cross 
the digital line between audio and visual.Björk Digital 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/01/bjork-digital-review-somerset-house-vulnicura-virtual-reality-vr>
 was an obvious choice; the touring virtual reality exhibition immerses 
visitors in a series of alternate, Björk-designed realities scored by tracks 
fromher blistering 2015 break-up album Vulnicura 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/22/bjork-vulnicura-review-breakup-album>
. Crescendoing from totally mundane music video concepts to actual surreal, 
semi-frightening 3D experiences, the six-piece series shows the artist’s 
growing mastery of this burgeoning technology.

Once donning those headache-inducing goggles stationed on a rotating stool, 
you first found yourself, nonplussed, on some peaceful distant shore with one
Björk <https://www.theguardian.com/music/bjork> in front of you – and, wow 
surprise, a second behind you! – but by the fifth experience, after falling 
through cosmic quicksand and tumbling around inside Bjork’s mouth, you find 
yourself cowering before a giant flaming avatar of the Icelandic singer that 
eventually (spoiler) passes through your body.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fmusic-festival-immersive-art-coachella-panorama%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c5e05237e5da2c24503a969047af5e8e020eeab%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sensory%20overload%3A%20how%20immersive%20art%20took%20top%20billing%20at%20music%20festivals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fmusic-festival-immersive-art-coachella-panorama%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sensory%20overload%3A%20how%20immersive%20art%20took%20top%20billing%20at%20music%20festivals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fmusic-festival-immersive-art-coachella-panorama%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c5e05237e5da2c24503a969047af5e8e020eeab%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Bjork performs a DJ set during Day For Night 2016. Photograph: Santiago 
Felipe/Getty Images 
Standing in painfully long lines for Björk Digital, many festival-goers had 
actually forgone seeing Björk human live on stage, shrouded in tropical plants 
for a critically panned DJ set she later defended on Facebook, validating 
Afra’s bet. “Bands tour,” one queueing 36-year-old from Austin told us, 
declining to give his name out of the shame of having waited six hours in line, 
“but don’t know when I’ll see Björk Digital again”. He had heard it was amazing.

Björk: 'It’s no coincidence that the porn industry has embraced virtual 
reality'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/03/bjork-its-no-coincidence-that-the-porn-industry-has-embraced-virtual-reality>
On the second floor of the cavernous post office, there was also a 40-minute 
wait to pass a velvet curtain to view Musica Universalis, an arresting 
“performative sculpture” of solar systems and revolving lights by United Visual 
Artists, a London-based collective that both shows at art institutions such as 
the V&A and the Barbican, and designs the sets for musicians such asMassive 
Attack <https://www.theguardian.com/music/massive-attack> and James Blake.


“I’m not actually familiar with these artists, but I did see the piece on 
Instagram, and it looked really great,” said Sarah Pendley, 30. Having already 
been in line for 15 minutes, she underscored the importance of social media in 
events like these – as did the young lady dancing in the Snapchat glasses, or 
the selfies galore. With the abundance of spotlights, oozing rainbows, and 
reflective surfaces, the selfie opportunities were literally infinite: 
Paris-based multimedia duo Nonotak evoked 87-year-old Japanese artist Yayoi 
Kusama through their own version of the Infinity Room – “Shiro”, amise-en-abyme 
of angled mirrors illuminated by strobing bars of light.

“Social media engagement has become a major component of public art and a 
consideration of how art experiences are created,” according to Elena Soboleva, 
who leads Special Projects at the art-encyclopedic website Artsy, expounding 
upon the other reason for the rise of art at music festivals.

“We had thought to perhaps discourage people from taking so many pictures,” 
says Czetwertynski, “but people just want to share what they’re experiencing, 
even if it’s unsharable.” The great art world of Houston of course had already 
mastered the art of destination, one-off, immersive art experiences. Take, for 
example, the softly glowingJames Turrell Skyspace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/nov/11/james-turrell-more-people-have-heard-of-me-through-drake-than-anything-else>
 on the campus of Rice University, or the Menil collection’s zen-inducing 
Rothko Chapel. The latter’s serene, skylit room of massive, exquisitely somber 
Rothko paintings, however, shows it’s behind the times. In the daylight hours 
before the festival began, the denim and leather jacket-clad, iPhone-wielding 
visitors were told time and again, “No photos.”
 