
Serie A leaders Juventus <https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus> 
returned from their winter break to demonstrate their fearsome Scudetto 
credentials with a 3-0 dismantling of Bologna on Sunday night.

Mesut Özil: ‘My future at Arsenal depends on Arsène Wenger staying’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/08/mesut-ozil-arsenal-contract-arsene-wenger>
Gonzalo Higuaín reached 12 league goals for the season by scoring in each 
half, with Paulo Dybala celebrating his first start since a lengthy injury 
lay-off with a successful penalty just before half-time. Patrice Evra was left 
out of the Juventus team amid reports he could leave this month.

Roma’s narrow victory at Genoa earlier in the day had slashed the gap to first 
place to a single point but Massimiliano Allegri’s men are once again four 
points out in front and also boast a game in hand.

Roma <https://www.theguardian.com/football/roma> had managed to keep the 
pressure on Juve by beating Genoa 1-0 at the Marassi - but they needed a 
first-half own goal from Armando Izzo to get over the line. The Giallorossi had 
not won outside of Rome since late October.

City rivals Lazio also remain in the title race after Ciro Immobile’s 
last-gasp strike earned them a 1-0 home win over Crotone, with Lucas Biglia 
missing a penalty for the Biancocelesti earlier in the game.

Hot on the heels of the capital club are Atalanta, 4-1 victors at Chievo 
thanks to a brace from Alejandro Gomez and further goals from Andrea Conti and 
Remo Freuler, while Sergio Pellissier notched the consolation in Verona.

Internazionale <https://www.theguardian.com/football/internazionale>, despite 
their early season woes, look set to compete for a European berth after 
recovering from behind to down Udinese 2-1 at the Dacia Arena.

Jakub Jankto had boosted the Bianconeri ahead but Ivan Perisic equalised in 
first-half stoppage time before grabbing a winner three minutes from time.

Later on, Carlos Bacca delivered a 1-0 AC Milan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/acmilan> success over 10-man Cagliari at 
San Siro, with visiting defender Bruno Alves seeing red at the death.

Elsewhere, former Liverpool midfielder Alberto Aquilani made his Sassuolo 
debut as the Neroverdi played out a goalless draw with Torino in Reggio Emilia.

Pescara were due to host Fiorentina but the game was postponed due to snow on 
the east coast.
 