
It’s tempting to transcribe in full the letter 
<http://muppet.wikia.com/wiki/Is_the_Count_on_Sesame_Street_a_vampire%3F?file=Count_Critisism_-_Letter1.jpg>
 which Joseph B Regoli wrote on 19 April 1979 to the makers of the children’s 
TV show Sesame Street about the character Count Von Count. It is, without a 
doubt, the best letter I have read since I learned how to read. Here is an 
extract for you to consider:

It seems poisonous to make a monster (Dracula) to appear as a competent 
teacher (even a teacher of numbers) because such an appearance would seem to 
mislead children into trusting Dracula, and possibly monsters in general.

Such a misplaced trust would preclude the child from developing a healthy 
fear, and distrust, of monsters. Such fear and distrust would, hopefully, help 
the child to perceive evil and avoid it, instead of trustingly walking into a 
trap.


You can understand Regoli’s concern. What children watch matters, it shapes 
their understanding of the world outside their homes. TV shows us society and 
so, implicitly, it tells us our place in it. And Regoli is right, TV can teach 
us about good and evil too.

I interviewed the monster that inspired the letter last week. The purple 
puppet smiled open-mouthed with his pointy, yellowing teeth (just two of them) 
winking at me. And I realised that I couldn’t bring myself to ask if he was, to 
quote Regoli, “evil”. Instead, I asked the figure wearing a cape if he would 
describe himself as a vampire.

“A wampire? Me?” he responded in his thick, Transylvanian accent. “Well Mona, 
I guess you could say that I have an unquenchable thirst for numbers.”

He sure does. But arithmomania 
<https://books.google.com/books?id=I2N9COt-4C0C&pg=PA948&lpg=PA948&dq=Charcot,+however,+was+the+first+to+identify+the+involuntary+%22impulsive%22+ideas,+such+as+doubting+mania,+double+checking,+touching,+and+arithmomania+(an+obsession+with+counting+and+numbers),+as+part+of+GTS+and+to+link+them+to+the+impulsive+movements&source=bl&ots=E28Tl-AZZt&sig=WHGJC8atEwhr9oIUrpeOLinb_10&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjGg-TFgbjRAhVDQ5AKHXlKCF0Q6AEIIjAB#v=onepage&q=arithmomania&f=false>
 (a type of obsessive-compulsive disorder where individuals constantly count) 
is not the only thing that makes the Count different from his neighbours on 
Sesame Street. No, what makes the Count a rare voice in the world of children’s 
entertainment is that his voice has an accent.

Whether TV shows transport children to a city on the floor of the Pacific 
Ocean (as in SpongeBob SquarePants) or a town of Picasso-esque talking animals 
(Peppa Pig), seldom is the world on screen one where immigration occurs. Sure, 
characters might speak in strange voices (SpongeBob sounds like he’s having a 
colonic), but it’s rare to hear a character in any English-language children’s 
show speak in an accent that isn’t that of a native-born British or American 
person.

Rare, but it does happen. Meryl Alper studied 
<https://teethingontech.files.wordpress.com/2013/03/meryl_alper_ica_2011_final_2011-05-31.pdf>
 53 episodes of television shows aired between 2004 and 2005 that were popular 
among American children age six to 11. Alper, an assistant professor of 
communication studies at Northeastern University, counted up 282 characters in 
total, 21 of whom were foreign. Of those 21 foreigners, three were parodies of 
famous people.

Perhaps it’s no coincidence that Sesame Street’s only character to be met with 
“a healthy fear and distrust” is also the show’s only puppet with a foreign 
accent. Alper found “in terms of personality traits, foreign characters were 
more bad, aggressive and uncultured than non-foreign characters”. 
Unsurprisingly, foreign characters were also less likely to have leading roles 
or feature in the opening credits of the children’s shows.

One immediate example comes to mind (not one which Alper included in her 
study);Apu <https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2007/jul/16/theaputragedy>
 Nahasapeemapetilon, a character in America’s most famous cartoon, The 
Simpsons. Apu, whose accent is voiced by American actorHank Azaria 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hank_Azaria>, is the proprietor of Springfield’s 
convenience store the Kwik-E-Mart where customers (and at least25 million 
<http://www.avclub.com/article/fxxs-simpsons-marathon-was-watched-25-million-peop-208884>
 US viewers, children and adults alike) can see him clasping his hands together 
in a prayer-like pose while saying his catchphrase “Thank you, come again”. 
Nahasapeemapetilon doesn’t exactly shatter immigrant stereotypes.

But we need foreign characters like the Count on our screens. The US has 36 
million second-generation immigrants 
<http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2013/02/07/second-generation-americans/> 
(people who were born in the US to immigrant parents), according to a 2013 Pew 
report. Those Americans make up about 11% of the entire population. Statistics 
in the UK are harder to find, but the European Unionestimates 
<http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/documents/3888793/5850217/KS-RA-11-019-EN.PDF> 
that by 2061, a third of the British population will be first- or 
second-generation immigrants. That’s a third of the population who won’t have 
positive depictions of themselves on kids’ TV if things don’t change.

I’m one of them. I could tell you that I grew up craving positive depictions 
of immigrants on TV so that I could better relate to my foreign-born parents. 
But that would be lying. The truth is, I was too busy arguing with my sister 
over the TV remote and chugging Ribena to think about it. Besides, it’s hard to 
notice the absence of something you never had – but that doesn’t mean that your 
life wouldn’t be better off with it. Maybe I wouldn’t have cringed so much at 
my mum’s accent if I had heard more foreign voices on screen.

That’s why I feel endless affection for this little vampire. My parents aren’t 
from Transylvania and they don’t have purple skin but, there are lots of 
reasons why they too didn’t necessarily fit in among their neighbours on our 
street. But, much like the Count, that never seemed to concern them, they were 
busy getting on with their lives (pursuing careers, breaking up fights, 
supplying Ribena).

On 23 May 1979, the Children’s Television Workshop (now known as the Sesame 
Workshop)responded 
<http://muppet.wikia.com/wiki/Is_the_Count_on_Sesame_Street_a_vampire%3F?file=Count_Critisism_-_Letter2.jpg>
 to Regoli. Their letter, which sounds like a best-case scenario for immigrants 
in 2017, reads:

We have tried to make it clear that the Count is not a representative of evil. 
He is presented as a rather eccentric character – obsessed with counting 
everything in sight. Other characters onSesame Street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/sesame-st> react to the Count’s 
behavior with amusement (or sometimes exasperation) but never fear.
 