
John Hiatt and Glyn Johns – Real Fine Love

John Hiatt <http://www.johnhiatt.com/> is one of my favourite American 
singer-songwriters. This is a west coast, feelgood song from the album that the 
legendaryGlyn Johns <http://glynjohns.com/> produced. They put together an 
all-star band for this record, including Pat Donaldson,Mike Henderson 
<http://www.mikehenderson.com/> and Ethan Johns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/26/ethan-johns-with-the-black-eyed-dogs-silver-liner-review>
 on drums. A great song to drive along with.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dso381D_K0HQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dso381D_K0HQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dso381D_K0HQ&media=>
Watch John Hiatt’s Real Fine Love. <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=so381D_K0HQ>
Buddy and Julie Miller – Dirty Water

This is the first record the husband and wife duo released together, and this 
song was a co-write. It’s one of the coolest guitar riffs I’ve heard.Buddy 
Miller <http://Buddy and Julie Miller> is certainly one of the great players 
out there.

Go Jane Go – Somewhere Beyond the Roses

I saw this band when I was in Australia on tour two years ago. It’s a 
collaboration between the fine songwriting skills ofDavid Francey 
<http://www.davidfrancey.com/> and Kieren Kane 
<http://www.deadreckoners.com/index-2.html>. It’s stripped back to just rolling 
banjo and vocals. It’s relatively unknown but certainly one of my favourite 
records.

Martin Hayes and Dennis Cahill <http://www.denniscahill.com/> – Joe’s Reel

Hayes <http://www.martinhayes.com/#martin-hayes> is such a wonderful, soulful 
fiddle player <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o5hg3iuoJoM>. This is a tune 
that reminds me of my wedding day. A very good friend played us down the aisle 
to this.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3JWUZ3XaNJk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3JWUZ3XaNJk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3JWUZ3XaNJk&media=>
Watch Martin Hayes and Dennis Cahill play Joe’s Reel. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bGBSC7vQ2Wg> 
Robert Plant and Alison Krauss – Fortune Teller

Their Raising Sand album was a perfect collaboration between a rock and a 
bluegrass singer. It won Grammy awards and really pushed the boundaries. This 
is one of my favourite songs from the record. ProducerT-Bone Burnett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/dec/27/t-bone-burnett-movies-coen-brothers-inside-llewyn-davis>
 as ever creates such a striking sounding sonic record.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Ds5DeIcYD6xE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Ds5DeIcYD6xE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Ds5DeIcYD6xE&media=>
Hear Robert Plant and Alison Krauss sing Fortune Teller. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s5DeIcYD6xE>  