
Watching the eddies of controversy around gender and pop in 2016 has been 
nothing if not soul-crushing. Inciting incidents pop up; they get passed 
around, then analyzed to seemingly no end; and eventually they recede into the 
background. That’s until the next big to-do, the one that might, finally, stop 
the cycle where women and men are slotted into roles not all that dissimilar to 
the ones they occupied when MTVwas launched some 35 years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/28/is-kesha-court-case-hangover-from-70s-eva-wiseman>
.

Singer's legal battle casts spotlight on sexism in the music industry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/27/kesha-profile-court-case-dr-luke-sony>
The dueling lawsuits between Kesha and her former guru Dr Luke, which are 
awash (at least on Kesha’s side) with horrific tales of sexual misconduct and 
outright meanness; the swirling stories about the publicist Heathcliff Berru, 
whose serial harassment of artists and other industry types led to him entering 
rehab andissuing a lengthy apology 
<http://www.bkmag.com/2016/02/26/aftermath-and-recovery-heathcliff-berru-speaks-and-reporting-on-sexual-assault-in-the-music-industry/>
; and, this week,the Spin profile of the Last Shadow Puppets 
<http://www.spin.com/2016/03/the-last-shadow-puppets-interview/> that was more 
remarkable for the way Miles Kane propositioned reporter Rachel Brodsky than 
for anything pertinent to their imminent second album. They’ve all been brought 
into the content cycle and put on spin, given the “outrage of the day” 
treatment before being hung out to dry.

It’s wearying if only because the stories – and the inevitable clamor that 
accompanies them – are generated at a constant churn, which makes them feel 
horrifyingly normal. Anyone who aspires to be a “woman in rock” (or pop) is 
only able to inhabit that scene as an “other”. They exist in a place where 
they’re only seen as women, as being to be looked at first, and as such can be 
relegated to subordinate status at any moment.

If the lopsided relationship between men and women in music was only played 
out in these pretty terrible ways, it might be easier to eradicate. But smaller 
behaviors that reflect women’s status not as professionals with artistic or 
business goals, but as nurturers and/or sex objects, exist all over the music 
industry, from capable female musicians being treated by venue staff as 
someone’s girlfriend to not-so-innocent asides offered up by male interviewers 
and interviewees to their female compatriots.

When I got into music many years ago, I was a fan of hard rock – the 
critically reviled bands decked out in black leather and Aqua Net. For the most 
part, those bands’ lyrics looked at women as sometimes irritating, yet 
necessary for what’s now called “emotional labor” and, of course, sex. I 
humored it because I was a teenager with hearts in her eyes, and because it at 
least seemed like the men involved liked some of the women who they sang about 
as people. Over time, that fandom morphed into a love ofriot grrrl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/jan/28/riot-grrrl-10-of-the-best>
, the confrontational bare-bones punk that preached a “girls to the front” 
mantra, and other bands that were populated by women. I didn’t hear “women” as 
a genre, but I did relate more to the lyrics of singers likePJ Harvey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/pjharvey> and Helium’s Mary Timony, who 
scraped womanhood’s carcass dry for their precisely wielded observations.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F08%2Fkesha-delivers-emotional-speech-while-accepting-human-rights-campaign-award-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F3%2F7%2F1457392500986%2FKP_1821999_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kesha%20delivers%20emotional%20speech%20while%20accepting%20Human%20Rights%20Campaign%20award%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F08%2Fkesha-delivers-emotional-speech-while-accepting-human-rights-campaign-award-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kesha%20delivers%20emotional%20speech%20while%20accepting%20Human%20Rights%20Campaign%20award%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F08%2Fkesha-delivers-emotional-speech-while-accepting-human-rights-campaign-award-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F3%2F7%2F1457392500986%2FKP_1821999_crop_640x480.jpg>
Other listeners, however, are happy to lump women together as their own thing. 
“Women in rock” have been treated as curiosities even as they’ve been allegedly 
celebrated, with their status as others called out in fashion spreads,tour 
lineups <https://www.facebook.com/lilithfairtour/> and roundups that seem 
well-meaning 
<https://www.google.com/search?q=female+fronted+bands+buzzfeed&oq=female+fronted+bands+buzzfeed&aqs=chrome..69i57.3294j0j1&sourceid=chrome&es_sm=91&ie=UTF-8>
, but only serve to solidify women’s position as the other. It also goes 
without saying that, for the most part, these ideals are being played out in a 
decidedly heteronormative and cis-centric sphere, and also largely among white 
principals; the othering that goes on with sexual orientation, race, and 
able-bodiedness also screws in societal perceptions of who the “default” might 
be.

The manner in which sexual harassment stories are dealt with by the media 
cycle has a similar effect – they are reported and chewed up by aggregators, 
turned into a trending topic and joked about by people who feel they’re above 
the fray. Along the way, the humanity at their core becomes abstracted to 
grander points about “men” and “women”, which can then be explained away by 
biology-borne nonsense lifted from a self-help book.

The weariness brought upon by this revolving door of bad actors has made me 
skeptical that all this social-media-bornesturm und drang will change anything 
at all. For starters, the upper echelons of the music business – even on the 
independent side –are pretty solidly white and male 
<http://noisey.vice.com/blog/the-billboard-100-shows-music-business-diversity-is-just-getting-worse>
. And even those stories that resonated far and wide have had mixed fallouts. 
On Wednesday, the Hollywood tabloid the Wrap reported that Sony was ready to 
drop Dr Luke from his label and publishing deal; that story was followed up by 
cheering from the social-media sidelines anda hasty denial from the producer 
<http://www.billboard.com/articles/business/6978195/dr-luke-sony-music-kesha-report-denied>
, and Sony has yet to make the move that the Wrap hinted at. The lawsuits, 
meanwhile, will drag on, with the next hearings not scheduled until May. 
Thursday morning brought with it a new video from the Last Shadow Puppets – one 
that was posted as normal on the usual-suspect music-focused outlets. Sure, 
some offered the begrudging link to Brodsky’s story, but the net result of 
promotion for the band obliterated any behavioral critique.

One of the biggest truisms about gender relations to emerge in 2016 is that, 
Twitter character limits notwithstanding, there are few pithy answers to the 
big questions. The occasional huge offender can be struck down to much fanfare, 
but patterns of behavior that result from centuries of societal conditioning 
rarely get changed in public, let alone with the roar of Twitter and Facebook 
narrating every move. If this year is to be one that music takes an honest look 
at its relationship with gender, it must be one where not only the stories that 
make the biggest waves get looked at and interrogated deeply – even if that 
means questioning seemingly innocent behaviors that, in the long run, help prop 
up the more benign manifestations of skewed gender parity.
 