
A long-running investigation by the Serious Fraud Office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/serious-fraud-office> into rigging of the 
£3.5tn-a-day foreign exchange markets has ended without any charges being 
issued against banks or individuals.

The SFO said that after reviewing more than a half a million documents it had 
concluded there was insufficient evidence for a realistic prospect of 
conviction.

“While there were reasonable grounds to suspect the commission of offences 
involving serious or complex fraud, a detailed review of the available evidence 
led us to the conclusion that the alleged conduct, even if proven and taken at 
its highest, would not meet the evidential test required to mount a prosecution 
for an offence contrary to English law,” the SFO said.

“It has further been concluded that this evidential position could not be 
remedied by continuing the investigation.”

The prosecutor did not disclose how much the investigation had cost or whether 
banks or individuals had been the subject of its investigation, which was 
sparked when the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA)provided it with information 
in July 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jul/21/foreign-exchange-trading-criminal-investigation-serious-fraud-office>
.

This year the SFO asked the government for an extra £21m to help it keep 
pursuing complex cases, such as those centred on foreign exchange, after it had 
received £10m last June.

Alison McHaffie, a regulatory partner with CMS law firm, said the decision to 
drop the case showed “the difficult job the SFO has in demonstrating criminal 
activity by individuals for this type of type of market misconduct and without 
a change in the law on corporate criminal responsibility.

“This means it is always easier to impose regulatory fines against the firms 
themselves rather than criminal prosecutions.”

At the time it launched the forex investigation in 2014, more than 20 
individuals had either been suspended or fired from financial institutions 
during the global investigation into currency rigging. The Bank of England also 
became embroiled in the scandal, and has previously released minutes of 
meetings held over six years until 2013 between bank officials and a group of 
foreign exchange traders.

Since then, the FCA and regulators in the US have levied record fines of more 
than £6bn on banks for rigging foreign exchange markets and published pages of 
electronic messages showing that the individuals involved called themselves the 
“A-team”, “the players” and “the three musketeers”.

The regulators published conversations between traders, some of whom used the 
name “1 team, 1 dream”, and reported that one had said: “How can I make free 
money with no fcking [sic] heads up.”

When a string of fines was announced in March 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/may/20/banks-hit-by-record-57bn-fine-for-rigging-forex-markets>
, Loretta Lynch, the US attorney general, had accused bank traders of behaving 
with “breathtaking flagrancy”. She extracted guilty pleas from Barclays, Royal 
Bank of Scotland, Citigroup and JP Morgan.

The SFO said it was continuing to liaise with the US Department of Justice 
over its investigation and it was grateful for help from the FCA, the 
Competition and Markets Authority and the City of London police, as well as the 
DoJ and Australian Securities and Investments Commission.

The foreign exchange rigging scandal erupted at a time when the reputation of 
the banking industry was being hammered by revelations that traders had been 
manipulatingLibor <https://www.theguardian.com/business/libor>, a benchmark 
interest rate used to price £3.5tn of financial products and loans. That 
benchmark has since been overhauled as a result of the criticism that erupted 
as further multimillion-pound fines were levied against banks.


Barclays was the first bank to be fined for Libor fixing when it was hit with 
a £290m fine in June 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/jun/27/barclays-chief-bob-diamond-bonus-fine>
, which triggeredthe resignation of the chief executive, Bob Diamond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/jul/03/bob-diamond-quits-barclays-libor-scandal>
 – who was not accused of wrongdoing – and wave of other penalties on a wide 
range of banks, including RBS and the Swiss bank UBS.

The investigation into Libor rigging by the SFO has secured the conviction of 
Tom Hayes – who is serving 11 years – while six individuals have been cleared 
by jury.

The Libor rigging scandal also spurred George Osborne into changing how the 
fines levied by the City regulator were used. They had previously gone back to 
the FCA and its predecessor, the Financial Services Authority, but he changed 
the rules to ensure that the cash – minus costs – went to the Treasury.
 