
It was just as well Tony Bair did a “deal in the desert” with Libya’s 
dictator, Muammar Gaddafi, because it may have prevented chemical weapons 
getting into the hands of Isis terrorists, the former prime minister told the 
Commons foreign affairs committee lastweek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/11/tony-blair-gaddafi-deal-prevented-isis-getting-chemical-weapons-libya>
.


It was a remarkable and curious claim. The deal, potentially worth £13bn to BP 
in valuable contracts, followed years of close cooperation between British 
intelligence officers and Gaddafi’s secret policemen after he agreed in 2003 to 
abandon his nuclear and chemical weapons programmes. Gaddafi agreed to do so 
after a ship taking nuclear parts toLibya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya> was seized in the Mediteranean.


Isis did not exist then and there was no indication at all that Gaddafi would 
be toppled. Quite the contrary; there was every indication that the Libyan 
dictator would remain a lucrative British ally.


Blair was not asked by the Commons committee about what he knew of the joint 
MI6-CIA operation leading to the rendition and torture of Sami al-Saadi and 
Abdulhakim Belhaj, two Gaddafi opponents.

IN 2004, they and their families were abducted, bound, and secretly flown to 
Libya, where they were imprisoned and tortured for six years.


Cori Crider, a director of the human rights group, Reprieve, commented 
<https://mail.google.com/mail/u/0/?shva=1#search/reprieve/151a06ce785b8c86>: 
“Mr Blair left many vital questions unanswered on his Libya record. ...The 
British government has never grappled with this most shameful element of 
Blair’s deal in the desert - it’s disappointing that we seem to be no closer to 
the truth today.”


The Met police opened a criminal investigation, named Operation Lydd, into the 
Belhaj/Saadi renditions in January 2012. The police have passed a number of 
files to ther Crown Prosecution Service.

“The latest submission by the police was at the end of July this year and we 
are continuing to advise the police and to look at all the evidence in relation 
to what is a very large and complex investigation”, a CPS spokesperson said 
last week, adding: “At this stage, as the matter is under review, we cannot say 
when we will have sufficient evidence to make a final decision.”


Jack Straw <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jackstraw>, then foreign 
secretary responsible for MI6, has said: “No foreign secretary can know all the 
details of what its intelligence agencies are doing at any one time.”

Government officials, insisting on anonymity, say MI6 was following 
“ministerially authorised government policy”.

Tony Blair <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> has said he did 
not have “any recollection at all” of the Belhaj-Saadi renditions.


The question of Britain’s involvement in torture has been raised again by 
Shaker Aamer <https://www.theguardian.com/world/shaker-aamer>, the last British 
resident to have been released from Guantánamo Bay.


He says his head was banged against a wall at the US Bagram base in 
Afghanistan where he was first held and that a British intelligence officer was 
present at the time the “enhanced interrogation technique”, which had not been 
approved by the UK, was carried out.


He says 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/14/shaker-aamer-guantanamo-detention-i-will-not-sue-uk>
 he will not sue the government. That may be because he has been offered a sum, 
perhaps in the region of £1m, in compensation, so long as he will not sue any 
government official or former minister in the courts.


In 2010, other British residents or citizens rendered to Guantánamo Bay were 
offered millions of pounds incompensation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/nov/16/guantanamo-payout-deal-climax-years-official-denials>
. Al-Saadi has accepted £2.2m in return for dropping his case.


Belhaj, however, is still pursing his claim which the supreme court is now 
considering. The government argues that British courts cannot hear the case 
because agents of foreign powers, as well as British, were involved.


Dominic Grieve, the former Tory attorney general and new chairman of the 
parliamentary inteligence and security committee, said he hoped Aamer and other 
British former detainees would feel able to give evidence to his inquiry into 
UK involvement in torture.

Asked about the allegations that Straw and Blair would have known about the 
treatment of detainees at Guantánamo, Grieve said: “These are serious 
allegations and they are to be taken seriously and they are some of the issues 
that the intelligence and security committee will be asked to look into.”


Asked if he would call Straw and Blair to give evidence, Grieve said: “We will 
go where the evidence takes us ... all such things are possible, I want to make 
that quite clear.”Grieve added that if a British official witnessed torture, he 
wouild expect that official to report the matter to his senior managers.

It is time to end the cover-ups.

 