
Leaving home. That’s almost how it feels to move on after 14 years at Liberty; 
12 as director. But everyone leaves home eventually. I go with more hope than 
fear and more fulfilment and optimism than regret, despite enormous continuing 
challenges to our fundamental rights and freedoms – what EM Forster called “the 
fight that is never done”.

Liberty (the National Council for Civil Liberties) was formed 82 years ago. 
Times very different from these? Perhaps not different enough. Yes, there was 
barely TV let alone “reality TV” or CCTV. DNA had yet to be discovered let 
alone stockpiled. And the real shocker for younger readers: there was no 
internet. The 1930s was a time of great economic uncertainty and inequality. In 
1932, desperate poverty prompted 3,000 hunger marchers to walk from Scotland, 
south Wales and the north of England all the way to Hyde Park in London. Here 
they were “duffed up” by the police via a method we would find familiar today. 
Undercover officers behaved violently among the peaceful throng so as to 
justify an oppressive policing response. When audiences at public meetings 
sometimes seem amazed at this story, I remind them of the more contemporary 
abuses of undercover policemen forming intimate relationships, and even 
fathering children, with innocent female environmentalists. I remind them of my 
friend Doreen Lawrence and how she was placed under surveillance when her 
campaign began to make an impact. The 1930s scandal led to a small group of 
activists, writers and lawyers meeting in the crypt of St Martin-in-the-Fields 
church on Trafalgar Square. Today they might have tweeted, blogged, Facebooked 
or Snapchattedthe foundation of their new movement 
<https://www.liberty-human-rights.org.uk/who-we-are/history/how-liberty-was-founded>
. Instead they wrote a letter to the Manchester Guardian.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk%2Fvideo%2F2009%2Fmar%2F06%2Fpolice-surveillance-climate-camp-journalists&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Under%20surveillance%3A%20police%20target%20environmental%20protesters%20and%20journalists&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk%2Fvideo%2F2009%2Fmar%2F06%2Fpolice-surveillance-climate-camp-journalists>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Under%20surveillance%3A%20police%20target%20environmental%20protesters%20and%20journalists&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk%2Fvideo%2F2009%2Fmar%2F06%2Fpolice-surveillance-climate-camp-journalists&media=>
 Footage obtained by the Guardian of police using surveillance against climate 
protesters. 
The older I get, the more I see life as a Renaissance painting with layers of 
irony where the paint should be. Too many leading Conservatives of both the 
Europhile and Eurosceptic varieties now deride Winston Churchill’s postwar 
legacy – the European convention on human rights. This vital document was 
designed to share so-called “British (freedom-loving) values” with wider 
post-traumatised Europe. The good news is that the convention’s defenders, and 
those of the Human Rights Act (which makes it enforceable in the UK), include 
many prominent Tory “inners” and “outers” in the referendum debate. Good news 
also, that for all its current strains, the Labour party – old, new and under 
new leadership – does finally seem more confident and united in its defence of 
our Human Rights Act. This remains (alongside gay equality and relative peace 
in Northern Ireland), among the finest legacies of its recent years in power.

One layer of ironic paintwork: those pro-EU cabinet ministers who would defend 
the single market at the expense of human rights, thus pandering both to 
unaccountable elites and the populist reaction they provoke. They would build a 
union for money and markets but without the protection of ordinary people and 
their values. I am tempted to say Churchill would be spinning in his grave. But 
that’s too crass. He and others of that wartime generation have no doubt been 
spinning for some time. That’s in the sense of turning in restless sleep rather 
than the modern usage of obfuscating truth for political ends.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Fshami-chakrabarti-on-14-years-of-fighting-the-power-the-leviathan-is-far-from-defeated%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f7a2fa328497183f973f787b37dba8c3e77d105%2F24_361_5228_3136%2F5228.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shami%20Chakrabarti%20on%2014%20years%20of%20fighting%20the%20power%3A%20'The%20leviathan%20is%20far%20from%20defeated'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Fshami-chakrabarti-on-14-years-of-fighting-the-power-the-leviathan-is-far-from-defeated%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shami%20Chakrabarti%20on%2014%20years%20of%20fighting%20the%20power%3A%20%27The%20leviathan%20is%20far%20from%20defeated%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Fshami-chakrabarti-on-14-years-of-fighting-the-power-the-leviathan-is-far-from-defeated%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f7a2fa328497183f973f787b37dba8c3e77d105%2F24_361_5228_3136%2F5228.jpg>
 Flag bearer: Shami (second left) at the 2012 Olympics opening ceremony, with 
the likes of Ban Ki-moon and Daniel Barenboim. Photograph: 
Niviere/Sipa/Rex/Shutterstock 
I came to Liberty from the Home Office where, as a young lawyer, I had spent 
perhaps the most formative period of my career. I worked for governments of 
both persuasions during a bipartisan authoritarian age. Tory home secretary 
Michael Howard – and later Tony Blair – had found easy targets in legal aid, 
lawyers, judges and even the rule of law that ultimately protects the poor and 
vulnerable from the rich and powerful. First asylum seekers and then the 
wretched closer to home became dehumanised and demonised, deprived of legal 
redress, means of support and even their physical freedom in ever greater 
numbers. I learned a great deal in the Dark Tower, not least about the 
relationship between law, politics and policy. I enjoyed the public-service 
spirit of collaboration and the influence that can come with giving 
constructive independent advice. But mandarin was never my mother tongue.

While I admired the best traditions of Liberty from the outside, it was 
clearly falling far short of its potential. It had become a worthy law centre 
and press office rather than the broader human rights campaign of its past and 
future. It lacked the focus, strategy, language and confidence to defend rights 
and freedoms beyond the last stand of the courtroom, by promoting them in the 
newsroom, living room, classroom and parliament chamber. My move from the civil 
service to civil society was frowned on by the suspicious on both sides. But, 
in time, the lessons of Whitehall professionalism and values of passionate 
activism blended to inspire a new generation of Liberty members and colleagues 
capable of speaking truth to power – whatever colour tie it wore – and not 
before time.

My first day was a culture shock. I had traded a pension and park view in a 
mighty department of state for a chaotic cubbyhole in shabby-chic south London. 
But at least the employer provided communal milk and a cooler 
conversation-starter at parties.

I had worked within the state for long enough to know that the shock of 9/11 
would be followed by knee-jerk

My second day at work was September 11, a tragic catalyst for so many divisive 
instincts and counter-productive policies from which we are yet to recover. I 
came back from lunch with a new colleague to catch up with the unforgettable 
images of the first and then the second plane hitting the towers. I had worked 
within the security state for long enough to know that shock would be followed 
by kneejerk. But for me, at least, the real challenge and opportunity came 
almost exactly two years later when I became director. Guantánamo Bay had 
become an icon of illiberal and un-American injustice and Blair’s own copycat
internment policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2004/dec/17/humanrights.politics> was soon 
to be rejected by the House of Lords.

The decline of privacy as a personal and societal value had accelerated with 
the advent of compulsory identity cards and the rise of the database state. As 
so often is the case in the history of erosions of civil liberties, power first 
encroaches on the disenfranchised. Then gradually, what became acceptable for a 
community’s “others” can seem more palatable, even for the majority.

Experiments in ever more intrusive surveillance, stop-and-search powers, 
summary deportation and extradition, and even punishment without reasonable 
suspicion, charge or trial: all these were first attempted with foreigners, 
terror suspects and the unworthy poor. Then the tools were increasingly 
employed against the broader population.

Sometimes our task was to appeal to our nation’s better nature, history and 
institutions. This worked with some success when a ragbag of lawyers, 
journalists, activists and politicians came together against the policy of 
indefinite detention without charge in Belmarsh prison in 2004. Trust in any 
government to imprison people based on secret intelligence alone was quite 
rightly undermined by the evaporation of the infamous “weapons of mass 
destruction” in Iraq. Sadly, exercises in punishment without charge or trial 
continued under the coalition and then Conservative governments. And all this 
from a political class that gloried in the800th anniversary of Magna Carta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jun/15/magna-carta-leaders-celebrate-800th-anniversary-runnymede>
 only last year. Nonetheless, criminal detention without charge of up to 90 and 
then 42 days were famously defeated, not in the courts but by public opinion 
and parliament. Once more the victory belonged to democrats from across the 
spectrum: to campaigners, parliamentarians, commentators and civil society. 
Good wishes poured in from all over the world. We felt taller and went to the 
pub. We secured reasonable detention limits for terror suspects. Don’t asylum 
seekers deserve similar consideration?
 Shami Chakrabarti in front of the the Royal Courts of Justice building, 2006. 
Photograph: Bloomberg via Getty Images 
Then, the idea that the innocent have “nothing to fear” from unchecked power 
in general and the near death of privacy in particular, came under closer 
scrutiny. The dangerous white elephant that was to be the National Identity 
Register, with its enormous implications for both race relations and those 
between the state and the individual, became more derided with each, ever more 
fanciful, justification. Financial costs to the citizen and the exchequer were 
perhaps even more persuasive.

The legislation was ultimately repealed in the coalition rose-garden days of 
2010. However, a combination of recent nasty immigration legislation andEdward 
Snowden <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/edward-snowden>’s revelations of 
blanket surveillance without public knowledge, parliamentary debate or proper 
law, demonstrate how the leviathan is far from sated or defeated.

There were tougher times, too … one home secretary went ballistic at me after 
a fluffy Sunday-morning TV show

Over time, our appeals to principle and imagination (“What if it were you?”) 
were greatly assisted by the law of unintended but inevitable consequences. 
Anti-terror stop-and-search powers were used againstoctogenarian peace 
campaigners 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/1499466/Heckler-82-who-dared-called-Straw-a-liar-is-held-under-terrorist-law.html>
 and instant extradition arrangements – passed in the understandable post-9/11 
panic – were used against bankers, businessmen and, most notably, vulnerable 
internet adventurerGary McKinnon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gary-mckinnon>. These life lessons in what 
happens when we don’t stand up for those who are more obviously “othered” drew 
support from parts of the polity and press who are the unlikely and occasional 
bedfellows of human rights campaigners. Nonetheless, they were often essential 
to even partial success.

There were tougher times, too. Late-night bullying emails from government 
advisers who had watched too much Malcolm Tucker; nasty personal “briefings”; 
and the former home secretary who once went ballistic at me in the green room 
after a fluffy Sunday-morning sofa TV show.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Fshami-chakrabarti-on-14-years-of-fighting-the-power-the-leviathan-is-far-from-defeated%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb90156e830ee3d29bb03b7fac779d54be2253d45%2F195_424_3950_2369%2F3950.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shami%20Chakrabarti%20on%2014%20years%20of%20fighting%20the%20power%3A%20'The%20leviathan%20is%20far%20from%20defeated'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Fshami-chakrabarti-on-14-years-of-fighting-the-power-the-leviathan-is-far-from-defeated%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shami%20Chakrabarti%20on%2014%20years%20of%20fighting%20the%20power%3A%20%27The%20leviathan%20is%20far%20from%20defeated%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Fshami-chakrabarti-on-14-years-of-fighting-the-power-the-leviathan-is-far-from-defeated%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb90156e830ee3d29bb03b7fac779d54be2253d45%2F195_424_3950_2369%2F3950.jpg>
 Strange bedfellows: with David Davis, Vivienne Westwood, Diane Abbot, Honor 
Blackman and Chris Huhne to protest against 42-day detention in 2008. 
Photograph: Nils Jorgensen/Rex/Shutterstock 
Then, towards the end of the last decade, something close to the heart of 
darkness: the bitter truth that western security agencies had been complicit 
and even culpable in the ultimate evil of torture – and in freedom’s name. Some 
of this happened to prisoners of our real wars in military detention. Some 
crimes were perpetrated in “black sites” and elsewhere, in one of the most 
shameful and counterproductive strategies of the so-called “war on terror”. 
Once more, the combination ofinvestigative journalism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/dec/11/cia-torture-report-british-spy-agencies-discussed-redactions>
 – much of it in this paper – test-case litigation and parliamentary tenacity 
brought the scandals to light.

Hate the light? Turn off the power. The last government instituted secret 
courts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2012/sep/25/secret-courts-the-essential-guide> 
to prevent future embarrassment. Civillegal aid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/legal-aid> has been obliterated and judicial 
review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/jan/21/assault-judicial-review-threatens-access-justice>
 curtailed. The present government attacks trade union freedom as well as 
democratic dissent from doctors, lawyers, charities and on our campuses. There 
is always a ready excuse. Sometimes public convenience and sometimes – in yet 
another layer of irony – defeating “extremism”. My successor will need that 
rare combination of a thick skin filled with energy, integrity, sensitivity and 
optimism.

So why am I still optimistic? Because I find hope everywhere. As director of 
Liberty I travelled the length and breadth of our freedom-loving country and 
found so many friends, not least among the young. We are no longer a small 
gathering of brave souls in the crypt, but a movement of some history and 
resilience. I hope you will continue to join our shared struggles in your 
thousands.

On Liberty by Shami Chakrabarti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/shami-chakrabarti> is out now in paperback 
(£9.99, Penguin)
 