
Although she began to achieve success only after she had reached 40, the singer
Sharon Jones, who has died of pancreatic cancer aged 60 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/19/soul-star-sharon-jones-dies-aged-60>
, had spent her life working towards a musical career. A passionate devotee of 
the classic soul and funk music pioneered by the likes ofJames Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2006/dec/26/guardianobituaries.usa>, Aretha 
Franklin and Tina Turner, Jones could have made a perfect fit for record labels 
such as Motown or Stax had she been born a decade earlier.

It was not until 2002 that she released her first album, Dap-Dippin’ With 
Sharon Jones and the Dap-Kings, after which she went on to record a further 
five albums. In 2014, Jones and the Dap-Kings earned a Grammy nomination for 
their album Give the People What They Want. The next year, they released a 
Christmas album, It’s a Holiday Soul Party, and this summer, the compilation 
album Miss Sharon Jones! was released, featuring music used on the soundtrack 
of thedocumentary film of the same name 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt4935480/?ref_=nm_flmg_dr_5>, directed by Barbara 
Kopple <http://www.cabincreekfilms.com/barbara_kopple.html>.

The band’s raw soul power (including a roaring horn section) coupled with 
Jones’s huge stage presence and even bigger voice had helped them build a 
steadily growing audience from the release of that first album. This was driven 
by constant gigging and regular recording, with the albums Naturally (2005), 
100 Days, 100 Nights (2007) and I Learned The Hard Way (2010) cementing the 
group’s reputation as flag-wavers for the spirit of “real” soul and funk music. 
The Dap-Kings also played onAmy Winehouse’s album Back to Black 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/features/amy-winehouses-back-to-black-10-things-you-didnt-know-w446833>
 (2006) and toured with her, which irked Jones somewhat.

But Jones began receiving prestigious invitations of her own. In 2007 she 
appeared as a bar-room singer in the Denzel Washington filmThe Great Debaters 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0427309/>, and that year also performed with Lou 
Reed <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/oct/28/lou-reed>. She guested on 
Michael Bublé’s album Crazy Love in 2009, and, with the Dap-Kings, was joined 
on stage byPrince in Paris in 2011 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2016/11/18/when-prince-surprised-sharon-jones-on-stage-in-paris.html>
. In 2016 the band toured with Hall and Oates and was seen performing in the 
Netflix TV series, Marvel’s Luke Cage.

Jones’s belated but dynamic progress was scuppered by illness. In June 2013 
she was diagnosed with bile duct cancer and underwent surgery, but subsequently 
had to have further surgery after her diagnosis was revised to pancreatic 
cancer. The Miss Sharon Jones! documentary was filmed while Jones was in the 
middle of her treatment. She explained that she decided to get involved in the 
film because “it would be cool to let my fans see what I’m going through. Maybe 
I’ll inspire someone who’s battling cancer to fight.”

At the end of 2013 she was declared free of the disease. Give the People What 
They Want was released in January 2014, and Jones hoped the album would earn 
greater music business recognition for herself and her band and for their style 
of music. “They should have another category for soul at the Grammy awards,” 
she told Spin magazine in 2014. “They’re trying to say there are no soul 
singers – that soul music died in the late 60s and early 70s. I want the 
industry to know that soul music hasn’t died.” Nonetheless, when she received 
her Grammy nomination, it was in the R&B category.

Jones was born the youngest of six children in Augusta, Georgia, to Ella Mae 
(nee Price) and Charlie Jones. In 1959 Ella Mae moved with Sharon and her two 
other daughters, Willa and Dora, to Brooklyn’s Bedford-Stuyvesant district, 
while her sons, Charles, Ike and Henry, stayed in Augusta with their father. 
The girls would spend summers in Augusta, and on one of these visits Sharon 
attended a James Brown concert with her father. Brown’s groundbreaking music 
and explosive performing style became a powerful influence on her.

She regularly sang gospel music in church and during the 70s performed with 
funk bands as well as picking up work as a backing singer, often as Lafaye 
Jones (Lafaye was her middle name). However, she was unable to make a 
breakthrough in her own right, and, as she later recalled in Miss Sharon 
Jones!, was once told by a record producer that she was “too fat, too black, 
too short and too old”.

She earned a living by working as a corrections officer at New York’s Rikers 
Island prison and as an armoured car guard for the Wells Fargo corporation. 
These tough jobs perhaps helped Jones to develop her formidable stage persona, 
in which she would strut around the stage in an explosion of tassels and 
glitter.

The turning point arrived in 1996, when Jones was recruited by Gabriel Roth 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bosco_Mann> and Philippe Lehman (the latter the 
boss of French label Pure Records) to sing at a recording session for the R&B 
performer Lee Fields, with the backing band the Soul Providers. Roth and Lehman 
were so impressed with Jones’s work that they invited her to sing solo on a 
pair of tracks, Switchblade and The Landlord, both of which appeared on the 
Soul Providers’ albumSoul Tequila 
<https://www.discogs.com/Soul-ProvidersFeaturing-Lee-Fields-Soul-Tequila-And-Eleven-Other-Funky-Favourites/release/1875366>
.

Roth and Lehman subsequently launched the Brooklyn-based label Desco 
<https://www.discogs.com/label/42438-Desco-Records>, for which Jones recorded 
three singles, Damn It’s Hot, Bump N Touch and You Better Think Twice (all of 
which later appeared on the compilation Spike’s Choice: The Desco Funk 45 
Collection). In 2000 Roth and Lehman went their separate ways, and Roth 
launched Daptone Records. Its first release was Dap-Dippin’ With Sharon Jones 
and the Dap-Kings, the Dap-Kings having been formed from members of the Soul 
Providers and fellow Desco recording artists the Mighty Imperials. Roth 
(calling himself Bosco Mann) played bass. The album was recorded in a basement 
in Williamsburg, and the band sold copies of it from the saxophonist Neal 
Sugarman’s kitchen.

It was when Kopple’s documentary was being shown at the Toronto international 
film festival in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/28/toronto-film-festival-2015-full-lineup>
 that Jones revealed that her cancer had returned. Defiant to the last, she had 
co-written a new song, I’m Still Here, for the film, in which she sang: “I 
didn’t know if I would live to see another day, but I’m still here.”

She is survived by Dora, Ike, Henry and Willa.

• Sharon Lafaye Jones, soul singer and songwriter, born 4 May 1956; died 18 
November 2016
 