
As reports confirmed Sharon Jones’ death on Friday evening, one thing emerged: 
hundreds if not thousands of fan pictures, selfies taken with Ms Jones from her 
gigs all over the globe with her band, the Dap-Kings. That is perhaps what is 
most striking: she was a firecracker, a lioness of a performer, yet completely 
accessible to her admirers. If you were lucky enough to see her perform live 
you felt as if you had underpaid; she was a workhorse, a tremendous dancer, a 
radiant, gleeful, funny performer, and in possession of an unforgettable, 
booming voice.

Soul star Sharon Jones dies, aged 60
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/19/soul-star-sharon-jones-dies-aged-60>
With all the recent acclaim surrounding her (including a documentary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/27/sharon-jones-interview-dap-kings-documentary>
), it’s easy forget that Jones’ career started at age 40 andher successes 
essentially came within the last decade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/20/sharon-jones-obituary>. Similar 
to Bill Withers, success came later in life for Jones, which is certainly 
another facet of inspiration for her fans and peers. It was a quick rise and 
her peers noticed. There was that one time Prince surprised her by jumping 
onstage in Paris. Chaka Khan, a huge part of the soul pantheon, tweeted: “She 
was a real deal in this industry.” Leon Bridges, whose career was in partly 
paved by Sharon’s bolstering of the modern soul revival, had this to say: “Rest 
in peace to the beautiful black queen.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfojrEzlygOc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfojrEzlygOc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfojrEzlygOc&media=>
Her label, Daptone Records 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/06/daptone-records-wick-rock-soul-music>
, initially a small indie label run out of Brooklyn, thrived mostly because 
Sharon was their nucleus, their figurehead, and surely she shined. Her small 
frame, age, and the years of refusal she faced added to the unlikeliness of her 
success: she was told for years that she was too short, too black, and not 
pretty enough. If that tale sounds similar to Nina Simone’s, it is because they 
were both black, talented, uncompromising, bold, and not part of the status 
quo. On Netflix’s surprise juggernaut success, Luke Cage, Sharon bookends the 
series finale with her song 100 Days, 100 Nights. On it, she sings: “One 
hundred days, 100 nights, to know a man’s heart.” Through her emotive art, we 
felt like we knew hers.

Sharon was only 60 when she died, and that’s an uncomfortable number to 
swallow, especially because she projected so much life and liveliness. Though 
her career was not as lengthy as those ofPrince 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/24/prince-remembered-cultural-commentators-artists-what-prince-meant-to-them-john-grant-gemma-cairney>
 orDavid Bowie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/14/celebrating-david-bowie-2017-concerts>
 (both of whom, along withLeonard Cohen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/11/leonard-cohen-obituary> and 
several other towering cultural figures, we lost this year), Sharon’s music 
lives on. Her legacy will thrive on through all the fans she took time to meet 
with, all the members of the Brooklyn soul scene who became extended family, 
and to all listeners who were fortunate enough to be alive when she decided to 
sing for us. Thank you, Sharon Jones.
 