
Sheffield <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/sheffield> has cashed in on the 
so-called “golden era” of relations between Britain and China, with a 60-year, 
billion-pound construction deal that is set to change the face of the steel 
city.

In the biggest Chinese investment outside London, Sheffield city council 
announced that an initial £220m would pay for four or five city centre projects 
over the next three years and create “hundreds if not thousands” of jobs in 
south Yorkshire.

The partnership is between Sheffield city council and Sichuan Guodong 
Construction Group, one of the biggest firms in China’s south-western Sichuan 
province.

The deal is seen as highly significant at a time of political uncertainty 
around Britain’s trading relationship with China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/30/china-britain-and-brexit-vote-to-leave-eu-robs-golden-relationship-of-its-lustre>
 following the vote to leave the European Union.


China, Britain and Brexit: vote to leave EU robs 'golden relationship' of its 
lustre
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/30/china-britain-and-brexit-vote-to-leave-eu-robs-golden-relationship-of-its-lustre>
Julie Dore, leader of Sheffield city council, said: “This is the biggest 
Chinese investment deal to be made by a UK city outside of London. And perhaps 
more importantly, it is the first deal of its kind to be made by a UK city. 
This is a real partnership.

“The projects funded by this investment will be determined by Sheffield city 
council, and the 60-year commitment secures a stream of investment into our 
city for the next generation, and means a whole range of projects become viable 
because of the long-term nature of the relationship.

“At a time of unprecedented uncertainty and turmoil on the national political 
scene, we have taken the bull by the horns and led by example. We have the 
skills and the connections to drive economic growth in our city.”

Council bosses did not reveal which projects are to be funded by the first 
tranche of investment, insisting that “sensitive negotiations” are continuing.

It is thought, however, that the money will be used to fund the city’s first 
five-star hotel, as well as new office and leisure developments and both 
high-end and affordable housing in the city centre. The total value of the deal 
was “potentially billions” over 60 years, a council spokeswoman said.

The deal, which took 18 months to thrash out, is the biggest Chinese cash 
injection in the north of England to date and followsGeorge Osborne’s 
oft-repeated desire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/oct/23/chinese-president-xi-jinping-manchester-visit-northern-powerhouse-status>
 to get the country’s financial muscle behind his “northern powerhouse” project.

Chinese officials have said they are open to launching trade negotiations with 
Britain in the aftermath of the Brexit vote, but there remains uncertainty 
about how Theresa May’s government will seek to do business with Beijing.

Experts have predicted the beginning of the end of the so-called “golden era” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/30/china-britain-and-brexit-vote-to-leave-eu-robs-golden-relationship-of-its-lustre>
 fostered by the former chancellor, who last year unveiled plans to make 
Beijing Britain’s second biggest trade partner by 2025.

Osborne was seen to have wooed China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> 
by stressing trade and investment rather than human rights. Experts believe 
that Theresa May and her chancellor, Philip Hammond, will take a cooler 
approach, albeit under greater pressure to strike trade deals with non-EU 
countries.

Next week, a delegation of Manchester’s business and civic leaders, including 
the council chief executive, Sir Howard Bernstein, and the council leader, Sir 
Richard Leese, will fly out to Beijing in an attempt to secure further Chinese 
investment in the city.

On Monday, executives will rub shoulders at Beijing’s Bird’s Nest stadium 
while watching Manchester United’s pre-season friendly againstManchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/manchester> City.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fsheffield-lands-billion-pound-china-deal-to-create-hundreds-of-jobs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa713f86cc8cdca79854c938afd022e82f97779cb%2F0_137_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sheffield%20lands%20billion-pound%20China%20deal%20to%20create%20'hundreds'%20of%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fsheffield-lands-billion-pound-china-deal-to-create-hundreds-of-jobs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sheffield%20lands%20billion-pound%20China%20deal%20to%20create%20%27hundreds%27%20of%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fsheffield-lands-billion-pound-china-deal-to-create-hundreds-of-jobs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa713f86cc8cdca79854c938afd022e82f97779cb%2F0_137_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 The National Stadium, or Bird’s Nest, in Beijing. On Monday, a delegation 
executives and politicians from Manchester will watch its two main football 
teams play a pre-season friendly at the ground. Photograph: How Hwee Young/EPA 
The trip follows Chinese president Xi Jinping’s state visit to London and 
Manchester last October, in which David Cameron announced the launch of direct 
flights from Manchester – the UK’s second biggest airport – to Beijing.

Chinese investment in the north has followed Osborne’s overtures, though the 
Sheffield deal is by far the biggest cash pledge to date.

Last September, the Hualing Group agreed to invest a reported £60m in the 
building of apartment blocks at Middlewood Locks in Salford, the Thorpe Park 
business zone in Leeds and a digital campus in Sheffield in a deal with the 
developer Scarborough Group.

The Beijing Construction and Engineering Group (BCEG) has agreed to fund £4m 
to help kickstart the building at Middlewood Locks. The firm is also understood 
to have invested around £15m in St Michael’s area of Manchester city centre in 
a project spearheaded bythe ex-footballers Gary Neville and Ryan Giggs.

BCEG in 2013 spent £12m on a 20% stake in Airport City, a new commercial 
district close to Manchester airport whose construction would cost £800m to 
complete.
 