
Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> said Shinzo 
Abe’s visit to Pearl Harbor was a “historic gesture” that showed the power of 
reconciliation.

Speaking at Pearl Harbor alongside the Japanese prime minister on Tuesday 
afternoon, duringthe first joint visit by US and Japanese leaders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/05/japan-pm-shinzo-abe-to-visit-pearl-harbor-with-barack-obama>
, Obama said Abe’s presence was a reminder that wars could end and enemies 
could become allies.

'Alliance of hope': US and Japan leaders meet for historic Pearl Harbor first
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/26/pearl-harbor-anniversary-obama-japan-shinzo-abe>
 It showed that “the fruits of peace always outweigh the plunder of war”, the 
US president said.

Obama said that the US-Japan relationship was now a cornerstone of peace in 
the world and that the alliance had never been stronger.


Abe offered “sincere and everlasting condolences” to the US service members 
who died when his country attacked Pearl Harbor, sending the US into the second 
world war.


Japanese leaders have visited Pearl Harbor before, but Abe is the first 
Japanese leader to visit the USS Arizona Memorial, honoring those who died in 
Pearl Harbor during the second world war, and the first to visit Pearl Harbor 
with a US president.

The prime minister did not apologize for the attack but said: “We must never 
repeat the horrors of war again.” He paid tribute to the “brave men and women” 
who were killed, saying it was important to show respect even to a former enemy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fshinzo-abe-pearl-harbor-visit-obama-japan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27fed699e8181077ffc23176474aa47e90054cd1%2F0_0_3513_2472%2F3513.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shinzo%20Abe%20visits%20Pearl%20Harbor%20in%20what%20Barack%20Obama%20calls%20'historic%20gesture'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fshinzo-abe-pearl-harbor-visit-obama-japan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shinzo%20Abe%20visits%20Pearl%20Harbor%20in%20what%20Barack%20Obama%20calls%20%27historic%20gesture%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fshinzo-abe-pearl-harbor-visit-obama-japan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27fed699e8181077ffc23176474aa47e90054cd1%2F0_0_3513_2472%2F3513.jpg>
 Barack Obama and Shinzo Abe laid wreaths and tossed flower petals into the 
water aboard the USS Arizona Memorial to honor those who died at Pearl Harbor. 
Photograph: Kevin Lamarque/Reuters 
The two world leaders laid wreaths 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/27/japanese-pm-shinzo-abe-wreaths-hawaii-historic-pearl-harbor-visit>
 and tossed flower petals into the water aboard the USS Arizona Memorial to 
honor those who died at Pearl Harbor. The rusting wreckage of the sunken ship 
where more than 1,000 American service members are entombed can be seen just 
under the water’s surface.

Obama and Abe closed their eyes and stood silently for a few moments before 
concluding their visit to the memorial. Then they boarded a boat to take them 
to nearby Joint Base Pearl Harbor-Hickam, where they spoke.

The two leaders greeted survivors in the crowd, shaking hands and hugging some 
of the men who fought in the 7 December 1941 battle.

The visit, Japan’s government has said, is powerful proof that the former 
enemies have transcended the recriminatory impulses that weighed down relations 
after the war.

It is a bookend of sorts for the president, who nearly eight years ago invited 
Abe’s predecessor to be the first leader he hosted at the White House.

For Abe, it is an act of symbolic reciprocity, coming six months after Obama 
became the first sitting US president to visit Hiroshima in Japan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/27/barack-obama-first-us-president-to-visit-hiroshima-japan>
, where the US dropped an atomic bomb in hopes of ending the war it entered 
after Pearl Harbor.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fshinzo-abe-pearl-harbor-visit-obama-japan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F624d52cc3c9a178a505f72c2ae0f4dd3872029c6%2F0_94_2940_1764%2F2940.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shinzo%20Abe%20visits%20Pearl%20Harbor%20in%20what%20Barack%20Obama%20calls%20'historic%20gesture'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fshinzo-abe-pearl-harbor-visit-obama-japan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shinzo%20Abe%20visits%20Pearl%20Harbor%20in%20what%20Barack%20Obama%20calls%20%27historic%20gesture%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fshinzo-abe-pearl-harbor-visit-obama-japan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F624d52cc3c9a178a505f72c2ae0f4dd3872029c6%2F0_94_2940_1764%2F2940.jpg>
 Shinzo Abe smiles after giving a hug to a Pearl Harbor survivor, Everett 
Hyland. Photograph: Hugh Gentry/Reuters 
“This visit, and the president’s visit to Hiroshima earlier this year, would 
not have been possible eight years ago,” said Daniel Kritenbrink, Obama’s top 
Asia adviser in the White House. “That we are here today is the result of years 
of efforts at all levels of our government and societies, which has allowed us 
to jointly and directly deal with even the most sensitive aspects of our shared 
history.”


In the years after Japan’s attack, the US incarcerated about 120,000 Japanese 
Americans in internment camps before dropping atomic bombs in 1945 that killed 
about 140,000 people in Hiroshima and 70,000 in Nagasaki.

Obama did not apologize at Hiroshima in May, a visit that he and Abe used to 
emphasize their elusive aspirations for a nuclear-free future. Nor did Abe on 
Tuesday.

No apology needed, said 96-year-old Alfred Rodrigues, a US navy veteran who 
survived what the then president, Franklin D Roosevelt, called a “date which 
will live in infamy”.

“War is war,” Rodrigues said as he looked at old photos of his military 
service. “They were doing what they were supposed to do, and we were doing what 
we were supposed to do.”

Since the war, the US and Japan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> have 
built a powerful alliance that both sides say has grown during Obama’s tenure, 
including strengthened military ties. Both Obama and Abe were driving forces 
behind the Trans-Pacific Partnership, a sweeping free trade deal now on hold 
due to staunch opposition by Congress and President-elect Donald Trump.
 