
They may not be totally convincing as potential Champions, but Chelsea beat 
Southampton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/southampton> more 
convincingly than the scoreline suggests to make their best start to a season 
in the top flight.

Four games, four victories is a club record at this level, and although Jos√© 
Mourinho's men should have won by a bigger margin against a side in turmoil 
after the departure of manager Paul Sturrock last week, the way they cruised 
through the game looked ominous for all but the very best in the Premiership.

'You can't do better than take 12 points from your first four games,' said 
Steve Clarke, assistant to Mourinho, who flew out of the country straight after 
the game.

The club insisted that their Portuguese manager is not looking for that final 
piece in theChelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> jigsaw, but 
there is still an element of doubt that his side have enough about them to 
overtake Arsenal.

By Clarke's own admission, Chelsea should have been three or four ahead by 
half-time, despite falling a goal behind - a wonderful strike from James 
Beattie - within 12 seconds of kick-off.

Yet after equalising, through Beattie again, into his own net, and taking the 
lead with aFrank Lampard <https://www.theguardian.com/football/frank-lampard> 
penalty, Chelsea failed to really kill off a Saints side who rarely threatened, 
but were always in with a chance of snatching a point.

Not that they were short of chances, but a combination of wayward finishing, 
outstanding goalkeeping and goalline clearances kept Chelsea down to a one-goal 
winning margin for the third weekend running.

'Missing chances is not a concern while we are winning games - it might be if 
we were losing,' added Clarke.

Yet an unlikely upset looked briefly possible when Beattie scored that early 
goal. Chelsea kicked off, but Joe Cole's wayward pass sat up invitingly for the 
big striker to hit a beautiful volley that dipped over the arching body of Petr 
Cech and into the net from fully 25 yards.

It was a sensational start to the game, the first goal Chelsea had conceded 
this season, but proved to be a false dawn. Chelsea soon settled into their 
groove, with Lampard dictating play from the middle of the park and Cole and 
Didier Drogba looking particularly threatening in the first-half.

Eidur Gudjohnsen, in for Mateja Kezman, headed wide from close range, Drogba 
had a shot blocked by Antti Niemi and Lampard thumped a drive over the bar, all 
inside the opening 10 minutes.

Drogba cut in from the left and had a shot saved from a tight angle. Cole 
twisted and turned defenders before shooting wide, then had a half-hearted shot 
cleared off the line. Drogba slid in on a curling Lampard free-kick, but failed 
to make contact, then miscontrolled a perfect through ball from Cole.

With so much possession and pressure on the Southampton goal, it seemed only a 
matter of time before a Chelsea equaliser, but it came through an unexpected 
route.

Lampard swung in a corner, Gudjohnsen flicked the ball with a heel and it flew 
off Beattie's hip towards his own goal. Anders Svensson made a valiant effort 
to clear, but the ball flew up on to the crossbar and down over the line.

The goal knocked the stuffing out of Saints. Svensson was in action again, 
clearing a header from the impressive Tiago off the line, but Chelsea soon had 
the decisive goal.

Another Lampard corner was swung in and Claus Lundekvam handled under pressure 
from Drogba. Southampton argued that he had been pushed and were still unhappy 
after Lampard scored from the resulting penalty, claiming he touched the ball 
twice when he slipped as he struck it.

The second half was less one-sided, although Niemi was still the busier 
keeper, tipping over another potential own goal, this time from Rory Delap, and 
saving well from Damien Duff and Kezman.

A draw would have been more than Southampton deserved and caretaker- manager 
Steve Wigley admitted: 'I wouldn't like to play Chelsea every week. They will 
be there or thereabouts at the end of the season.'

But thereabouts may not be good enough for Roman Abramovich. 

 Man of the Match 

 Frank Lampard The Chelsea midfielder was the club's player of the season last 
year and has grown in stature since playing for England in the European 
Championships. He took control of the game from an early stage, despite a cut 
eye that would have stopped Henry Cooper and required two stitches, and was 
dominant throughout.

You can mail the Observer direct at sport@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:sport@observer.co.uk>
 