
A vulnerability has been found 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/jan/13/whatsapp-backdoor-allows-snooping-on-encrypted-messages>
 within Facebook’s secure messaging service WhatsApp, which would allow the 
company and third-parties such as government agencies to intercept and read 
supposedly encrypted and private messages.

What is WhatsApp?

WhatsApp is a free messaging and calling service that uses the internet to 
deliver communications. It is used by over 1 billion people across the world 
including in countries with oppressive regimes. It was bought byFacebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> in 2014 for $22bn (£18bn) and 
implemented end-to-end encryption in April 2016.

What is end-to-end encryption?

End-to-end encryption (E2EE) ensures that a conversation can only be read by 
the sender and recipient and not intercepted by a middleman.WhatsApp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/whatsapp> uses the acclaimed Signal 
encryption protocol that relies on the exchanging of unique security keys that 
are verified between users to guarantee communications cannot be intercepted by 
a middleman.

Anything said between users with E2EE is guaranteed to be private during 
transit, unless there’s a backdoor to the encryption.

 What is a backdoor?


A backdoor to a technology such as encryption is simply a way for a 
third-party to access something secure without the primary parties being aware. 
In this case, it is a vulnerability that could be used as a backdoor by a 
third-party such as WhatsApp to read encrypted messages that are supposedly 
secure against interception. Your security technology is only as strong as the 
weakest link. The introduction of a vulnerability able to be used as A backdoor 
is the weak link.

What has WhatsApp done?

The Signal encryption protocol has no known weaknesses if it is implemented 
correctly. Whatsapp’s implementation has a vulnerability that could be used as 
a backdoor into the Signal protocol, giving itself the ability to force the 
generation of new encryption keys for offline users and to make the sender 
re-encrypt messages with new keys and send them again for any messages that 
have not been marked as delivered.

It means that it could generate keys known to Whatsapp or a third-party and 
therefore read and intercept apparently encrypted messages without the sender 
or recipients knowledge.

Why is it like it is?

WhatsApp says that it used this implementation of the Signal protocol to aid 
usability. If it is not in place, messages sent to an offline user, who then 
changes their smartphone or has to re-install whatsapp and in doing so 
generates new security keys for themselves, would remain undelivered once the 
user comes back online.

A WhatsApp spokesperson told the Guardian: “In many parts of the world, people 
frequently change devices and Sim cards. In these situations, we want to make 
sure people’s messages are delivered, not lost in transit.”

Should I be worried?

Unlike most of Facebook’s other messaging and social media services, this 
vulnerability is unlikely to ever be used for profiling for advertising 
purposes. The burden to execute the interception of messages is likely too high 
to be cost effective.

But the same cannot be said for government agencies and actors. A way into a 
supposedly secure, end-to-end encrypted, private messaging service could be a 
“goldmine” for surveillance purposes and is “a huge betrayal of user trust”, 
according to privacy advocates.

The amount of private information sent knowingly or unknowingly through 
WhatsApp could be vast and therefore is a very attractive target for 
surveillance.

Should I stop using WhatsApp?

If you use WhatsApp as a way to avoid government surveillance due to its 
end-to-end encryption service, you should stop using it immediately.

Facebook and WhatsApp could be compelled to give government agencies such as 
GCHQ and the US National Security Agency access to users’ messages.

What are the alternatives?

There are several alternatives to WhatsApp that use encryption to secure 
communications against interception. The most recommended is Signal, which was 
developed byOpen Whisper Systems <https://whispersystems.org/> and is the 
namesake of the Signal E2EE protocol.

It is used and recommended by NSA whistle blower Edward Snowden, and is 
considered the gold standard for private messaging. It does not have the same 
vulnerability in its implementation of E2EE as WhatsApp, and is available for
Android 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=org.thoughtcrime.securesms> and 
iOS <https://itunes.apple.com/app/signal-private-messenger/id874139669>.

 * This article was amended on 17 January to clarify earlier references to a 
“backdoor”. 
 * Exclusive: WhatsApp vulnerability allows snooping on encrypted messages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/jan/13/whatsapp-backdoor-allows-snooping-on-encrypted-messages> 