
This week, New York City becomes a playground for music industry tourists 
seeking to discover bands about to ‘break through’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/oct/12/cmj-music-marathon-2015-new-york-indie-music>
. This is the CMJ Music Marathon, a 35-year-old autumn tradition where college 
radio kids and business people flock to the city for a week of showcases and 
networking available to those with a $549 badge. In advance of the festival, we 
asked one of the city’s most compelling new groups,Show Me The Body 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/04/this-weeks-new-tracks>, to show 
us what’s really happening in New York right now.

CMJ 2015: the best bands to see at this year's music marathon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/oct/09/cmj-2015-music-marathon-best-bands>
Show Me The Body’s creaking, loud-quiet-loud noise-punk is laced with traces 
of the city, in its wiry, dissonant banjo plucks and rapid-fire hip-hop vocal 
delivery. On a Friday morning, the band’s 21-year-old frontman, Julian Cashwan 
Pratt, is picking apart the way the city has manifested itself in their sound. 
“In one sense, the pure architecture of the city informs the sound,” he offers 
quickly. “The train, shit breaking, construction happening. All of that 
municipal state-ordered machinery is something we see a lot and is something I 
think is scary.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Fshow-me-the-body-alternative-guide-to-new-york-cmj-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F13%2F1444746174829%2F4389cbe7-20eb-44ff-ab1a-9a068efd071d-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Show%20Me%20The%20Body's%20alternative%20guide%20to%20New%20York&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Fshow-me-the-body-alternative-guide-to-new-york-cmj-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Show%20Me%20The%20Body%27s%20alternative%20guide%20to%20New%20York&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Fshow-me-the-body-alternative-guide-to-new-york-cmj-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F13%2F1444746174829%2F4389cbe7-20eb-44ff-ab1a-9a068efd071d-1020x612.jpeg>
 Back to school: Show Me The Body. Photograph: Walter Wlodarczyk 
On record, Pratt’s words twist and turn from bluesy mid-tempo singing to 
aggressive shrieks and straight-up hardcore shouts. Show Me The Body are young, 
but they are NYC lifers. Born and raised in the city, they make music that 
grapples with watchingNew York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> 
change and trying to find a place within it all, to push back and not just roll 
with the punches of everyday life. It is simultaneously weary and wired, the 
sound of spaces being filled and emptied, of feeling suffocated and gasping for 
air.

“The city is dying,” Pratt says. “I can’t really write love songs currently 
because the city is changing so hard and it’s happening in ways that are really 
sad. It’s displacing a lot of people. Friends and family are threatened with 
eviction every week … The punches the city throws at you are not human punches, 
they’re corporate punches. Shutting down stations people use, cops going hard 
on certain days to fill their quotas.”
 Julian Cashwan Pratt: ‘I can’t really write love songs currently because the 
city is changing so hard and it’s happening in ways that are really sad.’ 
Photograph: Walter Wlodarczyk 
The visceral feel of their recordings is actualized that afternoon as they 
tear through a set at the courtyard of City-As-School, a forward-thinking West 
Village public high school that encourages a sense of autonomy in it students 
through out-of-classroom work experience. It’s fitting that a band like Show Me 
The Body is playing the school’s first courtyard gig. The scene is like one from
Rock ’n’ Roll High School 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/85224/rock-n-roll-high-school>: kids 
opening a mosh pit on the concrete, surrounded on three sides by five stories 
of brown-brick school building. Two songs in, when the rain starts to pour, the 
band throw a sweatshirt over their pedals and keep pushing as a more intense 
thunderstorm looms; by the end, Pratt is hitting himself over the head with the 
mic, falling to the ground, screeching amid thrashing teenagers.
“It’s not music I typically listen to but at the same time, it’s good, and 
providing a safe environment for kids to express themselves,” Alan Cheng, the 
school’s principal, tells me after the show, as the rain clears up.

Adds Max Rosencrans, the student who suggested booking the band: “It’s nice to 
see a bunch of angry high school kids in a mosh pit at the back of an 
alternative high school. It brings shit back to what New York used to be, like 
before Giuliani.”

Here’s the band’s guide to the New York they love and that people won’t 
necessarily see during CMJ.

Court Square Diner
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuNb8QlwTrdQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuNb8QlwTrdQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuNb8QlwTrdQ&media=>
 Court Square cameo: the eatery makes an appearance in the video for Vernon. 
Earlier in the day, Show Me The Body have me meet them in Long Island City, 
the Queens neighborhood where bassist Harlan Steed, also 21, grew up. (The trio 
is rounded out by 20-year-old drummer Noah Cohen-Corbett.) I meet up with Pratt 
first at Court Square diner. The diner’s stoop makes a quick appearance in 
their video for Vernon, which features a verse by Wiki of Ratking, a band they 
grew up with. Both bands are part of the Letter Racer collective. The video 
channels the kinetic frustration woven into their interrogation of everyday 
lifescapes – a conversation that gets pried open even more over breakfast. “In 
my book, if you’re not being subversive and you’re not doing it 100%, it’s 
bullshit,” Pratt says over eggs and toast. “If you’re living here and you’re 
not looking around thinking, ‘This is insane and scary and fucked up and how 
can we work together to solve this problem and make sure everyone still has a 
home?’ If you’re not thinking about that with what you’re creating, there’s no 
reason for you to be in this city.”

5 Pointz
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Fshow-me-the-body-alternative-guide-to-new-york-cmj-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7993c29e4022c37c2e94e16f0041a97bb2e35911%2F0_40_4007_2405%2F4007.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Show%20Me%20The%20Body's%20alternative%20guide%20to%20New%20York&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Fshow-me-the-body-alternative-guide-to-new-york-cmj-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Show%20Me%20The%20Body%27s%20alternative%20guide%20to%20New%20York&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Fshow-me-the-body-alternative-guide-to-new-york-cmj-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7993c29e4022c37c2e94e16f0041a97bb2e35911%2F0_40_4007_2405%2F4007.jpg>
 The 5 Pointz was an outdoor art exhibit space in New York that was torn down 
in 2014 and replaced with a condominium complex. Photograph: Theo 
Zierock/AFP/Getty Images 
Next, wandering around Long Island City, we pass what used to be 5 Pointz, a 
historic street art location at 45 Davis Street. For years, the massive 
building was covered in murals by artists from all over the world, but it was 
destroyed last fall to make room for condos. “I always sort of felt like 5 
Pointz was this tucked away thing that could never be touched, and that there 
were certain things about the city that would never change,” Pratt says. “For 
me, it was this waking up moment that you’ve gotta fight for shit, otherwise 
it’ll go away. And motherfuckers with money are gonna make it go away.” Pratt 
tells me about his father, who used to work as a community organizer in New 
York around housing, eviction and tenant rights. “In some ways, Show Me The 
Body is our way of community organizing, of getting people together … Even if 
there’s not one message shared, there’s at least a commonly felt veracity, a 
commonly felt aggression and feeling and spirit amongst people.”

The changing face of the city
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Fshow-me-the-body-alternative-guide-to-new-york-cmj-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29a076f0526731df6cbc7c3277331bec9f205bf7%2F0_74_5473_3285%2F5473.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Show%20Me%20The%20Body's%20alternative%20guide%20to%20New%20York&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Fshow-me-the-body-alternative-guide-to-new-york-cmj-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Show%20Me%20The%20Body%27s%20alternative%20guide%20to%20New%20York&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Fshow-me-the-body-alternative-guide-to-new-york-cmj-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29a076f0526731df6cbc7c3277331bec9f205bf7%2F0_74_5473_3285%2F5473.jpg>
 New York City is being changed by rampant construction Photograph: Richard 
Levine/Demotix/Corbis 
“Are you down with hopping a fence?” Pratt asks as we approach what he simply 
refers to as “the construction site”, an empty lot down by the waterfront, a 
10-minute walk away from the diner. It’s a spot where he and Steed would hang 
as kids. Over the years, the space was always more or less abandoned, but on 
this particular day, it appears that the construction has finally begun. “This 
is insane, dude,” Pratt says in disbelief. “I never thought I’d see it. You 
came on a sad day. Don’t they look like awful machines mining the Earth for its 
goodness?” Staring back at the yellow cranes and mountains of dirt, Pratt 
explains what a big open space like this meant to his friends growing up – how 
spaces like this are invaluable to kids in highly commodified cities with 
little public space. “They just built luxury condominiums across the street,” 
he explains. “They’re going to turn this one into condos too. It’s a little 
microcosm.”

Harlan’s Place
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Fshow-me-the-body-alternative-guide-to-new-york-cmj-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1c0e60d4f54eb36783e4f1f9d5bc6abdbb8ee76%2F0_63_5556_3336%2F5556.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Show%20Me%20The%20Body's%20alternative%20guide%20to%20New%20York&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Fshow-me-the-body-alternative-guide-to-new-york-cmj-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Show%20Me%20The%20Body%27s%20alternative%20guide%20to%20New%20York&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Fshow-me-the-body-alternative-guide-to-new-york-cmj-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1c0e60d4f54eb36783e4f1f9d5bc6abdbb8ee76%2F0_63_5556_3336%2F5556.jpg>
 Basement japes: Ratking. Photograph: Graeme Robertson for the Guardian 
Across town, we stop by Show Me The Body’s de facto home as a band, in the 
basement of a building of apartments and artist studios half-owned by Steed’s 
family. “This is where the magic happens,” he tells me, pointing to a little 
corner room in the basement, their practice space. “We once threw a show in 
here. It was kind of the sickest show we ever played. We played right here, 
kids were right here, it was hilarious,” Pratt says, pointing out a narrow 
boiler room.

Steed adds: “We did another one, our first EP release show – it was us and 
Ratking. We tried to do the show in the alleyway outside, but there were a 
bunch of noise complaints so we moved everything inside.”

Deli D-day
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Fshow-me-the-body-alternative-guide-to-new-york-cmj-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1da9b9805ab8005e4c57f822535a5ce446b641aa%2F0_82_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Show%20Me%20The%20Body's%20alternative%20guide%20to%20New%20York&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Fshow-me-the-body-alternative-guide-to-new-york-cmj-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Show%20Me%20The%20Body%27s%20alternative%20guide%20to%20New%20York&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Fshow-me-the-body-alternative-guide-to-new-york-cmj-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1da9b9805ab8005e4c57f822535a5ce446b641aa%2F0_82_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
 Few New York delis have reached the level of Katz’s Diner. Show Me The Body 
think they’re a dying breed. Photograph: C Pendzich/Rex Shutterstock 
“All of these delis you won’t see any more because of people like the ones who 
come to New York for things like CMJ and don’t support the local economy,” 
Pratt explains while we make our way towards the subway, en route to 
City-As-School. “A lot of local businesses are closing throughout the city. 
Whole immigrant groups are going to start leaving the city, dead ass, because 
there’s going to be no local economy.” Delis that are about to close might seem 
like strange spots for the band to point out as they show me their take on New 
York, but the sentiment is real. “The city’s always fucking changing; it’s 
supposed to, that’s how it always is,” Pratt says. “We just have to make sure 
it’s in a way that is positive for humans and not just positive for tourists 
and rich kids.”
 