
Nestled among the concrete wilderness of Surry Hills in Sydney, the Opera 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/opera> Australia centre is a large but 
unassuming building, filled with music rooms, building workshops and costume 
studios. As I’m shown into the antiquated boardroom for a meeting, I see a 
remarkable set of paintings. They hang haphazardly on the walls and look like 
the work of Sidney Nolan.

“Oh, but they are by Nolan,” says Tanja Binggeli, who works at the centre as 
German language coach. “No one really knows they’re here either.”

The paintings are unmistakably Nolan, in colour and shape: swaths of rich 
reddish-browns and blasts of sudden yellow light, with incongruous fantastical 
and historical figures lost in a strange landscape. They show the helplessness 
of both men and animals when faced by the enormities of a rampant and hostile 
natural world. The characters are bold and prickly, transfixed by the distance 
of immeasurable sky.

Germaine Greer: Sidney Nolan painted the outback like no one else
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2007/nov/19/art.australia> 
In short, they are grand, despite their relatively modest size, and they 
reveal Nolan’s technical virtuosity in all of its bedraggled glory.

The paintings, Binggeli says, are smaller versions of large set pieces that 
are now in storage, which were commissioned specifically for the opera company. 
Not associated with a gallery or museum, and never included in the numerous 
retrospectives that followed his death in 1992, they have therefore remained 
out of view.

Not only do they seem like major works – an integral part of his late canon – 
but they also reveal his connection to the opera, which is rarely associated 
with his work.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fsidney-nolan-little-known-opera-australia-paintings-hark-back-to-golden-age-of-the-arts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe0f8244947bb8f0a86cf76195728c26baa089ef%2F0_0_640_480%2Fmaster%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sidney%20Nolan%3A%20little-known%20Opera%20Australia%20paintings%20hark%20back%20to%20golden%20age%20of%20the%20arts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fsidney-nolan-little-known-opera-australia-paintings-hark-back-to-golden-age-of-the-arts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sidney%20Nolan%3A%20little-known%20Opera%20Australia%20paintings%20hark%20back%20to%20golden%20age%20of%20the%20arts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fsidney-nolan-little-known-opera-australia-paintings-hark-back-to-golden-age-of-the-arts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe0f8244947bb8f0a86cf76195728c26baa089ef%2F0_0_640_480%2Fmaster%2F640.jpg>
 Mother and Child (1983), by Sidney Nolan: “I painted a mother feeding a child 
that she’s going to lose, all done on a giant scale, because if you have all 
the singers down below and they’re all about five feet, and if you then have a 
woman feeding her baby who’s thirty feet high, it’s a curious effect.” 
Photograph: Nathan Dunne 
For all their beauty, these paintings also symbolise a time when major art 
institutions such as Opera Australia collaborated with contemporary visual 
artists – which rarely happens these days. It was a time when, despite finite 
budgets and smaller audiences, collaboration with major figures such as Nolan 
was viewed as a coup rather than a risk.

The paintings, a series of eight, form part of Nolan’s design of the Elijah 
Moshinsky production of Il Trovatore, first commissioned by Opera Australia in 
1983 and successfully revived in 1999.Set in 15th century Spain, the Verdi opera
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/03/il-trovatore-review-royal-opera-david-bosch-gianandrea-noseda>
 is a high flown, sprawling melodrama flamboyantly defiant of linear narrative, 
packed with all manner of fantastic and bizarre incidents: child abductions, 
witch burnings, vengeful gypsies locked in dungeons. Its plot is so hyperbolic 
it was satirised byGilbert and Sullivan in The Pirates of Penzance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/17/pirates-penzance-nieuw-ensemble-kirill-gerstein-review>
.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fsidney-nolan-little-known-opera-australia-paintings-hark-back-to-golden-age-of-the-arts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbdebb3b40674f377ce0bd3ac6b54501325b66fe2%2F0_0_2365_1825%2F2365.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sidney%20Nolan%3A%20little-known%20Opera%20Australia%20paintings%20hark%20back%20to%20golden%20age%20of%20the%20arts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fsidney-nolan-little-known-opera-australia-paintings-hark-back-to-golden-age-of-the-arts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sidney%20Nolan%3A%20little-known%20Opera%20Australia%20paintings%20hark%20back%20to%20golden%20age%20of%20the%20arts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fsidney-nolan-little-known-opera-australia-paintings-hark-back-to-golden-age-of-the-arts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbdebb3b40674f377ce0bd3ac6b54501325b66fe2%2F0_0_2365_1825%2F2365.jpg>
 ‘It was a time when, despite finite budgets and smaller audiences, 
collaboration with major figures such as Nolan was viewed as a coup rather than 
a risk.’ 
Nolan had worked with Moshinsky on several other productions at the Royal 
Opera House in London, but Il Trovatore was his only contribution to opera in 
Australia. He outlined his approach in the Reynolds lecture to the Royal 
Academy in 1988: “For me, designing for the opera provides the kind of ambience 
for giving the audience a belief in the validity of what is being produced – 
you believe because you see.”

The paintings at Opera Australia are an amalgam of the artist’s outback 
landscapes and his absorption of Verdi’s fantasia. While the vegetation is 
undeniably Australian, the characters are all Verdi. Although I was too young 
to attend the original production, I can only imagine the tumultuous mixing of 
worlds: medieval Spain voiced in Italian by way of the Australian outback. Joan 
Sutherland’s performance as Leonora consumed the most attention in the press 
coverage, but Nolan was singled out for his imaginative sets.

To achieve the different strains of the production, Nolan drew on the immortal 
template of the Madonna and child for one of the key set pieces, modernising 
the characters in his inimitable style. TG Rosenthal quoted him explaining the 
work, in a book, Sidney Nolan, published in 2002: “I painted a mother feeding a 
child that she’s going to lose, all done on a giant scale, because if you have 
all the singers down below and they’re all about five feet, and if you then 
have a woman feeding her baby who’s thirty feet high, it’s a curious effect.”

Nolan was able to take the gypsies of medieval Spain and transport them to 
Australia without any loss to the music.

Achieving a sense of perspective with multiple layers was done by using gauze, 
and for a sense of movement, Nolan embedded his giant figures in a fern-like 
forest, reminiscent of how one might experience the Australian bush; at once 
lush and hallucinogenic.

Nolan was famously moved after reading of the diaries of doomed explorers 
Burke and Wills; he arranged to fly for weeks over the red outback with Eddie 
Connellan’s flying mail service in 1947. This trip inspired his famous palette, 
which a journalist in the Daily Telegraph once described as hitting you “like a 
ton or two of real red earth.” The Il Trovatore paintings reveal how he 
developed this style over the course of his career; in these late works the 
earth is shaped into translucent, thinly painted hills and valleys, which are 
then worked over with a semi-dry bristle brush and some finger painting.

The tension between different representations of reality amid omnipresent 
music is a basic characteristic of opera. If the libretti has divine or mythic 
characters, the theory goes, then the music is likely to be more explicable to 
the audience, more felt. A painter of Nolan’s talent was able to take the 
gypsies of medieval Spain and transport them to Australia without any loss to 
the music.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fsidney-nolan-little-known-opera-australia-paintings-hark-back-to-golden-age-of-the-arts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8ba5fa37b2d46020201b4e67a91591c13972f8a4%2F0_0_640_480%2Fmaster%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sidney%20Nolan%3A%20little-known%20Opera%20Australia%20paintings%20hark%20back%20to%20golden%20age%20of%20the%20arts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fsidney-nolan-little-known-opera-australia-paintings-hark-back-to-golden-age-of-the-arts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sidney%20Nolan%3A%20little-known%20Opera%20Australia%20paintings%20hark%20back%20to%20golden%20age%20of%20the%20arts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fsidney-nolan-little-known-opera-australia-paintings-hark-back-to-golden-age-of-the-arts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8ba5fa37b2d46020201b4e67a91591c13972f8a4%2F0_0_640_480%2Fmaster%2F640.jpg>
 Backdrop (1983), by Sidney Nolan for Opera Australia Photograph: Nathan Dunne 
Like many other opera companies in the USA and Europe, opera in Australia is 
experiencing some fundamental challenges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/25/opera-review-wants-24m-more-funding-but-none-for-musicals>
, particularly to do with sustainability. For example, the recent national 
opera review recommended Opera Queensland be given three years to turn around 
its ailing finances, before its status as a major performing arts company is 
taken away – a remove which would result in a significant reduction of funding, 
and certain death.

One of the charges levelled at the country’s major companies was that people 
no longer wanted to see the same staid and unadventurous productions. A lack of 
collaboration was also said to be a major contributor to falling audience 
numbers, and thus finances.


Craig Hassall, the outgoing CEO of Opera Australia, looks back to a time when 
Nolan, Patrick White and others of their generation were major contributors to 
the arts in Australia: “It was a kind of golden age of talent, one that’s 
difficult to recapture and is a great loss,” he says.

Opera in Australia is out-of-touch and untenable. To survive, it needs to be 
reinvented
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/27/opera-in-australia-is-out-of-touch-and-untenable-to-survive-it-needs-to-be-reinvented>
But why is it difficult to recapture? Like Nolan’s contribution to Il 
Trovatore, why not have Ben Quilty produce the sets for Don Giovanni, or Fiona 
Hall collaborate on Turandot?

Maybe those who have invested heavily in contemporary art of recent years, 
such as Judith Neilson of White Rabbit Gallery, or David Walsh of Mona, could 
be brought into opera funding through artist collaborations?

Short of that, Nolan’s Il Trovatore is surely up for another revival – his 
unrelenting and adventurous spirit is sorely missed.
 