
Comedian Richard Belzer was warming up the studio audience for NBC’s Saturday 
Night program, October 18th. This, he was saying, was an historic show: “For 
the first time in five years, Paul Simon andArt Garfunkel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/art-garfunkel> will be performing together.”

Belzer was a bit misinformed. Last July, Garfunkel joined Simon onstage for 
three songs at CBS Records’ convention in Toronto. And whenGeorge McGovern ran 
for president <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/oct/21/george-mcgovern> 
in 1972, the two teamed up at a Madison Square Garden benefit.

Art Garfunkel calls Paul Simon a 'jerk' for splitting duo at height of success
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/25/art-garfunkel-calls-paul-simon-a-jerk-for-splitting-duo-at-height-of-success>
Still, the show was a big deal, if not as big as Joe Garagiola claimed during 
a World Series telecast, when he likened the meeting of Paul and Art to the 
resurrection of [Babe] Ruth and [Lou] Gehrig. Simon and Garfunkel, who once had 
one of the bestselling albums in history withBridge over Troubled Water 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/may/31/simon-garfunkel-bridge-over-troubled-water>
 in 1970, broke up shortly thereafter, and their two previous “reunions” were 
nervous and tentative affairs.

Although NBC generally attempted to follow guest host Simon’s directions – “I 
specifically stated that I didn’t want it pushed as aSimon and Garfunkel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/simonandgarfunkel> show,” Simon said – there 
was reunion fever in the air. The two had just made their first recording 
together in five years, My Little Town. The song appears on both of their solo 
albums, which were simultaneously released: Simon’s Still Crazy after All These 
Years and Garfunkel’s Breakaway.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D__Ro3eGuznI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D__Ro3eGuznI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D__Ro3eGuznI&media=>
 A studio version of My Little Town performed by Simon and Garfunkel 
“I think a standing ovation might be in order,” Belzer told the crowd.

Three minutes before show time, Simon walked on. “So this kangaroo walked over 
to the bar and said... I know this is going to come as a disappointment to you, 
but Art Garfunkel is not going to be here tonight. Instead, my brother is gonna 
give a guitar lesson on the spot.”

When Garfunkel did appear, Simon once again instigated the semi-hostile 
repartee that cropped up on last year’s Grammy show. “So,” Simon taunted, 
“you’ve come crawling back.” Garfunkel deadpanned: “It’s very nice of you to 
invite me on your show.” The two sang a medley of old hits, their new single, 
and Garfunkel performed one other number, I Only Have Eyes For You.

Simon and Garfunkel have pursued independent paths for five years now. Simon 
has concentrated on composing and making albums and has become one of popular 
music’s more craftsman-like songwriters, incorporating such diverse musical 
strains as reggae, gospel and jazz.

Garfunkel, the non-writing partner, has recorded two albums, the cloyingly 
sweet Angel Clare and the more restrained Breakaway. Not enormously successful 
as a solo, he has sought to establish himself as an actor and gained respect 
for his performances in Carnal Knowledge and Catch-22.

One wondered, then, how Simon and Garfunkel came to do a record and TV special 
together and what’s behind the animosity that seems to exist. In separate 
interviews on their separate sides of town (Art on the east, Paul on the west), 
they tried to explain.

“I had had the typical musician’s experience with TV,” said Simon. “It was 
unpleasant and the music didn’t come off that well. But Phoebe Snow was in town 
and Artie said he’d come by. It was a good chance. I didn’t have anything to 
lose.”

Garfunkel: “Paul invited me a few months ago and I took the invitation. During 
the summer he began hanging out with people who make that show – Lorne Michaels 
and Tom Schiller and Chevy Chase – and he became more fervent about saying, 
‘You’ll enjoy this, come.’ I must say he was right.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDSw-DrxAhEU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDSw-DrxAhEU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDSw-DrxAhEU&media=>
 A clip from the 1977 TV film, The Paul Simon Special, co-written by Chevy Chase
Still, reunions of former supergroups have an exaggerated impact on an 
audience seemingly in search of heroes, and Garfunkel himself was quick to try 
to discourage talk of a more complete reunion.

“Paul and I are very aware of the commercial potency of Simon and Garfunkel,” 
he said. “And this potency could be like an unwieldy and unwantedly weighty 
issue. Unwantedly weighty? You know what I mean. It could have more weight than 
could actually be constructive or helpful. So we do think that some of the 
things we might do together might have long shadows or larger ramifications. 
And because of that there’s a reserve caution – a sense of, ‘Let’s make sure we 
know what we’re doing.’ And that’s a bit of a brake. There’s a bit of that – 
that is 10 per cent. Ninety per cent is not looking at the repercussions, but 
responding. Just based on feelings. The feeling of, ‘Will I enjoy this, will 
this be fun?’”

Simon had similar thoughts when he and Garfunkel returned to the recording 
studio after half a decade. “It was pleasant,” he said. “Nervous and tense at 
first. I wondered if it would be good. It fell back into something I had done 
for so many years. It’s easy to sing with Artie. It’s something I’d done all my 
life.”

Neither Simon nor Garfunkel privately expresses anything like the seeming 
hostility they play on in public.

“To a degree, it’s a setup,” said Simon. “When groups break up people always 
assume they break up in bitterness. So we play on the comic possibilities. Once 
you have a lot of people thinking something is true, it’s easy to make a joke 
about it.”

While Simon is more direct and business-like in response to such a question, 
Garfunkel becomes more theoretical: “At this point, you leave me embarrassed. 
That the subject of the vibes between us is such an issue. It’s all 
embarrassing. It caters to the immature. I grant there’s a curiosity. But to 
make that the source of … entertainment? It would drag the whole thing down, 
we’d all feel like … it’s 16 Magazine after all. I could put it to rest by 
saying, ‘Yeah, I’ve always been Paul’s friend and I suppose I always will be.’ 
That should discharge anything to do with curiosity about, ah, underlying 
vibes, you know.”

Presuming friendship, we are offered the reunion song of My Little Town, which 
is a rather angry look at the past of the songwriter.

In my little town
I never meant nothin’
I was just my father’s son
Saving my money
Dreaming of glory
Twitching like a finger
On the trigger of a gun...


Simon said he wrote the melody before he had the lyric. Garfunkel liked the 
melody and Simon decided to give the song to him. “You sing too many sweet 
songs,” he told Art. Simon said he wanted to write a better lyric because he 
wanted to “add a nasty song” to Garfunkel’s repertoire.

It became a joint venture when Garfunkel began to sing harmony to the lyric 
Simon was teaching him, and it was Garfunkel who suggested putting the song on 
both albums. He felt it was such a strong song that it would capture more 
attention for whatever album had it. “But it’s not written about my life, my 
feelings,” Simon said.

One still wondered if the song and the other dual projects instilled a desire 
in either former partner to record an album together.

“No. Absolutely not.” Simon was adamant. “But I wouldn’t mind being in the 
position of doing something like the single again. That’s something I’d really 
like.”

How intense is the public’s demand for Simon and Garfunkel? Not strong enough 
to make My Little Town a guaranteed No 1 single.

“It’s tough because of all the album sales,” said Bob Sherwood, Columbia 
Records’ national singles promotion director. Simon’s album is over half a 
million units, while Garfunkel’s is at 345,000. “It’s not going to be a 
teenage-type single. But the airplay is that of a No 1 record,” Sherwood said, 
“in every major market but Chicago.”

Radio programmers are enthusiastic about the single. “A year ago we thought 
about rereleasing The Boxer as a single,” Sherwood said. “We got a unanimous no 
on it because of the record’s strength as an oldie. But everywhere we tested 
it, people said, ‘Boy, radio sure needs a Simon and Garfunkel record.’ The 
minute My Little Town came out we had airplay.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dl3LFML_pxlY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dl3LFML_pxlY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dl3LFML_pxlY&media=>
 A studio version of The Boxer by Simon and Garfunkel 
As for their pull on television, the results are inconclusive. Of the first 
three Saturday Night programs aired, the one hosted by Simon had a higher 
rating than the one George Carlin hosted, but finished behind Rob Reiner’s 
show. Both Simon and Garfunkel are satisfied with separate careers. Simon is 
now touring small halls (under 3,000 seats) across the country.

“I wanted good music halls,” said Simon. “I don’t need the money. I don’t need 
to tour for money. Why do I do it? I have new songs and a new album. I want 
people to be aware of them.” Simon said he would “just about break even” after 
paying his 11 touring musicians and travel expenses.

One of his new songs was Gone At Last, a duet recorded with Phoebe Snow, whom 
Simon met through engineer/producer Phil Ramone, who has worked for both of 
them. “I thought Phoebe was about the best singer around,” said Simon. “I was 
supposed to do Gone At Last with Bette Midler but the record companies couldn’t 
agree on the details. That was the only problem.”

The current Simon tour has been publicized as a “farewell tour”. It isn’t all 
quite that dramatic, but Simon said he is undecided about the future. “I’m 
gonna take three months off and read and go to some concerts. I have no 
specific thing in mind. I’d like to learn about writing songs. Study 
composition. I like making records. It’s special, a unique way of expressing 
yourself.”

Garfunkel is also vague about the future. He is considering performing but is 
only considering it. Acting, then?

“Yeah, but nothing specific. I would dig to be a psychotic, to play the part 
of a killer. Somebody who’s gently and quietly weird. I would also like to play 
a singer in a film. But not a musical, a film that has a character in it who is 
a singer.” Garfunkel, who recently separated from his wife, Linda, added: “I 
would also enjoy a full-out, old-fashioned romance. Preferably one with a happy 
ending.”

Their plans seem to include no common junctions, but one never knows. Lorne 
Michaels felt from his association with them that “neither is threatened by 
Simon and Garfunkel. It’s a synthesis that can get out of hand – bigger than 
both of them combined. Early on, they needed a sense of separate identity, but 
they knew there would be a time they could meet and deal with it as 
individuals. They enjoy the fun of being Simon and Garfunkel. The love has 
never dissipated.”

Right now, though, each appears content to follow his own direction, on 
different sides of town.

© Wayne Robins, 1975
 