
Despite heavy criticism, publisher Simon & Schuster is moving forward with 
plans to releasea 2017 book by the conservative provocateur Milo Yiannopoulos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/30/breitbart-milo-yiannopoulos-claims-deal-autobiography>
, which it says will be about free speech.

Breitbart's Milo Yiannopoulos claims lucrative deal struck for autobiography
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/30/breitbart-milo-yiannopoulos-claims-deal-autobiography>
Yiannopoulos writes for Breitbart News, considered by many as a platform for 
the “alt-right” movement, an offshoot of conservatism that mixes racism and 
populism and has risen to prominence alongside the rise to the presidency of 
Donald Trump. Former Brietbart chief executiveSteve Bannon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/09/steve-bannon-seinfeld-royalties-peter-mehlman-trump>
 is a close adviser to the president-elect.

Yiannopoulos’s Twitter account was suspended 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/20/milo-yiannopoulos-twitter-ban-leslie-jones-bad-idea>
 earlier this year after a series of racially insensitive tweets to 
Ghostbusters actress Leslie Jones, who is black. Yiannopoulos has denied he is 
a white nationalist.

The Hollywood Reporter reported 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/milo-yiannopoulos-strikes-250k-book-deal-959745>
 on Thursday that Yiannopoulos was paid $250,000 for the book. Simon & 
Schuster, which is owned by New York media company CBS, said it does not 
discuss book advances.

The Chicago Review of Books announced 
<https://twitter.com/bookschicago/status/814544045825474561> on Twitter that it 
would not review any Simon & Schuster books next year because of the 
publisher’s “disgusting validation of hate”.

In an emailed statement, it said that 15 of the more than 300 books it wrote 
about last year were Simon & Schuster imprint books. In their place, the 
Chicago Review of Books said it would choose 15 books from independent and 
small publishers.

While many others inside and outside the publishing industry criticized Simon 
& Schuster publicly, the book, which is available for pre-order,soared to No 1 
on Amazon.com’s bestseller list 
<https://www.amazon.com/gp/bestsellers/books/ref=sv_b_2> on Friday.

Simon & Schuster said it does not condone discrimination or hate speech and 
said the book, titled Dangerous, will be about free speech and will be 
published in March.

“We have always published books by a wide range of authors with greatly 
varying, and frequently controversial opinions,” Simon & Schuster said, asking 
readers to “withhold judgment until they have had a chance to read the actual 
contents of the book”.

Milo Yiannopoulos: Twitter banning one man won’t undo his poisonous legacy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/20/milo-yiannopoulos-twitter-ban-leslie-jones-bad-idea>
Dangerous will be published by Simon & Schuster imprint Threshold Editions, 
which focuses on books by conservative voices, including Rush Limbaugh and 
President-elect Trump.

Danielle Henderson, a writer whose memoir is expected to be published by Simon 
& Schuster in 2018, said on Twitter: “I’m looking at my @simonschuster 
contract, and unfortunately there’s no clause for ‘what if we decide to publish 
a white nationalist’.”


A representative for Henderson did not immediately respond to a request for 
comment.

Asked for comment, Yiannopoulos referred to his Facebook post about the book.

 