
A former British ambassador to Moscow has revealed the role he played in 
bringing the explosive dossier about Donald Trump’s alleged links toRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> to the attention of the US 
intelligence agencies.

Sir Andrew Wood was consulted about the claims by Senator John McCain at a 
security conference in Canada shortly after the US election.

Wood said he did not have the dossier but that McCain obtained it from his own 
sources. It waswritten by former British MI6 agent Christopher Steele 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/12/intelligence-sources-vouch-credibility-donald-trump-russia-dossier-author>
 and handed to the director of the FBI, James Comey.

“I told him I was aware of what was in the report but I had not read it 
myself, that it might be true, it might be untrue. I had no means of judging 
really,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme.

Donald Trump dossier: intelligence sources vouch for author's credibility
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/12/intelligence-sources-vouch-credibility-donald-trump-russia-dossier-author>
The dossier, published this week by BuzzFeed, alleges that acts of sexual 
impropriety involving Trump occurred in Moscow, and says there was collusion 
between the Russian government and the Republican candidate’s campaign team.

Trump has flatly denied the stories, which he described as “fake news”.

Wood said he believed Steele was a “very competent professional operator”, 
adding: “I do not think he would make things up. I don’t think he would 
necessarily always draw the correct judgment but that’s not the same thing at 
all.”

Former Foreign Office and intelligence officials told the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/12/intelligence-sources-vouch-credibility-donald-trump-russia-dossier-author>
 on Thursday that Steele was highly respected in the intelligence community.


Steele’s dossier contains “pretty central accusations” about a presidential 
candidate being complicit in the hacking of his rival, and about the Russian 
intelligence services holding lurid sexual material on Trump, Wood said. “These 
seemed to me to have important implications - if true.”


The allegations were lent weight by some of Trump’s public behaviour on the 
campaign trail, he added. “It is a suggestion that was I think given certain 
colouration by the way Trump talked about the hacking exercise and by the 
stories about his treatment of women, and of course the KGB and FSB now make it 
a regular practice to do honeytrap exercises.”

The former spy went into hiding this week after his cover was blown. “Russia 
would certainly like to know where he got his information from - assuming his 
information is basically true and he hasn’t just made it up, which I don’t 
believe for a moment - and they’re accustomed to take action,” said Wood, 
describing the allegations as “dangerous knowledge”.

He dismissed the suggestion that the allegations could be fabricated by Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> as part of a Russian false-flag 
operation. “That would be a fairly elaborate exercise designed to get at Chris 
Steele, and I don’t see why that would be done.”
Russian Embassy, UK (@RussianEmbassy) 
Christopher Steele story: MI6 officers are never ex: briefing both ways - 
against Russia and US Presidentpic.twitter.com/tJwLtLZs24 
<https://t.co/tJwLtLZs24>
 <https://twitter.com/RussianEmbassy/status/819525677175242752> January 12, 
2017 <https://twitter.com/RussianEmbassy/status/819525677175242752> 
The Russian embassy in London claimed in a tweet that the British intelligence 
services played a role in the scandal, writing: “MI6 officers are never ex”. 
Wood brushed off this suggestion, saying: “They’re speaking [about] their 
experience with KGB officers, I suppose.”

The former diplomat denied that the publication of the allegations had 
strengthened Vladimir Putin’s position: “I think the fact that it’s been 
exposed or rumoured or suggested reduces that power. I think also that Mr Trump 
is not a man who’s regularly driven by bashfulness or shame and even if this is 
true, that he’s been compromised in that way, he would react pretty strongly 
and say so what. That’s my opinion.”

Steele has gone to ground but further details about his career continue to 
emerge.The BBC reported on Friday <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-38607456> that 
he was hired by England’s 2018 World Cup bid to gather intelligence on Fifa, 
the world football organisation, and England’s rivals including Russia.

Speaking at a news conference on Friday afternoon, Theresa May, the prime 
minister, said it was “absolutely clear” that the Trump dossier’s author had 
not worked for the British government for years.
 