
Portland, Oregon, US


Walking is the best way to see a city. I recently visited Portland, Oregon, 
and began by taking the bus to an inner city dormant volcano. Starting out with 
a beautiful view of the central hub of the city in the distance, the walk 
begins through a beautiful park before finding a set of lakes. From here you 
hit an incredibly long and straight road called SE Hawthorne Avenue, toward the 
Willamette river that chops the city in two. Walking the full length of this 
road shows the diversity of Portland culturally with the aromas wafting out 
from restaurants: South Korean, Mexican, Greek, French.

Next are the many coffee and tea shops grinding their own beans to the sound 
of local music. This area of Portland buzzes with diversity: theatres, music 
houses, instrument shops, organic farmers markets, art shops and second hand 
thrift and furniture stores. It is a relaxed and mellow walking experience as 
you head toward the river. When you cross the river and beautiful bridge, you 
hit the high-rise hustle and bustle of downtown. Look up or you’ll miss the 
glitz of the modern world as you head toward the Pearl District where again, 
the chilled nature of the city takes over from the core business district of 
downtown.

From here, you can head north-west and enter the enchanted world of Forest 
Park. With over 70 miles of trails where the air feels cooler and healthy to 
each breath you take. A walk in suburbia shows off the true diversity of a 
city.”(Andy Bee)

Dublin, Ireland
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fsix-best-city-walks-readers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F670d2656b21d80a2f83365ea7d3969d699a5965e%2F0_157_5041_3025%2F5041.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Six%20of%20the%20best%20city%20walks%20%E2%80%93%20from%20readers%20around%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fsix-best-city-walks-readers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Six%20of%20the%20best%20city%20walks%20%E2%80%93%20from%20readers%20around%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fsix-best-city-walks-readers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F670d2656b21d80a2f83365ea7d3969d699a5965e%2F0_157_5041_3025%2F5041.jpg>
 The ‘splendours and wonders’ of Dublin: St Patrick’s Cathedral and St 
Patrick’s Park. Photograph: Westend61/Getty Images 
Dublin is a fantastic city to walk in. This is partly due to its size; you can 
walk everywhere between the two canals in less than an hour. It’s not pretty 
nor grand, and it lacks the class of other capitals, but it has character in 
abundance.

To walk from Stephens Green to the park is one of the nicest urban walks in 
the world, whether you go by the quays or Thomas Street. Along the way you pass 
St Patrick’s Cathedral, Christ Church, the Brewery, the Liffey, the Luas, the 
south inner city and all the splendours and wonders it provides. On a sunny day 
it’s a pleasure; in the rain also. You want pubs? Where to begin ... be sure to 
stop off in Ryan’s of Park Gate Street. (Anonymous)

London, UK
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fsix-best-city-walks-readers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f255d001b64e90349e8d7db1f066e1c43e136fa%2F0_301_5220_3132%2F5220.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Six%20of%20the%20best%20city%20walks%20%E2%80%93%20from%20readers%20around%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fsix-best-city-walks-readers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Six%20of%20the%20best%20city%20walks%20%E2%80%93%20from%20readers%20around%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fsix-best-city-walks-readers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f255d001b64e90349e8d7db1f066e1c43e136fa%2F0_301_5220_3132%2F5220.jpg>
 Battersea Park: ‘On a sunny day this has the feel of one of the greatest 
spaces in Europe.’ Photograph: Juliet White/Getty Images 
Walking west from Vauxhall Bridge towards Battersea Park on the north side of 
the Thames is a favourite walk of mine. I love the point when the apartment 
buildings fade away and I am left with the view of Battersea Power Station, 
Chelsea Bridge and the Thames as far as Worlds End. The beautiful London plane 
trees whose branches stretch over the Victorian railings give one the feeling 
of walking within the trees.

The old water works is on the right as I approach Chelsea Bridge; its tower a 
reminder of London’s past. I pass Chelsea Bridge along the embankment and look 
across to Battersea Park, one of London’s greatest parks, though I feel it 
never gets the recognition it deserves.

I stroll past the Peace Pagoda and look across to the houses on the other side 
of the Thames and wonder if anything looks as Dutch as this view in London. I 
turn and walk towards the Festival of Britain fountains before reaching the 
stunning Victorian bandstand – it’s perfect for relaxing and watching people 
stroll past. If you have arrived on a sunny day this has the feel of one of the 
greatest spaces in Europe. Such a Parisian feel.

I continue on to the the sub-tropical gardens, the firstin England built in 
1863 when the park warden travelled to South Africa for horticultural 
inspiration. I carry on to the 1950s cafe and have an ice cream while sitting 
on a bench looking across the boating lake to the Victorian rockery. I walk 
towards Albert Bridge to continue my journey along the Thames totally infused 
with the beautiful park and the joy and happiness of all the Londoners that 
make this a perfect urban walk.”(Dan)

Istanbul, Turkey
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fsix-best-city-walks-readers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05a3728fc41affda2732c5fd9cd200b5b5ed6d39%2F0_299_5433_3259%2F5433.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Six%20of%20the%20best%20city%20walks%20%E2%80%93%20from%20readers%20around%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fsix-best-city-walks-readers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Six%20of%20the%20best%20city%20walks%20%E2%80%93%20from%20readers%20around%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fsix-best-city-walks-readers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05a3728fc41affda2732c5fd9cd200b5b5ed6d39%2F0_299_5433_3259%2F5433.jpg>
 Back streets near Istiklal shopping street in Beyoğlu, Istanbul. Photograph: 
Alamy 
If you love Istanbul, you should walk through it; if you love walking, you 
should walk through Istanbul. Starting from the Rumeli Castle to Dolmabahçe, on 
the side of Bosphorus, feel what the great discoverers of ancient history felt 
when they first saw these lands, and understand why Sultan Mehmet the Conqueror 
was so eager to make it the capital of his empire after 100 years of Ottoman’s 
attempts to conquer Constantinople.

You need to touch the ancient stones of Hagia Sophia, smell the Rodos clay, 
and feel the glory of what was once the biggest worship building in the world. 
Walk by Byzantine walls, touch its stones, look at the sea and feel the history 
in your veins. And if you want to walk even earlier in history, go to the first 
settlement: Khalkedon, which is now the most modern and westernised part of 
Istanbul. You can have some tea with locals, talk about politics, and get lost 
in the narrow, chaotic streets.

Go to the old settlements of Beyoğlu, the back streets of the main walking 
route Istiklal Street and find yourself in something out of Harry Potter’s 
universe. If you prefer some colourful buildings, walk through Balat, up the 
hill until the Armenian school, and feel the diversity and freedom. I have 
lived in Istanbul for 16 years, and with every walk it is completely different, 
but in many ways it remains the same: great, giant, glorious. The capital of 
two continents and greatest empires.”(Jeanne)

Plovdiv, Bulgaria
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fsix-best-city-walks-readers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f91f4c85fdd98cf2fca3cc4b7f1843833ceb420%2F0_393_3246_1946%2F3246.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Six%20of%20the%20best%20city%20walks%20%E2%80%93%20from%20readers%20around%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fsix-best-city-walks-readers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Six%20of%20the%20best%20city%20walks%20%E2%80%93%20from%20readers%20around%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fsix-best-city-walks-readers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f91f4c85fdd98cf2fca3cc4b7f1843833ceb420%2F0_393_3246_1946%2F3246.jpg>
 The Roman theatre in Plovdiv, Europe’s oldest continuously inhabited city. 
Photograph: De Agostini/W. Buss/Getty Images 
I love to travel around Europe alone, and few things are as rewarding as 
walking through a new city for the first time. Plovdiv, the second largest city 
in Bulgaria and Europe’s oldest continuously inhabited city, was a particular 
highlight. The city centre is the longest pedestrian zone in Europe, making it 
perfect for a ramble. The walk takes in almost a thousand years of architecture 
and culture, as vibrant Austro-Hungarian buildings overlook the excavated 
remains of a Roman theatre opposite a particularly stylish 15th-century mosque.

Straying down the back roads took me into the 21st century. Nayden Gerov 
Street, tucked between the main street and one of the city’s seven hills, 
hosted a street art festival in 2013, which transformed the walls into an 
explosion of colour. Opposite the walls, the rocks at the foot of the hill had 
faces of famous people drawn on them. Of all the street art-heavy areas I’ve 
seen across Europe, this was the most exciting and imaginative – a modern twist 
in an ancient city. (Jen Steadman)

Detroit, Michigan, US
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fsix-best-city-walks-readers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93d53c278ef1990013291f0b3ff8985139612505%2F0_64_4921_2954%2F4921.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Six%20of%20the%20best%20city%20walks%20%E2%80%93%20from%20readers%20around%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fsix-best-city-walks-readers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Six%20of%20the%20best%20city%20walks%20%E2%80%93%20from%20readers%20around%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fsix-best-city-walks-readers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93d53c278ef1990013291f0b3ff8985139612505%2F0_64_4921_2954%2F4921.jpg>
 Detroit’s waterfront: ‘the contrast opens the mind to the challenges and 
changes in cities.’ Photograph: Carlos Osorio/AP 
A walk along the downtown waterfront shows many facets of urban space and 
life. Along the water is a mix of renovated spaces and outdated factories built 
at the height of the industrial era. The contrast opens the mind to the 
challenges and changes in cities. A block off the water is the entrance into 
the thriving downtown that was thought to be dead just a decade ago. Excitement 
and energy are all around.

The architecture is a mix of 1920s art deco, mid-century modern and new. 
Wandering in and out of the grand buildings is an experience everyone can 
enjoy. The attention to detail and the enormous skills of the craftsman who 
built these icons is on full display. Everything is within a mile. Most of it 
is pedestrian friendly. All of it is enlightening.(Daniel Gilmartin)

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion

 * ‘A good wander unveils the wonder of a city’: readers on urban walking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/aug/06/a-good-wander-unveils-the-wonder-of-a-city-readers-on-urban-walking>
 