
Joey Carbery

Leinster, fly-half. Age 21

Joey Carbery started the year playing for Clontarf and finished it with three 
caps, the first coming against New Zealand in Chicago when he replaced Jonny 
Sexton with 22 minutes to go and coolly guided his forwards around the field to 
help Irelandachieve a historic victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/05/ireland-new-zealand-rugby-union-report>
 over the All Blacks.

His first start for Leinster had come two months before but Carbery kept his 
nerve and played with an assurance beyond his years. He was promoted early 
because Ian Madigan became fed up with understudying Sexton and moved to France 
and Paddy Jackson was unavailable for the international in America. Carbery, 
who was born in New Zealand but moved to Ireland when he was 11, is a fly-half 
who stands flat and maximises his attacking options.

It took him three minutes on his first full appearance for Leinster in 
September to announce himself, receiving the ball on his own 10-metre line 
against Treviso and confounding three defenders to score the first of two 
tries. Ireland have a succession plan for Sexton.

Ireland clinch first ever win over All Blacks to end New Zealand's record 
streak
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/05/ireland-new-zealand-rugby-union-report>
Keelan Giles

Ospreys, wing. Age 18

Keelan Giles turns 19 at the end of January having become the most talked 
about player in Wales in the autumn. He sat on the bench against Japan but did 
not come on, because victory was onlysecured in the final minute 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/wales-japan-autumn-internationals-match-report>
. His scoring rate for his region is more than one try a match and he has 
notched five in six appearances for Wales Under-20s. Comparisons have been made 
with Shane Williams – quick footwork and acceleration and he is deceptively 
strong.

It is a case of when he makes his international debut, with Wales inviting him 
to train with the team at the end of last summer’s tour to New Zealand, after 
the Junior World Cup, to integrate him early. Japan looked the perfect 
opportunity with Wales picking experienced three-quarters in Jamie Roberts, 
Jonathan Davies and Leigh Halfpenny, but a change in playing style from wallop 
to gallop has bred an initial uncertainty and he was held in reserve.

The Wales coaches need to make a statement to show players they mean what they 
say and Giles lining up in Rome at the start of the Six Nations would be a loud 
declaration of intent.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Frugby-uinon-six-to-watch-in-2017-young-players%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Febcb27cfeca2aac253885949305ade622ed31a0c%2F0_0_3296_1978%2F3296.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Six%20young%20rugby%20union%20players%20poised%20to%20make%20an%20impact%20in%202017%20%7C%20Paul%20Rees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Frugby-uinon-six-to-watch-in-2017-young-players%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Six%20young%20rugby%20union%20players%20poised%20to%20make%20an%20impact%20in%202017%20%7C%20Paul%20Rees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Frugby-uinon-six-to-watch-in-2017-young-players%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Febcb27cfeca2aac253885949305ade622ed31a0c%2F0_0_3296_1978%2F3296.jpg>
 Keelan Giles is tackled by Ken Owens during Ospreys’ Pro12 match against local 
rivals Scarlets. Photograph: Huw Evans/REX/Shutterstock 
Joe Marchant

Harlequins, outside-centre. Age 20

Joe Marchant plays like a No13 of old, quick feet and a burst of pace, looking 
to attack defenders on their outside shoulder. The World Rugby Under-20 
Championship final between England and Ireland was ignited by Marchant, who 
scored a try from 40 metres, stepping out of one tackle and then another before 
accelerating away.

He has profited from the experience around him at Harlequins, where he has 
Jamie Roberts and Nick Evans inside and Mike Brown outside, but he is a player 
who lives off his wits, as he showed when picking up a bouncing ball near his 
own line against Worcester and sidestepping two tacklers to reach the safety of 
the 22.

Marchant is in a position where England are hardly struggling for options but, 
having been called into the 45-man elite player squad on Saturday, he is 
clearly impressing Eddie Jones, who has talked about the need to work on 
England’s attack. In Marchant, he has a merchant of menace.

Christian Scotland-Williamson

Worcester, second-row. Age 23

Worcester surprised many when they included Scotland-Williamson in their 
second row at Bristol instead of the vastly more experienced Donncha 
O’Callaghan. The club’s academy product, who missed most of the past two 
seasons with a back problem that required surgery, was one of the few Warriors 
who were up for the relegation fight, scrapping for possession and looking to 
get his hands on the ball.

At 6ft 9in and more than 19st, he is one of the more imposing forwards in the 
top flight but injury slowed his progress and he made his Premiership debut 
this season. Second row is another position where England have ample resources 
but Jones is not a coach who is ever satisfied. He will be using England’s 
summer tour to Argentina to look at the next generation of players and someone 
impressing in a struggling side will not be lost on him.

Scotland-Williamson has been compared to Courtney Lawes with his ability to 
make dents in defences and haul down ball-carriers, big, strong and athletic.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Frugby-uinon-six-to-watch-in-2017-young-players%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F904728292cd1bf202a0185bf1bab317b1e9f91df%2F0_169_3310_1986%2F3310.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Six%20young%20rugby%20union%20players%20poised%20to%20make%20an%20impact%20in%202017%20%7C%20Paul%20Rees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Frugby-uinon-six-to-watch-in-2017-young-players%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Six%20young%20rugby%20union%20players%20poised%20to%20make%20an%20impact%20in%202017%20%7C%20Paul%20Rees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Frugby-uinon-six-to-watch-in-2017-young-players%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F904728292cd1bf202a0185bf1bab317b1e9f91df%2F0_169_3310_1986%2F3310.jpg>
 Injuries have given academy player Billy Searle the opportunity to impress at 
10 for Bristol. Photograph: Henry Browne/Reuters 
Billy Searle

Bristol, fly-half. Age 20

Billy Searle joined Bristol’s academy in the summer after moving from Plymouth 
Albion. The intention was to blood him in the Anglo-Welsh Cup but a series of 
injuries at 10, including their recruit Shane Geraghty, led to him starting in 
the European Challenge Cup at Bath and he has taken the field in seven of 
Bristol’s last eight matches, including last week’sbasement fight against 
Worcester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/26/bristol-worcester-premiership-match-report-rugby>
 despite the return of Tusi Pisi, who was moved to the centre. Searle quickly 
made an impact, using space created by defenders tightly marking Will Hurrell 
to make a break and set up Tom Varndell for the first of the wing’s three tries.

If Searle showed signs of inexperience towards the end, throwing risky passes 
when the need was to keep the lead, he had more than proved his worth, varying 
his game and dictating in a way his opposite number was unable to, despite 
having a man advantage for most of the match. He is a modern outside-half and 
it is no coincidence that since his elevation, Varndell is scoring tries again.

Thomas Young

Wasps, flanker. Age 24

Thomas Young has been overlooked by Wales despite his outstanding club form 
and a footballing ability his country is crying out for. Perhaps it would be 
different if he were a three-quarter but Wales are at a point where, looking to 
boost their regional game, they are placing a quota on players who are based 
outside their country. Size was used as an argument against Young, who stands 
less than 6ft, but as emphasis shifts to use of the ball it should be time for 
a rethink.

Young has the handling skills, adept at drawing tacklers and off-loading, he 
has pace and he has a breakaway’s instinct for being in the right place. There 
is more than a touch of Martyn Williams about him, a constant link between 
forwards and backs. He is the perfect fit for Wasps, who look to capitalise in 
broken play, and if Wales are serious about overhauling their style of play 
will it make sense to keep overlooking him, even with Justin Tipuric in their 
squad?
 