
Skepta’s self-released album Konnichiwa is storming back towards the top 10 
afterwinning the Mercury award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/15/mercury-prize-2016-goes-to-skeptas-konnichiwa>
 last week. According to the Official Charts Company, it has jumped 44 places 
after a 50% spike in sales.

Skepta on grime: 'People are catching on. There's a revolution happening'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/sep/10/skepta-konnichiwa-boy-better-know-mercurys>
Konnichiwa beat the bookies’ favourite, Blackstar – the final studio album 
from David Bowie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/07/david-bowie-blackstar-review-a-spellbinding-break-with-his-past>
 – and fellow grime MC Kano’sMade in the Manor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/10/kano-made-in-the-manor-review-grime-mainstay-finds-a-reflective-maturity>
 to the £25,000 prize. Watching Skepta, who was born Joseph Junior Adenuga and 
is 34, accept the award sent chills through my body, especially after the Brit 
awards in Februaryfailed to recognise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/15/grime-brit-awards-black-british-skepta-stormzy-lady-leshurr>
 the contribution to music made by him and many other grime acts. This week’s
Mobo nominations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/21/skepta-kano-mobo-award-nominataions-laura-mvula>
 are further cause for celebration. Grime was introduced to the awards for 
music of black origin as an individual category two years ago, so that acts no 
longer had to share a platform with hip-hop. This year the judges are spoilt 
for choice across all genres.

For me, it’s not surprising a generation has fallen at Skepta’s feet. His bars 
resonate with me more than the words of any politician. We millennials are a 
generation full of hustlers and DIYers. Skepta’s work ethic mirrors this 
exactly and he createdKonnichiwa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/12/skepta-konnichiwa-review-boy-better-know-album-of-the-week>
, an album full of the sounds of protest, independent of a record label. A 
self-described activist, Skepta plans to use the prize money to help 
disadvantaged young people. He has already started to build a recording studio 
on a Tottenham estate.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fskepta-mercury-win-vindication-grime-konnichiwa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff399a3397710eb40d44a7478ae9b831cc04982c0%2F0_161_4665_2800%2F4665.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Skepta%E2%80%99s%20Mercury%20win%20is%20vindication%20for%20grime%2C%20the%20soundtrack%20of%20my%20generation%20%7C%20Frances%20Acquaah&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fskepta-mercury-win-vindication-grime-konnichiwa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Skepta%E2%80%99s%20Mercury%20win%20is%20vindication%20for%20grime%2C%20the%20soundtrack%20of%20my%20generation%20%7C%20Frances%20Acquaah&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fskepta-mercury-win-vindication-grime-konnichiwa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff399a3397710eb40d44a7478ae9b831cc04982c0%2F0_161_4665_2800%2F4665.jpg>
 Dizzee Rascal took grime mainstream when he won the Mercury prize in 2003. 
Photograph: Linda Nylind for the Guardian 
His Mercury win is a milestone for grime, which has somehow overcome the many 
hurdles placed in its way. The music began in the early 2000s and was the local 
sound of east London. Often misinterpreted as hip-hop, grime owes more to 
garage, jungle and reggae. MCs form part of crews and speak in slang, often 
freestyling on the spot. When they perform live, the crowd’s reception 
determines if they get a wheel up (replay of the track from the beginning). In 
its early days grimerelied heavily on pirate radio stations such as Rinse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/27/jungle-garage-and-grime-20-years-of-rinse-fm>
 where artists could say as they pleased with no filter.

Dizzee Rascal’s legendary Boy in da Corner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2003/jul/18/popandrock.artsfeatures> won the 
Mercury prize in 2003 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2003/sep/10/arts.mercuryprize2003> and is 
hailed as the album that took grime mainstream. Its popularity is still evident 
more than a decade later, as an online petition for him toperform it in its 
entirety 
<http://www.thebeat1036.com/dizzee-rascal-perform-boy-da-corner-live-london-31-08-2016>
 means he will take to the stage next month. But although grime’s resurgence is 
largely a mythical concept, created by those who have jumped on the bandwagon 
since Drake signed the petition, it is true that grime is enjoying the most 
commercial success it has ever seen.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fskepta-mercury-win-vindication-grime-konnichiwa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4485fca3ef48d764f318bfac6174d6047522c07%2F0_138_4288_2573%2F4288.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Skepta%E2%80%99s%20Mercury%20win%20is%20vindication%20for%20grime%2C%20the%20soundtrack%20of%20my%20generation%20%7C%20Frances%20Acquaah&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fskepta-mercury-win-vindication-grime-konnichiwa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Skepta%E2%80%99s%20Mercury%20win%20is%20vindication%20for%20grime%2C%20the%20soundtrack%20of%20my%20generation%20%7C%20Frances%20Acquaah&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fskepta-mercury-win-vindication-grime-konnichiwa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4485fca3ef48d764f318bfac6174d6047522c07%2F0_138_4288_2573%2F4288.jpg>
 Kano at Bestival in September. Photograph: C Brandon/Redferns 
Last year, BBC Radio 1Xtra held a Grime Symphony in the Royal Albert Hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/13/proms-late-night-with-bbc-1xtra-review-grimeclassical-clash-is-a-neat-fit>
 backed by an orchestra, with performances still racking up hundreds of 
thousands of views on YouTube. This summer Boy Better Know, the grime crew 
founded by brothers JME and Skepta,headlined the Wireless festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/11/boy-better-know-at-wireless-review-grime-pharrell-skepta>
, while Stormzy was well received at the traditionally rock-oriented Reading.

Key album drops this year, from the scene’s pioneers Skepta and Kano, were not 
only nominated for the Mercury, they managed to make it to the top 10 in the 
albums chart. But less well-known artists still rely on smaller venues. The 
recentclosure of London nightclub Fabric 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/07/fabric-closure-dance-music-london-nightlife>
 is a huge loss as it was one of the few places that supported them. While
Eskimo Dance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/oct/09/this-weeks-best-clubs> – the 
influential rave and brainchild ofgrime godfather Wiley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/19/wiley-koko-london-review-skepta-grime-godfather>
 – has toured the country, fans of the genre don’t have the luxury of regular 
club nights they can attend.

The notorious form 696 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/jan/10/police-stigmatising-hip-hop-696-form>
 used by police to assess risk is still a barrier not just for grime music but 
for other genres that have black roots. It has been shown to target black music 
nights and is one hurdle grime is yet to overcome. But I have no doubt it will. 
Radio 1 boss Chris Price recently called grime Britain’s “big cultural export”. 
For a group of musicians that had so much standing in their way, and every 
reason to throw in the towel, grime artists have achieved so much. I can’t wait 
to see what happens next.
 