
The sun is blazing hard over east London and the reigning king of UK grime is 
posing for pictures with his top off. Skepta’s torso is thick with tattoos; 
he’s got an over-sized spliff in one hand and an incongruously diddy bottle of 
rosé in the other. Around him, his friends and fellow MCs keep a production 
line of joints and jokes rolling. Kids on bikes shout greetings; passing cars 
bang out his current single Man (Gang). Between swigging and soaking up the 
sun, he’s a man at ease.

Skepta: Konnichiwa review – rhymes that are dextrous, sharp and very British
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/12/skepta-konnichiwa-review-boy-better-know-album-of-the-week>
“This is my favourite photo shoot ever,” he tells the snapper. Skepta is known 
to be serious in interviews – solemn, even. On record he is a muscular, 
scowling presence, his raps a blend of brash aggrandisement, anti-establishment 
sloganeering and bleak introspection. Today, he’s something else entirely. He’s 
about to fly off to tour Australia, andhis current album, Konnichiwa, has been 
nominated for a Mercury award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/04/2016-mercury-prize-shortlist-what-our-critics-said-hear-the-albums>
. “How could I not be happy?” he says, with a rare smile.

He’s got a point. You could call Joseph Junior “Skepta” Adenuga’s rise over 
the last two years unstoppable. The Tottenham-born musician has captured an 
entire generation of young people, while taking London’s inner-city sound to 
the world stage. In 2016 alone, Konnichiwa entered the UK album charts at No 2,
he made his Glastonbury Pyramid Stage debut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/jun/25/skepta-zz-top-and-more-fridays-music-at-glastonbury-2016>
 and Canadianrap superstar Drake announced he had “signed” to Skepta’s Boy 
Better Know label in the UK 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/newsbeat/article/35658387/drake-signs-to-skeptas-boy-better-know-label>
. Drake sealed it by getting a BBK tattoo on his shoulder.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsOhxPhqzMwg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsOhxPhqzMwg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsOhxPhqzMwg&media=>
The path to success, however, has proved convoluted. Skepta started releasing 
music in the early 00s, a key figure in the grime scene that emerged when 
London’s sink estates started producing a dark, low-res reflection of the shiny 
UK garage that was dominating pop. After starting Meridian Crew (named after 
his Tottenham estate), then the Boy Better Know crew with his brother and 
fellow MC, Jamie “JME” Adenuga,Skepta <https://www.theguardian.com/music/skepta>
 became a cult underground artist. He was feted for his merciless, witty abuse 
of other MCs and carrying an unshakable self-determination that owed nothing to 
traditional musical channels in order to get his music heard.

Radio 1 doesn’t exist to me. I don’t judge my success by anything they say
Skepta 
“The mainstream didn’t want to hear us,” he remembers. “We knew to set up your 
own shit if people ain’t listening, so we were setting up little pirate 
stations. Pirate radio is like street art. Back in those days, when I was a 
kid, I thought Radio 1 just played the BBC, like if you were driving home after 
work and missed EastEnders, you’d be able to turn on the radio and hear it!” 
Even now, aged 33, that DIY mentality has stuck. “Radio 1 doesn’t exist to me. 
I don’t judge my success by anything they say.”

This scorn for the mainstream was exacerbated by his bruising mid-career 
flirtations with chart pop. Like many grime artists in the 2010s, when the 
industry was giddy with the bouncy chart hits of Dizzee Rascal, Tinchy Stryder 
and Tinie Tempah, Skepta was signed to Universal. He put out a string of 
singles that, while moderately successful, crowbarred him on tovapid pop-dance 
beats <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZVSr0tLQr_4>. US artists such as Puff 
Daddy werebrought in for guest spots 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NOYUOgmTjU4> in an attempt to make Skepta 
sound like every identikit chart rapper.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fskepta-konnichiwa-boy-better-know-mercurys%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe137a8ba901a32e6951d5196aa4e8f6e614d32ef%2F0_460_6741_4045%2F6741.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Skepta%20on%20grime%3A%20'People%20are%20catching%20on.%20There's%20a%20revolution%20happening'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fskepta-konnichiwa-boy-better-know-mercurys%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Skepta%20on%20grime%3A%20%27People%20are%20catching%20on.%20There%27s%20a%20revolution%20happening%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fskepta-konnichiwa-boy-better-know-mercurys%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe137a8ba901a32e6951d5196aa4e8f6e614d32ef%2F0_460_6741_4045%2F6741.jpg>
 Boy knows better... Skepta and members of his BBK crew in Hackney, east 
London. Photograph: Olivia Rose for the Guardian 
But a few years of prancing around in denim vests to tunes built from C&C 
Music Factory samples was enough. Skepta went into a crisis of 
self-examination, emerging from it skint and label-less. He shakes his head at 
the memory: “In every area of life you get a natural talent and then somebody 
comes in, a manager who knows about the business, they take them and fuck them 
over. The talent realises they’ve been fucked over and come out the other side. 
Some of them fall off and some people come out untouchable. And I’m one of the 
people that came out untouchable. I’m winning even if I have zero pence in my 
bank account, because my mind’s free.”

10 things we learned from Skepta's Konnichiwa
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/06/10-things-we-learned-from-skeptas-konnichiwa>
He often speaks in hip-hop hyperbole but it isn’t without substance: since 
then, Skepta has achieved recognition while remaining independent. Free from 
label constraints, he replaced euphoric pop riffs with his own defiant 
productions: ice-cold electronic rhythms spiked with reggae bass and techno 
futurism, resurrecting the grime sound that made his name and releasing them on 
his own BBK label. It was the right move. In 2014, he let loose That’s Not Me, 
a shot of brutal energy that atoned for every misstep he’d made in the last 
four years in three thrilling minutes. Its video was filmed on an £80 budget and
won a Mobo award 
<http://www.guardian-series.co.uk/news/13946393.Tottenham_rapper_Skepta_wins_big_at_the_MOBOs/>
. His absolution was complete. Following single Shutdown nailed his 
anti-mainstream stance in two blunt lines: “They try to steal my vision/ This 
ain’t a culture, it’s my religion.”

From there, grime went national, aided by direct-to-fan social media. In 
tandem with the genre’s popularity and a wealth of new MCs breaking through, 
Skepta’s notoriety expanded outside his core London fanbase to a new audience 
of suburban teenagers. His internet-enabled model, where releases would be 
pushed through his own channels, removed the distorting effect of major-label 
A&R opinion; grime could flourish as it pleased with no commercial 
interference. By summer 2015, the Boy Better Know crew were drawing as big a 
crowd at the Reading and Leeds festivals as they were at Wiley’s underground 
rave Eskimo Dance. Then it went global. By the time Skepta dropped Konnichiwa 
earlier this year, he was playing gigs from Tokyo to Lagos.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdyONbqggasY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdyONbqggasY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdyONbqggasY&media=>
Basking in the heat, Skepta contemplates the album that’s gunning for a 
Mercury win. “As a younger man, I didn’t think this was possible,” he says. Its 
instant popularity still tickles him (all the more so as Konnichiwa was 
distributed direct from his home, his living room doubling up as a make-do CD 
warehouse). “Like, my album came out in May, I was on a flight to Toronto the 
next day to play a show, and they knew all the words to the new songs. The next 
day! You think when I was a kid I ever thought that would happen? I mean,
Pharrell Williams <https://www.theguardian.com/music/pharrellwilliams> is on my 
album! If I was on a major label I might think, ‘Oh yeah, that’s what happens 
isn’t it, I’m signed, I’ve got loads of money.’ You don’t even appreciate it. 
’Cause I’m independent, I wake up every day, look in the mirror, and I’m like: 
‘You! You scruffy little shit from Tottenham got Pharrell on your album! I’m 
blessed, bro.’ That independent existence is scary because I don’t have no 
certainty in my life. But that adrenaline is sick, it makes me make things 
happen.”

If wearing a hoodie means you’re going to rob something, I’m going to wear a 
hoodie and go to No 1
Skepta 
The appearance of super-producer Pharrell was one of Skepta’s few concessions 
to the accepted wisdom of packing an album with guest spots; in contrast, the 
producers alone listed on the latest Kanye and Beyoncé records add up to a 
phone book’s worth of names. But Skepta, who produces the majority of his own 
music, was determined to keep Konnichiwa tight. Talk of the potential of 
big-name US collaborations darkens his mood.

“I had so many anti-climaxes in America,” he says. Since his star has risen in 
the States, numerous artists have been clamouring for a slice of Brit 
authenticity. But Skepta is unimpressed by their fame game. “Artists that I 
look up to, that I’d seen on television here in London, I meet them and they’re 
not even human,” he continues. “They’re just arseholes – people that, when I 
was younger, I thought were gonna inspire me when I met them. For real, they’ve 
gone too far. People tell them that they’re an artist and that they’re big and 
that’s what they become. I’m never gonna become the person everyone tells me I 
am.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fskepta-konnichiwa-boy-better-know-mercurys%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbed6c50aab29b7821776e9c2a98f67f3144a0a06%2F0_1378_5022_3012%2F5022.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Skepta%20on%20grime%3A%20'People%20are%20catching%20on.%20There's%20a%20revolution%20happening'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fskepta-konnichiwa-boy-better-know-mercurys%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Skepta%20on%20grime%3A%20%27People%20are%20catching%20on.%20There%27s%20a%20revolution%20happening%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fskepta-konnichiwa-boy-better-know-mercurys%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbed6c50aab29b7821776e9c2a98f67f3144a0a06%2F0_1378_5022_3012%2F5022.jpg>
 Photograph: Olivia Rose for the Guardian 
This rejection of sheen over substance has been at the heart of Skepta’s 
comeback. These days he’s more likely to be foundhelping build a playground in 
his dad’s native Nigerian village 
<http://noisey.vice.com/en_uk/blog/skepta-has-opened-a-playground-in-nigeria> 
(as he did this February) than he is to be found in the tabloid middle pages. 
He discarded the designer clothing he wore in the major-label years, reverting 
to basic black tracksuits that realigned him with the kids on the streets. (“If 
they paint us with the brush that means wearing a hoodie means you’re going to 
rob something, I’m going to put on a hoodie and go to fucking No 1,” he says). 
His album is full of tracks where he is the relatable everyman, fromCrime Riddim
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DVw542-t5W4>’s tales of police harassment to 
the titular opener pointing out that he travelled “to the Brits on a train… Man 
shut down Wireless, then I walked home in the rain”. In keeping with this 
outlook, he asserts that he’d rather have a conversation with a fan than take 
selfies with them.

Grime, fame and paranoia - Skepta battles his demons
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/jan/29/guide-feature-music-skepta> 
“Anyone I see in the street who asks to take a photo with me, I’m like, nah!” 
he says. “Instead I’ll talk to them: ‘What’s your name? How are you? What are 
you up to? How’s things bro?’ I’ve lived in London with no security guards for 
all this time, because I can’t do the celebrity shit of having security pushing 
people away. I don’t wanna get security, or make some fucking gold statue of 
myself.”

But surely if he wins the Mercury, he’ll be getting more attention? “Nah, I’m 
slipping back out of this,” he replies, referring to his notorious reluctance 
to appear in the press. “I don’t like to celebrate this shit. It’s not 
ungrateful, and sometimes I hear the demons in my head saying: ‘Walk the red 
carpet.’ But then I hear the true self say: ‘No!’” And what about the prize 
money? “What?” he says in surprise. “Do you get money if you win? I don’t care 
about stuff like that. I just wanna have enough to support my ideas, whether 
that means sleeping on my friend’s sofa or sleeping in a suite in the Ace 
Hotel.”

As he says this, as if he’s planted them there, two young fans from Aberdeen 
approach from the street, eager to tell him about Scotland’s growing grime 
scene, and how it’s spreading through online channels. True to his word, Skepta 
is friendly, giving them advice, genuinely listening to their responses, then 
resolutely refusing a selfie. They leave, starstruck and satisfied. Talk of 
grime spreading has the MC philosophical. “We’ve been ahead for so long in the 
UK, we’re so multicultural and that’s the beauty,” he says. “That’s why grime 
was formed, from this mix, this understanding of different people. Now other 
people are catching on. There’s a revolution happening.”

When Skepta talks of a revolution, he’s talking about one that starts from 
within. He’s a firm believer in self-actualisation, as well as the power of 
creating networks outside of the conventional structures. “Getting in touch 
with your life purpose is important,” he says, if by now a little hazily. “Now 
I understand what I’m here to tell everyone: togetherness is everything, bruv.”

As such, it’s little surprise that he’s got no time for party politics. 
Whereas some grime artists like Novelist are taking to the stage, encouraging 
chants of “Fuck David Cameron” and tweeting their allegiance to the Labour 
Party, all that is bottom of Skepta’s agenda. Last month, Tory culture secretary
Ed Vaizey sent Skepta and fellow rapper Kano a congratulatory tweet 
<https://twitter.com/edvaizey/status/761257407179882496> for being nominated 
for a Mercury award. He had ignored all the non-grime artists on the shortlist 
in what looked like a bizarre, craven reach for credibility. Vaizey wasn’t 
dismissed in response; he was utterly ignored. Today Skepta has never heard of 
him, and has no interest in hearing about him whatsoever – Vaizey is part of a 
different world to his, and he sees the media and politicians as one and the 
same.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fskepta-konnichiwa-boy-better-know-mercurys%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c5ab0dc48416113f989dd5d947302262df67f25%2F0_475_5019_5015%2F5019.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Skepta%20on%20grime%3A%20'People%20are%20catching%20on.%20There's%20a%20revolution%20happening'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fskepta-konnichiwa-boy-better-know-mercurys%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Skepta%20on%20grime%3A%20%27People%20are%20catching%20on.%20There%27s%20a%20revolution%20happening%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fskepta-konnichiwa-boy-better-know-mercurys%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c5ab0dc48416113f989dd5d947302262df67f25%2F0_475_5019_5015%2F5019.jpg>
 Skepta: ‘Greatness is a state of mind’. Photograph: Olivia Rose for The 
Guardian 
He pauses to relight his spliff, and warms to his theme. “The other day 
Beyoncé wasdancing to That’s Not Me in Wembley arena 
<http://www.dailymotion.com/video/x4ji6ct>,” he says. “That should be on the 
news; that is fucking sick, it’s a game changer. But no, you turn on the TV and 
bam! It’s shooting guns, a bombing, everything. It’s their world, the people 
who are doing all this bombing and shit; politicians in the House of Commons, 
all these weird houses. Bro that’s their world, not mine. I don’t know them.”

He delivers this last sentence with the conviction of a charismatic leader. 
And why not? After breaking into the US Billboard charts, and touring the world 
with an album of slang-heavy music that should only make sense in the UK, you 
do get the feeling that Skepta could do anything with that sort of self-belief. 
He seems to know that, too. He taps on the side of his cap, where the word 
“GREATNESS” is embroidered in bold lettering.

“Greatness,” he says. “Greatness is a state of mind.”

Skepta plays Alexandra Palace, 2 Dec 
<http://www.alexandrapalace.com/whats-on/skepta/>; the Mercury prize is on BBC4 
and 6Music on Thursday 15 September
 