
Skepta, the award-winning grime star <https://www.theguardian.com/music/skepta>
, together with a group of 12 young musicians he has mentored for two months, 
took their urban musical revolution to the Victoria & Albert Museum on Saturday.

Queen Victoria’s consort, Prince Albert, may not have had quite this kind of 
music in mind when he dreamed of creating a grand cultural quarter in London to 
celebrate the empire’s cultural achievements, but after blockbusting 
exhibitions in the past few years devoted firstto the shape-shifting David Bowie
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/11/david-bowie-is-exhibition-300-items-13m-visitors-but-no-bakelite-saxophone>
 and thento the punk designer Alexander McQueen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/mar/08/alexander-mcqueen-victoria-albert-museum-behind-the-scenes>
, grime was an inevitable next move.

The imposing national institution in Kensington is staging a Revolutions 
Weekender 
<https://www.vam.ac.uk/shop/whatson/index/view/id/3540/event/Revolutions-Weekender--A-Festival-of-Peace--Love-and-Music/dt/2016-11-05/free/1>
, billed as a Festival of Peace, Love and Music, that continues on Sunday and 
it invited the star and his young disciples to take part. “I want to show the 
young generation that success is not something you search for externally, it is 
from within,” the musician said.

Skepta, who won this year’s Mercury Music prize for his album Konnichiwa as 
well as appearing on Glastonbury’s Pyramid Stage, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/sep/10/skepta-konnichiwa-boy-better-know-mercurys>
 runs a musical workshop in Tottenham, north-east London, in a project to 
promote a fresh generation of talent that is sponsored by Levi’s, the jeans 
manufacturer.

The V&A put on a display of notebooks, lyrics and photographs created during 
theSkepta <https://www.theguardian.com/music/skepta> workshops and offered the 
public the chance to mix the beats and vocals produced by the teenagers to 
create their own versions of the tracks in a temporary studio in a gallery.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fskepta-dizzee-mobo-grime-mercury%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1df1a91edc603fc35fded39caf346cb82f2d5ff%2F0_263_5484_3290%2F5484.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Skepta%20leads%20the%20revolution%20as%20his%20proteges%20storm%20the%20V%26A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fskepta-dizzee-mobo-grime-mercury%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Skepta%20leads%20the%20revolution%20as%20his%20proteges%20storm%20the%20V%26A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fskepta-dizzee-mobo-grime-mercury%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1df1a91edc603fc35fded39caf346cb82f2d5ff%2F0_263_5484_3290%2F5484.jpg>
 The V&A museum is hosting a Revolutions Weekender. Photograph: David Levene 
for the Observer 
Other elements of the revolutionary weekend, being run by the museum in 
conjunction with its current show, You Say You Want A Revolution? Records and 
Rebels 1966-1970, are each inspired by the throwing over of cultural authority 
that characterised the late 60s in Britain.

Alongside talks and film screenings, DJ Laps entertained visitors in the main 
entrance lobby, while theatrical performances and outbreaks of pop-up poetry 
were staged throughout the museum by the Synergy Theatre Project, which works 
with prisoners, ex-prisoners and young people at risk of offending to promote 
rehabilitation and resettlement.

Visitors who headed for the Revolutionary Reading Room were invited to discuss 
revolutionary literature, from Lewis Carroll’sAlice in Wonderland, to Alan 
Ginsberg’sHowl, Germaine Greer’s The Female Eunuch and Tom Stoppard’s 
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are Dead.

Inside the Imagination Station gallery young visitors were encouraged to 
create their own rebellious placards, and to march through the museum stirring 
up parental dissent.

But it was the V&A’s nod to the growing influence of grime, the music genre 
that first made waves more than a decade ago whenDizzee Rascal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/dizzeerascal> won the Mercury, that shows 
how dominant the sound is becoming. Just as rock’n’roll blew in to change the 
face of popular music in the 1960s, grime is energetically reshaping the 
current musical landscape. Although Skepta lost out at last Friday night’s Mobo 
awards in Glasgow, the top prizes were taken by many of his fellow grime stars, 
including Kano, Chip and Lady LeShurr.

“We’ve been ahead for so long in the UK, we’re so multicultural and that’s the 
beauty,” Skepta, real name Joseph Junior Adenuga, said this summer. “That’s why 
grime was formed, from this mix, this understanding of different people. Now 
other people are catching on. There’s a revolution happening.”

This summer iTunes acknowledged the trend by finally relenting and creating a 
distinct category for this kind of urban music. No longer do grime artists such 
as Kano and south Londoner Stormzy have to lurk behind broader labels such as 
hip-hop and rap. This summer Hodder & Stoughton also brought out a book,This is 
Grime <https://www.theguardian.com/music/grime>, to chart the sound’s path from 
underground raves and pirate radio stations in London to success in the 
mainstream commercial market.

This spring even the relatively staid Ivor Novello awards recognised grime 
again for the first time since 2011 with a nod for Skepta, and, last month 
Stormzy won the AIM innovator award.

Ticket sales for live grime shows are also on the march. This year they are at 
their highest since 2011 and are predicted to beat the combined sales of 2012, 
2013 and 2014, according to data from the online seller, Ticketmaster.
 