
Towards the end of 2016 police set fire to the homes of 30,000 slum dwellers 
<http://www.irinnews.org/news/2015/10/21/forced-evictions-leave-nigerian-slum-dwellers-homeless>
 living on the edge of the seafront in Lagos, Nigeria, displacing tens of 
thousands of people. In Indonesia, alandmark case 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-indonesia-landrights-slums-idUSKCN1201QK> 
has been launched claiming unlawful and forcible eviction by the government. In 
Arumbakkam in India, slum dwellers are petitioning their local authorities to 
change their mind about eviction.

All over the world slum dwellers are in conflict with authorities who struggle 
to decide what to do with slums. Should they leave them where they are and help 
make them adequate places to live? Or should they eradicate them and leave 
people homeless or searching for replacement housing? How can slums be upgraded 
without causing huge stress and strife to all concerned if authorities do not 
have the financial resources to implement major projects?

The traditional solution is to tear down slums and then to install public 
infrastructure such as water, sewage, electricity (along new roads) – and then 
build new houses in a planned way and re-house the slum dwellers there. This is 
what happened inRio de Janeiro in advance of the 2016 Olympics 
<https://widerimage.reuters.com/story/destruction-and-rebuilding-in-vila-autodromo>
, but this solution is fraught with problems, may not be inclusive and can only 
occur if finances permit.

Four myths about slums: 'Don't assume people want to leave'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/sep/28/four-myths-about-slums-dont-assume-people-want-to-leave>
The UN recently adopted a New Urban Agenda 
<https://habitat3.org/the-new-urban-agenda/> to help tackle this issue with the 
goal of upgrading slums and granting slum dwellers access to safe and 
affordable housing with basic services by 2030. And the global goals, agreed by 
the world’s governments in 2015, include proposed indicators for achievingSDG 
11.1 <https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/sdg11> : slum dwellers should be 
covered by social protection programme 
<http://indicators.report/indicators/i-4/>, able to access primary health care 
<http://indicators.report/indicators/i-26/>, access safe water 
<http://indicators.report/indicators/i-45/>, access safe sanitation 
<http://indicators.report/indicators/i-46/> and not have poor indoor air 
quality due to cooking <http://indicators.report/indicators/i-50/>.

We’ve been working on a new project based in Kolkata, India which shows that 
improving older slums to meet the indicators set out by the New Urban Agenda is 
better and cost effective. We do this by using one simple method: giving people 
an address.

In the slums where we work we give each dwelling a unique postal address based 
on its geo location within the slum. This postal address helps planners map out 
the area more effectively and makes sure that each household is included.


This is relatively simple and inexpensive for two reasons. Firstly, anyone 
with GPS equipment can now identify the geo-coordinates of any place on the 
planet. Secondly with Google Maps, mapping is freely available to anyone with 
access to the internet.

To ensure that no dwelling is left behind, a census can identify the scale of 
the issues involved. An accurate census helps answer important questions like 
the durability of the home, the number of people living in each room, access to 
toilets and water, and access to social entitlements like primary health care. 
The answers can then aid planners in making a strategy best suited for that 
particular slum. Slum dwellers can help with this process too, allowing them to 
work in cooperation with NGOs, local public representatives and government 
officials.

Children of the Dustbin Estate: growing up on a Lagos swamp
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/dec/20/children-growing-up-dustbin-estate-lagos>
With the help of our project, nine slums have been postal addressed so far, 
with community and local councillors engaged in the whole process. The slum 
dwellers use their new postal address for opening bank accounts, getting ID 
cards and social benefits. And they can then receive mail delivered directly to 
their homes by India’s postal service.

Local NGOs <http://www.hopechild.org/> then use the data gathered to identify 
the slum dwellers and ensure they are all able to access primary health care 
and education. The slums where this process has happened are improving 
themselves with very little help from the authorities.

Slum eradication and achieving the New Urban Agenda indicators should not 
automatically mean the tearing down of slums. By empowering slum dwellers to 
map and postal address their community, showing them how to carry out a census 
and calculate the scale of the issues they face, slum upgrading can occur 
successfully and without the use of displacement or violence.

Alex Pigot, CEO and co-founder of Addressing the Unaddressed 
<http://www.addressingtheunaddressed.org/>.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter. Join the conversation with the 
hashtag#Dev2030 <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23Dev2030&src=typd>.














 