
I sit with a friend having some seasonal drinks. The second she gets up to go 
to the toilet, I catch myself reaching for my smartphone. But instead of taking 
it out and idly filling the two minutes she’s gone, I flip the switch on the 
side to silent and look around the room instead. I’m practising for 2017.

On the face of it, smartphones might seem like hard things to hate. On 
average, smartphone owners use them for overthree hours per day 
<https://www.emarketer.com/Article/Growth-of-Time-Spent-on-Mobile-Devices-Slows/1013072>
. By the standards of even five years ago, the handheld devices of today are 
extraordinary pieces of technology that enable a vast range of capabilities. 
Whether it iscommunicating entirely in emojis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/14/london-company-advertises-emoji-translator>
, piloting a drone, or Googlingwhile on the toilet 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/carolinekee/are-you-reading-this-in-the-bathroom-rn>, 
the things we can do with smartphones would have amazed, and possibly 
terrified, our ancestors.

How I quit my smartphone addiction and really started living
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/11/smartphone-technology-addiction-facebook-twitter>
Belying all of this glossy capability however, there are more perturbing 
elements to the devices so many of us are carrying with us everywhere we go. 
Fromworrying reports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/mar/04/smartphones-addictive-make-people-narcissistic-say-academics>
 ofsmartphone addiction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/11/smartphone-technology-addiction-facebook-twitter>
, to the identification of smartphone faux-pas such as“phubbing” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/shortcuts/2013/aug/05/phubbing-anti-social-phone-campaign>
, to the news that seven in 10 Americans haveused a smartphone behind the wheel 
<http://about.att.com/story/smartphone_use_while_driving_grows_beyond_texting.html>
 and one in 10 people checktheir phone during sex 
<http://metro.co.uk/2016/05/13/one-in-ten-people-are-rude-enough-to-check-their-phones-during-sex-5879512/>
, the belief that smartphones are harmless is increasingly untenable. The fact 
that our government can nowlegally hack them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/29/snoopers-charter-bill-becomes-law-extending-uk-state-surveillance>
 hardly makes things any better, nor doethically dubious manufacturing and 
supply chains 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/jan/25/apple-child-labour-supply>.

The reason aspects of our smartphone use are reported is obviously because 
they’re surprising and appear extreme, but such behaviours are not as uncommon 
as we may think. The real story lies in the bigger picture, for which we have 
to ask the bigger questions. Why have we allowed ourselves to become so 
dependent on these devices? What does it say about our lives that smartphones 
have become so alluring and so potent that we can’t put them down?

As George Monbiot has argued 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/15/neoliberalism-ideology-problem-george-monbiot>
, the age in which we live is not one that makes us happy. 2016 has been 
earmarked by many as a particularly difficult year. Whether you attribute it to 
Britain’s unexpected vote to leave the EU, the election of Donald Trump, the 
deaths of much-loved public figures such as David Bowie, Prince, George Michael 
and Carrie Fisher, or some other cause, it is hard to disagree.

If anything, high-profile world events such as those of 2016 are the 
proverbial tip of a (quickly melting) iceberg in a seascape of day-to-day 
emotional distress that has only worsened this year after building steadily for 
years. The constant pressure to out-compete others and reach unrealistic 
standards of wealth or attractiveness has combined with uncertainty about the 
future, boredom, the growing cost of living and social isolation, to produce a 
quietly disastrous outcome, exacerbated by depression and anxiety, particularly 
in Britain.One in four people in the UK 
<http://www.mind.org.uk/information-support/types-of-mental-health-problems/statistics-and-facts-about-mental-health/how-common-are-mental-health-problems/>
 experience a mental health issue each year, with the likely number of those 
remaining undiagnosed meaning this figure is probably higher. Against this 
backdrop, many of us are dealing with similar issues to a lesser degree – a 
dull emotional emptiness that has no name, and that catches up with us every 
time we are left with an idle moment.

Fearless teenagers and Teen Vogue could transform a bleak-looking future | 
Reni Eddo-Lodge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/29/future-bleak-teenagers-race-change-society>
It is in this context that we should understand the pathology of smartphones. 
Next time you look around a train carriage and can count into double digits the 
people staring at their smartphones, remember that above all these devices are 
used as instruments of distraction. The German philosopher and cultural critic
Walter Benjamin 
<https://www.marxists.org/reference/subject/philosophy/works/ge/benjamin.htm>, 
who wrote that in a capitalist society contemplation was replaced by 
distraction, might well have exclaimed: “you see?!!” at how his theories have 
been borne out in the way we use these devices to distract ourselves. Whether 
smartphones are facilitating access to the constant stream of new content 
provided by Facebook and Instagram, or the filtered social contact of WhatsApp 
or Snapchap, they enable an enticing, if momentary, escape from the otherwise 
dull ache of modern life.

This habit is the trap out of which I urge us all to climb in 2017. While 
social media can be mildly entertaining and there is nothing wrong with 
messaging our friends, using a small computer to block out our time to 
ourselves is not a solution to anything. No chat or social media app will make 
us feel better about our futures or ourselves, and our habituation to using 
them is only making Mark Zuckerberg and his friends richer. Smartphone apps can 
even make you feel worse; following strangers on Instagram, for example,is 
positively correlated with depression 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25965859>.

It is easy to sound moralistic, but the point I make is more about claiming 
back our thinking time and our attention from these devices. Every second that 
we don’t spend on a smartphone is one we could spend in some other more 
meaningful way. You don’t have to volunteer or read classic literature, but at 
least you have that time at your disposal. How you spend it is up to you.
 