
For a split second, it was if as two boxers had finished slugging it out after 
57 years in the ring, and neither was sure who had won.


In the red corner, Raúl Castro, grizzled veteran of the revolution led by his 
older brother Fidel, and now president of a Cuba once again undergoing dramatic 
change. In the blue,Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama>, the clear winner of the 
last round: an American-style political press conference held in the communist 
heart of Havana’s Palacio de la Revolución.


As they prepared to walk off stage this week, Castro seized the initiative. 
Determined at the very least to signal that the cold war was tied on points, he 
grabbed Obama’s arm by the wrist and hoisted it up alongside his own.


World leaders and awkward handshakes: a brief history
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/22/world-leaders-awkward-handshakes-a-brief-history>
It may have looked just another awkward fumble, but at that moment, the 
central question of the trip hung in the air. Who was the victor and who was 
the vanquished?


For most Americans, this fight was not even close. Cuba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cuba> was the last in a long line of 
authoritarian regimes to accept that communism could not meet the needs of its 
people. By inviting its “cretinous” arch enemy into the marbled sanctum of the 
revolution and subjecting itself to the humiliation of media questions about 
imprisoned dissidents, the politburo was surely signifying defeat.


But Obama knew the answer was more complicated than that. By the standard quid 
pro quo of diplomacy, the US had given up much by coming here and ending its 
increasingly embarrassing cold war sulk; Cuba very little.


Throughout the trip, Castro baited the Americans too – responding to questions 
over human rights by pointing out US shortcomings that Obama himself agonizes 
over: on healthcare, gun violence, access to higher education and women’s pay.

“Healthcare is a right,” said the Cuban leader more than once, in words that 
could have come from the lips of Bernie Sanders, the “democratic socialist” who 
has just shocked Obama’s own party by winning a dozen state elections for the 
Democratic nomination back home.

On the way into the palace of the revolution, one of the president’s National 
Security Council advisers muttered privately that he had never gone into a 
press conference with less idea what to expect.

In the end, Obama did the only thing he could do. He kept smiling, but he let 
his arm go limp, his hand flopping from the wrist in a clear signal of 
non-compliance.


It is a move that may be taught to aspiring diplomats for decades to come. Had 
he tried to wriggle free, the abiding image of the first trip by a US president 
in 88 years would have been one of continued political struggle. Had he simply 
left a straight arm aloft, Obama would have gifted the Cubans the photo 
opportunity of the century: a US president vindicating the revolution with a 
socialist salute.


Instead, the question was left dangling, and the two leaders could begin to 
slowly come to terms with the inherent ambiguity of this week’s trip.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F22%2Fobamas-attend-baseball-match-in-cuba-with-raul-castro-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obamas%20attend%20baseball%20game%20in%20Cuba%20with%20Ra%C3%BAl%20Castro%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F22%2Fobamas-attend-baseball-match-in-cuba-with-raul-castro-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obamas%20attend%20baseball%20game%20in%20Cuba%20with%20Ra%C3%BAl%20Castro%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F22%2Fobamas-attend-baseball-match-in-cuba-with-raul-castro-video&media=>
Obamas attend baseball game in Cuba with Raúl Castro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/mar/22/obamas-attend-baseball-match-in-cuba-with-raul-castro-video>
By the time to two met again at the baseball stadium on Tuesday – listening to 
The Star Spangled Banner played for a second time in a city once threatened 
with American nuclear annihilation – there was even a flicker of warmth between 
them.


In this sporting cauldron, there was less room for ambiguity: the Tampa Bay 
Rays beat the Cuban national side 4-1. The two countries share a mutual love of 
baseball, but while the Cuban version seems closer to the egalitarian spirit of 
the sport’s 1950s heyday, there was a moment that could be considered more 
humiliating than the score.


Obama embraces Cuba's pastime with a spot of baseball diplomacy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/22/obama-cuba-baseball-diplomacy> 
After the first ball went into the crowd, the Florida team appeared surprised 
to see it tossed back on to the field. In contrast to the US tradition that 
views stray balls as highly prized keepsakes, here in Cuba they are in short 
supply even inside the giant stadium of the country’s biggest team.


As an American player stooped to pick it up and toss it back into the crowd, 
there was undoubted affection for the roaring opposition crowd, but an unspoken 
and uncomfortable message too: in our country, we have more than enough 
baseballs, thank you.


Later that afternoon, as Castro watched Air Force One take off, his enigmatic 
smile suggesteda sense of relief among the Cubans that the visit had passed off 
smoothly.


It also perhaps reflected genuine happiness at the progress the two leaders 
had made towards a lasting peace between former cold war enemies. Maybe even, 
it contained something of an afterglow from a personal friendship that seemed – 
from their warm farewell on the tarmac – to have strengthened over the course 
of two days together.

But most likely, as a strategist who has been at or near the seat of power for 
57 years, Castro was enjoying a moment of political satisfaction that his plans 
for Cuba now have the endorsement of the country’s biggest neighbour – and most 
likely economic saviour.

Since he succeeded Fidel in 2008, Castro has put the island on the path of 
China-style reform: gradually liberalising the economy, lifting travel 
restrictions and engaging former adversaries, but all the while ensuring the 
continuity of one-party rule. Obama’s visit to Havana – like those of Nixon, 
Clinton, Bush and other US presidents to Beijing – carried the short-term risk 
of being criticised about human rights abuses and a lack of freedoms and 
democracy, but he evidently decided the potential long-term gains made it 
worthwhile. The events of this week are likely to have made him feel he made 
the right call.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fbarack-obama-cuba-visit-raul-castro-analysis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91e0c34ae23a11ce37f34032eee8cef6c12287c5%2F0_0_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Smiles%20all%20around%20after%20Obama's%20Cuba%20visit%20%E2%80%93%20but%20which%20side%20got%20more%20out%20of%20it%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fbarack-obama-cuba-visit-raul-castro-analysis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Smiles%20all%20around%20after%20Obama%27s%20Cuba%20visit%20%E2%80%93%20but%20which%20side%20got%20more%20out%20of%20it%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fbarack-obama-cuba-visit-raul-castro-analysis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91e0c34ae23a11ce37f34032eee8cef6c12287c5%2F0_0_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Barack Obama shares a joke with Raúl Castro as he walks to board his plane at 
José Martí international airport in Havana. Photograph: Adalberto 
Roque/AFP/Getty Images 
Like any politician, Castro’s priorities are domestic. He has an important 
Communist party congress next month that will determine the next phase of 
reform. Exactly what this will be is still a matter of speculation. At the very 
least, it will debate further market reforms, probably including the 
unification of the dual currency system. There is also a possibility it will 
explore political change. Castro has said he will step down in 2018 and that he 
will hold a national consultation on constitutional reform before then. But 
hardliners in the ruling party – inevitably though not necessarily accurately 
nicknamed “Fidelists” – are reluctant to accept anything that might weaken 
their hold on power or the still primarily socialist nature of Cuba’s economy. 
Whatever reforms Castro decides to push ahead with, he now has a powerful ally 
and an extra set of incentives thanks to the Obama visit.

Obama’s Cuba visit is latest step towards ‘new alliance of the Americas’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/20/obamas-cuba-visit-latest-step-towards-new-alliance-of-americas>
Cuba needs economic help – and not for the first time. In the first 30 years 
after the revolution, it depended on Soviet largesse. The impact of the fall of 
the Berlin Wall was arguably felt as badly on this Caribbean Island as 
anywhere. The misery of the euphemistically known “Special Period” was 
compounded by the crippling US trade embargo only relieved by the opening of 
tourism and support from leftwing governments in Latin American countries, 
particularly Venezuela and Brazil. Now those countries have problems of their 
own, it is more important than ever that Cuba look elsewhere for trade and aid. 
Obama’s visit – and his strong support for an end to the US embargo – looks set 
to provide a geographically natural solution to that problem.

Castro did not get everything he wanted, of course. Longstanding Cuban demands 
for the return of the Guantánamo Bay naval base 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/21/raul-castro-demands-return-guantanamo-bay-obama-visit>
 appear to have been ignored. The US insistence that the two leaders hold a 
joint press conference appears to have made him uncomfortable and brought more 
prominence to the debates on free expression, greater access to the internet 
and human rights – all of which were reinforced by Obama’s elegantly crafted 
speech at the Grand Theatre. That may not, however, be an entirely bad thing 
for the elderly president.

Much was made before this visit about Obama cementing his legacy before 
leaving the White House at the end of this year. But the US president is not 
the only one thinking of his place in history. Castro – who has lived in the 
shadow of his brother for most of their lives – is also crafting a reputation 
of his own. When he took power some thought he would be a caretaker, nursing 
along the old ideals of the revolution. He has done that, but this visit 
highlights the extent to which he has also been his own man and an agile 
political operator. He has maintained old ideological ties (Venezuela’s 
President Nicolás Maduro was also visiting Havana last week), while embracing 
the leader of the world’s biggest capitalist nation.

Fidel will always be Cuba’s revolutionary icon, but Obama’s trip looks likely 
to ensure that Raúl will be known as its reformer. More importantly, the 
younger Castro brother will be now probably be remembered as a peacemaker.

 * This article was amended on 24 March 2016. Raúl Castro succeeded Fidel as 
president in 2008, not 1996 as we originally had it.  