
Italian and British police face mounting accusations that they confused a 
notorious people smuggler with an innocent refugee, after some of the 
smuggler’s former victims said they did not recognise the suspect extradited to 
Rome and paraded before the media.

The accusations followed claims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/08/police-investigating-if-wrong-man-caught-in-anti-smuggling-operation>
 from the family, housemates and neighbours of Medhanie Tesfamariam Berhe that 
the 29-year-old had been mistaken for Medhanie Yehdego Mered, a 35-year-old 
smuggling kingpin supposedly deported from Sudan on Wednesday. Berhe, they say, 
was in fact a jobless refugee with no involvement in the smuggling business.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fsmugglers-victims-say-police-have-arrested-innocent-refugee%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12db1000a0ebff8d87f0b2c2d3d72886b4260667%2F0_0_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Smuggler's%20victims%20say%20police%20have%20arrested%20innocent%20refugee&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fsmugglers-victims-say-police-have-arrested-innocent-refugee%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Smuggler%27s%20victims%20say%20police%20have%20arrested%20innocent%20refugee&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fsmugglers-victims-say-police-have-arrested-innocent-refugee%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12db1000a0ebff8d87f0b2c2d3d72886b4260667%2F0_0_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
 Medhanie Berhe (L) and people smuggler Medhanie Mered. Composite: EPA and 
handout 
The accusations create huge potential embarrassment for both the Italian 
authorities, who previously claimed to have seized “the boss of one of the most 
important criminal groups operating in central Africa and Libya”, and Britain’s 
National Crime Agency, which was involved in the Mered investigationandhailed 
the capture 
<http://www.nationalcrimeagency.gov.uk/news/869-prolific-people-smuggler-captured-in-sudan>
 of “one of the world’s most wanted people smugglers”.

Mered is a a well-known Eritrean people smuggler, based in Sudan and Libya, 
who has boasted of sending at least 13,000 people from Khartoum toEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, via Libya and the 
Mediterranean Sea. Italy said he had been seized in Khartoum in late May and 
subsequently deported to Rome.

But on Thursday, two men who said they were his former victims told the 
Guardian they did not recognise him from the images distributed by the Italian 
government.

“I know [Mered] very well, I can recognise him very well,” said Anbes Yemane, 
a 23-year-old Eritrean student who said he had been smuggled toItaly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> by Mered in December 2013. “That 
wasn’t him.”

Yemane remembered being kept in squalid, cramped conditions by Mered before 
departure, with he and his fellow passengers being treated more like cattle 
than customers. “The conditions were very bad, and I was threatened by [Mered] 
personally. He used to threaten us with a gun. [But] from the picture that I 
saw from the Italians, that wasn’t [Mered].”

A second former customer, who asked not to be named specifically because he 
believed Mered was still at large inSudan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/sudan> and therefore represented a threat to 
his relatives in Khartoum, said: “The person who was captured by the Italians 
is not the person who smuggled me. I know [Mered] very well – and I’ve known 
him since 2011, and it would be very easy for me to recognise him. This isn’t 
the smuggler.

“He is very dangerous and very powerful, and as I have relatives still in 
Sudan, he may retaliate if he knows that I am the one giving this information.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fmered-medhanie-general-people-smuggling-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Who%20is%20Medhanie%20Yehdego%20Mered%2C%20'the%20General'%3F%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20profile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fmered-medhanie-general-people-smuggling-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Who%20is%20Medhanie%20Yehdego%20Mered%2C%20%27the%20General%27%3F%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20profile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fmered-medhanie-general-people-smuggling-video-explainer&media=>
Who is Medhanie Yehdego Mered, ‘the General’? – video profile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/video/2016/jun/08/mered-medhanie-general-people-smuggling-video-explainer>
Meanwhile, in Sudan, Norway and Italy, members of Berhe’s family maintained 
that it was their young relative, known to some friends by his ancestral name 
of Kidane, who had been confused for Mered. He had been randomly arrested by 
the Sudanese police in Khartoum in late May and then disappeared. Berhe’s 
sister and flatmate, Seghen, claimed she had no idea where he was until he 
suddenly appeared handcuffed to Italian police officers in Rome on Wednesday.

“That’s my brother, and he’s innocent,” said Seghen, 30, after being presented 
with a photograph of the arrested man. “I haven’t heard from him for two weeks 
until yesterday in the news. I have been searching for him in prisons in 
Khartoum, but they [said] there is no man [with] that name.”

Eritrea has committed widespread crimes against humanity, says UN
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/08/un-commission-eritrea-international-criminal-court-hague>
Berhe escaped Eritrea in October 2014, Seghen said, one of thousands of 
Eritreans to flee a government that the UN accused this weekof committing 
crimes against humanity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/08/un-commission-eritrea-international-criminal-court-hague>
 on its population.

He allegedly went first to Hitsats refugee camp in Ethiopia, although the UN 
refugee agency, which runs the camp, would not confirm this detail publicly out 
of concern for the privacy of refugees. Then in March 2015 he allegedly moved 
to Khartoum to be closer to family members such as Seghen – long after Mered is 
alleged to have begun his smuggling business.

“[Berhe] is not a smuggler at all,” said Seghen. “He hasn’t been working at 
anything … My brother and sister support him.”

Another of Berhe’s sisters, Hewit, said: “They thought he was a smuggler just 
because he had one of the same names as Mered. Medhanie is much younger than 
Mered and he doesn’t even speak Arabic.”

Seghen and her family had enlisted the help of Sicilian lawyer Michele 
Calantropo, who flew to Rome on Thursday to attend the accused’s first 
interrogations on Friday morning.

Calantropo faces the unusual situation of representing clients who believe the 
defendant is a different man from the one the prosecutors think has been 
arrested. “There are no elements at the moment to confirm the identity of the 
man arrested in Sudan and extradited to Italy,” he said shortly before leaving 
Sicily.

Francesco Lo Voi, the Italian chief prosecutor, conceded the situation was 
unusual but would not comment further. “We are leading the appropriate 
investigations about this unusual situation,” he told the Guardian. “At the 
moment all we can say is that the report of the extradited person, his arrest 
and his extradition in Italy were disclosed in an official document from the 
[UK] National Crime Agency, and by Interpol and the Sudanese authorities. We’ll 
have more details tomorrow.”

The NCA did not update an earlier statement saying that it was “confident in 
its intelligence gathering process”.

On Thursday night, its website still maintained the agency had helped achieve 
the arrest of “one of the world’s most wanted people smugglers”, ina post 
<http://www.nationalcrimeagency.gov.uk/news/869-prolific-people-smuggler-captured-in-sudan>
 that seemed to have confused Mered’s first name for his last name.

Additional reporting by Medhane Paulos

 