
As Nicola Sturgeon launches her renewed drive to build support for Scottish 
independence <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/scottish-independence>, the 
frontrunner to be her party deputy, Angus Robertson, has urged members to “get 
out and speak to voters again”.

The SNP leader is expected to announce a nationwide listening exercise on 
Friday morning at an away-day of MSP, MPs and MEPs in Stirling. It will be the 
first time that all of the party’s parliamentarians have been brought together 
to this end.

Replace House of Lords with elected senate, urges Gordon Brown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/29/gordon-brown-house-of-lords-elected-senate-brexit-uk-scottish-independence>
But activists, who have been waiting to disect the failures of the 2014 
independence campaign, warn that any initiative focused on the 55% of Scots who 
voted to remain within the UK would undermine an internal audit.

Sturgeon announced a summer independence drive at the party’s spring 
conference in Glasgow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/12/nicola-sturgeon-snp-to-resume-drive-for-scottish-independence>
, where she promised the SNP would “turn the 45% of September 2014 into a 
strong and positive majority for independence” by “patiently and respectfully” 
hearing the concerns of no voters.

Several senior advisers have since acknowledged that the idea, which came as 
the SNP leadership sought to quell calls for a speedy second referendum, had 
not been expected to receive such a positive response.

Following the vote to leave the EU Sturgeon says independence may offer 
Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> the greatest stability. 
Nowhere is this more apparent than in the current contest to become SNP deputy 
leader, the position vacated by Dundee East MP Stewart Hosie in May, following 
the revelation of his extra-marital affair.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fsnp-nicola-sturgeon-to-hold-away-day-for-all-mps-to-bolster-case-for-independence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F649a5d31fcb6dd809b31598771deb0d907d663b1%2F0_218_5760_3457%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=SNP%20to%20hold%20'away-day'%20for%20all%20its%20MPs%20to%20bolster%20case%20for%20independence&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fsnp-nicola-sturgeon-to-hold-away-day-for-all-mps-to-bolster-case-for-independence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=SNP%20to%20hold%20%27away-day%27%20for%20all%20its%20MPs%20to%20bolster%20case%20for%20independence&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fsnp-nicola-sturgeon-to-hold-away-day-for-all-mps-to-bolster-case-for-independence%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F649a5d31fcb6dd809b31598771deb0d907d663b1%2F0_218_5760_3457%2F5760.jpg>
 Angus Robertson, the favourite to become the party’s deputy leader, said 
members needed to ‘get out and speak to voters again’. Photograph: Murdo 
Macleod for the Guardian 
Angus Robertson, the party’s Westminster leader who emerged as an early 
favourite 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/03/angus-robertson-early-favourite-to-become-snp-deputy-leader>
, said it was time for the party to “get out and speak to voters again”. He 
urged local activists at a hustings in South Ayrshire earlier this week: “All 
of us need to get our trainers on and door-knock for 2017 and beyond.”

Robertson said the SNP should push for a second referendum “when we know we 
can win it”, but warned activists that “we have to go up the leafy drives of 
the people who voted no”. He also cautioned that “who you elect as deputy won’t 
ensure a second independence referendum happens any quicker”.

While all four male candidates for SNP deputy have been keen to emphasise the 
friendly nature of their contest in contrast to Labour’s increasingly toxic 
leadership battle <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labourleadership>, 
differences have emerged, notably between Robertson and his closest challenger, 
Tommy Sheppard.

Sheppard, who became an SNP MP 2015, is a former Labour council leader and one 
of the many thousands who joined the party in the wake of the 2014 referendum. 
He has focused his campaign on the needs of the radically expanding party, 
calling for an organisational upgrade that entails better communication from 
the leadership and more chances for members to contribute to policy making.

Sheppard argued that the party needed to make itself “match-fit” for a second 
independence campaign, and that an internal debate and an outward-facing 
listening exercise could be mutually beneficial. “The more we self-educate, the 
better position we are in to have meaningful dialogue with those who disagree 
with us.

“I think we do know why we lost [in 2014],” Sheppard told the Guardian. “But 
the question is what are we going to do about it? We need to look at every 
aspect of the independence prospectus.”


The result of the deputy contest, to be decided in a ballot of the SNP’s 
120,000 members, will be announced at the party conference in October, where 
the party will also discuss a second referendum. .

The Guardian view on a second Scottish referendum: Sturgeon has no choice but 
caution | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/28/the-guardian-view-on-a-second-scottish-referendum-sturgeon-has-no-choice-but-caution>
Heather Anderson, who campaigned during the referendum with the group Farming 
for Yes, and is now an active SNP member, was surprised but delighted by 
Sturgeon’s announcement of a summer independence drive. “It felt that we’d been 
given permission to talk about the possibility of independence again,” she said.

“The SNP has grown massively and they have to find a way of engaging all those 
new members that is not just going through last month’s minutes in a church 
hall. I think many members are keen to deepen their understanding of how we 
become independent, not just why.”

Anderson reports that this appetite for internal discussion has been 
galvanised by the Brexit vote. Her most recent branch meeting was packed and 
lively, and local Yes groups across the country have started to make plans 
again. The cross-party Scottish Independence convention is due to hold a 
relaunch rally on 18 September.

“It’s very important to look at the arguments for independence in this new 
environment. We couldn’t be further away from 2014, and many of the main 
arguments used in the [no] campaign have fallen apart.”
 