
The Scottish National party is seeking assurances from EU member states that 
an independentScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> could remain 
in the single market after Brexit – and senior SNP figures now believe a second 
referendum on independence could be held by autumn 2018, before the UK leaves 
the union.

The Scottish government believes the guarantee about the single market would 
ensure greater support for independence in asecond referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/25/sturgeon-independence-may-be-best-for-scotland-amid-brexit-upheaval>
 and are working to persuade member states to let them be treated as a 
continuing member of the EU.

Senior SNP figures believe the Brexit secretary, David Davis, will end up 
demanding a “hard Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/18/tory-eurosceptics-push-for-hard-brexit-eu-single-market>
” that will mean the UK will not remain part of the single market, and will 
implement some form of green card system to restrict EU citizens entering 
Britain.

The threat of losing single market membership would be enough of a “material 
change” to allow the SNP, led by Nicola Sturgeon, to call for a second 
independence referendum, the senior figures believe. She described a second 
referendum as “highly likely” on the morning after the Brexit vote.

If Westminster opted for a hard Brexit it would also be easier for Scottish 
politicians to persuade business of the virtues of Scotland remaining inside 
the EU.They are confident a second referendum would be backed by Holyrood, and 
then Theresa May would have no option but to grant the demand.Alex Salmond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/26/alex-salmond-scottish-independence-vote-likely-brexit>
, the former Scottish first minister, is pushing for a referendum in 2018.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fsnp-seeks-single-market-assurances-independent-scotland-eu-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc448caf6b6883f8aa3adadb916e2fa165c952b7d%2F0_203_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=SNP%20seeks%20assurances%20an%20independent%20Scotland%20can%20stay%20in%20single%20market&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fsnp-seeks-single-market-assurances-independent-scotland-eu-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=SNP%20seeks%20assurances%20an%20independent%20Scotland%20can%20stay%20in%20single%20market&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fsnp-seeks-single-market-assurances-independent-scotland-eu-brexit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc448caf6b6883f8aa3adadb916e2fa165c952b7d%2F0_203_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Salmond campaigning for independence in 2014. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for 
the Guardian 
In an interview 
<http://stv.tv/news/politics/1358976-no-big-obstacle-to-independent-scotland-joining-eu/>
 during the summer Guy Verhofstadt, theEuropean parliament’s chief Brexit 
negotiator 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/08/guy-verhofstadt-diehard-european-to-lead-brexit-talks-for-european-parliament>
, said there should be no obstacles to an independent Scotland being part of 
the EU, saying it would be “suicide” for the EU to refuse entry to people who 
are sympathetic to the EU’s aims.

The SNP plans to tell voters that if Scotland left the UK, it would remain 
part of the single market possibly via membership of the EEA, in the same way 
as Switzerland Norway and Lichtenstein. Such a move might serve as a staging 
post until Scotland can regain full EU membership.

SNP leaders are also confident that longstanding Spanish objections to any 
special treatment for Scotland, such as access to the single market, can be 
addressed. Spain has been fearful that if Scotland was treated as a continuing 
member of the EU, this would set a precedent for Catalonia. The Spanish 
government has repeatedly argued Catalonia would need to renegotiate the terms 
of its entry to the EU if it was independent.

Salmond has said the independence referendum would need to be held inside the 
timetable of Brexit. The SNP is demanding to be embedded in theBrexit talks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/12/brexit-talks-may-be-most-complicated-negotiation-ever-says-minister>
, but May is eager to keep her negotiating demands secret for at least three 
months, and is wary of giving the Scottish government access to any private 
papers.

May to make first visit as PM to 'intriguing, surreal, freaky' Balmoral
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/16/may-pm-visit-balmoral> 
Prof Michael Keating, the director of the Economic and Social Research 
Council’s Centre on Constitutional Change, has warned that free trade between 
Scotland and the rest of the UK would end if one country was in the EU single 
market and the other was not.

He told MPs on the Commons Scottish affairs committee earlier this month: 
“There would be an economic barrier, a barrier to free movement, a barrier to 
goods and probably services as well ... there would be a cost to that.

“And the question would be is it more important to maintain access to the 
European single market or to the UK single market? We can’t have both. That’s a 
political judgment.”

A Panelbase poll for the Sunday Times and LBC puts support for independence on 
48%, down four points from 52% in June in theaftermath of the EU vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/02/brexit-eu-referendum-week-labour-party-boris-johnson>
 but up three points on the2014 referendum result 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ng-interactive/2014/sep/18/-sp-scottish-independence-referendum-results-in-full>
.

Nearly half (46%) of Scots oppose a referendum in the next few years, 33% want 
a second referendum before Brexit negotiations have concluded and 21% want a 
rerun after the Brexit negotiations.
 