
Actions speak louder than words is perhaps the maxim that governments should 
live by; that governments should have as their desktop screensavers or written 
on Post-its on ministerial fridges. It came to mind when Theresa May made her
Milibandesque inaugural speech as prime minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jul/13/prime-minister-theresa-may-pledges-to-build-a-better-britain-video>
, and it came to mind again last week whenJeremy Hunt told 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/20/jeremy-hunt-promises-better-mental-health-services-children-adolescents>
 us that the NHS is failing Britain’s young people on mental health. “Too many 
tragedies” occur because of weaknesses in the children and adolescent mental 
health services (Camhs), Hunt said.

It’s a popular opinion. So popular in fact, that people who work in Camhs have 
been saying it for years. Ditto the individuals who use the service, or would 
use the service if they were not languishing on waiting lists. Or those who are 
put off even trying to enter the system, or don’t know what help is available. 
Not to mention the parents and guardians of these young people.

Hunt says services need to intervene earlier. He is absolutely right. Will he 
tell us next that people need air to breathe and plants need water to thrive? 
And why then, has the government he is a member of, and the previous one, 
overseen the decimation of mental health services, and in particular, those 
dedicated to helping young people?

Jeremy Hunt says child mental health services are NHS's biggest failing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/20/jeremy-hunt-promises-better-mental-health-services-children-adolescents>
Earlier this month the Guardian revealed that 235,000 young people in the UK 
are receiving mental health care 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/03/quarter-of-a-million-children-receiving-mental-health-care-in-england>
, and that’s a figure based on responses from 60% of trusts, so the real number 
will be higher. Figures released by NHS Digital show a shocking rise in young 
people self harming, includingan increase of 42% over the past decade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/23/nhs-figures-show-shocking-rise-self-harm-young-people>
 in the number of girls treated as inpatients after self poisoning.Almost 
two-thirds of headteachers <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-27993469> are 
concerned about depression in pupils.One in 10 five to 16-year-olds 
<http://www.youngminds.org.uk/training_services/policy/mental_health_statistics>
 are thought to have a mental illness. Time and again we are warned that young 
people’s mental health is an area that needs huge investment to prevent a 
generation of unwell adults. Prof Dame Sue Bailey, former head of the Royal 
College of Psychiatrists, has called the situation a“car crash waiting to 
happen”. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/01/fund-nhs-child-mental-health-services-to-avoid-crisis>

And yet freedom of information requests find that one in five local 
authorities have either frozen or cut their Camhs budgets 
<http://www.youngminds.org.uk/news/blog/2942_widespread_cuts_in_children_and_young_people_s_mental_health_services>
 every single year since 2010. From the same year to 2015, £50m was cut from 
Camhs across the board. Funding promises do not make it to the frontline. The 
NSPCC found thata fifth of young people are turned away from Camhs services 
<https://www.nspcc.org.uk/fighting-for-childhood/news-opinion/1-in-five-5-children-referred-to-local-mental-health-services-are-rejected-for-treatment/>
 for not meeting the threshold for help. Years and years of the falling axe; 
years and years of avoidable deaths and futures derailed.

Now Hunt has the gall to tell us that mental health services are failing 
children and adolescents. They are. But it’s not, for the most part, the fault 
of the psychiatrists, psychologists, therapists, community psychiatric nurses 
and all of the support and admin staff who make up the mental health services; 
they often work after hours and take on additional duties for no extra pay. 
Services are failing thanks to budgets being cut, departments merged or closed 
and a lack of staff, all courtesy of a government that seems to think the 
public will forget it has been in charge for this duration.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fteenage-girls-talk-about-anxiety-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Teenage%20girls%20talk%20about%20anxiety%3A%20'It's%20always%20linked%20to%20failure'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fteenage-girls-talk-about-anxiety-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Teenage%20girls%20talk%20about%20anxiety%3A%20%27It%27s%20always%20linked%20to%20failure%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fteenage-girls-talk-about-anxiety-video&media=>
Teenage girls talk about anxiety: ‘It’s always linked to failure’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/video/2016/oct/06/teenage-girls-talk-about-anxiety-video>
It is not uncommon for unwell youngsters to spend nights in police cells 
<http://www.itv.com/news/wales/2016-08-23/children-as-young-as-12-are-being-held-in-police-cells-when-they-suffer-a-mental-health-crisis/>
 because of a lack of available beds. It is even more typical for young people 
to be offered inpatient bedsmany miles away from their homes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/apr/09/children-mental-health-mother-campaign-daughters-side-hospital-unit>
,or on adult wards <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-26255533>, or to turn 
18 and slip through the gap between Camhs and the adult system.

Hunt’s rhetoric towards junior doctors will not help the dire take-up of 
psychiatry posts 
<http://careers.bmj.com/careers/advice/view-article.html?id=20015985>. And now 
Brexit will deter the overseas staff that large parts of the mental health 
services rely on.

Of course, episodes of mental illness are horrific at any point in a person’s 
life.Depression in older people has reached crisis levels too 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/health/elder/12156889/Almost-half-of-all-older-people-in-care-homes-are-depressed-and-think-condition-is-a-normal-part-of-ageing.html>
, but what is especially devastating about children and teenagers becoming ill 
is that it can knock them off course for life.

Worried about a child’s mental health? Here’s what you should do | Katie Argent
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/05/child-mental-health-emotional>
This happened to me, and is the sole reason I did not sit A-levels or earn a 
degree. Because I became ill at 16, and did not manage to access proper 
treatment until years later. I am, despite this, lucky. The kindness of people 
and their willingness to understand and appreciate the different road I have 
taken (unwillingly), and to spot potential, has meant that I, eventually, got 
to where I wanted to go – but it often didn’t look as though things would turn 
out this way and the effects are life-lasting.

So I agree with Hunt. He is entirely correct: Camhs is weak. But when you 
starve something, neglect it, take away everything that makes something strong, 
it will inevitably become weak. The truth is the UK could afford to give more 
money to the NHS,which spends less than many other countries on its health 
system 
<http://www.kingsfund.org.uk/projects/nhs-in-a-nutshell/health-care-spending-compared>
. As Simon Stevens, head of NHS England, has said, even if the £1.25bn that has 
been “pledged” to young people’s mental health services is delivered, Camhs 
would still only be in a positionto help one in three youngsters in mental 
health need 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/04/nhs-child-mental-health-services-anxiety-depression>
.

After the leave campaign stood in front of its lie-on-wheels promising £350m 
per week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/27/uk-statistics-chief-vote-leave-350m-figure-misleading>
 to the NHS, to hear Theresa May point blankrefuse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/14/no-extra-money-for-nhs-theresa-may-tells-health-chief>
 the NHS the money it needs is enough to turn the stomach. Hunt may be a 
wealthy man, but to hear him cast aspersions on a service that the Tories have 
stripped of all resources and funding since it came to power? That’s rich.
 