
The clock is ticking down on 2016 marking the end of the  50th anniversary of 
thekey international human rights instruments 
<http://www.humanium.org/en/childrens-rights-history/references-on-child-rights/1966-international-covenant/>
, adopted as covenants by the UN in 1966, that deal with our fundamental rights 
– the rights to life, free expression, education and housing. But anyone 
assuming this occasion would result in a major acclamation for human rights 
will be disappointed.

It’s been a bad year for human rights protections. Besides the shock result of 
the UK’s Brexit vote, the world stood agape as the US electorate gave the title 
of leader of the free world to a billionaire real estate tycoon. Credit Suisse 
released itsGlobal Wealth Report 
<https://www.credit-suisse.com/us/en/about-us/research/research-institute/news-and-videos/articles/news-and-expertise/2016/11/en/the-global-wealth-report-2016.html>
 highlighting that the wealthiest 10% of people now own 89% of the world’s 
assets. And all the while we witnessed millions of people devastated by war, 
natural disasters, and economic crises with nothing but the clothes on their 
back attempt to cross treacherous waters and lands in a bid for survival.

Of these, Donald Trump may seem like an easy target in light of his 
self-professed bigotry. But I fear something that has been less observed so 
far. There is a very real connection between the values of the president-elect 
and the way he makes his billions, through real-estate investment.

What animates those in the business of housing is the idea that housing is a 
matter for the financial elite: a place to park surplus capital to maximise 
wealth, with little concern or return for people struggling to live in dignity 
with a decent, affordable roof over their head. This engenders inequality and 
exclusion and takes out the social function of housing from the equation

The virtual silence about this type of opportunism and its implications 
reflects the world in which we live. The more housing is dominated by corporate 
and financial elites who interact with it as an asset from which to reap a 
profit, with scant regulations, the more people who most need human rights 
protections are denied access: pushed to the peripheries because they cannot 
afford to live in cities, or removed from their homes and rendered homeless to 
make way for those with economic clout.

For those pushed out, housing is not about financial securitisation. It’s 
about securing the right to life. They describe their experiences in terms of 
their struggle for dignity; they articulate their circumstances as a denial of 
their humanity and their human rights.

I have met people in Asia, Africa, east and west Europe, and North and South 
America who are homeless or living in informal settlements, institutions, or 
containers; forced to live without safe drinking water, or electricity, amidst 
excrement and garbage, without adequate protection from inclement weather, with 
no bed to lie on, no place to wash or defecate; threatened by violence, 
insecurity, discrimination and stigmatisation. All are hanging by the thinnest 
thread.

People's homes are not commodities: cities need to rethink housing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/oct/18/homes-investment-cities-housing-un-habitatiii>
One third of deaths worldwide are linked to poverty and inadequate housing 
<https://documents-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N16/253/02/PDF/N1625302.pdf?OpenElement>
, according to 2011 research published byAnne-Emmanuelle Birn 
<http://www.cambridge.org/catalogue/catalogue.asp?isbn=0511985622>, whose work 
also shows that the death rate among homeless people can be from two to 10 
times higher than for those who are not homeless. Suicide rates in the US and 
Europe sharply increased in the aftermath of the 2008 mortgage crisis.

In so many ways housing is about human life, dignity and humanity. Fundamental 
human rights. How do we reconcile that with the dominant idea of housing as a 
commodity owned by faceless, nameless corporate elites who are left 
unaccountable to human rights obligations?

 As we say goodbye to 2016 and look forward to a new year, we need to 
re-embrace housing for its fundamental dimensions – its social value as a place 
necessary for human wellbeing, where people raise families, build communities 
and participate in civic life. And we need to sell that notion of housing back 
to our governments to derail the collision course between human rights and 
investor interests.

Leilani Farha is UN special rapporteur on the right to housing.

Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/housing/> for your free Guardian 
Housing network newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to you on the 
last Friday of the month. Follow us:@GuardianHousing 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>
 