
The London double-header is no longer able to live up to its billing with 
London Irish in Championship exile and Wasps escaping to Coventry. The allure 
of two teams expected to be involved in the relegation struggle kept the crowd 
below 50,000, still double what Saracens and Harlequins would attract between 
them on an average weekend, and on the evidence of Saturday Worcester have more 
reasons to be fearful thanpromoted Bristol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/25/bristol-doncaster-championship-final-second-leg-match-report>
.

Nick Evans’ cool head sees Harlequins sneak past Bristol at Twickenham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/03/harlequins-bristol-rugby-union-premiership-match-report>
Worcester’s initial defiance against an unusually wan Saracens meant they went 
into the interval only three points down in a half of three penalties but the 
physical toll of almost constant defending resulted in their collapse and Ben 
Spencer’s solo try wrapped upa 35-3 bonus-point victory for Saracens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/03/saracens-worcester-premiership-rugby-union-match-report>
.

While Worcester barely foiled an attacking shot, Bristol outscored Harlequins 
three tries to two in the second match, which was played in the rain, on their 
first outing in the Premiership since being relegated in 2009. Bristol made 16 
clean breaks to their opponents’ three and, despite the conditions, made 12 
offloads but indiscipline cost them asthey went down 21-19 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/03/harlequins-bristol-rugby-union-premiership-match-report>
.

“Harlequins were struggling to break us down in attack but we gave penalties 
away and that brought the maul into play,” Andy Robinson, theBristol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bristolrugby> director of rugby, said. “Our 
discipline was poor and it is vital we strive to get referees on our side. We 
have a number of players who were in the Championship last season and the 
question was whether they could step up. The answer at Twickenham was, yes, but 
we have to make sure they do it week in, week out.”

Promoted sides have struggled to cope with the increased pace of the game in 
thePremiership <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership> but Robinson 
tailored summer training to ensure his players were able to bridge the 
considerable divide and the squad spent time training at Font Romeu in the 
Pyrenees. They were there when the long-distance runner Mo Farah was preparing 
for the Olympics.

“When you watch a guy like him training and the effort he puts in it is 
inspirational,” Robinson said. “My only fear was our kit man walking across the 
track and colliding with him! Our training sessions have been intense with 
quite a bit of contact and our next game will be physical against Northampton 
at Ashton Gate on Sunday.”

It was a case of so near, so Farah, Bristol struggled to overcome the loss of 
their Wales centre Gavin Henson after 29 minutes. He sustained a leg injury 
after being tackled late by the England prop Joe Marler and some of the 
attacking fluency went with him.

The Harlequins <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/harlequinsru> captain, Danny 
Care, relieved in victory after his side trailed 14-3 two minutes before the 
break, believes the West Country club showed they have what it takes to survive 
in the top flight.

“They were incredibly competitive and fought for everything,” he said. “They 
made it really hard for us and they will compete in this league. I think the 
conditions suited them and we need to become better at playing in wet weather, 
doing the basics well.”

Schalk Burger scores on Saracens debut in Twickenham win over Worcester
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/03/saracens-worcester-premiership-rugby-union-match-report>
While Bristol had something to take back with them on the trip home, and not 
only a bonus point,Worcester <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/worcesterrugby> 
had only their initial defensive resilience to clutch. They were rarely seen as 
an attacking force, missing Chris Pennell, Bryce Heem and Francois Hougaard, 
and were fortunate Saracens were unusually slipshod in possession.

“We have a huge collective spirit and we saw that in the first 40 or 50 
minutes,” said the Worcester coach, Carl Hogg. “We had a few opportunities to 
launch attacks and dent their momentum but we lacked accuracy. We were up 
against the best team in Europe and I hope that against other sides we get more 
opportunities to implement our gameplan.”

Worcester are at home to Gloucester on Friday, already trailing to their 
expected relegation rivals Bristol and Newcastle, who defeated Sale last Friday.

“Newcastle winning doesn’t particularly put pressure on us,” Hogg said. 
“PlayingSaracens <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> was always going 
to be a tough task and it was a stiff learning curve.”
 