
Ministers last week stepped in with an extra cash boost for social care. On 
top of a funding increase announced three months ago, they unveiled a further 
rise to help meet payroll costs and to help professionalise the workforce. 
Council leaders “warmly welcomed” the move and the emphasis on preventive 
support for older and disabled people.

You may have guessed this wasn’t in England. It was in Wales, where, as the 
Welsh Local Government Association (WLGA) observes, the policy position is “
very different 
<http://gov.wales/newsroom/health-and-social-services/2017/10m-a-year/?lang=en>
”. True, the sums involved are not huge. After a £25m grant increase for social 
care in 2017-18 set out last October, the Welsh government last week founda 
further £10m 
<http://gov.wales/newsroom/health-and-social-services/2017/10m-a-year/?lang=en> 
and raised the individual cap on homecare costs – a feature of the system not 
replicated in England – from £60 a week to £70, which should give councils 
another £4m for the year from April.

Overall, that makes £39m more against what the WLGA says would have been a 
£92m shortfall in social care funding. Still a problem, then, but if the 
Westminster government were to make an equivalent contribution towards a 
previously forecast£1.9bn shortfall 
<https://www.kingsfund.org.uk/publications/autumn-statement-2016> in England in 
2017-18, that would be worth £805m. As it is, measures hastily put together 
just before Christmas may amount toa maximum of £281m 
<https://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/8811>, according to the Institute for 
Fiscal Studies, and only £75m of that is grant.

If ministers thought a combination of face-saving package and festive goodwill 
would get them off the hook, they were mistaken: last week, the chairs of three 
influential Commons select committees sent ajoint letter to the prime minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/06/social-care-crisis-theresa-may-under-pressure-to-act-fast>
 urging cross-party agreement on the future of social care and health funding, 
and the Liberal Democrats’ health spokesman, Norman Lamb, is expected to put 
the idea of a cross-party convention directly to Theresa May in the Commons on 
Wednesday.

Leading care charities are rallying behind Lamb with support for a cross-party 
“process” – note the difference – in another letter to May. “Such a process 
should not aim to ‘take the politics out of health and care’,” says the letter, 
coordinated by older people’s charity Independent Age, “but rather to make 
clear the costs and consequences of the political decisions that must be made.”

That is a degree of clarity May is unlikely to be comfortable with. In all her 
(admittedly limited) utterances on what she concedes is aneed to review the 
social care funding system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/dec/21/theresa-may-recognises-social-care-crisis-but-solution-seems-far-off>
, she has been careful not to include reviewing NHS resources, too. The 
prospect of opening another bidding war on NHS cash plainly terrifies her. And 
the ease with which thehospitals lobby has slipped back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/07/theresa-may-urged-to-get-grip-on-nhs-winter-crisis>
 into its familiar importunate mode in recent days – muscling social care aside 
after their brief united front last autumn – shows why.

Would social care be better off going it alone? While logic and principle 
suggest that the care and health system should be seen as an inseparable whole, 
and reviewed as such, realpolitik may dictate otherwise.

But social care should also show willingness to look at its own performance. 
May is convinced there remains money to be found in the system by making better 
use of existing resources. Although this does not obivate the need for funding 
reform, it is true that better value is being found in some places than others. 
Research by the Social Care Institute for Excellence (SCIE) in Birmingham shows 
that significant savings could be made 
<https://www.scie.org.uk/news/mediarelease/total-transformation-press-release> 
if the city adopted three models of care reform pioneered elsewhere: theLiving 
Well scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2014/oct/29/the-quiet-revolution-taking-place-in-cornish-social-care>
 of support for older people in the community, developed in Cornwall; Kent 
county council’shospital discharge programme 
<http://www.scie.org.uk/future-of-care/total-transformation/case-studies/kent-county-council>
; and theShared Lives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2014/may/23/shared-lives-community-based-supporting-adults>
 concept of family-based accommodation for people with disabilities.

Using data supplied by Birmingham council, SCIE estimates that applying the 
three approaches could save the council £6.6m a year and the NHS £1.4m. To put 
that into perspective, the council has to makecuts of £78m 
<https://www.birmingham.gov.uk/news/article/44/brumbudget17_have_your_say> in 
its overall budget in 2017-18 and the care and health economy across Birmingham 
and Solihull faces a£720m shortfall 
<https://inews.co.uk/essentials/news/health/birmingham-nhs-faces-721m-funding-blackhole/>
 by 2020. But £8m is not to be sniffed at. Equally important, the kind of 
community support fostered in SCIE’s models plays perfectly to May’s vision of 
a “shared society 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/08/theresa-may-tories-party-social-justice-speech>
”. If that’s the flow, social care needs to go with it.

• David Brindle is the Guardian’s public services editor
 