
If you spend your days dealing with family crisis conferences, child 
protection hearings or tense mediation meetings, you might fancy some cheering 
up. Step forward “Debstar” and “Jim McGraw” – the stage names of Debbie Greaves 
and Jim McGrath, two social workers who are turning the stuff of their working 
lives into standup comedy.

Ray Jones: ‘Social work is under real threat’ | Patrick Butler
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/20/ray-jones-social-work-threat-childrens-services-privatisation>
“We’ve got so many stories people can relate to,” says McGrath, before a 
sold-out show in Brighton. “People thank us afterwards, saying ‘I really needed 
that – I was having the worst week’,” adds Greaves, who is a firm believer in 
the power of laughter to help her fellow professionals maintain a healthy 
perspective and build resilience in difficult times.

“Putting the social into social work” is the battle cry they carry around 
Britain onregular tours <https://www.facebook.com/standupforsocialworkers/> 
from their Northern Ireland base, juggling annual leave and work schedules. 
Greaves quickly scotches any idea that using stage names is about keeping their 
comedy activities secret. “I just like a distinction between the professional 
me and the comedian.” She points out, too, that her bosses have seen her in 
comedy action. “They know I won’t go over the line that will land me in the 
deregistration zone!”

Both comedians can draw on decades of experience for material. Now 40, 
Australian Greaves has spent 20 years working in children’s services in her 
homeland and around the UK, while 54-year-old McGrath has notched up 30 years 
across youth offending, child protection and neighbourhood dispute resolution.

It's cathartic doing comedy. You get to rant and rave about how rubbish things 
are

McGrath began performing comedy at a Dublin pub open-mic night a few years 
ago, while Greaves’ first taste of standup came in 2013 when she did an 
impromptu 10-minute slot to add a bit of fun to her local social work awards 
ceremony. McGrath then made contact after hearing he wasn’t alone in the world 
of social work standup.

“Changes in social work have had a huge impact on morale, compounded 
by cutbacks and ongoing pressures,” says Greaves. “Comedy should hold up a 
mirror to life, deconstructing idiosyncrasies to get people to laugh at the 
system.” And while their profession provides the backbone of their acts, 
broader material is woven in. “What’s happening in the news affects us as 
social workers, too – things like the refugee crisis,” points out McGrath.

Any talk of social work and comedy naturally brings up Guardian cartoon strip 
andRadio 4 spin-off  <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b006qprs>Clare in the 
Community <https://www.theguardian.com/society/series/clareinthecommunity> (see 
below) andthe Channel 4 sitcom Damned with Jo Brand 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/damned>. “Anything that gets the general 
public talking about social work and the complexities of the job is to be 
invited, as long as it reflects positively on both social workers and service 
users – we’ve had too much ‘poverty porn’ on our TVs and condemning of social 
workers,” says Greaves. She speaks of being angry at “the same old churned-out 
stereotype of social workers in crisis and disarray ... We’ve all been in 
situations that have been funny, but there is a fine balance between laughing 
at the situation and making fun of the person.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbDzTAhXV9UM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbDzTAhXV9UM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbDzTAhXV9UM&media=>
 Jo Brand’s Channel 4 sitcom ‘Damned’ 
Greaves speaks as someone who has experienced social work practice from both 
sides – client as well as provider. Raised in foster care in Australia, she 
claims a (mostly) good experience of social workers. Yet that didn’t stop her 
feeling the stigma attached to being in care – and getting up on stage, she 
says, has helped her face inner demons. “It’s cathartic doing standup as you 
get to rant and rave about how rubbish things are.”

McGrath admits to using comedy to deal with stresses, such as the perils of 
working in Northern Ireland duringthe Troubles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2016/mar/28/made-in-belfast-the-legacy-of-the-troubles-100-years-after-the-easter-rising-video>
. “Social workers were expected to go into areas without police back-up because 
of the security threat [to the police] – but we did it because we had to,” he 
says. “That said, it’s still more frightening to stand on stage and 
expose yourself to the judgment of your peers.”

Damned: Jo Brand's new sitcom finds the humour in social work
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/sep/23/damned-jo-brands-new-sitcom-finds-the-humour-in-social-work>
Greaves and McGrath donate £1 from every ticket to the Social Workers 
Benevolent Trust <https://www.basw.co.uk/financial-support/swbt/>, which has 
seen increasing demand from members of the profession seeking help for problems 
worsened by a difficult political climate and increasing lack of job security. 
They are also now using their comedic skills as a creative way to work with 
client groups, particularly to build confidence – McGrath with recovering drug 
addicts and Greaves with a learning disabilities group.

So what did the punters think after the Brighton gig? “I thought it was 
good to find humour about the work and the office politics; people in our 
profession need to be very ‘PC’ when working, but we also need to let ‘real’ 
feelings out somewhere,” said one fellow social worker.

Greaves sums up their approach to comedy simply. “We’ll have a good old laugh 
and a whinge,” she says, “and then go away feeling just a little bit better 
about things.”

For details of future comedy dates go to the duo’s Facebook page 
<https://www.facebook.com/standupforsocialworkers/>
 