
1) The Carlos Ruiz experience

The USMNT had never lost a World Cup qualifying game in Guatemala when they 
played there in March, but a 21-game unbeaten streak against their opponentswas 
about to end in abject fashion 
<http://www.foxsports.com/soccer/story/usmnt-reach-new-low-with-loss-to-guatemala-and-now-the-world-cup-is-in-doubt-032516>
.

Not for the last time this year, the team’s concentration on restarts would be 
their achilles heel. First Mix Diskerud was left flailing as Rafael Morales 
headed Guatemala into an early lead, then the veteran Carlos Ruiz sprinted off 
the last man and slid the ball under Tim Howard while the US center-backs were 
still turning near the halfway line.

El Pescadito had made a habit of tormenting American defenders in his various 
MLS incarnations in a long career, but the sight of the 36 year-old journeyman 
running away from the latest candidates in Jürgen Klinsmann’s center-back 
carousel (Michael Orozco and Omar Gonzalez), was a particularly galling image 
for US fans to start the year with.

Guatemala 2-0 USA: World Cup 2018 qualifying – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/mar/25/usa-v-guatemala-world-cup-2018-qualifying-live>
The US were fortunate to have the opportunity to remedy things immediately, 
and four days later they put four past Guatemala in their then reliable 
fortress of Columbus, but the positive mood that result engendered (boosted by 
the competitive debut of the much-heralded Christian Pulisic) could not quite 
erase the intensifying sense of unease about Klinsmann’s team selections and 
tactics.



2) Olympic failure, part one

Colombia turned out to be a regular deflater of US soccer pretensions this 
year, though perhaps never so emphatically as in the playoff series for a spot 
at the Olympics in March. The USMNT-U23 team had secured a credible 1-1 draw in 
Colombia in the first leg, only to fall apart in the return — losing 2-1, 
ending the game with nine men and generally chasing shadows. Kellyn Acosta 
endured a particularly torrid time at full back, and the gulf in class and 
ambition between the two teams looked particularly worrying for US fans 
wondering about the next generation.

For the first time in 50 years the USA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/usfootballteam> would miss successive 
Olympic tournaments, but perhaps more to the point the master plan for this 
World Cup cycle was in further disarray. After the 2014 World Cup, Klinsmann 
had envisaged a smooth procession of competitive soccer leading up to Russia 
2018, but now key losses had eliminated both the 2017 Confederations Cup and 
the 2016 Olympics from that notional schedule.

3) The US women score lots and lots of goals … and then fewer goals
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DccTvUHdVtOs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DccTvUHdVtOs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DccTvUHdVtOs&media=>
After the surprise 1-0 home loss to China that ended the World Cup winning 
2015, the USWNT resumed normal service at the start of 2016, as their traveling 
circus roamed the country scoring goals for fun. Until a 3-3 draw with Japan 
ended the sequence in early summer, the US won 11 games in a row — scoring an 
eye-watering 42 goals and conceding just one in the process, against Germany.

The latter game was also distinguished for featuring a great goal by Alex 
Morgan <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ccTvUHdVtOs>. Though perhaps more 
importantly for the US, it came within the context of a run of tight games at 
the #SheBelieves tournament, as they tried to ramp up the intensity to defend 
their Olympic title. Single goal wins over England and France gave a rather 
clearer benchmark of where the US were than 10-0 wins over Puerto Rico, but 
such is the unbalanced lot of the women’s national team schedule, and even if 
the warning signs had been there during the World Cup win, it seemed 
inconceivable that the USA would not lift themselves for the medal rounds of 
the Olympics.

4) Copa America finish flatters the USA
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYNO9TdGHw5Q&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYNO9TdGHw5Q>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYNO9TdGHw5Q&media=>
The USA’s Copa America Centenario started and ended with losses to Colombia, 
and while the team matched Klinsmann’s stated ambition of reaching the 
semi-finals, the manner of their dismantling when they got there made sure that 
no fan was left with any illusions about the team’s current standing. Lionel 
Messi and Argentina saw to that,as they overran the USMNT 4-0 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/21/argentina-usa-copa-america-semi-final-score>
, before Colombia beat the hosts 1-0 in the third-place game.

Argentina hammer four past outclassed USA to reach Copa América final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/21/argentina-usa-copa-america-semi-final-score>
And yet with the World Cup qualifiers ahead there were encouraging signs. 
Despite again missing an injured Jozy Altidore from a summer tournament, the US 
attack found its groove, inspired by the irrepressible Clint Dempsey, and with 
Booby Wood continuing an upward trajectory that continued throughout the year. 
Klinsmann too, showed signs of adapting smartly as the tournament went on — 
reshaping his midfieldto overwhelm Costa Rica in the second group game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/07/copa-america-usa-costa-rica-match-report>
, and persisting with the formula right up to the Argentina game. But then 
familiar frailties (lack of concentration early, lack of concentration at set 
pieces, lack of ideas when behind) reasserted themselves. The US weren’t 
humiliated at the tournament they hosted, but they didn’t light it up either.

5) Losing to “cowards”

A relatively routine group stage for the USWNT at the Olympics was remarkable 
chiefly for the chants of “ZIKA!” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/06/rio-2016-womens-football-usa-france-hope-solo>
 that accompanied every touch of the ball by Hope Solo (who’d somewhat 
injudiciously chosen to tweet about her fears of the disease before the 
tournament), and just as in Canada last year there was the expectation that 
they would now begin to go through the gears en route to the final.

But then came Sweden, and former US boss Pia Sundhage, in the quarter-finals. 
The US attacked from the start and had 27 shots to Sweden’s six, but Sweden’s 
counter-attacking was more efficient than the USA’s pressure. It took a 77th 
minute Alex Morgan goal to take the game to extra-time, but it proved to be a 
temporary reprieve, as Sweden won on penalties to deliver the worst tournament 
finish in years for the USA.

Hope Solo ignores Zika chants to star in USA Olympic soccer win over France
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/06/rio-2016-womens-football-usa-france-hope-solo>
And it was Tabloid Hope rather than Athlete Solo who’ll be remembered from 
this tournament,particularly after her post-game comments following the Sweden 
elimination 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/12/hope-solo-sweden-cowards-olympics-football-rio-2016>
: “We played a bunch of cowards. The best team did not win today. I strongly, 
firmly believe that … Sweden dropped back. They didn’t want to open play. They 
didn’t want to pass the ball around. They didn’t want to play great soccer, 
entertaining soccer. It was a combative game. A physical game. Exactly what 
they wanted. Exactly what their game plan was. We had that style of play when 
Pia was our coach. I think it was very cowardly.”

Sundhage, well used to the antics of her “piece of work” former charge, wasn’t 
bothered: “It’s OK to be a coward if you win.”

6) Breaking up the band
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fus-soccer-year-in-review-2016-jurgen-klinsmann-hope-solo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F55e06705edbbf6d833cea08eebbab66277168a7b%2F0_62_3031_1820%2F3031.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Solo's%20cowards%20to%20Klinsmann's%20exit%3A%20a%20review%20of%202016%20in%20US%20soccer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fus-soccer-year-in-review-2016-jurgen-klinsmann-hope-solo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Solo%27s%20cowards%20to%20Klinsmann%27s%20exit%3A%20a%20review%20of%202016%20in%20US%20soccer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fus-soccer-year-in-review-2016-jurgen-klinsmann-hope-solo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F55e06705edbbf6d833cea08eebbab66277168a7b%2F0_62_3031_1820%2F3031.jpg>
 Alex Morgan hopes to improve her game with a move to Europe in 2017. 
Photograph: David Dermer/AP 
And after the failure — the fallout. There was a valedictory feel to watching 
the USWNT team in the Olympics. If last year’s World Cup win ended up as a 
triumph for believing in the veteran core of the team, the center could not 
hold in 2016.
Carli Lloyd, newly minted as a global superstar after her World Cup final 
hat-trick, struggled with injury in the lead up to the World Cup, as did Megan 
Rapinoe, who had little impact on the tournament. Rapinoe’s defining 
contribution to the year turned out to bekneeling for the national anthem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/15/us-soccer-megan-rapinoe-kneels-national-anthem>
 in the wake of the Colin Kaepernick protest, and it felt in keeping with a 
curiously unfocussed year for the USWNT — more defined by individual storylines 
than collective coherence.

Hope Solo's punishment shows that women are judged more harshly | Shireen Ahmed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/26/hope-solo-suspension-female-athletes-double-standards>
Some of those stories led to infamy, such as the recently-retired Abby 
Wambach’s arrest for drunk driving, or Solo’s international careereffectively 
being ended in an act of vindictiveness by US Soccer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/24/hope-solo-suspended-us-womens-soccer-rio-olympics-loss>
 — they banned her for six months, ostensibly for her Sweden comments, but it 
had the definite feel of payback for years of headaches now that the keeper was 
finally at an age where she could be surplus to requirements.

And then there were other individual trajectories whose consequences are not 
yet played out. Alex Morgan moved to Lyon at the end of the year, looking to 
develop her game to the next level with a Champions League team rather than 
starting the NWSL season with Orlando.

Whatever collective identity emerges from the next generation of players (and 
one needs to emerge pretty quickly with a new collective bargaining agreement 
to work towards in the new year), 2016 was the end of an era.

7) Klinsmann’s last stand

In hindsight, the two games the US won against St Vincent and the Grenadines 
and Trinidad and Tobago in late summer, to ensure advancement to the final Hex 
round of Concacaf World Cup qualifying, went entirely as could be expected — 
the USA beating inferior opposition comfortably, after some patient laboring to 
make the initial breakthrough.

But it was a measure of how far Klinsmann’s stock had fallen that the 
attacking creativity offered by Sacha Kljestan and Christian Pulisic should 
spark the surprised optimism it briefly did — after all, surely the US weremeant
to be playing like this, at least according to Klinsmann’s long-abandoned 
attacking manifesto.

Kljestan was coming off a career year with New York Red Bulls, while Pulisic 
was continuing to meet every challenge sent his way with Borussia Dortmund, and 
their movement, touch and cool in front of goal, and its knock-on effect for 
the strikers in front of them, and the ability for Michael Bradley to play as a 
more traditional No6 behind them, meant that for one final brief moment before 
the Hex started it looked like Klinsmann had once again got his act together …

8) Dos a Cero no more
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fus-soccer-year-in-review-2016-jurgen-klinsmann-hope-solo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a19cfcab4226f2003fdcb9a79b453289529335b%2F0_104_2112_1267%2F2112.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Solo's%20cowards%20to%20Klinsmann's%20exit%3A%20a%20review%20of%202016%20in%20US%20soccer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fus-soccer-year-in-review-2016-jurgen-klinsmann-hope-solo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Solo%27s%20cowards%20to%20Klinsmann%27s%20exit%3A%20a%20review%20of%202016%20in%20US%20soccer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fus-soccer-year-in-review-2016-jurgen-klinsmann-hope-solo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a19cfcab4226f2003fdcb9a79b453289529335b%2F0_104_2112_1267%2F2112.jpg>
 Mexico celebrate their victory in Columbus. Photograph: Joseph Maiorana/USA 
Today Sports 
… the positive feeling lasted all the way into the first minute of the opening 
game of the Hex against Mexico, when Miguel Layun jogged across to his coach 
Juan Carlos Osorio, holding up five fingers, to indicate Klinsmann’s tactical 
“masterstroke” of introducing an experimental five-man backline in the most 
significant game of the year.

Mexico's Rafael Márquez scores late winner to stun USA in World Cup qualifier
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/11/mexico-stun-united-states-on-late-rafael-marquez-winner>
Osorio shrugged, pulled Layun into a back four to immediately adjust, and for 
the next half hour Mexico tormented a demoralized US team: over-running them in 
midfield; posing challenges to underprepared defenders; and generally making 
the USA’s attack an irrelevance.

And this was in the USA’s “fortress” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/10/us-soccer-mapfre-stadium-columbus-ohio-azteca-mls>
. For four World Cup cycles the USA had played Mexico in Columbus, Ohio, and 
for four World Cup cycles they had won by the now mythical scoreline of 2-0, or
Dos a Cero,as the familiar fan chant had it.

Not any more. The US rallied in the second-half, but despite leveling the 
scores and pressing late on, their coach was out-thought by his counterpart — 
Osorio’s substitutions had way more impact than Klinsmann’s. And on a 
historical night it was Rafa Marquez, a man who made his international debut 
before Pulisic was born, who scored the winner.

The immediate aftermath of the game focused on that historic loss and on the 
additional pressure now on Klinsmann to get an unprecedented result in Costa 
Rica a few days later, but looking back, perhaps more attention should have 
been paid to Michael Bradley running over to Klinsmann during an injury break, 
seemingly to check if there was a plan B for dealing with the unfolding crisis. 
The players had not been set up to succeed and revolt was simmering.

9) The end

One of the easiest phenomena to see and hardest to prove, is the moment when 
players quit on a manager, but anyone watchingthe USA’s ragged 4-0 capitulation 
in Costa Rica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/15/usa-slump-defeat-costa-rica-jurgen-klinsmann>
 knew what was unfolding.

Johan Venegas is currently a fringe striker for the Montreal Impact, but 
against the lumbering US defense he Joel Campbell were made to look like world 
beaters — when the latter raced clear of the defense to complete the scoring, 
it was hard not to think back to Carlos Ruiz losing the defenders in that 
Guatemala game and to wonder what progress had been made by the USA between the 
two competitive games that bookended the year.

US fans wanted Jürgen Klinsmann out but they may come to regret his exit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/21/jurgen-klinsmann-fired-us-soccer-team>
The only question now was whether Sunil Gulati, a man whose legacy as 
president of US Soccer is inextricably linked to his long-time pursuit of 
Klinsmann, was prepared to use the upcoming winter break to make a change.

But missing the Confederations Cup and Olympics is one thing — missing the 
World Cup is quite another, and this performance and the potential consequences 
of letting the rot go unchecked effectively made Gulati’s decision for him.

10) Bruce Arena ponders the nationality of the national team

The Klinsmann project was supposed to be about integrating the US with the 
best of international practices, and of course the coach ruffled plenty of 
feathers when he pointed out that virtually all the examples of best practice 
he was interested in were to be found in Europe. It repeatedly put him on a 
collision course with MLS, as he tried to guide players to challenge themselves 
in Europe while the league pushed its own “league of choice” manifesto.

And with Klinsmann scouring Europe (particularly Germany) for players with US 
ancestry, he also attracted his fair share of pushback from those who felt that 
these players missed an innate sense of understanding of what it meant to be 
American.
One of those voices was Bruce Arena, who’d followed up his underwhelming 
second World Cup cycle as US coach in 2006, by going on to consolidate his 
position as the greatest US club team coach of the MLS era. Now called in as a 
safe pair of hands to stabilize World Cup qualification, Arena found himself 
spending part of his opening press conference as US head coach clarifying
comments he’d made about foreign born players 
<https://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/08/magazine/how-jurgen-klinsmann-plans-to-make-us-soccer-better-and-less-american.html?mtrref=ftw.usatoday.com&gwh=DB89431CD8773BA04CB384E8C3D14E07&gwt=pay&assetType=nyt_now>
, before departing on a potentially awkward tour of Germany to meet several of 
said players.

Arena defused the moment deftly, but the very fact he was expected to do so 
reflected what a departure in style and ideology the new/old coach represents. 
The internationalist, modernizing ambition of the Klinsmann years has given way 
to a more familiar goal for US coaches — find a squad that works for right now, 
starting with the most immediate resources to hand. For Arena, that means going 
with what he knows — an MLS core — and making them play in an “American” style. 
Read into that what you will, but Arena won’t care. He’s inherited a situation 
where he needs results more than style points.
 