
The playlist: ‘Diana Ross got me singing at the top of my voice’

Music critic Alexis Petridis on how to find the right jogging tunes

Before I started running, lots of people gave me advice, and all of it turned 
out to be true. Yes, I found running weirdly addictive. Yes, it provided me 
with a sense of mental equilibrium: I felt better physically, but also 
psychologically. Yes, the runner’s high is a real thing: a euphoric, fleeting 
rush of endorphins that feels remarkably like being on fantastic drugs, without 
the comedown.

But they never mentioned music, which in retrospect seems odd. Among the 
pleasures of running – right up there with mental equilibrium and smug 
self-satisfaction – is the bizarrely intense relationship I feel with whatever 
I’m listening to. Perhaps it has something to do with running putting you in a 
heightened, more receptive state; perhaps with the fact that you often 
concentrate intently on what’s coming out of your headphones to keep your mind 
off how knackered you are. Whatever it is, it’s powerful. Songs have vaulted 
out of nowhere into my all-time-favourites list as a result of listening to 
them while I run. In some ways, it’s the aspect of running I look forward to 
the most, the thing that can get me out of the house when it’s cold or wet or I 
just don’t feel like it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fsound-of-speed-athletes-and-amateurs-on-the-art-of-the-running-playlist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff589c6870eb8e336d7fbb15ae90a5033c317041e%2F199_638_3509_2105%2F3509.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sound%20of%20speed%3A%20athletes%20and%20amateurs%20on%20the%20art%20of%20the%20running%20playlist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fsound-of-speed-athletes-and-amateurs-on-the-art-of-the-running-playlist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sound%20of%20speed%3A%20athletes%20and%20amateurs%20on%20the%20art%20of%20the%20running%20playlist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fsound-of-speed-athletes-and-amateurs-on-the-art-of-the-running-playlist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff589c6870eb8e336d7fbb15ae90a5033c317041e%2F199_638_3509_2105%2F3509.jpg>
 Nu-metal of the I-didn’t-ask-to-be-born-mum variety (Slipknot, pictured) might 
not work for everyone. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian 
Certainly, I think music is too important a part of running to leave to others 
to control, although if you want to do that, there are plenty of options. 
Streaming services, still engaged in the faintly creepy task of trying to 
second-guess what you want to listen to, have acres of curated and continually 
updated exercise playlists: “Go harder, better, faster and longer with these 
motivational EDM tracks. Yes, you CAN do it. You got this”; “The sound of 
sweatspiration … train hard and reap the rewards with a rootsy, motivating mix.”

The perfect running playlist: the best rock tracks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/the-running-blog/2013/aug/05/perfect-running-playlist-best-rock-tracks>
These descriptions alone largely motivate me to go back to bed and pull up the 
covers – and that’s before I even get to the music. In fairness, there’s a 
pretty wide representation of genres on offer – “fast folk and aggressive 
Americana, guaranteed to push your workout to the max” offers one playlist, 
chillingly – but the vast majority appear to have been compiled by people 
steadfast in the belief that what you really want to listen to when you’re 
exercising is awful pop-dance or terrible, shouty, I-didn’t-ask-to-be-born-mum 
nu-metal.

If that’s your thing, fill your boots. But I’ve got a feeling that, regardless 
of your tastes, you might be better off making your own running playlists than 
relying on algorithms. Whatever genre you opt for, I’d go for a mix of new 
stuff, heavily laced with stuff you have at least some familiarity with: for 
some reason, I find the moment of happy recognition when a track you know and 
love kicks in gives you a quick energy boost.

People seem to fuss about the tempo affecting how you run: there are playlists 
on which everything is around 170bpm, based on precisely this logic. But I’ve 
never found that it matters. I’ve run really fast and really well – by my 
standards, at least – while listening to late-70s and early-80s soul that was 
laid back to the point of sonnambulence.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fsound-of-speed-athletes-and-amateurs-on-the-art-of-the-running-playlist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa038e2757b6b1d5d946bbf185db5829607d1af7%2F0_141_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sound%20of%20speed%3A%20athletes%20and%20amateurs%20on%20the%20art%20of%20the%20running%20playlist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fsound-of-speed-athletes-and-amateurs-on-the-art-of-the-running-playlist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sound%20of%20speed%3A%20athletes%20and%20amateurs%20on%20the%20art%20of%20the%20running%20playlist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fsound-of-speed-athletes-and-amateurs-on-the-art-of-the-running-playlist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa038e2757b6b1d5d946bbf185db5829607d1af7%2F0_141_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 A good bet to help you reach that ‘runner’s high’ … Diana Ross. Photograph: 
Rick Nederstigt/EPA 
More affecting than speed is the tenor of the music. Given that the runners’ 
high usually seems to kick in after 40 minutes, I’d strongly suggest loading 
that part of your playlist with music that might intensify this, although there 
are potential downsides to doing that, not least the spectacle you can make of 
yourself if you get carried away: I speak as a man who was once spotted by a 
friend running along the A23, in the throes of endorphin-induced euphoria, 
singing along to Diana Ross’s I Ain’t Been Licked at the top of my voice, a 
sight said friend described as both “deeply upsetting” and “impossible to erase 
from my memory”.

The motivator: ‘We finish at a club for a beer and a dance’

Tim Jonze finds that the right coach can help in unlikely ways

“Music is fundamental to what we do,” says Greg Drach, co-founder of the 
exercise groupMidnight Runners <http://midnightrunners.co/#intro>. “It’s a 
legal performance-enhancer.” Midnight Runners stage mass runs through the city 
streets after dark, with some joggers lugging boomboxes so everyone can listen 
to the same playlist. “People run at different speeds, so music helps keep the 
group together,” says Drach. “Plus you can’t hear your own breathing as much.”

Building exercise playlists can be less scientific than you might think. Drach 
says he started out picking Spotify playlists that adhered to a suitable 
160-180bpm, but this didn’t always work out. “A lot of songs were terrible for 
running,” he says. “They just felt wrong, didn’t get you pumping.”

The perfect running playlist: the best disco tracks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/the-running-blog/2013/aug/12/perfect-running-playlist-best-disco-tracks>
Instead he opted for a more instinctive approach, and it turns out that being 
a music fan with an ear for a tune is essential, no matter how big the 
operation. Gillian Reeves, national group exercise manager at Virgin Active 
Health Clubs, says instructors spend hours sorting playlists, with the company 
even building a specialised platform from which to create them, using a 
constantly updated library of 50,000 tracks.

“One of the reasons participants come back,” she says, “is that they like your 
selection. It can transform exercise, which may seem tedious, into a 
theatrical, emotive experience.”

Chris Stanton, who runs The Pack 
<https://www.virginactive.co.uk/classes/the-pack> spin classes at Virgin 
Active, says factors like bpm can be important when you want your class to find 
an extra gear – he tries to match the music to the required 
revolutions-per-minute during hill climbs, for instance. But Reeves and Stanton 
both tend to look beyond the numbers and, depending on the class, follow some 
simple rules: pick songs in which the verse and chorus provide natural 
intervals for you to catch your breath; use acoustic tracks to cool down as 
they provide less stimulation for the nervous system; make sure any lyrics 
complement the motivational atmosphere you’re trying to create. “Songs about 
sad times or breakups aren’t the best,” says Reeves.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fsound-of-speed-athletes-and-amateurs-on-the-art-of-the-running-playlist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf47e1e624c5aa50896e22026a2719e2b227cece%2F0_75_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sound%20of%20speed%3A%20athletes%20and%20amateurs%20on%20the%20art%20of%20the%20running%20playlist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fsound-of-speed-athletes-and-amateurs-on-the-art-of-the-running-playlist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sound%20of%20speed%3A%20athletes%20and%20amateurs%20on%20the%20art%20of%20the%20running%20playlist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fsound-of-speed-athletes-and-amateurs-on-the-art-of-the-running-playlist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf47e1e624c5aa50896e22026a2719e2b227cece%2F0_75_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Subtlety-free … EDM acts such as Avicii feature heavily on many workout 
playlists. Photograph: Ollie Millington/Redferns via Getty Images 
The playlists Midnight Runners and Virgin use are pretty familiar. Both opt 
for subtlety-free EDM and chart-pop remixes with huge, arm-waving choruses: 
Avicii, Clean Bandit, Calvin Harris and DJ Snake feature on their more intense 
workout playlists, though Drach says he likes to throw in the occasional 
classic (“so people can all sing along”). Reeves, meanwhile, occasionally pays 
tribute to a legend: “Earlier this year there were a lot ofPrince 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/prince> tracks around the time he passed, in 
homage to such an inspiring artist.”

Clearly, the point isn’t to make sure your muscles are straining in tandem to 
a robotic rhythm, but rather to ensure you’re having fun. Indeed, Midnight 
Runners time their 11.30pm runs to finish at a party location, so that the 
exhausted runners can grab a recovery beer from the bar and shift the workout 
to the dancefloor.

The Olympian: ‘Beyoncé as a pick-me-up, the Weeknd to chill out’

Dina Asher-Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/21/dina-asher-smith-olympic-games-sprinter-rio-2016>
, 100m and 200m British record-holder, Olympic and World Championship bronze 
medallist, and history student

Whether I am about to race in an Olympic final or the first heat of the 
British indoor championships, my choice of music will be designed to balance 
out what I am feeling. So if I am nervous, I’ll put on something soothing. But 
if I’m tired – if it’s day five of the Olympics and I need energy from 
somewhere – I’ll listen to something that picks me up. I know the level of 
arousal I need to be at my best. Music helps me get into that zone.

In the past, I’ve tried being really hyper before I compete – it doesn’t work. 
I’ve also tried being really calm – again, it doesn’t work. You have to be 
somewhere in the middle. So I have a bunch of playlists. If I need to chill 
out, I’ll listen tothe Weeknd <https://www.theguardian.com/music/the-weeknd>, 
slow R&B and old skool classics –TLC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/08/rocks-back-pages-tlc-rolling-stone-1995-t-boz-chilli-left-eye>
 and stuff like that. If I want to pick myself up, it’s Beyoncé, grime, Jay Z, 
Kanye West – stuff that is empowering and gets you thinking.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fsound-of-speed-athletes-and-amateurs-on-the-art-of-the-running-playlist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd577da332dfdf85edf88e4458763089c27d0b07a%2F0_78_2878_1726%2F2878.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sound%20of%20speed%3A%20athletes%20and%20amateurs%20on%20the%20art%20of%20the%20running%20playlist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fsound-of-speed-athletes-and-amateurs-on-the-art-of-the-running-playlist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sound%20of%20speed%3A%20athletes%20and%20amateurs%20on%20the%20art%20of%20the%20running%20playlist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fsound-of-speed-athletes-and-amateurs-on-the-art-of-the-running-playlist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd577da332dfdf85edf88e4458763089c27d0b07a%2F0_78_2878_1726%2F2878.jpg>
 Sometimes you need stuff that powers you up and gets you thinking … Beyoncé. 
Photograph: Brian Snyder/Reuters 
Unlike many athletes, I don’t listen to music when I’m training or warming up. 
Yes, rhythm is really important. But when I run, I have to feel the patterns of 
what I’m doing without accompanying music – because when you race, you don’t 
have Jay Z pounding out on the track with you.

Running with music: the case for and against
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/the-running-blog/2013/mar/13/running-with-music-for-against>
That said, sometimes I will put my headphones on with no music. I know it 
sounds funny, but it is like a symbol of being in the zone. It’s like: “I need 
my own space here.” Otherwise, you get people saying: “Hey!” That’s fine 99% of 
the time but not when there’s an Olympic medal on the line. Sometimes if I’m 
cold when training in the winter, I’ll also use my headphones as earmuffs!

I’m currently in the final year of a history degree at King’s College, London, 
so when I am writing an essay I will always listen to Classic FM, as its music 
keeps me focused without distracting me – most of the time, there are no words 
to sing along to. I’m going to write my dissertation onjazz in 20th-century 
America 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/03/jazz-festival-rock-jim-marshall-photographer-monterey-newport>
. Until recently, I didn’t listen to much jazz – I chose the topic more because 
of the race relations and interaction with popular culture. But once I started 
getting into it, I realised it’s the foundation for so much else.Interview by 
Sean Ingle <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/seaningle>

 * More uplifting culture for 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/series/uplifting-culture-for-2017>  