
South Korea’s embattled leader, Park Geun-hye 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/park-geun-hye>, will respond “calmly” to the 
outcome of an impeachment motion later this week, political allies have said as 
she again defied calls to step down immediately over acorruption and cronyism 
scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/nov/02/south-korea-explainer-park-guen-hye-six-key-points-scandal-choi-soon-sil>
 that has brought her presidency to the brink of collapse.


Park, who became the country’s first female president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/dec/19/park-geun-hye-south-korea-election>
 in late 2012, appears to be attempting to dictate the terms of her now 
inevitable exit as she braces for Friday’s impeachment vote in parliament.

But her favoured course of action – an April resignation – no longer has the 
support of members of her ruling Saenuri party.

Faced with approval ratings that have dropped to a record low of 4% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/25/choi-gate-south-korean-presidents-approval-rating-tanks-at-4>
 since the scandal broke several weeks ago, Park said on Tuesday that she would 
accept the result of the impeachment vote, but would leave it to the 
constitutional court to decide if the vote was valid.


“Even if the impeachment bill is passed, I am resolved to continue calmly for 
the country and the people, while watching the constitutional court 
procedures,” Park was quoted as saying by the Saenuri parliamentary floor 
leader, Chung Jin-suk.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsouth-korean-president-park-geun-hye-defies-calls-to-quit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F84cf5c4c81a50c46ac001493db7b1a433306e2de%2F0_144_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=South%20Korean%20president%20Park%20Geun-hye%20defies%20calls%20to%20quit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsouth-korean-president-park-geun-hye-defies-calls-to-quit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=South%20Korean%20president%20Park%20Geun-hye%20defies%20calls%20to%20quit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsouth-korean-president-park-geun-hye-defies-calls-to-quit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F84cf5c4c81a50c46ac001493db7b1a433306e2de%2F0_144_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 Protesters call for Park Geun-hye to step down in Seoul. Photograph: 
Rex/Shutterstock 
During their hour-long meeting, Chung said he told Park that public anger had 
forced the ruling Saenuri party to withdraw an earlier proposal for her to step 
down voluntarily in April, with a new president to be elected in June, six 
months ahead of schedule.

Park had indicated that she was willing to accept the now scrapped proposal, 
Chung added.

“We explained that the party’s stance that had called for an April resignation 
and June presidential election has become realistically hard to maintain,” 
Chung said. “She nodded and said she accepted my stance.”

The party’s chairman, Lee Jung-hyun, who also attended the meeting, said it 
seemed that Park was hoping lawmakers would accept her resignation rather than 
push ahead with an attempt to impeach her.


Commentators agreed that Park’s remarks indicated she was not prepared to step 
down voluntarily, even if Friday’s motion was passed. Instead, she would wait 
for the constitutional court’s verdict – a process that could take up to six 
months.


“She will fight really hard to overturn at the constitutional court,” said 
Rhee Jong-hoon, a political commentator at iGM Consulting.

“And if the motion is overturned? She will remain in office until her term is 
finished. Nothing matters after the constitutional court rules against the 
impeachment bill.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsouth-korean-president-park-geun-hye-defies-calls-to-quit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1092caf524bf2ed2785cdf86089febdbb19099f%2F0_184_4500_2699%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=South%20Korean%20president%20Park%20Geun-hye%20defies%20calls%20to%20quit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsouth-korean-president-park-geun-hye-defies-calls-to-quit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=South%20Korean%20president%20Park%20Geun-hye%20defies%20calls%20to%20quit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsouth-korean-president-park-geun-hye-defies-calls-to-quit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1092caf524bf2ed2785cdf86089febdbb19099f%2F0_184_4500_2699%2F4500.jpg>
 A student holds a placard depicting South Korea’s president, Park Geun-hye, as 
a puppet manipulated by Choi Soon-sil. Photograph: Ahn Young-joon/Associated 
Press 
For the impeachment motion to pass by the required two-thirds majority in the 
300-seat national assembly, opposition MPs must all vote in favour and win the 
support of at least 28 ruling party lawmakers.

South Korean media quoted opposition politicians as saying that they had 
secured 35-40 Saenuri votes, but that claim has been disputed.


If the impeachment bill succeeds, Park would be suspended as president but not 
immediately removed. Her duties would be temporarily transferred to the prime 
minister while the court reviews whether her impeachment is constitutionally 
sound.

If six of the court’s nine justices support the impeachment, Park would be 
removed from office and a new presidential election held within 60 days.

On Monday, MPs said the strength of public feeling meant that parliament must 
go ahead with impeachment, irrespective of Park’s determination to hang on 
until April and leave office voluntarily.

“The public’s anger, reflected through candlelight rallies, will not allow the 
president to return to state affairs,” said Park Jie-won of the opposition 
People’s party, according to Yonhap news agency. “Our only option is an 
impeachment.”


Hwang Young-cheul, a member of an anti-Park faction inside the Saenuri party, 
said the idea that the president could step down in April had “already been 
rejected by the people”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsouth-korean-president-park-geun-hye-defies-calls-to-quit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8979ab9e0ae0e627df3e8c4d3e645be9d2d2b58f%2F0_173_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=South%20Korean%20president%20Park%20Geun-hye%20defies%20calls%20to%20quit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsouth-korean-president-park-geun-hye-defies-calls-to-quit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=South%20Korean%20president%20Park%20Geun-hye%20defies%20calls%20to%20quit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsouth-korean-president-park-geun-hye-defies-calls-to-quit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8979ab9e0ae0e627df3e8c4d3e645be9d2d2b58f%2F0_173_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Huge rally of demonstrators protesting against South Korean president Park 
Geun-hye on 26 November in Seoul. Photograph: Woohae Cho/Getty Images 
“All preparations have been made that are necessary to ensure the impeachment 
motion [is] passed,” Hwang said.

Park’s conduct during her single five-year term, which was supposed to run 
until early 2018, has evoked fury across the South Korean political spectrum 
following accusations that she abused her position to help a longtime friend.

Park is accused of colluding with Choi Soon-sil, whom she has known for 
decades, to coerce major South Korean companies such asSamsung 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/samsung> into donating $70m (£55m) to 
two foundations run by Choi.

Choi faces embezzlement charges while Park, who has been named as a formal 
suspect, has denied seeking any personal gain.

As long as she remains president, Park cannot be charged with any criminal 
offence except insurrection or treason, but she would lose that immunity upon 
leaving office.

Choi, the daughter of a Christian cult leader who befriended Park after her 
father, former South Korean dictator Park Chung-hee, was assassinated in 1979, 
is also believed to have meddled in government policy.

Reports said that Choi, a Rasputin-like figure who has never held public 
office and does not have security clearance, influenced Park’s decisions on 
everything from economic policy to the North Korean nuclear threat.

The revelations have sparked massive protests in recent weeks, with organisers 
claiming that as many as 1.5 million people turned out in the capital Seoul 
last weekend to demand Park’s resignation.
 