
Supporters of South Korea’s president Park Geun-hye rallied on Saturday for 
her reinstatement while opponents gathered to repeat their demands thatthe 
leader impeached over a corruption scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/12/half-a-million-south-koreans-celebrate-impeaching-of-president-park-geun-hye>
 step down immediately.

The Park supporters, who last held a major rally in mid-November, began their 
demonstration first. Later, anti-Park protesters packed the streets of central 
Seoul for an eighth straight weekend.

Half a million South Koreans celebrate impeaching of president Park Geun-hye
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/12/half-a-million-south-koreans-celebrate-impeaching-of-president-park-geun-hye>
Many of the opponents were angry Park’s lawyers argued on Friday that the 
impeachment had no legal basis.

“This is my first time out here, but yesterday when I heard about her opinion 
against the impeachment submitted to the constitutional court, whatever pity I 
had felt for her disappeared,” Roh Yi-young, 55, said.

Park’s lawyers struck a defiant note in their first comments since the 
impeachment vote, saying the motion should be overturned by the constitutional 
court, which has 180 days to review it.

The lawyers’ submission to the court rejected all the points made in the 
impeachment motion approved by a wide margin by parliament on 9 December which 
accused her of violating her constitutional duty and breaking the law.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fsouth-koreans-hold-rival-rallies-as-fate-of-president-park-is-decided%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F938e3d830fd9f4dd389c4e0a96c42e20c3eb9070%2F0_141_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=South%20Koreans%20hold%20rival%20rallies%20as%20fate%20of%20president%20Park%20is%20decided&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fsouth-koreans-hold-rival-rallies-as-fate-of-president-park-is-decided%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=South%20Koreans%20hold%20rival%20rallies%20as%20fate%20of%20president%20Park%20is%20decided&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fsouth-koreans-hold-rival-rallies-as-fate-of-president-park-is-decided%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F938e3d830fd9f4dd389c4e0a96c42e20c3eb9070%2F0_141_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 Supporters of South Korea’s president Park Geun-hye hold rally in Seoul. 
Photograph: Yang Ji-Woong/EPA 
Park’s presidential powers have been suspended since the vote for impeachment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/09/south-koreas-parliament-votes-to-impeach-president-park-geun-hye>
, which set the stage for her to become South Korea’s first elected leader to 
be thrown out of office. The constitutional court must first uphold the motion. 
Park, 64, is accused of colluding with long-time friend Choi Soon-sil, who has 
been indicted and is in custody, to pressure big businesses to make 
contributions to non-profit foundations backing presidential initiatives.

Saturday’s pro-Park rally near the court a few blocks from the presidential 
Blue House drew largely older people who said those behind the movement to oust 
her were misguided. “The people who love this country have come out to save the 
country despite the hardship,” Kim Ku-ja, 69, said with the national flag 
draped over her.

What’s so wrong about a woman getting Botox shots?

She blamed the media for fuelling anti-Park sentiment, focusing their coverage 
too much on the views of younger and liberal voters and on criticism that Park 
received cosmetic procedures while in office. “What’s so wrong about a woman 
getting Botox shots? Why is that a problem?” Kim said. Park’s supporters have 
been in the minority in the weeks of protests demanding her removal.

Organisers of Saturday’s anti-Park rally estimated the crowd at about 300,000. 
It was largely peaceful as were the previously rallies, with songs and speeches 
striking a festive tone mixed with angry calls for her to quit.

Park has indicated she would not step down, fuelling concern the political 
crisis could drag on for months. She has denied wrongdoing but apologised for 
carelessness in her ties with Choi. If the impeachment is upheld or Park steps 
down voluntarily, a new election has to be held in 60 days to pick a leader who 
will serve a single five-year term. Park’s term was originally set to end in 
February 2018.
 