
Behold the shopping mall – the built epitome, according to its critics, of the 
mindless, car-bound consumerism of white-bread suburban America. Yet Southdale 
Center, the first fully enclosed, climate-controlled collection of shops from 
which all the 1,100 or so similarly designed malls now standing across the 
United States descend, came from the mind of an anti-car, pro-pedestrian 
European Jewish socialist.


Victor Gruen, a refugee from Nazi-occupied Austria, arrived in America in 1938 
with high architectural aims. He soon launched a career creating New York City 
storefronts for urban businesses, like Ciro’s on Fifth Avenue and Steckler’s on 
Broadway, 14 years into which he received a commission to design something else 
entirely: a shopping centre 10 miles outside Minneapolis.


This job offered Gruen a blank canvas on which to realise his long-imagined 
utopian vision of an indoor city centre that would import the urbanity of his 
native Vienna into his fast-growing adopted homeland. Southdale itself went up 
as he had imagined it – but nothing else went according to plan. By the 1970s, 
Gruen had returned to Austria to live out his days having all-too-clearly 
realised what a suburban monster he’d created.


Though few built environments now seem as prosaic as that of the shopping 
mall, it looked downright radical when Gruen first came up with it. He first 
publicly submitted such a design in 1943, to Architectural Forum magazine’s 
competition “Architecture 194X”, which called upon modern architects to imagine 
the city of the post-war future. Alas Gruen’s entry, with its full enclosure 
and lack of a central square, struck even those forward-thinking editors as a 
bit much, and they sent him back to the drawing board.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F06%2Fsouthdale-center-america-first-shopping-mall-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F5%2F1430839797732%2F3a2d47fe-7b58-46d1-827a-082e64c92cb4-2060x1447.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Southdale%20Center%3A%20America's%20first%20shopping%20mall%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2030&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F06%2Fsouthdale-center-america-first-shopping-mall-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Southdale%20Center%3A%20America%27s%20first%20shopping%20mall%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2030&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F06%2Fsouthdale-center-america-first-shopping-mall-history-cities-50-buildings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F5%2F1430839797732%2F3a2d47fe-7b58-46d1-827a-082e64c92cb4-2060x1447.jpeg>
 ‘The joys of the outside brought inside’ at Southdale. Photograph: Simon.com 
The real postwar America proved far more accommodating to Gruen’s vision than 
the imagined one. The 1952 commission that brought Southdale into the world 
came from the Dayton family, a name synonymous with department stores in 1950s 
Minneapolis. They wanted a shopping centre to complement the new Dayton’s 
location that was planned for the suburb of Edina, a growing town of 15,000 
people located — in line with the concerns of cold war America — just outside 
the blast radius of a nuclear bomb dropped on the city.


You have no idea what an innovation this was in the 1950s
James Lileks 
When it opened in 1956, Southdale connected that new branch of Dayton’s with 
another large department store, the also now-forgotten Donaldson’s, with space 
for more than 70 smaller shops in between. By then, the concept had some 
precedents around America, such as Seattle’s Northgate Mall, which opened in 
1950, Appleton, Wisconsin’s Valley Fair Mall, which opened in 1954, and Gruen’s 
own Northland Mall, which opened outside Detroit that same year.


But where the open-air design of those projects left them exposed to the 
elements, Southdale sealed off the outside environment in order to better 
create its own world within. Gruen liked to call it “introverted”, as opposed 
to the “extroverted” commercial strips — “avenues of horror,” he called them — 
whose proliferation across suburban America he resented. And so Southdale’s 
vast, blank walls turned their backs to the street, enclosing not just all 
those stores, but cafés, public art, pedestrian boulevards and a lush 
courtyard, through whose skylight the sun shone on a fishpond, all manner of 
foliage, and a centrepiece cage filled with songbirds.


James Lileks, a chronicler of Minnesota 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/minnesota> modernism, describes Southdale 
early aesthetic as “the joys of the outside brought inside”. Discussing the 
“outdoor” eatery, complete with superfluous table umbrellas, Lileks says: “You 
have no idea what an innovation this was in the 1950s; there wasn’t any place 
where you could sit ‘outside’ in your shirt-sleeves in January” – least of all 
in a place with as inconvenient a climate as Minnesota’s. Southdale’s 
advertisements promised an “eternal spring”, and its environment delivered.


But the utter controllability of the enclosed shopping mall, a built form that 
would arguably hit its zenith of popularity in California, had to do with much 
more than the climate. It both appealed to Gruen’s top-down design philosophy — 
like any good socialist, he believed in the improvability of man by man — and 
played straight into the fears of middle-class American shoppers. They didn’t 
just want protection from the heat, wind, rain, snow and traffic encountered 
downtown; they also wanted protection from the people encountered there.


Those social concerns ran somewhat at odds with Gruen’s own. He wanted to 
create not just a “gigantic shopping machine”, but a community centre where, 
free from “the terror of the automobile”, Americans could stroll, congregate, 
debate and enjoy the human experience just as Gruen remembered doing in Vienna.


To this end, he designed Southdale not as an isolated structure, but as one 
element of a masterplan including hundreds of hectares of residential, 
commercial, medical, office and mixed-use projects around a lake and public 
park, most of which the developers ignored. Instead, it set the precedent for 
all the colossal boxes surrounded by what Gruen called “land-wasting seas of 
parking” – 1,500 of which appeared across America in the half-century after 
Southdale’s unveiling, all of which benefited from a postwar change in tax law 
which dramatically increased the profitability of such big commercial projects.


Levittown, the prototypical American suburb – a history of cities in 50 
buildings, day 25
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/apr/28/levittown-america-prototypical-suburb-history-cities>
Though Gruen himself would disown and decry the shopping mall, declaring in 
1978 his refusal “to pay alimony for those bastard developments”, many 
Minnesotans, especially the 75,000 who turned out for opening day, loved 
Southdale. Generations of Americans who grew up far from a genuine city centre 
turned to places like Southdale for the closest thing to an urban experience 
they could find.


Hence the pangs of nostalgia that accompany the 21st century’s desertions or 
even demolitions of some of the United States’ enclosed malls. Even suburban 
Americans, no longer captive audiences for ersatz city centres, have not just a 
host of revitalised actual downtowns to choose from, but a new wave of 
high-design, urban-flavoured shopping malls that do away with introversion. 
(Some old enclosed malls, in a bid for the same appeal, have even gone so far 
as to remove their roofs and cut holes in their walls.)


“You should have left downtown downtown,” pronounced architect Frank Lloyd 
Wright in a characteristically grumpy 1956 visit to Southdale. But his comment 
reveals that he didn’t quite grasp his colleague’s intentions. M Jeffrey 
Hardwick titled his biography of Gruen, Mall Maker, but Gruen saw himself as 
more of a city builder, albeit an ultimately frustrated one. Socialists often 
claim that “real socialism”, in a properly supportive context, has never been 
tried. Victor Gruen could claim that neither has the “real” shopping mall.


• Which other buildings in the world tell stories about urban history? Share 
your own pictures and descriptions with GuardianWitness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/mar/23/50-buildings-great-stories-urban-history>
, on Twitter and Instagram using #hoc50 or let us know suggestions in the 
comments below
 