
Southend United will not be counting chickens or even shrimps. They entered 
2016 seventh in League One but fizzled to 14th in May. A Boxing Day win and 
Saturday’s 1-1 draw withCharlton Athletic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/charltonathletic>, both at home, ensured 
sixth place this time and it would have been fifth but for an 89th-minute 
equaliser. Phil Brown, their manager, called it “a great advert for League One 
football and for the club”.

Ten seasons ago they had a one-off campaign in the Championship while Charlton 
were in the Premier League. Brown, now in his fourth full season, got them out 
of League Two at the second attempt. If his success in leading Hull City into 
the top tier for the first time in 2008 may have gone to his head, Roots Hall 
has grounded him. Black overcoat, open-neck white shirt and hair amok define a 
man seemingly comfortable and popular in more modest surroundings.

Football League your thoughts: Bolton's Henry spoils party for Scunthorpe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog/2016/dec/31/football-league-your-thoughts-boltons-henry-spoils-scunthorpe-party>
Their best crowd, 10,329, beat the 8,493 for Wimbledon on Boxing Day and Brown 
was “delighted we performed”. Anton Ferdinand, who joined from Reading in 
August and led the side, said “part of the reason for a very good game and some 
fantastic football was because it was packed to the rafters”. He had not seen 
that before. “Our disappointment at dropping two points means we’re going in 
the right direction,” he added. A 12-match unbeaten run has taken them up the 
table. Before it they were 22nd.

In truth the very good game burst from a cagey first half, more depressing 
than pressing, asSouthend <https://www.theguardian.com/football/southend> in 
particular, in face of Charlton’s careful 4-1-4-1, were often careless in the 
comfort of easy possession. They did score their goal, though, as Simon Cox, 
half the front pair in a 4-4-2 with Marc-Antoine Fortuné, spun in a packed 
penalty area to surprise Dillon Phillips in goal. It bore the stamp of a man 
who bagged two of the three on Boxing Day. And before the interval Anthony 
Wordsworth, on the break, gave Phillips the chance to show his agility.

It was a foretaste of a second half that was as end-to-end as the first had 
been middle-to-middling. By the 70th minute Ted Smith, with tip-over and parry, 
had denied Fredrik Ulvestad and Jorge Teixeira and, sensationally, Morgan Fox 
before Joe Aribo hit the bar to match the post struck by Stephen McLaughlin for 
Southend. Adam Thompson stood firm beside Ferdinand in weathering the storm and 
Michael Timlin’s elegance at left-back repeatedly caught the eye.

From his free-kick to the sparkling substitute Jermaine McGlashan, Southend 
all but closed out the match, Phillips tipping Will Atkinson’s shot for a 
corner, from which Fortuné headed badly wide. In an instant Aribo was crossing 
at the other end and Andrew Crofts, captain and Welsh international, rammed in 
his first ever goal for Charlton in his 30th game.

If this was galling for Southend, Brown did not argue with Smith’s naming as 
man of the match and, up to a point, Charlton’s deserving of something. He is a 
trainee, aged 20, standing or flying in for the injured Mark Oxley, and had 
been sick for several days. “He shouldn’t have played in truth but he stood up 
to it and grew as a man,” said Brown, who has selected a product of the club’s 
academy in each of his 195 games in charge.

The result was also a blessing in the interests of managerial relationships. 
On 22 October Southend won 3-0 at MK Dons, ending Karl Robinson’s six-year epic 
there. This was his eighth match at Charlton, of which one has been won and 
three lost. Another defeat might have been too much for the owner. Roland 
Duchâtelet is on his eighth manager in three years and fourth of 2016. They 
barely have time to find the changing room, let alone lose it.

Famous Belgians used to be the subject of a joke. Infamous ones are no 
laughing matter. In Belgium Duchâtelet founded the Vivant political party. His 
involvement at Charlton might fairly be called Mourant and its continuation 
proclaims more money than sensitivity. At least on New Year’s Eve this foul 
acquaintance could be forgot briefly by the 1,847 faithful who travelled here.

As for Southend, beyond Swindon on Monday they may be filled to the rafters 
again for Sheffield United on Saturday.

Talking points

• Russell Slade was one of Charlton’s five managers in 2016. His 21 games, the 
most of anyone, produced five wins, only six defeats but 10 draws. Coventry 
City have snapped him up as their third manager of the season, following Tony 
Mowbray and Mark Venus. On Saturday, following an opening defeat, he was denied 
victory at high-flying Peterborough by an injury-time equaliser for 1-1. His 
record at Leyton Orient and, to a lesser extent Cardiff City, goes before him 
in credit. He is expected to sign Nathan Clarke, his centre-back captain at 
Orient, but not in time for Bolton’s visit on Monday. Coventry, 23rd inLeague 
One <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> but not out of 
touch, have not been in the fourth tier since 1959.

• Port Vale, under Bruno Ribeiro, made their best home start ever with six 
successive wins. On Boxing Day, after three defeats running and two points out 
of a possible 18, he resigned with Vale in 17th place in League One and no 
further home wins. Michael Brown, already assistant manager, stepped up as 
caretaker and gave them their seventh against Chesterfield. At 39 he is a 
Valiant indeed, still registered as a player, with three matches this season 
and only one yellow card. As his striker Tom Pope said, he will get Vale 
battling again.

• What to do when a proven goalscorer becomes a serial fluffer? Norwich City’s 
Cameron Jerome averages roughly a goal every four games in over 450 
appearances.On Saturday at Brentford he could have had four in one but missed 
the lot. Alex Neil, his manager, said: “I thought Cameron put in a good 
performance but just that final little bit when he needs to hit the target and 
score the goal was crucial for us. Unfortunately he wasn’t able to do that but 
it wasn’t for a lack of effort.” Nor was it for lack of chances. Norwich are 
surely better than eight defeats and two draws in their last 12 matches. 
Rotherham and Wolves come next. Neil deserves them but had better win.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fsouthend-charlton-league-one-roots-hall-phil-brown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F101e5b9599e64f22b9a69f1a152e7f55b9f5746a%2F188_0_2569_1882%2F2569.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Southend%20make%20it%20a%20dozen%20and%20counting%20despite%20Charlton%E2%80%99s%20late%20leveller%20%7C%20Jeremy%20Alexander&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fsouthend-charlton-league-one-roots-hall-phil-brown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Southend%20make%20it%20a%20dozen%20and%20counting%20despite%20Charlton%E2%80%99s%20late%20leveller%20%7C%20Jeremy%20Alexander&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fsouthend-charlton-league-one-roots-hall-phil-brown%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F101e5b9599e64f22b9a69f1a152e7f55b9f5746a%2F188_0_2569_1882%2F2569.jpg>
 Cameron Jerome in action against Brentford. Photograph: 
TGSPhoto/Rex/Shutterstock 
• Exeter City continue to show there is something to be said for sticking 
rather than twisting. They are the latest side to squeeze through the mid-table 
scrum in League Two with four wins and two draws in their last six games 
lifting them from bottom to 11th, five points off the play-offs. Their record 
remains extraordinary, with an eighth away win on Saturday, 4-1 at Newport 
County, and only one at home, in their last match at St James Park against 
Mansfield. On Monday they host Leyton Orient, where they won to start their 
unbeaten run. Orient have a new manager since then, Andy Edwards, their fourth 
in a year. Exeter have Paul Tisdale – in his 11th season.

• Mansfield Town are not League Two’s lowest scorers. They lead Accrington’s 
21 by one. But they were glad to end a drought on Saturday. It had lasted five 
hours 43 minutes, ending when Matt Green scored in the 59th minute against 
Doncaster Rovers, who needed a late penalty for a draw.
 