
At the end of what he described as a terrible year, the South Africa coach, 
Allister Coetzee, has chosen the rawest Springboks side in the professional era 
for Saturday’s Test against Wales rather than rely on experience to secure the 
victory some believe he needs to keep his job.

The back division have a total of 40 caps, a figure reached by five of Wales’s 
backs, with the three-quarters sharing eight. There are three new caps and 
seven changes from the sidewho lost to Italy last Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/italy-beat-south-africa-first-time>
. The front-rowers Tendai Mtawarira and Adriaan Strauss, the South Africa 
captain who is making his final international appearance, have more caps 
between them than their 13 team-mates combined.

Wales will be without Sam Warburton, who suffered a neck injury in training, 
and return Jamie Roberts to the bench, where he is joined by the fit-again No8 
Taulupe Faletau. They will field a starting lineup sharing 812 caps, more than 
three times the 260 of South Africa. The visitors have two survivors from the 
team who took the fieldin the World Cup semi-final against New Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/24/south-africa-new-zealand-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
 13 months ago.

Coetzee has included only one player who is based outside the country – Racing 
92’s Johan Goosen – as he rewards players who have stayed at home. The Toulon 
wing Bryan Habana, who has 124 caps, is among those dropped after the defeat in 
Florence and it may signal the end of his 12-year international career.

“We have picked some exciting youngsters and it is the right time to give them 
Test match exposure,” said Coetzee, who took over from Heyneke Meyer in April. 
“It is time to back them and I do not see the selection as a gamble. It is a 
good team and the right one for the future of South African rugby.

“It has been a terrible, tough year and it is right to try to get something 
out of it by taking this route. The large number of players based overseas is a 
problem for us. Another 50 are leaving at the end of this year and we have to 
back guys at home so players will have a look and say they would rather hang 
around and give themselves another shot at representing the Springboks. The 
policy has not been cast in stone but it will definitely be there in the next 
month or two.”

Four of the backs play for the Lions, who reached this year’s Super Rugby 
final, including the half-backs Elton Jantjies and Faf de Klerk and the 
uncapped inside-centre Rohan Janse van Rensburg, the youngster player in the 
side at 22 and a prolific try scorer at provincial level. Habana’s place has 
been taken by Jamba Ulengo, who will make his first Test appearance aged 26.

“I would not go as far as saying this is the end for Bryan,” Coetzee said. “He 
has not just got a role on the field but a massive one off it for South African 
rugby and he has been mentoring Jamba this week, sharing his knowledge and 
experience. At the beginning of the season, I talked to Bryan about the role I 
wanted him to play and now we have to review that.

“This season has been the lowest of the lows and the only way is up. On 
Monday, players were hurting following the loss to Italy and it was very 
morbid. We had the day off to get on with psychological repair and I could see 
in training the next day we had moved on.

“We are seeking revival, not redemption and I want the guys to play without 
fear against Wales and enjoy it. I think there was a fear of failure against 
Italy which showed itself in overthinking but there is a different mindset this 
week.”

Wales have won two of their three matches this month but their management team 
have come under pressure after last Saturday’slate and narrow victory over Japan
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/wales-japan-autumn-internationals-match-report>
. They have chosenthe team who defeated Argentina the week before 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/12/wales-argentina-autumn-internationals-match-report>
 apart from at blindside flanker, where Dan Lydiate replaces Warburton.

“We beat Japan but the performance and expectation of the players and coaches 
came up short,” said Rob Howley, Wales’s interim head coach. “We are going out 
to play: that is the modern game. We have the players to do it and, after 
hurting ourselves against Japan, it is a matter of being sensible.”

South Africa team v Wales

Principality Stadium, Cardiff, 5.30pm Saturday J Goosen; R Combrinck, F 
Venter, R Janse van Rensburg, J Ulengo; E Jantjies, F de Klerk; T Mtawarira, A 
Strauss (capt), L Adriaanse, PS du Toit, L de Jager, N Carr, U Cassiem, W 
Whiteley.Replacements M Marx, S Kitshoff, T Nyakane, F Mostert, J-L du Preez, P 
van Zyl, P Lambie, L Mapoe.
 