
The Spanish judiciary is being systematically politicised in an attempt to 
suppress the Catalan government’s plan to hold a binding referendum next year 
on independence, the Catalan foreign minister, Raül Romeva, has said.

On Wednesday Spain’s constitutional court suspended two resolutions passed by 
the Catalan parliament in October that were intended to pave the way for a vote 
on independence in September 2017.

The pro-sovereignty speaker of the Catalan parliament, Carme Forcadell, is due 
to appear before Catalonia’s supreme court on Friday to answer charges that she 
exceeded her authority by authorising a debate on the roadmap for independence 
in the chamber last July.

In a blunt ruling, the court told Forcadell and the Catalan president, Carles 
Puigdemont, that they had a duty to “stop or paralyse” any attempts to 
circumvent the suspension or face the consequences, “including at a penal 
level”.

Separatist movement in Catalonia steps up battle with Madrid
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/27/catalonia-independence-spain-democratic-mandate>
Speaking to the Guardian, Romeva said: “The judicial system is being 
politicised more and more day by day.” He said the perversion of the Spanish 
constitution should concern all supporters of free speech and constitutional 
law throughoutEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.

“[Forcadell] is being prosecuted simply for permitting a legislature to have a 
debate. All Forcadell has done is to permit a debate that the majority of 72 
MPs in the Catalan parliament asked her to do.”

Romeva said the constitutional court was not a genuine judicial body since its 
judges were nominated by political parties, and its president was a former 
member of Spain’s ruling People’s party.


“Put together, it shows there is a really worrying lack of separation of 
powers between the politicians and the judiciary inSpain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/spain>,” he said. “The demand for 
independence is political, so let us talk about this politically, not 
judicially. Judicialising politics is not the answer, and will not produce a 
solution. It will only make the conflict worse and worse.”

Thousands of Catalan separatists protest against government's legal challenges
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/13/thousands-catalan-separatists-protest-against-governments-legal-challenges>
Romeva vowed that Catalans would not be deprived of their vote, saying the 
referendum would go ahead with or without the approval of the government in 
Madrid.

“The choice is referendum or referendum. Obviously we would prefer the vote to 
take place with the co-operation of the Spanish government, as happened with 
Scottish independence, but if that is not possible the referendum will happen 
and will be binding on the Catalan people,” he said.

“If the Spanish government agreed, we could negotiate the question, the date, 
the franchise and the quorum. An agreement is preferable because issues such as 
what to do about Spanish debt could be negotiated.”

He added: “If that is not possible, the Catalan government has the clear 
mandate from the elections in September 2015 to hold the referendum anyway. If 
necessary we will make the law to make it legal and binding. We are completely 
committed to this referendum being fair, with all options discussed fairly by 
international standards. One way or other we are going to have this vote.”

According to a poll in November 
<http://www.elmundo.es/cataluna/2016/11/18/582ed93446163ff8698b467f.html>, the 
pro-independence movement would narrowly lose a referendum, with 45.1% of 
Catalans opposing the movement and 44.9% supporting it. The Spanish prime 
minister, Mariano Rajoy, has consistently opposed any move to bring about 
Catalan independence, insisting Spain’s unity is not up for discussion.


“Polls, we know, are not a crystal ball,” Romeva said. “We need to put it to 
the people. They want it settled and they are tired of the debate.”

In Britain, an all-party motion in the Commons is gathering support from MPs 
including the Green party co-leader Caroline Lucas condemning the prosecution 
of Forcadell.
 