
Spain’s Socialist party may have lost two general elections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/26/spanish-elections-exit-polls-show-deadlock-likely-to-continue>
 in the space of six months,ousted their leader 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/02/spanish-socialist-leader-quits-pedro-sanchez-psoe>
 and found themselveseclipsed by the anti-austerity Podemos party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/26/spains-regional-elections-boost-rajoy-but-political-deadlock-unlikely-to-end>
, but the past 12 months have not been without at least one small victory.


On Thursday, the Spanish Socialist party (PSOE) announced that staff at its 
Madrid headquarters had won a share of the country’s €2.3bn (£1.96bn) Christmas 
lottery, El Gordo (the Fat One).

“Happy that many workers have got lucky with the Christmas lottery,” the party 
said in a tweet <https://twitter.com/PSOE/status/811898773366538240>, adding, 
with a degree of understatement: “A great end to a difficult year.”

The fillip, however, is likely to be short-lived as the party is still reeling 
from its worst elections results in four decades and remains without a leader 
following theremoval of Pedro Sánchez two months ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/01/pedro-sanchez-resigns-as-leader-of-spains-socialist-party>
.

The 2016 El Gordo comes at the end of the most tumultuous year in Spanish 
politics since the transition to democracy following Francisco Franco’s death 
in 1975.

Two inconclusive general elections left the country without a government for 
10 months until the end of October, when Mariano Rajoy, leader of the 
conservative People’s party,managed to form a minority government thanks to an 
abstention by a deeply divided PSOE 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/31/mariono-rajoy-to-be-sworn-in-as-spains-prime-minister>
.

The Christmas lottery has once again proved a welcome distraction from 
political skirmishes and Spain’s slow recovery from the economic crisis of 
2008. Madrid proved the big winner of this year’s El Gordo as all the tickets 
bearing thefirst prize number of 66513 
<https://twitter.com/loterianavidad_/status/811890326923251712> were sold in 
the capital’s Acacias neighbourhood.

The winning number was sold at a lottery shop that was taken over by its new 
owner just four months ago. The outlet is on Paseo de la Esperanza – or Hope 
Street.

The five lucky digits appeared on 1,650 tickets, yielding each holder of a 
décimo – or 10th share – €400,000.

El Gordo, which dates back to 1812, offers more total prize money than any 
other lottery. According to organisers, ticket sales this year rose to €2.6bn – 
up 3.5% on 2015.
 