
Spain's top court has rejected seven appeals against oil exploration in the 
waters around the Canary Islands.

In 2012, Madrid restored a decade-old permit to prospect for oil off the coast 
of Fuerteventura and Lanzarote, but it was then put on hold following 
challenges on environmental grounds.

On Tuesday, the supreme court threw out the appeals 
<http://www.poderjudicial.es/cgpj/es/Poder_Judicial/Noticias_Judiciales/El_TS_desestima_los_recursos_contra_los_permisos_a_las_prospecciones_petroliferas_en_las_Islas_Canarias>
, paving the way for Spanish energy company Repsol to move forward with its 
exploration plans,which have drawn an angry response from islanders concerned 
at the impact on tourism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/14/ibiza-oil-prospectors-protests-balearic-islands>
.

Environmentalists criticised the court's decision. Ricardo Aguilar, the 
research director of Oceana inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, who was an expert witness 
during the case, said: "It is a disgrace how the government is handing out 
exploitation permits that benefit just a few people, while putting the rest of 
Spain in danger of losing countless essential and extremely fragile habitats."

He added: "The Canary Islands' deep-sea ecosystems are unique and they sustain 
species that are vital for the tourism and fisheries in the area. It is 
irresponsible to destroy these habitats in a few years to facilitate the 
extraction of a finite and highly polluting energy resource."

Julio Barea, responsible for Greenpeace Spain's campaign against oil 
exploration in the country, said: "Now we know who defends Repsol while the 
environment is not defended by the ministry for justice. Unfortunately, 
accidents have shown that there is no safe way to drill for oil in deep waters 
and fisheries and tourism in the Canary islands will pay the consequences of 
this suicidal policy of the government."


Oceana said it had documented 82 protected marine species during an expedition 
it conducted in the oil blocs.


Repsol has said exploration could start in the third quarter of this year with 
commercial drilling potentially taking place in 2019,Reuters reported 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2014/06/24/spain-canaryislands-drilling-idUSL6N0P534Y20140624>
.


Separately, the Scottish company Cairn Energy has licences for oil exploration 
in the Gulf of Valencia, off the coast of Ibiza, where local politicians, 
business figures and environmentalistshave united to oppose the plans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/14/ibiza-oil-prospectors-protests-balearic-islands>
.
 