
The downstairs space at Soho theatre in London normally plays host to comedy 
gigs, but a few months ago it hosted a very different kind of standup night. 
Ordinary people stood up to be counted with brief speeches in which they spoke 
passionately about something important to them that they believed should be 
important to all of us.

The Truth to Power Cafe <http://www.londonartistsprojects.co.uk/> was the 
brainchild of producerJeremy Goldstein 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2008/apr/07/foreditors10>. It 
will be back next year, touring venues around east and south-east London, 
beginning at Hackney’s Arcola theatre in mid-January, drawing participants from 
those local communities. It is theatre at its simplest and most direct, using 
the shared space as a forum in which people can speak out.

Playwrights have traditionally used the stage to speak to government and those 
in authority, sometimes with consequences to themselves. Nobody taking part in 
the Truth to Power Cafe will risk losing their head (or indeed an Arts Council 
grant), but Goldstein believes that speaking out has a value, quotingGeorge 
Orwell <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/may/10/1984-george-orwell>’s 
assertion that in times of “universal deceit, telling the truth is a 
revolutionary act”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Ftruth-to-power-cafe-soho-theatre-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fabb1f06e3d99a0c2ba241cc24603426bc4ad0324%2F0_0_4965_3508%2F4965.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Speaking%20truth%20to%20power%3A%20the%20revolutionary%20potential%20of%20theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Ftruth-to-power-cafe-soho-theatre-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Speaking%20truth%20to%20power%3A%20the%20revolutionary%20potential%20of%20theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Ftruth-to-power-cafe-soho-theatre-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fabb1f06e3d99a0c2ba241cc24603426bc4ad0324%2F0_0_4965_3508%2F4965.jpg>
 Unexpectedly charged … Jeremy Goldstein’s Truth to Power Cafe. Photograph: 
Holly Revell 
These brief speeches may be potentially revolutionary but they are also 
surprisingly theatrical. You would have thought turning the theatre into a 
soapbox would be a slightly dry affair. On the contrary, the space becomes 
unexpectedly charged and these interventions belie the belief after the Brexit 
vote that we don’t accept the word of experts any more. We do here, because 
these people are all experts in their own lives.

At Soho, the fashion designer Clare Farrell 
<http://www.theecologist.org/green_green_living/clothing/1386795/claire_farrell_theres_no_reason_for_primark_to_ever_go_on_the_cover_of_a_magazine.html>
 talked about textiles and sustainability, pointing out that the textile 
industry is the second most polluting industry on earth after the oil industry, 
and asking us to think about the clothes we buy. Lois Keidan of theLive Art 
Development Agency <http://www.thisisliveart.co.uk/> was short, sharp and funny 
when talking about the undue influence thatmen in suits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/29/women-in-burkinis-and-men-in-suits>
 have on us.

But it is often the most personal stories that are the most potent. A student 
spoke unguardedly about her experience with depression and antidepressants, and 
an actor talked about her personal experience of sexual assault, using truth to 
seize back the power from those who hurt her physically and emotionally. 
“Forgiving is not about saying what they did is OK, but is about setting myself 
free.”

It was as moving as any play, and because everyone involved spoke unedited and 
retained control over what they said – unlike in verbatim theatre – it felt 
entirely authentic.

Over the four days it was at Soho, 24 people aged 16 to 60 got a chance to 
take to the stage and make their voices heard, speaking truth to many different 
kinds of power as represented by parents, landlords, bankers and politicians. 
Next year’s tour is looking for around 100 participants, so if you live near 
the Arcola,the Albany 
<http://www.thealbany.org.uk/event_detail/1940/Theatre/Truth-to-the-Power-Cafe>,
the Yard <http://www.theyardtheatre.co.uk/event/the-truth-to-power-cafe-2017/>, 
Rich Mix 
<https://www.richmix.org.uk/events/spoken-word/truth-power-caf%C3%A9-2017>, 
Hackney Empire or Arts Admin in London, this is a chance to have your say. Take 
it.
 