
Jason Pierce is the man who makes Marcel Marceau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/marcelmarceau> seem positively gobby. You’d 
get more anecdotes out of a house brick, they told us as we left the humid fug 
of the capital for the crisp sunshine and sweet air of a farm on the borders of 
three counties.


We’re driven to a rambling farmhouse with roses climbing up the walls and 
poppies nodding in the garden. There are lush meadows and fields of ripening 
wheat alongside the road. The sun is hot and high and there are skylarks 
overhead. Shit, another day in paradise.

Crikey, Spiritualized 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/apr/12/spiritualized-sweet-heart-review>
 appear to be “getting it together in the country, man”. Previously this was 
the practice of only the fartiest old aristocrats of rock. Talking of which, 
blow us if it isn’t the one-time hairy boffin frontman of the Enid, Robert John 
Godfrey, now transformed into a skinhead in camouflage gear, who’s stirring 
this evening’s macaroni cheese supper in a cauldron on the stove. This place is 
his domain, currently rented out to Come September, a young band who live here 
all year round. Spiritualized have ejected them from the studio for a week to 
continue work on their debut album.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F18%2Fspiritualizeds-jason-pierce-we-want-to-induce-strong-reactions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91d98c93a794b85236973983f8bea6f76651e5a5%2F0_319_5432_3261%2F5432.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Spiritualized's%20Jason%20Pierce%3A%20'We%20want%20to%20induce%20strong%20reactions'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F18%2Fspiritualizeds-jason-pierce-we-want-to-induce-strong-reactions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Spiritualized%27s%20Jason%20Pierce%3A%20%27We%20want%20to%20induce%20strong%20reactions%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F18%2Fspiritualizeds-jason-pierce-we-want-to-induce-strong-reactions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91d98c93a794b85236973983f8bea6f76651e5a5%2F0_319_5432_3261%2F5432.jpg>
 The 1991 lineup of Spiritualized – including Jason Pierce, second from right, 
and Kate Radley, far right. Photograph: Martyn Goodacre/Getty Images 
We wander into a cornfield to take some pictures. Jason, Kate, Marc, John and 
Will dutifully scramble up a haystack without a single tut or murmur of 
dissent. There’s not so much an air of resignation about as a yielding to the 
greater good of the cause.Spiritualized 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/spiritualized>, you see, are scrupulously 
reluctant players of this pop promotion game. They don’t frolic in the shots, 
there’s no banter between them. Jason’s silence appears to be ruling their mood.

Oh no, hang on, Kate’s gonna say something: “Don’t drop your fag, Jase.”

Her concern for the country code is the only unbidden utterance any of them 
make in front of us all day.

“Spiritualized” means to be infused with the spiritual, to be filled with the 
intangible or to be consumed by religious fire. We sit and survey five people 
who are almost certainly not alight with religious fire or scrabbling to 
articulate their souls. Not in front of a brace of hacks anyhow. But in the 
music they come close.

Jason’s not very good at words. They tend to be the weakest part of his songs 
and have to be coaxed from him all afternoon. He’s not about to give anything 
away, but we don’t believe it’s because he has nothing to give. Jason’s father 
is, we’ve been told, a deeply religious man, a proselytiser. Perhaps that’s why 
Jason keeps flirting with religious imagery, playing with the fire of faith.

Whether he mistrusts it or wants to grasp the flame he won’t say, but finding 
it – and perhaps controlling it – seems important to him.

“If there’s a rush to be got from a church or a religion, hopefully you can 
get it off our music,” he says. He can’t name it, but he can point his guitar 
at the sky and invite it to come on down, suck it into his music. Saved. 
Spiritualized.

Neither will he agree that Feel So Sad, the recent epic 13-minute single, has 
the air of a negro spiritual – a song of pain designed to strengthen resolve 
and invoke peace. But he admits to listening to a lot of gospel music and 
states that the song isn’t depressing, that he feels it is uplifting.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQ_fYvWhANtY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQ_fYvWhANtY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQ_fYvWhANtY&media=>
We tell him about a friend who was feeling a little low when he saw the band 
play recently at the ICA in London. He phoned us up afterwards and sobbed, 
“They sucked the lifeblood out of me. They were a black hole.”

There’s disbelieving laughter. “We want to induce strong reactions,” says 
Jason. “I’d hate to be going through the motions of some kind of well-rehearsed 
show. We all get off on the sound. I feel that kind of high.” He’s being 
evasive. Not deliberately, probably just instinctively keeping us off the 
personal stuff by answering all our questions in terms of the music, the tour 
and the band. Having refuted our enquiries about religion, we ask if there’s a 
message, an ultimate goal.

“No,” he says. Then he allows: “We’re still experimenting at the moment. 
Trying to find our way, find out what we’re doing. On the album there’s all 
kinds of different emotion, well musically anyway.”

Is it passionate music? There’s eager nodding all round. But you’ve got a 
reputation for inducing your audience to sit down at gigs.

“We get off on playing the music.” Jason actually said that! He did! Will 
senses that we’re about to cackle. “We walk it like we talk it.”

Jason tells us he’s started standing up on stage. Phew! And a colleague 
reports that he witnessed Jason cry during a recent show. This is a start. 
Perhaps crowds falling to their knees with delirious joy or rushing the stage 
to touch the hem of his garment would be a more appropriate reaction to the 
music they’re making. For it’s becoming alarmingly close to their intent. Feel 
So Sad had a proud majesty.

Spiritualized’s new single Run, by total contrast, is a top-down, 
hit-the-highway chugger with a melancholy flavour. Jason said all he wanted to 
say with the melody and had to turn to an oldJJ Cale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/jul/27/jj-cale-singer-songwriter-dies> 
song for the lyric. Words failing him again.

Will: “Lazy bones meets lazy bones!”

Jason: “There aren’t countless numbers of things that happen to us each day 
that we think, ‘Shit, I gotta write a song about that.’”

Later, they let us hear some work in progress. One song, Smile, is amazing. 
Our eyebrows rear up and stay up for the duration. It’s a bold, confident, 
ambitious track. We wonder if it’s named after the famous abandoned Beach Boys 
album (Jason’s a big Boys fans, we hear), such is its scope. The lyric’s 
rocking simplicity provides a sassy counterpoint to the track’s grandeur; if 
they continue to improve at this rate, Spiritualized will be hanging out in the 
grottos of Olympus before long. This beats the crap out of anything Spacemen 3 
recorded.


“It’s not like we’re trying to become more accessible. That wasn’t the motive. 
A lot that went down with Spacemen didn’t make it to the final mixes, kind of 
got lost in the production. In a way, Hypnotised was the start of the 
Spiritualized sound. In hindsight, when it was recorded I thought, yeah, here’s 
something I want to explore more.”

You still refer to yourself as J Spaceman on the record sleeves. “I didn’t 
want people to think that Spiritualized happened because I was dissatisfied 
with Spacemen 3.”

Also on the sleeve of the first single is a dedication: “For Kate”. Kate is 
Jason’s lover. She used to play the clarinet in youth orchestras, now she’s 
playing keyboards in the band. Anyone snide enough to mutter “Linda McCartney” 
at this point should maybe consider what the rest of the band contribute.

We get the impression from the way they all leave the talking to Jason, from 
their reluctance to express an opinion in front of him and us, even when 
directly questioned, and from some of his statements, that Spiritualized is 
very much Jason’s show. Even though he asserts that the group is more of a 
unit, he doesn’t exactly lavish credit on the others.

Almost his first words of the afternoon are: “I know how everything should 
sound. But obviously everybody does their bit. It’s kinda nice having an 
original idea and letting it get out of my control.”

The blank faces of the others are strangely expressive on this one. 
Acquaintances of his to whom we’ve spoken have described Jason variously as 
“cute”, “charismatic”, “a quiet dictator”, “fiercely competitive” and “a cheat 
at Scalextric”. We hear he can be a merciless tease when he’s been at the vodka 
and can ride roughshod over others’ work. How must it feel to have your “bit” 
described as merely Jason letting it get out of his control?

This is the kind of intra-band angst that is either oxygen or poison to great 
music. In Spacemen 3 it was fatal. In Spiritualized it seems to be stimulating 
and working well for the time being. There’s a curious balance about this 
silent tension. We say Spiritualized are four ids and a super-ego.

The sun setting finally ends our conversation and Jason invites us in to hear 
what they’ve been working on. This would appear to be the important part of the 
interview for him. This is what he really has to say. He is visibly more 
relaxed.

Pleased that we liked what we heard – the excellent Smile and a song called 
Angel’s Sigh – he’s actually quite chatty in the car when he gives us a lift to 
the station. We talk a bit about the messy divorce of Spacemen 3, the press’s 
treatment of which still rankles with him. This leads us to ask about the 
relationships within the band. Is it uncomfortable being in a band with someone 
he loves?

“When you’re in a band you’re going out with them all anyway.”

Make of that statement what you will, thrill seekers.

© Jim Arundel, Sally Margaret Joy, 1991
 