
Sports Direct has been relegated from the FTSE 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ftse> 100 following a torrid three months 
in which £1.6bn has been wiped from the retailer’s value after a Guardian 
investigation into working conditions and a slump in trading at its stores.

The group’s share price is now down more than 40% since the start of December 
and the retailer’s demotion from the premier league of UK listed companies was 
on Tuesday characterised as an example of the punishment investors can mete out 
to large companies that appear not to treat their workers fairly.

Frances O’Grady, the general secretary of the TUC, said: “This should be a 
cautionary tale for companies who treat their workers badly. The reputational 
and financial damage Sports Direct has suffered is of its own making.


“Subjecting staff to workhouse conditions is not the way to build a successful 
business. Shareholders must demand root and branch changes or Sports Direct’s 
name will continue to be dragged through the mud.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fsport-direct-falls-out-of-ftse-100-guardian-investigation-share-price-working-conditions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71731f6960e0e74dd93477010f15caed5c501f97%2F0_386_1240_744%2F1240.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sports%20Direct%20falls%20out%20of%20FTSE%20100%20following%20Guardian%20investigation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fsport-direct-falls-out-of-ftse-100-guardian-investigation-share-price-working-conditions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sports%20Direct%20falls%20out%20of%20FTSE%20100%20following%20Guardian%20investigation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fsport-direct-falls-out-of-ftse-100-guardian-investigation-share-price-working-conditions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71731f6960e0e74dd93477010f15caed5c501f97%2F0_386_1240_744%2F1240.jpg>
 The Guardian’s front-page story on 15 December 2015. Photograph: The Guardian 
Chuka Umunna, the former shadow business secretary who triggered a 
parliamentary debate on the retailer following the Guardian’s revelations, 
said: “What this illustrates is that good business is good business and vice 
versa. So if you’re going to be seen to be pursuing a business model that 
customers do not approve of there will be an impact on how the company is 
viewed and valued.

“Investors and customers are not only looking for good value. Increasingly 
they are looking for good values in a company.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fsport-direct-falls-out-of-ftse-100-guardian-investigation-share-price-working-conditions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb70fbc4861ab5c7040a1b27ba4386fb51238616e%2F12_58_1204_723%2F1204.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sports%20Direct%20falls%20out%20of%20FTSE%20100%20following%20Guardian%20investigation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fsport-direct-falls-out-of-ftse-100-guardian-investigation-share-price-working-conditions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sports%20Direct%20falls%20out%20of%20FTSE%20100%20following%20Guardian%20investigation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fsport-direct-falls-out-of-ftse-100-guardian-investigation-share-price-working-conditions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb70fbc4861ab5c7040a1b27ba4386fb51238616e%2F12_58_1204_723%2F1204.jpg>
 The Guardian’s front page on 10 December 2015. Photograph: The Guardian 
In December, a Guardian investigation revealed how thousands of temporary 
Sports Direct warehouse workers were receiving hourly rates effectivelybelow 
the minimum wage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/how-sports-direct-effectively-pays-below-minimum-wage-pay>
.

Undercover reporters employed inside the retailer’s warehouse in Shirebrook, 
Derbyshire, found howthousands of workers were subjected to an extraordinary 
regime of searches and surveillance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/sports-direct-warehouse-work-conditions>
, while localprimary schoolteachers also told the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/sports-direct-staff-shirebrook-strikes-policy-sick-leave>
 that pupils could remain in school while ill – and return home to empty houses 
– as parents working at the depot were too frightened to take time off work.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fsport-direct-falls-out-of-ftse-100-guardian-investigation-share-price-working-conditions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd82f699e8b7951b9349c4e14b272f0c58d6b0a7c%2F0_390_1240_744%2F1240.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sports%20Direct%20falls%20out%20of%20FTSE%20100%20following%20Guardian%20investigation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fsport-direct-falls-out-of-ftse-100-guardian-investigation-share-price-working-conditions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sports%20Direct%20falls%20out%20of%20FTSE%20100%20following%20Guardian%20investigation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fsport-direct-falls-out-of-ftse-100-guardian-investigation-share-price-working-conditions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd82f699e8b7951b9349c4e14b272f0c58d6b0a7c%2F0_390_1240_744%2F1240.jpg>
 The Guardian, 11 December 2015. Photograph: The Guardian 
The disclosures prompted the Institute of Directors to brand the company a 
“scar on British business” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/10/sports-direct-share-price-falls-following-guardian-working-practices-revelations>
 and Umunna to file an urgent parliamentary question, which resulted in the
business minister Nick Boles being summoned to the Commons to answer questions 
on the scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/14/sports-direct-crisis-grows-as-mps-and-investors-question-business>
. During the debate, a succession of MPs called for HM Revenue & Customs to 
investigate if the company had breached minimum wage legislation.

Sports Direct responded by announcing a pay rise for its staff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/31/sports-direct-pledges-10m-towards-staff-pay-rise>
, as well as a review of all agency staff terms and conditions, which was to be 
overseen personally by its billionaire founder,Mike Ashley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/mike-ashley>. 

In January the retailer shocked the stock market with a warning that annual 
profits would be £40m lower than expected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/08/sports-direct-issues-profit-warning-poor-christmas-sales>
, which caused the value of the company to slump by almost half a billion 
pounds.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fsport-direct-falls-out-of-ftse-100-guardian-investigation-share-price-working-conditions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5922189e41dcafc2c89669ea8f48ed71ea36b6a%2F0_157_1240_744%2F1240.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sports%20Direct%20falls%20out%20of%20FTSE%20100%20following%20Guardian%20investigation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fsport-direct-falls-out-of-ftse-100-guardian-investigation-share-price-working-conditions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sports%20Direct%20falls%20out%20of%20FTSE%20100%20following%20Guardian%20investigation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fsport-direct-falls-out-of-ftse-100-guardian-investigation-share-price-working-conditions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5922189e41dcafc2c89669ea8f48ed71ea36b6a%2F0_157_1240_744%2F1240.jpg>
 The Guardian report on 9 January 2016. Photograph: The Guardian 
When asked if it had launched any official investigation of Sports Direct, an 
HMRC spokesperson said: “While we don’t discuss individual cases, we always 
investigate businesses where we believe the national minimum wage is not being 
paid. We act on information from a range of sources, including workers, third 
parties or from our own proactive intelligence work.”

The retailer has denied that it has failed to pay the minimum wage, while 
Ashley’s review into the treatment of his own workforce is not expected to 
report for several weeks. In the meantime, local MPs are to visit the company’s 
warehouse on 21 March, an invitation the tycoon also extended to members of 
parliament’s business, innovation and skills select committee.

A spokesman for the committee said there were no plans for its members to 
visit Shirebrook, and that it was in correspondence with Ashley regarding a 
future appearance before the committee.

The quarterly review of the constituents of London Stock Exchange’s main 
indices will take place on Wednesday and is expected, formally, to relegate 
Sports Direct from the UK’s 100 most valuable listed firms.

The reshuffle is based on the value of companies following the market’s close 
on Tuesday, at which point the retailer was ranked 142nd on the LSE’s main 
market.

Ashley Hamilton Claxton, the corporate governance manager at Sports Direct 
shareholder Royal London Asset Management, said: “It is hardly surprising that 
Sports Direct has fallen out of the FTSE 100. Over the long term, shareholder 
value is intrinsically linked to corporate governance and companies ignore this 
at their peril. The long list of corporate governance failings at Sports Direct 
is a contributing factor in its fall from the FTSE 100 in our view.”

Sports Direct shareholders have long complained about the weak governance at 
the retailer, which they feel is effectively run like a private company by the 
founder, who still owns 55% of the shares.

Their complaints include the lack of strong independent directors to challenge 
Ashley, his unorthodox tactic of using Sports Direct funds to take stakes in 
other retailers and efforts by the company to award further shares to the 
billionaire in return for the company hitting financial targets.

Crispin Odey, a City hedge fund manager and Sports Direct shareholder who once 
called Ashley a “genius”, publicly revised his view in December, describing him 
as “difficult to house train” and characterising his authority over the 
retailer’s other directors as “dangerous”.

Since the Guardian started publishing the results of its investigation on 9 
December, when Sports Direct shares opened at 684p, the shares have lost 274p 
each to close at 410.3p.

The share price slump, which coincided with two negative statements about how 
the stores were trading and concerns that rival JD Sports is stocking superior 
products, has personally cost Ashley about £900m of his paper fortune during 
that time.
 