
Sports Direct has dramatically backed down from its legal battle with Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> football club and abandoned 
efforts to prevent disclosure of the pair’s joint venture, which has made the 
Old Firm club about 4p from every pound spent in its Ibrox store.

An interim gagging order was imposed last summer, blocking Rangers from 
publicly revealing details of its agreement with the retailer, which contains 
swingeing clauses and was already subject to commercial confidentiality 
agreements. By continuing with efforts to extend the order, Sports Direct’s 
founder,Mike Ashley <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/mike-ashley>, who owns 
55% of the nationwide chain and about 9% of Rangers, faced being called to the 
high court to give evidence.

In agreeing to Sports Direct’s request to abandon its case, the high court 
judge Mr Justice Peter Smith said he was keen to curtail “this ridiculous piece 
of litigation”. He also allowed Rangers to discuss parts of the confidential 
agreements that are already in the public domain or in order to correct 
inaccurate statements made by Sports Direct.

 Sports Direct had already lost legal moves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/19/judge-criticises-sports-direct-in-rangers-legal-case>
 to have the Rangers chairman, Dave King, found guilty of contempt of court and 
sent to prison forallegedly breaching the order 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/10/court-rejects-mike-ashley-rangers-chairman-dave-king>
, resulting in the retailer’s business tactics being criticised by Smith.

 The retreat by Sports Direct comes after the Scottish club’s supporters 
demanded that the retail deal was renegotiated, arguing that it is heavily 
weighted in favour of the FTSE 100 company.

A Guardian analysis of the Rangers accounts suggests that the club’s joint 
venture with Sports Direct, Rangers Retail Ltd, has paid the Scottish 
championship team dividends of about £559,000 since the deal came into effect 
almost four years ago. During that time, the Rangers store has taken more than 
£13m through its tills from fans, while a previous retail deal with JJB Sports 
saw the club receive aninitial payment of £18m 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-scotland-glasgow-west-17063863>, with a 
guaranteed minimum annual royalty of £3m.

 Over the same four-year period, the accounts also suggest that Sports Direct 
was paid three times Rangers’ dividends, totalling about £1.8m. On top of those 
payments, it has also earned hundreds of thousands of pounds from the joint 
venture for providing retailing services. Despite the difference in the amounts 
received by each party, Rangers owns 51% of Rangers Retail, while Sports Direct 
holds the remaining 49%.

 The agreements between the pair also include:

 * A seven-year notice period to break the contract

 * A confidentiality agreement that binds Rangers but not Sports Direct 
 * Obligations for Rangers Retail to buy stock at a “higher cost than its 
retail value” 
 * A clause allowing Sports Direct to force Rangers out of its shareholding in 
Rangers Retail if the relationship between the club and the retailer is 
“deadlocked”

 * A further clause that forced the football club to pay Sports Direct 
£620,000 for closing down two former Rangers stores in Glasgow and Belfast 
 * Zero upfront payment to Rangers for awarding the retail deal to Sports 
Direct in 2012 
 * A controlling vote for Sports Direct on “financial matters” concerning 
Rangers Retail 
For 11 months of last year, Rangers lost control of Rangers Retail after the 
club handed over 26% of the subsidiary’s shares to Sports Direct as security 
for a loan. During the time Rangers had a minority interest, the accounts show 
a £300,000 dividend paid to the football club, which suggests that Sports 
Direct received £900,000. The club now holds 51% of Rangers Retail again after 
repaying the £5m debt.

The seemingly one-sided nature of the deal between the sporting brands has 
contributed to the evaporation of a functional working relationship between 
Ashley and King, whoowns about 15% of Rangers 
<http://www.rangersinternationalfootballclub.com/share-information>.

In January, Sports Direct was accused by a high court judge of abusing the 
legal system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/22/judge-attacks-mike-ashley-for-abusing-legal-system-against-rangers-boss>
 to “intimidate” the Rangers chairman and pursue a vendetta against Ashley’s 
rival.

Sports Direct claimed that Rangers breached the terms of a confidentiality 
agreement between the retailer and the football club, as well as the court 
gagging order, and attempted to have King sent to prison.

Smith, who cleared King of contempt, said: “From start to finish, [the request 
to imprison King] was designed to intimidate rather than seek a proper sanction 
for an alleged breach. It was a muscular tactic using the threat of committal 
that the court should deplore.”

Sports Direct did not comment on the retail deal with Rangers or the outcome 
of its legal case on Wednesday.

Ryan Mowat, a partner at Rangers’ law firm Kingsley Napley, said: “Rangers are 
pleased that Sports Direct have today discontinued their claim for a permanent 
injunction ... Fortunately, the judge has been alive to the ‘game playing’ of 
Sports Direct, which has helped to expose the case for what it is.”

The methods employed by Sports Direct and its founder have come under a 
barrage of criticism since December, in the wake of a Guardian investigation 
that found that the retailer was effectively paying thousands of temporary 
warehouse workersbelow the minimum wage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/how-sports-direct-effectively-pays-below-minimum-wage-pay>
.

The coverage led to an urgent question and debate in parliament, calls for an 
investigation by HM Revenue & Customs, and a denunciation from the Institute of 
Directors, which described Sports Direct as a“scar on British business” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/10/sports-direct-share-price-falls-following-guardian-working-practices-revelations>
.

On New Year’s Eve, Sports Direct pledged £10m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/31/sports-direct-pledges-10m-towards-staff-pay-rise>
 for a pay rise for staff from the start of this year.

 