
Sport England <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sport-england> is planning to 
soften the blow for four sports that had their elite funding axed last week by 
providing additional investment to help them bring young talent through.

UK Sport funding axe ‘catastrophic’ for badminton, says chief executive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/09/uk-sport-funding-badminton-catastrophe->
Archery, badminton, weightlifting and wheelchair rugby were left reeling when 
UK Sport cut all their exchequer and lottery funding for the 2020 Olympics in 
Tokyo, with the chief executive of GB badminton describing the news as “
catastrophic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/09/uk-sport-funding-badminton-catastrophe->
”.

While Sport England – whose remit is to increase the number of ordinary people 
exercising and playing sport – is unable to step in and fund a high-performance 
programme, its director of sport, Phil Smith, told the Guardian they would help 
in other ways.

“These four sports got some unexpected and bad news from UK Sport last week, 
and their talent plans were predicated entirely on receiving investment from UK 
Sport,” he said. “If that is now not going to be the case, I’m sure we are 
going to invest in those sports.”

Smith, who was speaking after announcing an £88m investment in grassroots 
sport – including £7.25m for badminton – said he would provide more details in 
February but promised: “We will support these sports. What we can and will do 
is help them create a talent programme that one day might get them back in the 
frame to attract high-performance investment.”

Among Sport England’s other investments, targeted at the 14.9 million adults 
in England who play regular sport, were £17.3m of funding forBritish Cycling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-cycling>, £9m for England Hockey, 
£8.3m for British Gymnastics and £7.6m for the England and Wales Cricket Board, 
which focused its pitch on 20-over formats, bringing more people with South 
Asian heritage into club cricket and introducing more girls and women playing 
the game.

“We now have more women playing regular sport or doing an activity than 
before. However, the gender gap is still pretty stubborn, so we still have more 
to do,” Smith said. “So every investment we make does pay attention to whether 
the audience that any organisation can reach is reaching women.”

Missing from the tranche of funding are the Amateur Swimming Association, the 
Football Association, the Lawn Tennis Association, theRugby Football Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rugby-football-union> and several other 
large governing bodies. Their allocations will be announced in February.

However, Smith hinted that basketball was one area that could receive greater 
attention in the future. “Basketballhas been out of UK Sport’s list for quite a 
while 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/feb/04/basketball-uk-sport-olympic-funding>
 but what we have agreed with Basketball England is that we want to rebuild the 
talent programme,” he said. “Our conversations are going really well and I’m 
really impressed with the plan they are putting together.”
 