
A group of Sri Lankans who were reportedly trying to reach Australia when 
their boat became stranded offIndonesia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/indonesia> during bad weather are set to be 
“escorted” back towards India, officials say.

A pregnant woman and nine children are among the 44 people on board the boat, 
which has been drifting about 300m off the coast of Lhoknga in Aceh since 
Saturday.

Following a meeting late on Wednesday between local and central government 
officials, including the Indonesian vice-president, Jusuf Kalla, authorities 
said those on board would be allowed ashore while their boat was fixed, 
refuelled and supplied with food. They would then have to leave forSri Lanka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/srilanka>.

Manus Island: calls for asylum seeker to be brought to Australia for 
psychological help
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/16/manus-island-calls-for-asylum-seeker-to-be-brought-to-australia-for-psychological-help>
Describing the Sri Lankans as “illegal immigrants”, the head of the Aceh 
immigration division, A Samadan, said they had been rejected on four grounds, 
including a lack of travel documents and a failure to notify authorities of 
their intended arrival.

The boat would be escorted out of Indonesian waters towards India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>, Samadan said on Thursday. However, 
he could not confirm when this would happen.

Amnesty International hit out at Indonesia for not allowing those on board to 
be properly processed by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

The boat, flying Indian flags, began a hazardous journey from India after 
those on board reportedly fled Sri Lanka, where members of the Tamil minority 
have suffered past persecution. The group had been at sea for 20 days in the 
hopes of seeking asylum in Australia before bad weather struck off Aceh.

“These people have endured a long and difficult journey already,” Josef 
Benedict from Amnesty International said on Thursday.

“Refugees and asylum seekers frequently travel without identity documents, as 
often these documents are either difficult to obtain or get lost during the 
journey. This has no consequence on these people’s right to seek asylum. UNHCR 
should be allowed to register them immediately.”

Today's campaign: tabloid declares open season on asylum seekers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/16/australian-election-2016-turnbull-shorten-coalition-greens-labor-briefing>
The comments come just days after two men aboard the boat tried to swim to 
shore on Monday afternoon before they were picked up and sent back to the boat 
by the Indonesian navy.

There are currently more than 13,000 refugees and asylum seekers registered 
with the UNHCR in the archipelago and detention centres in Indonesia are above 
capacity.

In Indonesia alone, the number of Afghan asylum seekers awaiting a solution 
has increased from about 1300 in 2010 to more than 6000 in 2015.
 