
Strife-torn St Louis is among 35 cities around the world inducted on Wednesday 
into a $100m programme designed to strengthen their resilience to natural 
disaster, and enhance their ability to tackle issues such as violence, social 
exclusion and transport congestion.

The US city, which counts the troubled community of Ferguson among its 
suburbs, is judged to suffer from “high poverty and high crime rates”. 
According to St Louis officials, upgrading infrastructure and improving public 
health and education will help ease social tensions there.

 A total of 35 metropolitan areas have been added to the 100 Resilient Cities 
programme <http://www.100resilientcities.org/>, an initiative funded by the 
Rockefeller Foundation which allocates financial and logistical support to each 
chosen city, including a dedicated “chief resilience officer”. Thefirst 33 
cities <http://www.100resilientcities.org/cities> in the programme were named 
last December.

A total of 331 cities across 94 countries applied to be part of this year’s 
allocation. A team of judges was assigned by 100 Resilient Cities to choose 
places that have “demonstrated a dedicated commitment to building their own 
capacities to prepare for, withstand, and bounce back rapidly from shocks and 
stresses”.

The second tranche of cities was named at a one-day conference in Singapore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/singapore>, where delegates also discussed 
the major threats facing cities over the coming decades: natural disasters, 
social unrest, economic inequality, access to healthcare, management of water 
and freedom of movement.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fdec%2F03%2Fst-louis-resilient-cities-china-london-paris-sydney%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F2%2F1417538395939%2Faa29821d-2178-418e-b7e7-c1cf6707a421-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=St%20Louis%20aims%20to%20ease%20social%20tensions%20as%20it%20joins%20100%20Resilient%20Cities%20programme&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fdec%2F03%2Fst-louis-resilient-cities-china-london-paris-sydney%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=St%20Louis%20aims%20to%20ease%20social%20tensions%20as%20it%20joins%20100%20Resilient%20Cities%20programme&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fdec%2F03%2Fst-louis-resilient-cities-china-london-paris-sydney%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F2%2F1417538395939%2Faa29821d-2178-418e-b7e7-c1cf6707a421-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Downtown Deyang, one of the first two Chinese cities to join the 100 Resilient 
Cities programme. Photograph: Victor Paul Borg/Alamy 
Eight Asian and Middle-Eastern cities - Phnom Penh, Deyang, Bangalore, Amman, 
Huangshi, Chennai, Singapore and Toyama - were chosen, along with four African 
cities: Arusha, Accra, Kigali and Enugu. Other successful applicants include 
London, Barcelona, Paris, Boston and Wellington.

Athens was chosen after a period in which the Rockefeller Foundation noted 
that unemployment has averaged over 50% for young people. More than a third of 
Athens’ buildings are vulnerable to earthquakes, and the city is also baking in 
increasing heatwaves. But the foundation said the city is making “significant 
efforts” to expand welfare and healthcare services.

Also in Europe, Paris – while a “global icon” – has experienced community 
segregation due to urban gentrification, and its public transport system is 
under growing pressure, the foundation said. Lisbon is also dealing with 
creaking infrastructure, with city officials reporting that they are looking to 
do more to mitigate the impact of climate change.

Chicago is making a shift towards a technology-driven economy and is making 
strides to prepare itself for blizzards and floods, the foundation said. Phnom 
Penh suffers from regular energy blackouts and deteriorating air quality due to 
soaring car ownership. Meanwhile residents of Sydney, one of the world’s more 
liveable cities, are paying soaring electricity bills due to obsolete 
infrastructure and are at increasing risk from climate change-driven heat waves.

Climate change, which the World Bank has warned poses a “serious threat to 
urban infrastructure, quality of life and entire urban systems”, is a 
particular point of focus for the project. It is estimated that extreme weather 
events, which are increasingly fuelled by climate change, have already cost the 
world economy $2.5 trillion this century, with much of the damage caused in 
cities.

The newly announced ‘resilient cities’

North America: Montreal (Canada); Boston, Chicago, Dallas, Pittsburgh, St 
Louis, Tulsa (all US); San Juan (Puerto Rico); Juarez (Mexico); Santiago de los 
Caballeros (Dominican Republic).South America: Cali (Colombia); Santa Fe 
(Argentina); Santiago (Chile).Europe: Athens, Thessaloniki (both Greece); 
Barcelona (Spain); Belgrade (Serbia); Lisbon (Portugal); London (UK); Milan 
(Italy); Paris (France).Asia: Toyama (Japan); Chennai, Bangalore (both India); 
Deyang, Huangshi (both China); Singapore; Phnom Penh (Cambodia); Amman (Jordan).
Africa:Accra (Ghana); Arusha (Tanzania); Kigali (Rwanda); Enugu (Nigeria). 
Oceania:Sydney (Australia); Wellington (New Zealand).
 