
St Paul’s Cathedral has said it was not notified or consulted about the 
construction of a skyscraper that mars a centuries-old view of Sir Christopher 
Wren’s famous landmark, and expressed concern that the development was allowed 
to go ahead despite it apparently breaking planning rules.

Conservationists this week called on the London mayor, Sadiq Khan, to take 
action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/london-mayor-urged-to-act-over-tower-that-compromises-st-pauls-view>
 against Manhattan Loft Gardens, a 42-storey tower in Stratford, east London, 
which they say compromises the view of St Paul’s from King Henry’s Mound in 
Richmond Park.

Is the only way up for London's skyline?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/dec/06/london-towers-shard-paddington-bishopsgate-undershaft>
Designed by SOM and described on its website as “Europe’s most ambitious 
residential tower”, it comprises three extensive sky gardens, a 145-bedroom 
hotel, almost 250 residential units and retail and restaurant space.

The charity Friends of Richmond Park said that under the London Plan 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/what-we-do/planning/london-plan/current-london-plan>
, the capital’s overarching planning document, theLondon view management 
framework (LVMF) 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/what-we-do/planning/implementing-london-plan/supplementary-planning-guidance/london-view-management>
 states that any development affecting the view of St Paul’s should be 
“subordinate to the cathedral and that the clear sky background profile of the 
upper part of the dome remains”.

 Oliver Caroe, surveyor to the fabric at St Paul’s 
<http://www.newlistener.co.uk/home/surveyor-fabric-st-pauls-cathedral-oliver-caroe/>
, said the cathedral was not notified or consulted on the planning application 
for the development project in 2011 via the referral methods stipulated by the 
Greater London Authority and the LVMF.

“Chapter has always recognised that the protected views of strategic landmarks 
have been designated for the benefit for all Londoners,” he said. “We are 
privileged in this generation to play our part, with others who are concerned 
for the built environment, in safeguarding Sir Christopher Wren’s visionary 
landmark which contributes so enduringly to our identity as a city and society.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fst-pauls-not-consulted-over-development-that-mars-view-of-cathedral%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3de4ed6d410de97556cde695616490251e51892%2F98_120_1018_611%2F1018.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=St%20Paul's%20not%20consulted%20on%20development%20that%20mars%20cathedral%20view&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fst-pauls-not-consulted-over-development-that-mars-view-of-cathedral%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=St%20Paul%27s%20not%20consulted%20on%20development%20that%20mars%20cathedral%20view&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fst-pauls-not-consulted-over-development-that-mars-view-of-cathedral%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3de4ed6d410de97556cde695616490251e51892%2F98_120_1018_611%2F1018.jpg>
 The same view of St Paul’s before construction of Manhattan Loft Gardens 
began. Photograph: Patrick Eagar/Architect's Journal 
“In this case we observe that LVMF requires that, from the protected view from 
King Henry VIII’s Mound in Richmond Park, developments ‘should preserve or 
enhance the viewer’s ability to recognise and appreciate the dome of the 
cathedral … it is essential … that the clear sky background profile of the 
upper part of the dome remains’.

“Therefore it is reasonable for the public and statutory authorities to be 
concerned about the SOM Stratford development. We have been advised that the 
policy is expressly to safeguard the clear skyline view of the landmark and 
there is no limit to the distance behind the dome of the cathedral where the 
wider setting consultation area ceases to apply.

“We hope the experts in the field of view protection will clarify and confirm 
this interpretation and expectation.”

A clear strategy on tall buildings can cut developers down to size | Rowan 
Moore
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/27/skyscrapers-poll-planners-developers-strategy>
St Paul’s said it supported calls for a management and visualisation tool such 
as a 3D model that would assist in preserving cherished views inLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>.

“We would further welcome the opportunity to engage with all parties in the 
planning system to improve training and awareness to ensure that the heritage 
assets and views of strategic landmarks, which the GLA and the London mayor has 
designated, operate effectively,” Caroe said.

The chairman of Friends of Richmond Park, Ron Crompton, has written to Khan, 
calling for an urgent investigation into how GLA officers came to grant 
planning permission for the Manhattan Loft Gardens development in contravention 
of the LVMF.

Historic England, the UK’s statutory adviser on heritage, has also protested 
against the development and said it was not consulted.

A spokeswoman for the Manhattan Loft Corporation said the developer went 
through a transparent and public process to gain planning permission, adding 
that that maps of the LVMF protected view indicated that the background area to 
be protected beyond St Paul’s was 1.86 miles (3km). The new tower is 4.35 miles 
(7km) away.

“As planning approval was achieved [on] 18 July 2011, we were never asked 
about the LVMF background view impact,” she said. “However, SOM has a long 
history of working with the St Paul’s view corridors and the more recent London 
Plan LVMF document.”

A spokesman for Khan said: “We are currently looking into the issues involved 
with this development.”
 