
Sylvester Stallone is not as dumb as he looks. Of course he isn’t – he’s made 
a career of it. Stallone may be famous for playing action heroes and 
musclebound fighters, but in real life Rocky loves to draw and paint. He has 
evenexhibited <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-24693264> at major 
museums in Russia and France. He may not be a great painter, but he does plug 
away at an art he apparently prefers to acting.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fstallone-trump-arts-job%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F572980ac330d6ac8653a189f1a3caca9f85bb6ad%2F0_0_3500_2235%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stallone%20refused%20Trump's%20arts%20job%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0but%20who%20will%20take%20this%20poisoned%20chalice%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fstallone-trump-arts-job%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stallone%20refused%20Trump%27s%20arts%20job%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0but%20who%20will%20take%20this%20poisoned%20chalice%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fstallone-trump-arts-job%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F572980ac330d6ac8653a189f1a3caca9f85bb6ad%2F0_0_3500_2235%2F3500.jpg>
 A woman looks at the painting The Arena, in the exhibition Sylvester Stallone. 
Painting. From 1975 Until Today, at the Russian Museum in St. Petersburg in 
2013. Photograph: Alexander Demianchuk/Reuters 
Now Stallone has, according to reports 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/19/us/stallone-trump-nea-chairman.html?_r=0>, 
been sounded out for a top arts role, chair of the National Endowment for the 
Arts, by the soon-to-be-upon-us Trump administration. Why select Stallone? The 
National Endowment for the Arts has been a political football before and 
perhaps appointing Stallone would be a symbolic return tothe age when Rambo’s 
America was pitched against that of Robert Mapplethorpe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2016/nov/07/marina-abramovic-john-podesta-latest-target-right-wing-culture-wars>
.

It could also be a combination of pleasing Trump’s voters, giving the liberal 
arts community a scare – and perhaps even sucking up to Russia. For the most 
enthusiastic acclaim the actor’s paintings have received wasa prestigious 
one-man exhibition 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2013/11/04/travel/stallone-art-exhibition/> at the 
State Russian Art Museum in St Petersburg, one of Russia’s great public 
galleries. You might even see Rambo as an inspiration for Vladimir Putin’s 
physique.

But Stallone has politely 
<https://twitter.com/chrisgeidner/status/810692061162827776?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
 let it be known that he would not accept such a role, and would rather be 
given a job helping veterans – in so doing, he shows he is wiser than all the 
conservatives rushing to embrace the president-elect.

So who might serve as Trump’s supremo of the arts instead? If only Andy Warhol 
were still alive. Trump’s bestselling business booksquote 
<https://news.artnet.com/art-world/donald-trump-art-of-the-deal-warhol-782234> 
him more than once: “I’ve always liked Andy Warhol’s statement that, ‘Making 
money is art and working is art and good business is the best art.’ I agree.” 
Warhol did actually cosy up to the Reagan administration in the 1980s, or at 
least was accused of doing so by his fiercest critic, Robert Hughes. In fact it 
was Warhol’s associate Bob Colacello, editor of his magazine, Interview, who was
the real Reaganite 
<https://www.thestar.com/news/insight/2014/11/16/former_warhol_associate_reflects_on_andy_and_reagan.html>
. He saw Reagan as a kind of pop artist in politics; perhaps he could see Trump 
the same way.

One artist who might be thought to have an affinity for this bombastic emperor 
of kitsch is Jeff Koons. The way Koons appears to celebrate vulgarity might 
make him a perfect Trumpian, yet he is actually a longstanding admirer of 
Hillary Clinton and dismissed Trump as being“not suitable” 
<https://news.artnet.com/art-world/jeff-koons-endorses-hillary-clinton-712139> 
for the presidency. Schwarzeneggeris not a fan 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3828819/Arnold-Schwarzenegger-not-vote-Donald-Trump-2016-presidential-election.html>
 either; Andrea Bocelli haspulled out 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2016/12/20/andrea-bocelli-backs-out-of-trump-inauguration-performance.html>
 of performing at Trump’s inauguration.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fstallone-trump-arts-job%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F630c05116283a65bff60ccab87121f18921527af%2F0_0_3507_2485%2F3507.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stallone%20refused%20Trump's%20arts%20job%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0but%20who%20will%20take%20this%20poisoned%20chalice%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fstallone-trump-arts-job%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stallone%20refused%20Trump%27s%20arts%20job%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0but%20who%20will%20take%20this%20poisoned%20chalice%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fstallone-trump-arts-job%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F630c05116283a65bff60ccab87121f18921527af%2F0_0_3507_2485%2F3507.jpg>
 Bound to fall in love... Donald Trump and Kanye West. Photograph: Seth Wenig/AP
Trump also admires 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/music/articles/e5e4572a-0676-4120-9eb3-d34bbea34836> the 
minimalist music of Steve Reich, having called the avant garde composer “a 
great innovator”. In fact it seems he has a lot more feel for music than he 
does for visual art. Thedecor and design of Trump Tower 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/nov/27/architecture-donald-trump-tower-president-elect>
 are more than enough to reveal his total lack of sensitivity to beauty in art 
and architecture – but his apparent enthusiasm for a wide range of musicians 
suggests this does not extend to music. He even used the Rolling Stones, 
against their will, to soundtrack his campaign trail. And one creative titan of 
our time who has gone against the flow of disdain is Kanye West. Like Nigel 
Farage,he has been photographed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/13/kanye-west-donald-trump-meeting-trump-tower>
 against a golden backdrop with the president-elect at Trump Tower. Surely this 
is the solution: West is an all-round self-appointed genius who spans the arts.

Sylvester Stallone: the wacky people's champ who battled his own ego
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/24/sylvester-stallone-profile-creed-rocky>
Yet anyone he asks would be wise to take Stallone’s lead and say no. I am 
trying here to understand the thinking of Trump enthusiasts, from journalists 
to generals, who sign up to work with him or enthusiastically hail his reign. 
Why can’t they see, like Stallone, that it’s safer to stay away from his 
hellish kingdom?

Everyone who supports Trump, or even believes things will be OK over the next 
few years, is soon going to look tragically gullible, utterly corrupt or simply 
mad. We just have to survive it somehow. Take poor Nigel Farage – his whole 
life now has become one long wait for another nice Trump tweet about him. 
Farage will end up humiliated by Trump, and that’s one thing to look forward 
to. Because the new US president is not a safe bet. Stallone is right to stand 
well back as the world waits for hell’s president to be inaugurated.
 