
In a year in which so many musical greats have passed away, few have been so 
honoured in their own words asLeonard Cohen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/11/leonard-cohen-dies-aged-82>. 
News of the singer’s death, at his home in LA on Thursday, prompted an
outpouring of tributes from world leaders, musicians, poets and writers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/live/2016/nov/11/leonard-cohen-death-tributes-singer-songwriter-livehttps://www.theguardian.com/music/live/2016/nov/11/leonard-cohen-death-tributes-singer-songwriter-live>
 who often turned to Cohen’s lyrics to express their sadness.

The 82-year-old had alluded to his own death in a recent and wide-ranging 
interview with the New Yorker editor, David Remnick 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2016/10/17/leonard-cohen-makes-it-darker>, 
in which he talked about his unfinished poems and lyrics.

“I am ready to die,” he said. “I hope it’s not too uncomfortable. That’s about 
it for me.”

Leonard Cohen obituary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/11/leonard-cohen-obituary> 
The singer-songwriter later said 
<http://www.billboard.com/articles/news/7541930/leonard-cohen-new-album-corrects-ready-to-die-reports>
 he had been exaggerating. “I’ve always been into self-dramatisation. I intend 
to live forever.”

Some of the world’s biggest artist count the Canadian-born Cohen, who was a 
poet and novelist as well as a musician, among their influences. He was a 
songwriting peer and friend ofBob Dylan, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/bobdylan> who told the New Yorker 
<http://www.newyorker.com/culture/culture-desk/leonard-cohen-a-final-interview>
: “When people talk about Leonard, they fail to mention his melodies, which to 
me, along with his lyrics, are his greatest genius ... As far as I know, no one 
else comes close to this in modern music.”

Cohen’s son Adam released a brief statement on Friday to say his father had 
passed away peacefully and in the knowledge that with his latest album, You 
Want it Darker, Cohen had completed “one of his greatest records”.

 *  The Canadian prime minister, Justin Trudeau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/justin-trudeau>, said he had “managed to 
reach the highest of artistic achievement. His ability to conjure the vast 
array of human emotion made him one of the most influential and enduring 
musicians ever.” 
 * Elton John <https://www.theguardian.com/music/elton-john> called Cohen 
“unique – a giant of a man and a brilliant songwriter. Irreplaceable. Loved him 
and his wonderful music.” 
 *  Nick Cave: <https://www.theguardian.com/music/nick-cave> “For many of us 
Leonard Cohen was the greatest songwriter of them all. Utterly unique and 
impossible to imitate no matter how hard we tried. He will be deeply missed by 
so many.” 
 * Robert Cory, Cohen’s producer: “Unmatched in his creativity, insight and 
crippling candour, Leonard Cohen was a true visionary whose voice will be 
sorely missed. I was blessed to call him a friend, and for me to serve that 
bold artistic spirit firsthand was a privilege and great gift. He leaves behind 
a legacy of work that will bring insight, inspiration and healing for 
generations to come.” 
 *  Sylvie Simmons, Cohen’s biographer: “In this year of losses, so many 
losses, in this black week for the world, this tops them all … he went out in a 
blaze of glory. Died with his boots on – or his suit on – having delivered a 
masterpiece before he left.You Want it Darker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/20/leonard-cohen-you-want-it-darker-album-review>
 is one of his richest, deepest and most beautiful albums in a lifetime of 
rich, deep and beautiful work. So many stories about musicians and poets have 
an unhappy ending but not Leonard. He was ready, and he didn’t linger once his 
work was done. He knew darkness, looked right into its eyes, could even see the 
funny side.” 
 *  Clive Davis: “Leonard Cohen was truly a master songwriter. No one sounded 
like him either vocally or lyrically. He penetrated your soul with his haunting 
voice and his piercing words. Leonard was absolutely one-of-a-kind, a poet and 
an artist who put you under his spell time and time again.” 
 *  John Cale: <https://www.theguardian.com/music/john-cale> “Very upsetting 
news to learn of Leonard’s passing. The world has one less gentle soul tonight. 
We thank you for the multitude of gifts you left us.” 
 *  Beck: <https://www.theguardian.com/music/beck> “So long Leonard, thank you 
for your words, your songs, your life – a gentleman, a master, a hero – thank 
you for looking so deeply, for sharing your time, giving us your finely wrought 
diamonds, for lighting the dark corners where the soul lives, for translating 
the otherness we recognise but fail to express, tonight we celebrate you and 
send you our gratitude.” 
 *  Simon Le Bon: “Spent a good deal of my early teens, just me & #LeonardCohen
 <https://twitter.com/hashtag/LeonardCohen?src=hash> alone together in my 
suburban bedroom. It was a gentle & fulfilling love affair.” 
 *  Cat Stevens: “The fragileness of life has been once again exposed with the 
passing on of Leonard Cohen. May God grant him peace … forever.” 
 *  Russell Crowe: <https://www.theguardian.com/film/russellcrowe> “Dear 
Leonard Cohen, thanks for the quiet nights, the reflection, the perspective, 
the wry smiles and the truth.” 
 * Bianca Jagger: “In this dark moment after the US election let’s remember 
Leonard Cohen ‘There is a crack in everything, that’s how the light gets in.’” 
 * Boy George: <https://www.theguardian.com/music/boy-george> “We have lost a 
great artist, poet and poignant force of energy. R.I.P Leonard Cohen.”  