
To its acolytes, it is the revolutionary policy idea whose arrival is as 
urgently needed as it is inevitable. In a future in which robots decimate the 
jobs but not necessarily the wealth of nations, they argue, states should be 
able to afford to pay all their citizens a basic income unconditional of needs 
or requirements.

Universal basic income has a rare appeal across the political spectrum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/13/should-we-scrap-benefits-and-pay-everyone-100-a-week-whether-they-work-or-not>
. For those on the left, it promises to eliminate poverty and liberate people 
stuck in dead-end workfare jobs. Small-state libertarians believe it could 
slash bureaucracy and create a leaner, more self-sufficient welfare system.

Should we scrap benefits and pay everyone £100 a week?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/13/should-we-scrap-benefits-and-pay-everyone-100-a-week-whether-they-work-or-not>
In an increasingly digital economy, it would also provide a necessary 
injection of cash so people can afford to buy the apps and gadgets produced by 
the new robot workforce.

Crucially, it is also an idea that seems to resonate across the wider public. 
A recentpoll 
<http://www.spiegel.de/wirtschaft/soziales/grundeinkommen-zwei-von-drei-eu-buergern-wuerden-dafuer-stimmen-a-1093136.html>
 by Dalia Research found that 68% of people across all 28 EU member states said 
they would definitely or probably vote for a universal basic income initiative. 
Finland and the Netherlands have pilot projects in the pipeline.

This weekend the concept faces its first proper test of public opinion, as 
Switzerland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/switzerland> votes on a proposal 
to introduce a national basic income.

The model on which Swiss citizens will vote on 5 June sits at the left-liberal 
end of the spectrum. The wording on the ballot paper is vague – it calls for 
the country’s constitution to be changed to “guarantee the introduction of an 
unconditional basic income” that guarantees “a humane existence and 
participation in public life for the whole population” – but the proposed scale 
is ambitious.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fstate-handouts-for-all-europe-set-to-pilot-universal-basic-incomes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F509526c6e1c27ee9b540f14e6f1469cd2768b9ba%2F0_72_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=State%20handouts%20for%20all%3F%20Europe%20set%20to%20pilot%20universal%20basic%20incomes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fstate-handouts-for-all-europe-set-to-pilot-universal-basic-incomes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=State%20handouts%20for%20all%3F%20Europe%20set%20to%20pilot%20universal%20basic%20incomes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fstate-handouts-for-all-europe-set-to-pilot-universal-basic-incomes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F509526c6e1c27ee9b540f14e6f1469cd2768b9ba%2F0_72_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Promotional leaflets in favour of a universal basic income for Switzerland. 
Photograph: Denis Balibouse/Reuters 
The referendum’s initiators suggest a basic monthly income of 2,500 Swiss 
francs (£1,750) for adults and 625 Swiss francs for children as a “working 
example”. Given the high cost of living in Switzerland, the initiative’s 
co-founder Daniel Straub says this would be the rough equivalent of giving 
people living in centralEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> 
between €1,000 and €1,500 a month, or between £900 and £1,300 in the UK.

In a book published ahead of the Swiss referendum, Straub and his co-authors 
argue that a basic income pegged at such a level would not only free people up 
to do important work that is currently not incentivised by markets, such as 
care and climate change research, but also lead to higher wages for unloved and 
low-paid “dirty work”.

 “If these jobs are really indispensable, then they have a social value and 
should be appreciated more,” he says. “If no one else wants to do them, they 
should be more highly paid. Work conditions would have to be improved so that 
people do these jobs.”

A no-strings basic income? If it works for the royal family, it can work for 
us all | John O’Farrell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/07/basic-income-royal-family-living-wage-economy>
Set at such a level, a universal basic income would require an increase in 
Switzerland’s current social welfare budget. Even if it were to replace some 
benefit payments altogether, the country’s federal assembly has calculated an 
annual funding shortfall of25bn Swiss francs 
<http://derstandard.at/2000037702062/Schweiz-stimmt-ueber-Grundeinkommen-ab>, 
which it suggests would have to be bridged by tax increases. Some basic income 
activists have proposed a financial transaction tax.

Straub rejects some of the federal assembly’s calculations, but acknowledges 
that introducing a unconditional basic income would cost around a third of the 
country’s GDP. Switzerland currently spends19.4% of its GDP on welfare 
<https://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=SOCX_AGG>, less than the OECD 
average.

Latest polls suggest that more than 60% of Swiss voters are likely to reject 
the proposal, but Straub is optimistic that the initiative has already achieved 
some of its aims. “Five years ago, only about a hundred people in Switzerland 
had heard the term ‘universal basic income’. Now everyone is debating it, and 
acceptance levels are rising,” he says.

And now for something completely different: some positive news
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/01/and-now-for-something-completely-different-some-positive-news>
Unlike the Swiss initiative, Finland’s basic income experiment enjoys the 
political support of the government, a coalition of conservatives, liberals and 
the populist rightwing Finns party.

The framing of the Finnish initiative is also markedly different. The prime 
minister, Juha Sipilä, formerly a successful IT businessman, has commissioned 
the country’s social insurance body, Kela, to carry out experiments to 
establish whether a basic income could “make the system more participatory and 
strengthen work incentives, reduce bureaucracy, and simplify the now 
complicated benefit system in a way that ensures the sustainability of public 
finances”.

A preliminary report <http:// 
http://www.kela.fi/web/en/news-archive/-/asset_publisher/lN08GY2nIrZo/content/from-idea-to-experiment-preliminary-report-on-a-universal-basic-income-completed>
 published at the end of March suggests the government is already scaling the 
initiative back from a full basic income model, which its authors note would be 
“quite expensive”, to a partial one. According to Roope Mokka, the founder of 
the Nordic thinktank Demos Helsinki, the Finnish experiment, which will take 
place in 2017, is likely to involve 5,000 to 10,000 Finns being paid a basic 
income of €500 to €700 a month – considerably less than the average Finnish 
income of €2,700.

Even in Finland, universal basic income is too good to be true | Declan Gaffney
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/10/finland-universal-basic-income-ubi-social-security>
Given that Finland’s welfare state is comparable to that of other Scandinavian 
economies, introducing a universal basic income model similar to that used in 
Kela’s experiment would involve shrinking the country’s social security 
spending, which currently stands at about 31% of GDP.

Basic income experiments also scheduled to start in the Netherlands in 2017, 
and lie somewhere between the Swiss and Finnish models. According to Rutger 
Bregman, the author ofUtopia for Realist: The Case for a Universal Basic Income 
<https://thecorrespondent.com/utopia-for-realists/>, the appetite for such 
initiatives in cities such as Utrecht has grown mainly out of frustration with 
workfare programmes that turned out to be “hugely expensive and humiliating for 
those involved”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fstate-handouts-for-all-europe-set-to-pilot-universal-basic-incomes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F879a9984701fb26aa39236fd14ee1a9e5597d3ff%2F0_0_5431_3259%2F5431.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=State%20handouts%20for%20all%3F%20Europe%20set%20to%20pilot%20universal%20basic%20incomes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fstate-handouts-for-all-europe-set-to-pilot-universal-basic-incomes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=State%20handouts%20for%20all%3F%20Europe%20set%20to%20pilot%20universal%20basic%20incomes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fstate-handouts-for-all-europe-set-to-pilot-universal-basic-incomes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F879a9984701fb26aa39236fd14ee1a9e5597d3ff%2F0_0_5431_3259%2F5431.jpg>
 Utrecht will begin its experiment with a universal basic income on 1 January 
2017. Photograph: Alamy 
In the Utrecht experiment, which will start on 1 January 2017, one group of 
benefit recipients will remain on theold workfare regime 
<https://www.utrecht.nl/werk-en-inkomen/hoogte-bijstandsuitkering-en-kostendelersnorm/>
, under which people who live alone get €972.70 and couples €1,389.57. Another 
group will receive the same benefits unconditionally, without sanctions or 
obligations.

A third group will also receive the same benefits unconditionally, plus an 
extra monthly bonus of €125 
<https://www.utrecht.nl/werk-en-inkomen/weten-wat-werkt/> if they choose to do 
volunteering work. A fourth group will be obliged to do volunteering work. If 
they fail to do so, they will lose their €125 bonus. A fifth group will receive 
unconditional benefits without the bonus, while being allowed earn additional 
income from other jobs.

Similar experiments will be conducted in other Dutch cities such as 
Wageningen, Tilburg, Groningen and Nijmegen, most of them with the aim of 
finding ways to get rid of the sanctions and the obligation to apply for jobs.

The fact that political intentions behind Europe’s basic income movements vary 
so wildly should not discredit the basic idea, Mokka says. He likens the idea 
to the space race during the cold war. “Moonshot was never about getting to the 
moon. There was nothing in the moon. Kennedy and his administration knew that. 
The point is that each generation must have their mission, something that 
encapsulates their vision.

“Unconditional basic income is best seen as a platform on which several 
different political views can come together to deliberate beyond tweaking of 
old systems and to create something entirely new.”

• This article was amended on 7 June 2016 to correct an estimate of the number 
of people likely to take part in the Finnish basic income experiment.

This piece is part of our Half full series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/series/half-full-solutions-innovations-answers>
. Please share your suggestions of stories, trends, innovations and people that 
you’d like to see included in this series using the form below
 