
“We made the Cramps sound orchestral / That’s an achievement I guess. / As for 
rehearsal, we made the Shaggs sound like Yes.” Lines this smart and funny don’t 
appear on pop records too often – and ones that refer to demented outsider 
artist bandthe Shaggs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/mar/21/top-dross-worst-world-dakota-elle-fanning>
 never do. Outside the work of Stephin Merritt, that is.

In 2017, the superlative songwriter, leftfield pop’s answer to another Stephen 
(Sondheim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jul/10/stephen-sondheim-james-lapine-interview-writing-musicals-into-the-woods>
), is back with his 25th album, 50 Song Memoir. Well, 25th album if you count 
his many side projects (including groups like the Gothic Archies and Future 
Bible Heroes), the three Chinese operas he has written and Coraline, the 
musical Merritt wrote with David Greenspan, based on the children’s book by 
Neil Gaiman, which was first staged off-Broadway in 2009 and has enjoyed 
several productions since.

However, Merritt will perhaps always be best known for 69 Love Songs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2011/aug/25/69-love-songs-magnetic-fields>
. Released by his main groupthe Magnetic Fields 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/feb/08/magnetic-fields-stephin-merritt> 
in 1999, the three-hour triple album with the self explanatory title is a 
classic, maybe one of the great songwriting feats of the 20th century. “If I 
had three albums to take to a desert island, I would choose 69 Love Songs 
volumes one, two and three,” tweeted Molly Ringwald in a quote later emblazoned 
on the recent vinyl reissue (which this writer happily bought, to keep my two 
CD copies company). Its reputation towers – perhaps unfairly – over the 
Magnetic Fields’ four subsequent, more modestly sized, though equally singular 
records – such as the follow-up,i, on which all the song titles began with that 
letter <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2004/apr/30/popandrock.shopping2>. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fstephin-merritt-50-song-memoir-magnetic-fields-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb854900bdb36287b9cd19a66e4a41796f04c18ec%2F0_0_1500_1500%2F1500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stephin%20Merritt%20on%20his%20musical%20memoir%3A%20'People%20who%20could%20be%20insulted%2C%20I%20cleared%20with%20them%20first'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fstephin-merritt-50-song-memoir-magnetic-fields-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stephin%20Merritt%20on%20his%20musical%20memoir%3A%20%27People%20who%20could%20be%20insulted%2C%20I%20cleared%20with%20them%20first%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fstephin-merritt-50-song-memoir-magnetic-fields-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb854900bdb36287b9cd19a66e4a41796f04c18ec%2F0_0_1500_1500%2F1500.jpg>
 The cover of 50 Song Memoir 
Now, however, Merritt is squaring up to 69 Love Songs with another epic 
concept album. An idea proposed to him by the boss of his record company over 
dinner at the Oyster Bar in New York’sGrand Central Station 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/gallery/2013/feb/01/grand-central-station-new-york-anniversary>
, 50 Song Memoir contains a tune for every year of Merritt’s life (well, at the 
time he started the project – he turns 52 next month). Blizzard of 78, from 
which the lines above come, chronicles his first attempts to form a band while 
living in a commune in north Vermont; the furious “Quotes” (his song for 2006) 
isabout being accused of racism by the New Yorker’s then music critic Sasha 
Frere-Jones <http://www.nytimes.com/2006/05/18/arts/music/18rock.html>; London 
by Jetpack chronicles his first visit in 1980 (“I spent August in London when 
the New Romantic reigned / And though I was oblivious then, my love has never 
waned”); and Be True to Your Bar is an anthem for Dick’s Bar, the East Village 
boozer in which Merritt wrote most of 69 Love Songs.

Then there’s the song Weird Diseases, which takes in Merritt’s epilepsy as an 
infant, other maladies including “really painful renal cysts” and then 
hyperacusis, an intolerance to certain frequencies which started to plague him 
in 1992, and which makes it impossible for him to perform in front of a 
conventional drum kit.

So as well as your love life and drinking habits, we know about your whole 
medical history now, I tell Merritt, who is calling from his car in New York. 
“Only part of it!” he laughs. “I’m sorry to say it could be quite a lot longer 
– there could be a 12in version. And there could be an update.”

Was he nervous about divulging so much of his life in song? “I feel after 25 
albums the cat is kind of out of the bag,” he replies. Merritt adds that the 
songs dealing with more recent events were harder to write than those about the 
distant past. “The recent past is a mess, and the long-ago past is nicely 
sorted into categories. You can’t really remember anything outside of the 
alleged process of the already done. Oh no, I slipped into the second person! I 
had actually sworn not to do interviews in the second person for this album.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlSjc4rJUZdY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlSjc4rJUZdY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlSjc4rJUZdY&media=>
 Listen toNo, from the album 50 Song Memoir 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lSjc4rJUZdY> 
Writing one’s autobiography, of course, also involves revealing things about 
other people. On Life Ain’t All Bad, Merritt sets about a now-dead boyfriend 
his mother had in 1977, with lines including the couplet: “When I write my 
memoirs, which will be of course in verse / On the subject of you and how awful 
you are I will be infinitely terse.” The living friends, lovers and family 
members who appear on 50 Song Memoir were forewarned. “The people who could 
possibly be insulted, I cleared with them first, very much including my mother. 
In the songNo <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lSjc4rJUZdY> I say that my 
mother doesn’t believe in the physical universe and has no preview evidence to 
support her belief, and her only objection to the song was that in her opinion 
she has plenty of evidence.”

 The album concludes on a rousing note with Somebody’s Fetish, in which 
Merritt declares: “Nothing’s too strange for somebody’s palate / Some spank the 
maid, and some wank the valet.” In other words, he’s found love. “Well, I’m in 
love in several other places on the album as well,” he points out, “but I think 
the message is more that one can find a happy ending in the river of life 
rushing back. I could have given it a tragic ending. There are any number of 
other things to concentrate on – American politics for example.”

The album has already been played live in its entirety over two nights apiece 
in front of audiences in New York and Massachusetts (“They clapped a lot and 
stood up at the end,” says Merritt drily, when I ask about the reaction). So is 
it nerve-racking to make something that’s bound to be compared to his 
meisterwerk?

“Yes, it is nerve-racking, but it was more nerve-racking to do that with i, 
which I knew was going to be compared unfavourably to 69 Love Songs no matter 
what I did. As with Tusk byFleetwood Mac 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/fleetwood-mac>, where they knew it was going 
to be denounced as noRumours 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2011/sep/30/rumours-fleetwood-mac> 
by everyone in the world, and as a result it’s actually better than Rumours. 
I’ve already made my Tusk, so this is...”

Tango in the Night <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tango_in_the_Night>? 

“Tango in the Night, yes.” 

 * 50 Song Memoir will be released on Nonesuch in March.
 