
John Pape’s surprise at finding four police officers on his doorstep turned to 
shock when they informed him the body of his former lodger had been found in a 
cemetery in Barking, eastLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>.

“It was like a horribly abstract thing, because the circumstances were a 
mystery,” said Pape, 38, a promo producer at a comedy channel. “My thoughts 
first ran to suicide or exposure.”

Gabriel Kovari, 22, a Slovakian graduate who had moved out six days 
previously, “certainly didn’t seem a suicidal, self-destructive guy,” Pape 
recalled. Exposure? “It was August, and he still had keys to my flat.”

Questions crowded his head. It would be more than a year before they were 
answered with the arrest of Stephen Port, who was subsequently convicted and
jailed for life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/25/serial-killer-stephen-port-jailed-for-life>
 for the murders of four young men whom he had fatally drugged and raped and 
whose bodies he dumped near his Barking flat.

In the year after Kovari’s death in 2014, Pape felt compelled to raise 
concerns over other deaths, but police failed to link them. It left him fearing 
for his safety and his sanity as he hit a brick wall time and again.

“Looking back, knowing that your instincts were telling you something but your 
head is going: they’re the police, they’re probably doing a good job, you’re 
just obsessing – that is really infuriating. Because, I look back and I think: 
if only I had listened to my instincts more.”

The Independent Police Complaints Commission is investigating 17 Metropolitan 
police <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/metropolitan-police> officers over the 
handling of the Port case. The families of the other three victims – Anthony 
Walgate, 23, Daniel Whitworth, 21, and Jack Taylor, 25 – plan to sue the force.

Pape was Kovari’s landlord for only six weeks, though he regards their 
relationship as a friendship – admittedly a short one, but one based on an 
empathy that often swiftly bonds gay men in a predominantly straight world.

It may have been a tenuous link, but Pape was the last person police could 
trace to have been in contact with Kovari, who had arrived in London weeks 
earlier.

Pape had offered Kovari the spare room in his south London flat for £50 a week 
after they met online in July 2014, at which time Kovari was staying in a 
hostel on the Isle of Dogs. A talented linguist who was learning Arabic, Kovari 
had just graduated from university in Košice, and was working in a shop in 
Richmond, Surrey, while hoping to get security clearance to get translation 
work for the NHS or police.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fstephen-port-victims-landlord-i-felt-i-hit-a-brick-wall-with-the-police%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29e8de91fa774238860109eb43b36341734e8015%2F1703_127_754_943%2F754.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stephen%20Port%20victim's%20landlord%3A%20'I%20felt%20I%20hit%20a%20brick%20wall%20with%20the%20police'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fstephen-port-victims-landlord-i-felt-i-hit-a-brick-wall-with-the-police%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stephen%20Port%20victim%27s%20landlord%3A%20%27I%20felt%20I%20hit%20a%20brick%20wall%20with%20the%20police%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fstephen-port-victims-landlord-i-felt-i-hit-a-brick-wall-with-the-police%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29e8de91fa774238860109eb43b36341734e8015%2F1703_127_754_943%2F754.jpg>
 Gabriel Kovari. Photograph: PA 
Pape initially agreed he could stay for two weeks, but was relaxed about him 
staying longer as they were getting along. They went for drinks together at the 
local pub, and watched DVDs. Pape helped Kovari set up a bank account for his 
wages, which was what led police to his door.

Pape knew Kovari was meeting up with men through online apps, but didn’t pry. 
Pape briefly saw one of them at his flat. Meanwhile, Kovari was looking for 
somewhere else to live, even though he was under no pressure to move out. 
Pape’s flat was small and chaotic due to building work being carried out.

Nevertheless, Pape was surprised when Kovari told him he had found a flatshare 
in Barking and was moving the next day. That flat belonged to Port.

“I regret not asking him more questions,” Pape said. “But I did say if it 
didn’t work out in Barking he could come back.”

On 28 August 2014, five days after he had left Pape’s flat, Kovari’s body was 
found by a dog walker in the graveyard of St Margaret’s church, in the grounds 
of Barking Abbey. Like all of Port’s victims, his phone was missing and he had 
fatal levels of the date-rape drug GHB in his blood.

While the IPCC investigation will consider whether police could have been 
blinded by a prejudice that risk-taking young gay men taking drugs could end up 
dead in cemeteries, Pape’s concerns about his friend’s death began almost 
immediately.

He Googled “unexplained deaths in Barking” for further details about Kovari 
and found a local newspaper report about Walgate, a fashion student from Hull 
whose body had been found in strikingly similar circumstances two months 
earlier outside a block of flats in Cooke Street, Barking – Port’s flat. Google 
Maps showed him Cooke Street was just “a stone’s throw” from St Margaret’s 
churchyard. “I thought that was a strange coincidence,” he said.

Through Facebook, Pape contacted Kovari’s Spanish boyfriend, Thierry Amodio, 
who was in touch with Kovari’s family and the police, to offer help. Over the 
weeks and months, he and Amodio exchanged hundreds of messages, sharing 
developments and their exasperation over the police investigation.

Pape sent Amodio the link to the report of Walgate’s death, urging him to 
mention it to the police. “I wasn’t next of kin. The police wouldn’t tell me 
anything,” he said. “And I didn’t want to get in the way.” But he believes he 
mentioned the possibility of a link to the police officer who rang him on 6 
September 2014 to take a statement for the coroner.

It was a subject Pape would raise many times over the coming months. But the 
police remained adamant, he said. No link could be established.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fstephen-port-jack-taylor-sentencing-victims-family-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stephen%20Port%20is%20'sick%2C%20twisted%20scumbag'%2C%20says%20murder%20victim's%20family%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fstephen-port-jack-taylor-sentencing-victims-family-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stephen%20Port%20is%20%27sick%2C%20twisted%20scumbag%27%2C%20says%20murder%20victim%27s%20family%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fstephen-port-jack-taylor-sentencing-victims-family-video&media=>
Stephen Port is ‘sick, twisted scumbag’, says murder victim’s family – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2016/nov/25/stephen-port-jack-taylor-sentencing-victims-family-video>
Another person who said he knew Kovari in London also became Facebook friends 
with Amodio. Jon Luck, apparently an American who had moved from Los Angeles to 
London to study humanities, told Amodio he had met Kovari through the dating 
app Grindr and they had had sex on or around 24 August. Upon hearing he was 
dead, Luck asked: “Will police want to speak to me as my DNA would be on him?”

Three weeks after Kovari’s death, the body of Whitworth, a chef from 
Gravesend, was found in the same graveyard. He too had died from an overdose of 
GHB. In his hand was a suicide note blaming himself for Kovari’s death, saying 
he had accidentally overdosed him on GHB during sex. Much later the police 
would work out that the note had in fact been written and planted by Port.

Luck’s messages took on a sinister tone. He began telling Amodio of friends 
having seen Kovari and Whitworth together at an orgy, and of chemsex parties in 
Barking where older gay men drugged and raped younger gay men. Amodio told Luck 
to call the police and provided a number, but Luck never did call detectives. 
Amodio told Barking and Dagenham police about Luck and his allegations, and 
reportedly provided a link to Luck’s Facebook page.

If detectives had checked they would have discovered that the IP address 
associated with Luck’s Facebook account matched that of a social media account 
owned by Port, and that Port was already known to them in connection with the 
first death.

Three months earlier Port had been arrested and charged with perverting the 
course of justice for lying in his police statement over how Walgate’s body had 
come to be found outside his flat. Later he would plead guilty to that charge 
and serve three months in prison.

“Jon Luck” was Port, and the Facebook messages were part of his deceit to 
convince police of a link between his two latest victims and the theory that a 
remorseful Whitworth had killed himself.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fstephen-port-victims-landlord-i-felt-i-hit-a-brick-wall-with-the-police%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F99ed9bb1824c6bc8f22d531c690833edb1e085c0%2F0_568_1416_849%2F1416.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stephen%20Port%20victim's%20landlord%3A%20'I%20felt%20I%20hit%20a%20brick%20wall%20with%20the%20police'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fstephen-port-victims-landlord-i-felt-i-hit-a-brick-wall-with-the-police%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stephen%20Port%20victim%27s%20landlord%3A%20%27I%20felt%20I%20hit%20a%20brick%20wall%20with%20the%20police%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fstephen-port-victims-landlord-i-felt-i-hit-a-brick-wall-with-the-police%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F99ed9bb1824c6bc8f22d531c690833edb1e085c0%2F0_568_1416_849%2F1416.jpg>
 Stephen Port. Photograph: AP 
Pape had heard through Amodio the claims of chemsex orgies and the drugging 
and raping of young men. “At this point I just thought: what? Another dead body 
in the cemetery? Then there is all this about orgies and drugging and raping.”

He knew that people Kovari had known had been to his flat. He was so concerned 
for his safety that he called Barking and Dagenham police. “I said: if this is 
murder, you have to tell me.” He said he was told it was not murder. Seeking 
reassurance again on another occasion, his call was not returned, he claimed.

Pape remained concerned. Three bodies in Barking, all young gay men. The 
stories – which, of course, turned out to have been invented by Port – of 
orgies, drugging and raping. Meanwhile, he read that a senior detective had 
told the local paper the deaths of Kovari and Whitworth were “unusual and 
slightly confusing” and there was no link to Walgate’s death.

“To me it all looked the definition of suspicious. But obviously not to the 
police,” said Pape. “I was thinking: what if this turns out to be the 
worst-case scenario, and I’ve sat on it and did bugger all? But I felt I had 
hit a brick wall with the police.”

Pape felt he needed to exert more pressure. “I think it was because there was 
no one else in this country fighting his [Kovari’s] corner. His family is back 
home, he was only here for a few weeks. His death was a double whammy of a 
young gay man and an eastern European immigrant. So there was this sense: if I 
don’t, who will?

“Then, where there seemed to be a link to the other deaths, it was not just 
doing right by Gabriel, it was about feeling I had a responsibility because 
other young men might be at risk. It goes beyond fighting his corner. It’s ‘do 
I need to be doing my best to raise awareness?’”

He contacted the LGBT and human rights campaigner Peter Tatchell, who advised 
him to contact the Pink News website, and Galop, a gay and lesbian 
anti-violence charity.

In an email to PinkNews in October 2014, Pape stressed that he needed to know 
the deaths were being thoroughly investigated, and his concerns that they were 
not. “My biggest fear is that vulnerable young gay men are being taken 
advantage of in Barking with fatal consequences,” he wrote, adding: “I do not 
trust the police to give this their full attention without someone pushing for 
answers”.

He said he later learned that both organisations were told the first death was 
not linked to the other two.

Pape was not the only one pushing. Walgate’s mother, Sarah Sak, also believed 
there could be a link. Speaking after Port’s trial, she said she had warned 
officers 12 times that Port could be the killer.

As the last person known to have had contact with Kovari, Pape was called as a 
witness at his inquest in June 2015.

The supposed Whitworth suicide note was read out. It contained the 
extraordinary sentence: ‘BTW, please do not blame the guy I was with last 
night, we only had sex then I left, he knows nothing of what I have done.” It 
added: “I dropped my phone on the way here so it should be in the grass 
somewhere. Sorry to everyone.”

The inquest heard that police officers, not handwriting experts, had compared 
the writing on the note with that in Whitworth’s diary. It also heard that 
relatives too had positively identified the writing – a claim later angrily 
denied by the family. A bedsheet found with Whitworth’s body and covered in 
Port’s DNA was not forensically tested. Nor was a bottle containing GHB found 
at the scene.

As an interested person, Pape was allowed to question the police witness, and 
his questions struck right to the heart of the case. Was there any established 
link – other than the suicide note – between Kovari and Whitworth? The answer 
was no. Could there be any link with the first body found? The answer was that 
no link was apparent.

The coroner recorded open verdicts in the cases of Kovari and Whitworth. And 
that appeared to be that, said Pape. He felt there was nothing further he could 
do.

Port was released from prison on an electronic tag in June 2015. On 20 
September the body of Taylor, a forklift truck driver from Dagenham, was found 
in the same circumstances and the same graveyard.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fstephen-port-victims-landlord-i-felt-i-hit-a-brick-wall-with-the-police%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa16262cb0ed72393daf2680a3ca591ca757de8cd%2F0_152_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stephen%20Port%20victim's%20landlord%3A%20'I%20felt%20I%20hit%20a%20brick%20wall%20with%20the%20police'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fstephen-port-victims-landlord-i-felt-i-hit-a-brick-wall-with-the-police%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stephen%20Port%20victim%27s%20landlord%3A%20%27I%20felt%20I%20hit%20a%20brick%20wall%20with%20the%20police%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fstephen-port-victims-landlord-i-felt-i-hit-a-brick-wall-with-the-police%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa16262cb0ed72393daf2680a3ca591ca757de8cd%2F0_152_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 St Margaret’s church in Barking. Photograph: Nick Ansell/PA 
Pressure from Taylor’s family forced police to release CCTV footage taken at 
Barking station in the early hours. It shows Taylor walking with a man swiftly 
identified – by a police officer, in fact – as Port.

Pape was on holiday in Nepal and just about to fly home when police emailed 
him with the news. “It was surreal, being alone in Kathmandu and hearing that 
what I had feared was in fact true.”

But it was only when the plane landed and phone messages came in – “ping, 
ping, ping, ping” – from friends he had long been telling of his concerns that 
it truly hit him. “The shock was comparable to being told Gabriel was dead. But 
there was also that anger, about feeling I hadn’t been properly listened to.”

He attended a public forum in Barking in early 2016 at which he heard police 
say they had engaged with the LGBTQ community and had “gay liaison officers”. 
“But not once was I or Thierry told they even existed. And if they didn’t 
liaise with us, two openly gay witnesses in the case of an unexplained gay 
death – who the hell were they liaising with?”

Having heard about the experiences of the victims’ families, he said the 
police conduct seemed worse than he had thought. He added: “Whatever the IPCC 
come back with, I believe there was homophobia. They judged those four young 
lads and dismissed their families,” he claimed. “I hope the LGBTQ community see 
this for what it is.”

Pape went to the Old Bailey to witness Port being sentenced. “I sat in the 
public gallery. And it was satisfying, seeing him go down for life.”

The Metropolitan police said it was unable to give answers to specific 
questions about the investigation due to the ongoing IPCC inquiry, and referred 
to a statement it released on Port’s conviction.

Commander Stuart Cundy, of the Met’s specialist crime and operations command, 
said part of the IPCC investigation would examine whether discrimination played 
any part, and highlighted “the great deal of work” the Met has done with LGBT 
communities.
 