
In 1961, Bennett Cerf <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bennett_Cerf>, one of the 
founders of the publishing firm Random House, sent a copy of a new book by Jane 
Jacobs,The Death and Life of American Cities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/oct/14/jane-jacobs-death-and-life-rereading>
, to the legendary city planner Robert Moses. Moses’s reply was curt:

Dear Bennett, 

I am returning the book you sent me. Aside from the fact that it is 
intemperate and inaccurate, it is also libelous. I call your attention, for 
example, to page 131. Sell this junk to someone else.

Cordially, Robert Moses

This was no ordinary demurral over a book’s merits. It was a salvo in a 
struggle between a man who had amassed vast bureaucratic powers and remadeNew 
York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> with expressways, parks and 
housing towers, and the woman who assembled neighbours and public opinion to 
stop him when he set his sights on the evisceration of a swath of lower 
Manhattan.
 Robert Moses stands in front of the Manhattan skyline in 1956. Photograph: AP 
Moses was an avatar of the early 20th-century vision that the only salvation 
of cities was the large-scale destruction of their existing features, and 
Jacobs an exemplar of another, which maintained that the future of cities 
rested on preserving exactly those qualities. Jacobs’ book was the most 
powerful retort to Moses’s mode of thinking, and her actions a resounding 
retort to his mode of operating.

The struggles between Jacobs and Moses loom large in the popular 
consciousness. The subject of books byRoberta Brandes-Gratz 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=YoaOWZ29BNQC&pg=PA82&lpg=PA82&dq=The+Battle+for+Gotham:+New+York+in+the+Shadow+of+Robert+Moses+and+Jane+Jacobs+guardian&source=bl&ots=dwebjQJjIV&sig=fkgIv2Ez7Mg4wBLNL-xQFiJh3uM&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjIg8D3vKnMAhUJJpoKHYkuCkIQ6AEILDAC#v=onepage&q=The%20Battle%20for%20Gotham%3A%20New%20York%20in%20the%20Shadow%20of%20Robert%20Moses%20and%20Jane%20Jacobs%20guardian&f=false>
 andAnthony Flint 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/sep/12/jane-jacobs-new-york-history>, 
they now feature in what is surely the world’s first opera about an urban 
planning dispute,A Marvelous Order <http://mosesjacobsopera.com/>, which 
premiered last month.

The only hazard to this libretto is that their conflict, which has become an 
iconic representation of the tension between top-down and organic notions of 
urbanism, was one in which most contact was indirect. In fact they encountered 
each other in person only once. Moses’s sneering dismissal of Jacobs’s book was 
one of very few direct acknowledgements of her existence.

This is fitting since both worked through realms of indirect influence and 
power: Moses within the byzantine and barely accountable tangle of New York’s 
public authority powers; Jacobs in the inherently decentralised world of 
community organising and writings about urbanism. But however indirect the 
sparring, there’s no doubt who prevailed in the end.

‘Immense behind-the-scenes influence’


Despite never winning a single election, Robert Moses reigned over a set of 
principalities that would rival a Habsburg monarch. At his peak he held 12 
offices, the most prominent being theNew York city parks commissioner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/oct/30/mitchell-silver-new-york-parks-bill-de-blasio>
, state parks council head, and chairman of the Triborough Bridge and Tunnel 
Authority. The latter, created in 1933 to oversee construction of the set of 
bridges connecting Manhattan, the Bronx and Queens, was pivotal, providing 
Moses with a steady stream of revenue that he leveraged into countless other 
construction projects.
 The world’s first opera about an urban planning dispute. 
As Robert Caro wrote in his epochal tome The Power Broker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/23/the-power-broker-robert-moses-and-the-fall-of-new-york-robert-caro-review>
, “Moses … displayed a genius for using the wealth of his public authorities to 
unite behind his aims banks, labor unions, contractors, bond underwriters, 
insurance firms, the great retail stores, real estate manipulators – all the 
forces which enjoy immense behind-the-scenes political influence in New York.”

Moses’s early construction was largely confined to Long Island: he steadily 
knit his spider’s web of roads nearer the heart of the city, bulldozing 
increasingly dense urban fabric and eventually setting his sights on Washington 
Square Park, the historic centre of Greenwich Village.

Washington Square Park anchored the Village, offering 10 acres of green space 
to a steadily changing set of neighbours, from Edith Wharton to Bob Dylan. In 
1880, Henry James wrote in Washington Square of its “rural and accessible 
appearance” – a quality that had not entirely dimmed by the 1950s. Moses, 
however, upon looking at the park, was convinced that the amenity it most 
sorely lacked wasa four-lane road through its centre 
<https://ephemeralnewyork.files.wordpress.com/2014/04/washsquare1950splan.png>.
 An artist’s sketch from 1959 of the proposed Lower Manhattan Expressway, a 
10-lane highway through SoHo and Little Italy that required the demolition of 
416 buildings. Photograph: AP 
One neighbourhood resident, Jane Jacobs, received a flyer from the Committee 
to Save Washington Square Park in 1955, providing notice of the proposal to 
extend Manhattan’s 5th Avenue through the park. Jacobs, born in the small city 
of Scranton, Pennsylvania, had arrived in the neighbourhood in the 1930s, 
holding a variety of writing jobs culminating in work for the prominent 
publication Architectural Forum.

There is nobody against this plan – nobody but a bunch of MOTHERS!
Robert Moses 
News of the proposed roadway provoked alarm. In a letter to the city’s mayor, 
Jacobs wrote: “It is very discouraging to do our best to make the city more 
habitable and then to learn that the city is thinking up schemes to make it 
uninhabitable.” Moses’s previous road plans had an unerring tendency to become 
reality. Jacobs set about ensuring that this one didn’t.

She rapidly took on the roles of both strategist and media and community 
liaison with the park’s committee, displaying a great skill for community 
organising – enlisting supporters both small and large, from local children to 
prominent neighbourhood residents such as Eleanor Roosevelt.
 Washington Square Park in 2016. Photograph: Ali Smith for the Guardian 
Jacobs cultivated the media in all its forms, garnering the support of 
independent press such as the nascentVillage Voice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2015/oct/13/the-village-voice-changes-hands-again>
. Nor were traditional levers of power neglected: the support of Carmine 
DeSapio, New York secretary of state, Democratic machine politician and Village 
resident, proved very helpful. The Board of Estimate (a city body controlling 
land use decisions) was prevailed upon to drop the plan.

It was amid this process that Jacobs saw Moses for the only time, as she 
reported to James Howard Kunstler ina Metropolis Magazine interview 
<http://www.kunstler.com/mags_jacobs1.htm>:

I saw him only once, at a hearing about the road through Washington Square, 
which was to be an entrance ramp to the Lower Manhattan Expressway. He was 
there briefly to speak his piece. But nobody was told that at the time.

None of us had spoken yet because they always had the officials speak first 
and then they would go away and they wouldn’t listen to the people. Anyway, he 
stood up there gripping the railing, and he was furious at the effrontery of 
this, and I guess he could already see that his plan was in danger. Because he 
was saying: ‘There is nobody against this – NOBODY, NOBODY, NOBODY but a bunch 
of … a bunch of MOTHERS!’ And then he stomped out.”
 The official 1936 opening of the Triborough Bridge, a construction project 
which helped consolidate Robert Moses’s political power. Photograph: AP 
Jacobs continued her struggle against urban renewal by articulating a positive 
vision of the “teeming city” in a 1958 article for Fortune magazine – which led 
to the commission of her masterwork, The Death and Life of American Cities.

The city is like an insane asylum run by the most far-out inmates
Jane Jacobs 
This broadside against the prevailing scientific rationalism of urban planning 
extolled diversities of usage, old buildings and the organic structures of 
cities: “Why have cities not, long since, been identified, understood and 
treated as problems of organised complexity?” It was a powerful call in an era 
in which any such complexity was the very thing that planners were looking to 
organise out of existence.

Another such effort arose about a month after Jacobs had finished her 
manuscript. The city’s Housing and Redevelopment Board was pursuing a study 
intended to classify a large area of Greenwich Village south of Washington 
Square Park as “blighted”, in order to enable large-scale redevelopment. Moses 
was not personally responsible but his associates headed the effort. Jacobs 
soon became co-chair of a Committee to Save the West Village, devising a new 
set of efforts to derail the flattening of her neighbourhood.
 Jane Jacobs at a press conference in Greenwich Village in 1961. Photograph: 
Alamy 
Moses’s efforts had frequently glided forward thanks to assertions of expert 
knowledge unavailable to the general public and the skilful manipulation of 
civic processes. Jacobs fought back on both fronts. The committee conducted 
their own survey of neighbourhood conditions to rebut the “blighted” 
designation, collecting ample documentation that the neighbourhood was not, in 
fact, a slum.

Public hearings on the proposal had not been held, as mandated by law; Jacobs 
obtained an order from a state judge that they must take place. It soon emerged 
that the City Planning Commission had already, surreptitiously, designated the 
area as blighted.

A frequent Moses tactic, aped by the city in these proceedings, was to 
schedule public hearings at short-notice, to avoid mobilised resistance. But 
Jacobs had a source at City Hall providing regular tips, and worked to deluge 
these meetings with opposed citizens.

Additional skulduggery was unearthed. She noticed the same irregular “r” 
appearing both on press releases from the real estate company charged with 
redeveloping the area, and on statements from an ostensible community group in 
support of the redevelopment. The latter was revealed as a front that had 
vastly misrepresented the scale of the project proposed to neighbourhood 
residents.

Rising public distaste with the secrecy and collusion at work in the process 
led to the city’s abandonment of the “blighted” designation, and its plans for 
redevelopment. By then, however, another, potentially more destructive, threat 
awaited.

‘A monstrous and useless folly’


The Lower Manhattan Expressway was an effort to tie up the loose ends of local 
roadways by extending Interstate 78 – all 10 lanes of it – from the Holland 
Tunnel to the Manhattan and Williamsburg Bridges. The obstacle was the 
streetscape of SoHo and Little Italy, and the great variety of uses within that 
the city found dispensable.

“The grand total for proposed demolition was 416 buildings that housed 2,200 
families, 365 retail stores, and 480 other commercial establishments,” wrote 
Anthony Flint in Wrestling with Moses.
 Greenwich Village residents protest against Robert Moses’s plans to build the 
Lower Manhattan Expressway in 1960. Photograph: Alamy 
The area was both densely settled and architecturally significant, containing 
one of the greatest collections of cast-iron architecture in the world. Yet 
neither factor registered as even slightly consequential initial objections to 
a fresh new expressway – and one eligible for 90% federal funding as part of 
the Interstate Highway system.

The expressway had the support of the city, the Regional Plan Association, the 
American Institute of Architects, the Municipal Art Society, business groups 
and construction workers’ associations.

Once again, Jacobs set about forging a diverse local coalition to stop it.

An organic network of support was developed, drawing on a diverse set of local 
residents, Puerto Ricans, Italians, intellectuals, labourers and, rumour has 
it, even the mafia – united by a common opposition to their homes and 
businesses becoming a merge lane.

Jacobs’s coalition pursued both short- and long-term tactics, obtaining delays 
for resident relocation studies while holding frequent rallies – one featuring 
residents in gas masks, to dramatise the likely increase in pollution – and 
blanketing any public hearings with opposition. She herself offered frequent 
quotable barbs, once describing the expressway at a Board of Estimate meeting 
as a “monstrous and useless folly”.
 New York’s SoHo district is still home to some of the world’s most famous 
cast-iron architecture. Photograph: Michael Pasdzior/Getty Images 
The city’s mayor, Robert F Wagner, halted the condemnation proceedings in 
1962. But the expressway was a beast that refused to be slain, thanks to 
continued support from powerful backers – none more powerful than Moses. By 
1965, the mayor announced his renewed support, offering a slightly altered plan 
that submerged parts of the expressway complex, as well as a proposal for some 
new housing as a sop to relocated residents.

Mayoral challenger John Linsday took up the baton of expressway opposition – 
yet once elected, he too went about tweaking the proposal in the hopes of 
making it more palatable. New versions included an 80-foot elevation andan 
ultra-modern Paul Rudolph proposal 
<http://urbanomnibus.net/2010/10/paul-rudolphs-lower-manhattan-expressway/> for 
a wrapping of new housing. Multi-lane highways are, however, a difficult dish 
to make appetising.

The city’s steamroller processes continued. At one public meeting concerning 
the project, writes Flint, “the microphone faced toward the audience, not the 
officials the residents were nominally addressing ... suggest[ing] that state 
officials were just going through the motions.”


“The city is like an insane asylum run by the most far-out inmates,” Jacobs 
pronounced. She led protesters on to the stage, and the stenographer’s record 
of the meeting was destroyed. She was arrested and jailed for a night on 
charges including inciting a riot and criminal mischief, and could have faced 
years in prison if convicted.

Jacobs eventually determined to leave New York. Her architect husband had 
obtained a commission in Toronto, and she was eager to take her sons beyond the 
risk of the draft for Vietnam. She left in 1968 – not in defeat, however, but 
in victory. The expressway project had lost all steam, and Mayor Lindsay 
declared it scrapped the following summer.

Related: Story of cities #33: how Santiago tackled its housing crisis with 
'Operation Chalk' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/29/story-cities-33-santiago-chile-housing-crisis-operacion-sitio-operation-chalk>

Moses received his final comeuppance in the same year, undone by the internal 
manoeuvrings in government that had so elevated him, as Governor Nelson 
Rockefeller engineered the dissolution of his most lasting fiefdom, the 
Triborough Bridge Authority. While Jacobs went on to enjoy a distinguished 
career as author and urbanist, Moses descended into increasing obloquy. He died 
in 1981, Jacobs in 2006 – one largely reviled, the other venerated.

“And sure enough,” wrote Tom Wolfe in 2007 
<https://www.papress.com/mobile/details.dna?isbn=9781568987712>, “over the past 
40 years, the rebirth of Lower Manhattan from Chelsea to Tribeca, of northern 
Brooklyn, of Astoria and Long Island City in Queens, has taken place without 
razing a single building in the name of ‘urban renewal’, or shooing away a 
single citizen through ‘eminent domain’.”

Jacobs – one of those common citizens, denigrated at the time as merely a 
“housewife” – has, perhaps more than any other, offered inspiration to those 
informed that plans drawn up in the corridors of power will require them to 
move elsewhere. Simply say “no”.

Does your city have a little-known story that made a major impact on its 
development? Please share it in the comments below or on Twitter using 
#storyofcities
 