
A cluster of concrete domes and vaults rises above a rocky valley in the 
middle of theArizona <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/arizona> desert, 
perched on the brow of the hill like the ruins of a space-age Acropolis. 
Beneath one richly patterned apse sit two women, carving cosmic symbols into 
freshly cast ceramic bells, while a second group pours molten bronze into sand 
moulds under another dome nearby. Slender cypress trees sway in the warm 
breeze, as the sound of wind chimes tinkles across the terraces.

This otherworldly scene, which feels like a New Age crafts retreat, is all 
that has materialised, so far, of a vision that was hailed by Newsweek magazine 
in 1976 as “the most important urban experiment undertaken in our time”.

Conceived by Italian architect Paolo Soleri 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/apr/10/paolo-soleri-architect-dies-93>
,Arcosanti <https://arcosanti.org/> was to be a revolutionary new model of 
super-dense urban living, a vast multi-levelled concrete megastructure that 
would house 5,000 people in self-sufficient harmony, all working together in 
the production of bells. The community would renounce cars, grow its own food 
and have minimal energy requirements, living in buildings designed around
passive solar 
<http://www.greenbuilding.com/knowledge-base/principles-passive-solar-design> 
principles. The development would be surrounded by a great glazed “energy 
apron” of productive greenhouses in the valley, which would double up as a way 
of heating the air for the homes above.

“If you are truly concerned about the problems of pollution, waste, energy 
depletion, land, water, air and biological conservation, poverty, segregation, 
intolerance, population containment, fear and disillusionment,” read the sign 
at the entrance the 25-acre site, “join us.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fstory-cities-35-arcosanti-paolo-soleri-desert%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4908e3c28a6644f163bcdad598923d71e30b4c43%2F0_861_2059_1506%2F2059.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2335%3A%20Arcosanti%20%E2%80%93%20the%20unfinished%20answer%20to%20suburban%20sprawl&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fstory-cities-35-arcosanti-paolo-soleri-desert%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2335%3A%20Arcosanti%20%E2%80%93%20the%20unfinished%20answer%20to%20suburban%20sprawl&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fstory-cities-35-arcosanti-paolo-soleri-desert%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4908e3c28a6644f163bcdad598923d71e30b4c43%2F0_861_2059_1506%2F2059.jpg>
 Paolo Soleri and acolytes study his plans in the mid-70s. Photograph: Cosanti 
Foundation 
Forty six years on, the project is about 3% complete. It is home to a 
part-time community of around 50 people and intermittent workshoppers, who have 
to drive to the supermarket to get their supplies, and enjoy the comfort of 
mains electricity and heating. But diggers still trundle across the site, and 
volunteers can occasionally be seen hauling buckets of concrete to and fro.

“We’re very much still building,” says Jeff Stein, the avuncular 64-year-old 
co-president of theCosanti Foundation <https://arcosanti.org/about_us>, the 
organisation that looks after the project, gesturing to a group of students 
busy manhandling a new grey-water recycling tank into place a little way down 
the hill, while others learn the techniques of casting tiles on to the desert 
floor. “We might not reach 5,000 people, but we’re growing. Slowly. The 
production of wind bells is quite a difficult way to support the development of 
a new town.”

A product of the utopian counter-cultural energy of the 1970s, magnified by 
the sense of impending doom that came with the oil crisis, Arcosanti was the 
manifestation of Soleri’s allergic reaction to what he saw as the toxic disease 
of American suburban sprawl.

Coming from the dense urban context of Italy, where he grew up in Turin, 
Soleri found American cities to be anathema, their auto-centric planning “a 
fathomless sinkhole for immense waste”. Cities designed around cars, he said, 
had the effect of producing “not mobility, but a hermitage of the single home 
in an ever-increasing sea of single units, a dreadful flat-land of self-denial, 
courtesy of the great fiction of self-sufficiency.” Spread people out into “a 
square-mile thin pancake,” he said, and you end up with “a slimy veneer of 
organic matter of no use to you or the observer puzzled by the thin, gooey-drip 
man. Suburbias and exurbias are promoters of ‘slime’.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fstory-cities-35-arcosanti-paolo-soleri-desert%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf63738cfd875f727104bebec245e95d7fe00dc7%2F0_298_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2335%3A%20Arcosanti%20%E2%80%93%20the%20unfinished%20answer%20to%20suburban%20sprawl&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fstory-cities-35-arcosanti-paolo-soleri-desert%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2335%3A%20Arcosanti%20%E2%80%93%20the%20unfinished%20answer%20to%20suburban%20sprawl&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fstory-cities-35-arcosanti-paolo-soleri-desert%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf63738cfd875f727104bebec245e95d7fe00dc7%2F0_298_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 A model of the complete Arcosanti. The dark grey buildings have been 
completed. Photograph: Oliver Wainwright 
He had encountered this human slime first hand when he first arrived in the 
car-mecca of Phoenix in the 1940s, to study under Frank Lloyd Wright at his 
alternative desert colony ofTaliesin West 
<http://www.franklloydwright.org/taliesin-west/plan-a-visit.html> – which was 
then sited far from the sprawling city (and is now almost engulfed by it). 
Soleri learned much from Wright, but he broke with his master after a year and 
a half, standing in fierce opposition to Wright’s promotion of low-rise 
suburbia, embodied in such plans asBroadacre City 
<http://paleofuture.gizmodo.com/broadacre-city-frank-lloyd-wrights-unbuilt-suburban-ut-1509433082>
, which proposed giving each family in the US a one-acre plot to build their 
own pastoral homestead.

“We must build up, not out,” was Soleri’s riposte. “The problem is the present 
design of cities are only a few storeys high, stretching outward in unwieldy 
sprawl for miles … turning farms into parking lots, and waste enormous amounts 
of time and energy transporting people, goods and services over their expanses.”

His answer, which he spent decades writing, lecturing and drawing up in the 
form of fantastical perspective drawings, was “arcology”, a fusion of 
architecture and ecology, based on the two key tenets of complexity and 
miniaturisation. His intricate images, exquisitely drafted by hand on huge 
rolls of paper (for which he had to extend his desk, which still pokes out of 
the window of his former studio), depict gargantuan structures teeming with 
densely packed cells of human life.

These mixed-use habitats would extend upwards, outwards and deep underground 
in organic rings and tendrils. Some would form great urban canyons, others look 
more like the roots and branches of a tree, or the tissue of lichen and fungi, 
connected by networks of elevators, escalators and moving walkways. The city 
was conceived as a living, breathing thing: “In an arcology,” Soleri wrote, 
“the built environment and the living processes of the inhabitants interact as 
organs, tissues and cells do in a highly evolved organism.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fstory-cities-35-arcosanti-paolo-soleri-desert%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ef7853aef848bc8d31b986819153327ef4419c2%2F0_0_1587_1074%2F1587.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2335%3A%20Arcosanti%20%E2%80%93%20the%20unfinished%20answer%20to%20suburban%20sprawl&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fstory-cities-35-arcosanti-paolo-soleri-desert%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2335%3A%20Arcosanti%20%E2%80%93%20the%20unfinished%20answer%20to%20suburban%20sprawl&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fstory-cities-35-arcosanti-paolo-soleri-desert%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ef7853aef848bc8d31b986819153327ef4419c2%2F0_0_1587_1074%2F1587.jpg>
 Soleri found inspiration in everything from coral reefs to termite mounds. 
Photograph: Cosanti Foundation 
He drew from nature for his models, finding inspiration in everything from 
coral reefs to Amazonian forests, termite mounds to worm colonies and 
wildebeest herds. Homes would be compact and miniaturised, in order to take up 
less space on the planet, with the aim of maximising the vitality of urban 
life, while minimising the use of land, raw materials and energy. Each fresh 
recruit to Arcosanti was given an 8-foot (2.4 metre) by 8-foot concrete cube to 
live in, each side punctuated by a 5-foot (1.5 metre) diameter circle. It was a 
taste of off-grid hippy monasticism inspired by his time at Taliesin West, 
where each student had to build their own shelter in the desert (a tradition 
that continues there today), and an embodiment of his underlying motive to 
“frugalise the frenzied consumerist juggernaut”.

It was a thrilling call to arms that seduced Mary Hoadley, 71, who arrived 
here in 1970, fresh from studying anthropology at Stanford, lured by the 
prospect of raising concrete vaults from the desert floor with a host of other 
volunteers in a collective festival of construction.

“It really felt like a pioneering thing when we first arrived,” she says, 
sitting in the living room of her home, which nestles behind the foundry apse 
like a cosy Hobbit cave, its porthole windows looking down on the 
bronze-pouring action below. Steps wind down a rugged rock face to a bedroom, 
while light floods in from round skylights in the domed ceiling above. It’s 
easy to believe the rumour that George Lucas got his inspiration for the 
architecture of his desert planet ofTatooine 
<http://starwars.wikia.com/wiki/Tatooine> after a visit here.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fstory-cities-35-arcosanti-paolo-soleri-desert%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f9edf27a8edaa66eb844e4dcd3ca3a483932bf1%2F0_81_5472_3567%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2335%3A%20Arcosanti%20%E2%80%93%20the%20unfinished%20answer%20to%20suburban%20sprawl&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fstory-cities-35-arcosanti-paolo-soleri-desert%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2335%3A%20Arcosanti%20%E2%80%93%20the%20unfinished%20answer%20to%20suburban%20sprawl&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fstory-cities-35-arcosanti-paolo-soleri-desert%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f9edf27a8edaa66eb844e4dcd3ca3a483932bf1%2F0_81_5472_3567%2F5472.jpg>
 Arcosanti is home to a part-time community of 50 people and intermittent 
workshoppers. Photograph: Oliver Wainwright 
“Camping out in the desert, getting up at sunrise every day to work hard in 
the service of an idea, was so invigorating,” Hoadley adds. “And of course, in 
our youthful naivety, we thought we would build the whole thing in five years.”

Hundreds of volunteers were similarly drawn here by Soleri’s intoxicating 
vision of sci-fi environmentalism, which was set out in an electrifying 
exhibition at the Corcoran Gallery in Washington DC in 1970. At the time, it 
was the largest one-man architecture show in US history. It went on to tour in 
New York, Chicago, Ottawa and Berkeley, and Soleri soon became a regular 
feature on the international lecture circuit, staging sell-out performances 
where he would theatrically unroll his great drawings across the stage.

“It was a visceral kind of experience,” says Tomiaki Tamura, 65, who moved to 
Arcosanti in 1976 and now runs the expansive archive, housed in a suite of 
rooms that look out on to an outdoor amphitheatre. The concrete building – 
which was cast on the desert floor in panels and hauled up into place, giving 
it a gnarled, earthy texture – curves around the theatre’s stepped seating, 
forming a two-storey crescent (still awaiting its planned third floor). In a 
celestial touch typical of Soleri’s designs, the area behind the stage is 
fitted with reclining steps, angled upwards for gazing at the stars.

“I was not one of the flower children,” Tamura adds, “but there was something 
compelling about how Soleri made the utopian, counter-cultural ideas that were 
flying around into something much more tangible and physical. That kind of 
dynamism really captured the imagination.”

A model in the archive reveals quite how much building they still have to go 
to complete his grand plan. The existing vaults, which stand 10 metres high, 
look minute in comparison to what was imagined might one day loom behind them: a
25-storey hemispherical megastructure <https://arcosanti.org/node/10137>, 
stacked high with hundreds of tiny rooms and open garden terraces.

Story of cities #36: how Copenhagen rejected 1960s modernist 'utopia'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/may/05/story-cities-copenhagen-denmark-modernist-utopia>
The ultimate masterplan, which is currently being digitally modelled in 3D for 
the first time by visiting workshoppers, looks a little like a city-sized 
cathedral, except with the apses, which would usually face the inwards, flipped 
to face the surroundings. “Rather than facing in to the sacred space of the 
narthex,” says Stein, in theatrically hushed tones, “they would turn to face 
outwards to the sacred space of all creation.”

Soleri himself died three years ago, at the age of 93, leaving the future of 
Arcosanti somewhat up in the air. His legacy lives on in the copious books of 
drawings, but its hard to say that his model town of collective, low-energy 
living has been influential, particularly on its neighbours. The people of 
Phoenix, 70 miles to the south, still spend $12bn (£8.3bn) a year on cars and 
prefer to live in their fenced-off fiefdoms. When asked how Arcosanti had been 
received by other architects, he replied: “With puzzlement, criticism, 
hostility, and dismissal, with a few exceptions constituting endorsement.”

A building hasn’t been completed here since 1989, but Tamura is optimistic 
about the next phases, talking enthusiastically about a potential partnership 
with a developer to realise a chunk of the planned megastructure in the form of 
a big hotel and conference centre. It is perhaps the only viable way of 
securing funds, given the sale of wind chimes hasn’t quite proved as lucrative 
as hoped – although it rather goes against the founder’s principles. 
“Developer,” Soleri would say, as he wandered the site in his trademark 
swimming trunks, “starts with ‘D’, just like ‘devil’ and ‘demon’.”

Does your city have a little-known story that made a major impact on its 
development? Please share it in the comments below or on Twitter using 
#storyofcities

 