
In the depths of Beijing’s Planning Exhibition Hall, a big grey hangar that 
squats in the corner of Tiananmen Square, stands a scale model of the city. It 
is an endless field of tiny wooden and perspex blocks, low-rise courtyards 
huddled cheek by jowl with a motley jumble of towers, expanding ever outwards 
in concentric rings.

To attempt to build a model of China’s 22-million strong capital is a 
Sisyphean endeavour. This carpet of miniature rooftops is hopelessly incapable 
of keeping up with the city’s relentless pace of change, the exhibition hall 
too small to ever contain a megalopolis so sprawling that it is currently 
building itsseventh ring road 
<http://online.thatsmags.com/post/journeys-seventh-ring>, an orbital loop that 
will run for almost 1,000km in circumference.

But the model’s bird’s-eye view exposes something that is illegible from the 
ground: the rigid order that underlies the rambling sprawl. A rhythm of axes, 
grids and symmetrical walled compounds emerges from the chaos, pointing to the 
fact that this seemingly incoherent metropolis is in fact the carefully 
structured product of one of the earliest planning documents in history.

The first thing you notice is the monumental fissure that slices north-south 
through the city, as if the urban grain had been severed by a great tectonic 
rupture. It is an axis that runs for more than 20km, shooting out like a laser 
beam meridian line from the walls of the Forbidden City, the palatial compound 
that lies at the centre of it all.

The 180-acre imperial palace appears to send ripples through the surrounding 
urban grain like a rock thrown into a pond, forming the successive layers of 
ring-roads. Its rhythm of symmetrical walled courtyards seems to structure the 
layout of the entire city, from the scale of blocks, to streets, to individual 
homes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fstory-cities-beijing-earliest-planning-document-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F776e992b7be3b3d04d1a472215ed363884f8bcc6%2F0_0_6097_3661%2F6097.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%234%3A%20Beijing%20and%20the%20earliest%20planning%20document%20in%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fstory-cities-beijing-earliest-planning-document-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%234%3A%20Beijing%20and%20the%20earliest%20planning%20document%20in%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fstory-cities-beijing-earliest-planning-document-history%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F776e992b7be3b3d04d1a472215ed363884f8bcc6%2F0_0_6097_3661%2F6097.jpg>
 The 180-acre Forbidden City in the heart of Beijing. Photograph: Alamy 
The effect is no accident: Beijing was conceived as a diagram of an organised, 
harmonious society, designed to bind the citizens together in bricks and mortar 
under the supreme rule of the emperor. It was to be an expression of absolute 
power like no other city in the world.

Founded more than 3,000 years ago as the city of Ji, Beijing’s present urban 
form was established in the early Ming dynasty (1368-1644), when theYongle 
emperor <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yongle_Emperor> moved the imperial 
capital here from Nanjing.


In establishing the fundamental layout of the new capital, the Ming reached 
for a suitably weighty touchstone, drawing on theteachings of the Kaogong Ji 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=ExoiBQAAQBAJ&printsec=frontcover#v=onepage&q&f=false>
 (roughly translated as “regulations of construction”), a text dating from the 
fifth century BC; part of the Rites of Zhou, an ancient Confucian manual of 
bureaucracy and organisational theory.

“It was a means of legitimising their rule,” says Toby Lincoln, lecturer in 
Chinese UrbanHistory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/historyandhistoryofart> at the 
University of Leicester. “By explicitly drawing on this ancient manual of 
rites, their new capital city used divine numerology and ritual to express the 
power of the ruling elite in physical space.”

As one of the oldest examples of urban planning guidance in the world, the 
Kaogong Ji covers everything from how to determine north-south orientation when 
planning a new city (stick a pole in the ground and watch its shadow), to 
dictating the specific dimensions for local, regional and national capitals.

It states that the national capital should be “a square with sides of nine li” 
(a traditional Chinese unit of measurement equivalent to around 500 metres), 
with “each side having three gateways”. Inscribed within this square, it 
stipulates that there must be “nine avenues running north-south and nine 
running east-west, each of the former being nine chariot tracks wide” – a 
principle that perhaps set the precedent for the scale of modern-day Beijing’s 
agoraphobia-inducing highways.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fstory-cities-beijing-earliest-planning-document-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5e8c4a4abc7579fcceabba63321cff3c9be4f63a%2F0_0_3000_1971%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%234%3A%20Beijing%20and%20the%20earliest%20planning%20document%20in%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fstory-cities-beijing-earliest-planning-document-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%234%3A%20Beijing%20and%20the%20earliest%20planning%20document%20in%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fstory-cities-beijing-earliest-planning-document-history%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5e8c4a4abc7579fcceabba63321cff3c9be4f63a%2F0_0_3000_1971%2F3000.jpg>
 A woman looks at the model of Beijing’s city master plan. Photograph: Guang 
Niu/Getty Images 
But the ancient Han Chinese were less concerned with the practicalities of 
easing chariot traffic flow than with casting the capital as an expression of 
divine power, organising the city as a direct representation of the cosmos – 
with the emperor (aka the Son of Heaven) at the very centre of this model 
universe. Accordingly, the ideal city would take the form of a perfect square 
(the shape that the earth was deemed to be), with its principal roads dividing 
it into nine equal sectors, representing the nine provinces of the empire. The 
three gates on each of the city walls, meanwhile, stood for the three elements 
of the universe – heaven, earth and man – the total adding up to the 12 months 
of the year. Residing at the heart of this city-sized cosmogram, the emperor 
was the very middle of the Middle Kingdom itself: he who held power over the 
city and state, by extension, held control over all creation.

So vast, so rich and so beautiful, that no man on earth could design anything 
superior to it
Marco Polo 
And what a creation it was. When Marco Polo visited the city in the 13th 
century, before the Ming had taken control and begun their improvements, he 
described it as already being “so vast, so rich and so beautiful, that no man 
on earth could design anything superior to it”. By the time the Yongle emperor 
had finished building his 10-metre thick walls in the mid-15th century, Beijing 
was the largest city in the world (a distinction it held until the early 19th 
century) – a majestic capital of the oldest and richest civilisation on the 
planet, whose command of science and technology far exceeded that of Europe, 
which was just emerging from the dark ages.


This conception of the city as an expression of both regal power and social 
order, guided by cosmological principles and the pursuit of yin-yang 
equilibrium, was unlike anything in the western tradition. As architect and 
Chinese scholar Alfred Schinz, author ofThe Magic Square: Cities in Ancient 
China 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=qhcRYkz-I3YC&printsec=frontcover#v=onepage&q&f=false>
, puts it: it is “probably the most elaborate and complex system of thought 
developed by ‘archaic’ man about the world order and its reflection in a 
planned settlement structure”.

It was a form of symbolic planning that had a strong impact on the everyday 
life of the city, too, influencing the profane world beyond the realm of the 
emperor’s divine rituals. Each of the city gates was assigned a particular 
function, according to the kind of traffic that was permitted to enter through 
it. Chaoyangmen, to the east, was used for grain, prompting warehouses to grow 
up around it. Andingmen, to the north, saw the daily flow of night-soil, with 
three great pans outside where it was dried and sold to farmers, stimulating 
agricultural trade immediately outside the city walls. Qianmen, to the south, 
was positioned on a central trading route, which fostered a lively market 
culture that continues to this day – although the informal street markets were 
sadly swept away andreplaced with a Disneyfied traditional shopping street 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2009/08/13/us/13iht-letter.html> for the 2008 Olympics.

The city plan also proved to be a powerful way of structuring and maintaining 
a sense of order down to the scale of the individual family, the walled 
compound form extending beyond the gates of the imperial palace and into the 
home. According to David Bray, author ofSocial Space and Governance in Urban 
China 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=ruoXr97uXvsC&printsec=frontcover#v=onepage&q&f=false>
, not only did the walled city “embody a complex array of cosmologically 
determined symbolic spaces, designed to reinforce the might of the emperor and 
his government, but also, in its simple grid design it provided the template 
for the ordering of everyday social life.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fstory-cities-beijing-earliest-planning-document-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbca339bbb2a76c5c0f007d06c478050065931a31%2F0_195_2999_1800%2F2999.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%234%3A%20Beijing%20and%20the%20earliest%20planning%20document%20in%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fstory-cities-beijing-earliest-planning-document-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%234%3A%20Beijing%20and%20the%20earliest%20planning%20document%20in%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fstory-cities-beijing-earliest-planning-document-history%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbca339bbb2a76c5c0f007d06c478050065931a31%2F0_195_2999_1800%2F2999.jpg>
 Night view of Changan Avenue, the 10-lane thoroughfare which slices east-west 
through the city. Photograph: Imaginechina/Corbis 
Just as the 180-acre imperial palace was structured as a rigid diagram of 
court hierarchy – its courtyards, halls and suites of 9,000 rooms organised 
according to the royal food chain – so too were Beijing’s surrounding houses 
planned as an expression of the Confucian family structure. The traditional 
courtyard homes, or siheyuan, that line the city’s hutong alleyways were 
arranged according to the “duties of obligation” between family members.


The northern-most wing was the place of the patriarch and his wife (or wives), 
the eastern wing was for to the second-ranking male and his family, the western 
wing was for the third-ranking male, while the southern wing closest to the 
street was for servants and the menial functions of cooking and storage. As
anthropologist Francesca Bray puts it 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=3--cToRlmYUC&printsec=frontcover#v=onepage&q&f=false>
, the traditional courtyard house was “a kind of loom, weaving individual lives 
into a typically Chinese social pattern” – the city itself a regularised 
tapestry of obedient subjects laid out before the emperor.

The repetition of the walled compound as a means of enforcing social order was 
a tool that didn’t go unnoticed centuries later by Chairman Mao. In his drive 
to erode the nuclear family structure, he began to reconfigure Beijing into a 
network of semi-autonomous enclaves, each under the control of thedanwei – the 
work unit to which each citizen was assigned and the basic unit by which 
society was organised and controlled in the Communist era, both ideologically 
and physically.


The traditional courtyard house was “a kind of loom, weaving individual lives 
into a typically Chinese social pattern”

Each compound was to be self-sufficient, offering its residents housing, 
employment, education and healthcare, along with communal canteens and bath 
houses, creating miniature walled cities within the city. Intended to foster a 
sense of belonging and being part of a collective endeavour, it instead turned 
Beijing into a place of introverted islands, separated by competition and 
mutual distrust. It had the effect of atomising the previously vibrant urban 
society into a world of isolated cells, each citizen’s loyalties tied to their
danwei, which managed every aspect of their lives, from cradle to grave, 
issuing permits for marriage, divorce and even childbirth.

Story of cities #5: Benin City, the mighty medieval capital now lost without 
trace
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/mar/18/story-of-cities-5-benin-city-edo-nigeria-mighty-medieval-capital-lost-without-trace>
While the controlling power of the danwei has been progressively diluted, and 
the land holdings of state-owned enterprises increasingly sold off to private 
developers, the model of walled compounds continues in Beijing to this day. 
“Walls, walls, and yet again walls,” was the reaction ofSwedish art historian 
Osvald Sirén <http://hahn.zenfolio.com/siren>, when he visited China’s capital 
in the 1920s. “They surround [the city], they divide it into lots and 
compounds, they mark more than any other structures the basic features of the 
Chinese communities.”

He was recounting his experience of walking the hutongs of old Beijing, within 
the limits of the city walls – which were demolished in the 1960s to build a 
subway line, above which the second ring road now rumbles – but he could have 
been describing driving past one of the many gated communities that have since 
sprung up across the city. These exclusive islands of themed villas and 
apartment blocks, surrounded by private schools and swimming pools, have a 
mirror image at the opposite end of the social spectrum, too.

“Enhance the idea of safety and reduce illegal crimes,” read a banner hanging 
over the main road to Shoubaozhuang, a village of 7,000 migrants to the south 
of Beijing – one of 16 such villages around the city that was subject to a
programme of “sealed management” 
<http://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/world/inside-chinas-gated-communities-for-the-poor/article1212705/>
 in 2010, their residents’ routines controlled by a strict curfew. The ancient 
cosmological symbolism may long have fallen away from the streets of Beijing, 
but the role of city planning as a means of enforcing social order is as strong 
as ever.

Does your city have a little-known story that made a major impact on its 
development? Please share it in the comments below or on Twitter using 
#storyofcities
 