
“Changes like this usually happen through wars and natural disasters.” 

The academic and activist Iskra Geshoska is describing a project called Skopje 
2014 <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-28951171>, a comprehensive plan to 
“beautify” the city centre of Macedonia’s capital.

It is seen at its most extreme along the river Vardar, where construction work 
is intense on a new, “instant” city centre replete with more heroic statues 
than you’d find in cities 10 times Skopje’s size. With astonishing speed, a 
modernist city has been transformed into a mini-Las Vegas.

Along the river are two very approximate reconstructions of historic 
buildings, and several oversized government headquarters, all within an idiom 
of Corinthian columns and mirror glass that has been absent from most European 
cities since the late 1980s; they are linked by bridges lined with golden 
candelabras and yet more statues. Behind them stands a 1960s city of brutalist 
high-rises and office blocks, but many of these are undergoing an extraordinary 
redesign – with hollowDoric columns <http://www.doric-column.com/> being 
affixed to slender concrete pillars.


For the government of the former Yugoslav republic, this project is making 
their capital truly “European”. It is linking it, through a process of 
“antiquitisation” – which involved decorating the city with ancient-looking 
monuments – to the glorious past of Alexander the Great, which the Greeks would 
deny them. (Absurdly, Greece has regularly blocked Macedonia’s accession to 
Nato or the EU for its use of the name.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fstory-cities-skopje-plans-future-ancient-past%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe7edb88314e6a2d817bb59efd4a11e8ee9a17b5%2F0_91_3053_1832%2F3053.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2331%3A%20Skopje%20plans%20for%20the%20future%20by%20fixating%20on%20its%20ancient%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fstory-cities-skopje-plans-future-ancient-past%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2331%3A%20Skopje%20plans%20for%20the%20future%20by%20fixating%20on%20its%20ancient%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fstory-cities-skopje-plans-future-ancient-past%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe7edb88314e6a2d817bb59efd4a11e8ee9a17b5%2F0_91_3053_1832%2F3053.jpg>
 Soldiers dig for bodies in the ruins of the 1963 earthquake. Photograph: 
Keystone/Getty 
For government opponents such as Geshoska, of the Skopje NGO Kontrapunkt 
<http://ngo-kontrapunkt.blogspot.co.uk/p/ngo-kontrapunkt.html>, it is a 
catastrophe, not least because the Skopje 2014 plan aims at erasing an earlier 
plan altogether – one which was as futuristic as the current plan is 
retrograde: the1965 Skopje City Centre Plan 
<http://www.failedarchitecture.com/masterplan-for-the-city-of-skopje-macedonia/>
, by Japanese architect Kenzo Tange.

These two plans are totally opposed in their ideas about what a city is, and 
what it is for; two extreme examples of modernism and postmodernism, violently 
forced into the same space.


The 1965 plan was the result of a natural disaster two years earlier. The 
Skopje earthquake destroyed around 70% of the city and buried thousands of 
people under the rubble.

As reflecting the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia’s “non-aligned” 
geopolitical status – communist, but outside of the Soviet Bloc – therelief and 
reconstruction efforts 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books/about/Skopje_resurgent.html?id=irBNAAAAMAAJ&redir_esc=y>
 crossed the borders of the cold war. Temporary, prefabricated housing estates 
were designed and donated by the US, Denmark, Britain and Bulgaria. Polish 
planners applied their expertise in reconstructing destroyed cities. 
Switzerland contributed schools, the USSR a concrete panel factory, Poland the 
Museum of Modern Art. American universities offered scholarships to Macedonian 
architects, while a plan by the Greek firm Doxiadis Associates plotted the 
city’s infrastructure and future growth.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Diybmt-iLysU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Diybmt-iLysU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Diybmt-iLysU&media=>
 Video: Macedonia, a timeless capital 
But the competition for the city centre was won by the Tokyo office of Kenzo 
Tange, who was then much feted for hisHiroshima Peace Museum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/18/story-of-cities-hiroshima-japan-nuclear-destruction>
 and a wildly ambitious plan for Tokyo Bay.Tange’s planning 
<http://yomadic.com/communist-architecture-skopje-kenzo-tange/> was influenced 
by metabolism, a Japanese movement for a form of architecture that would be 
adaptable, fast, ultra-modern and ultra-urban. In the 1960s, Japan had the 
highest growth rates in the world – but Yugoslavia had the second highest, so 
it wasn’t such a stretch to imagine that the futures of Tokyo and Skopje might 
not be too far apart.

Gazing out over the city centre – and the remnants of Tange’s plan – from the 
Polish-designed Museum of Modern Art, a concrete-and-marble gallery placed at 
the top of the 15th-century Ottoman Fortress, architect Vladimir Deskov tells 
me: “The plan was a hundred years in advance of the city.”

The old Skopje is centred around the Old Bazaar, a series of winding, cobbled 
streets with a skyline of domes and minarets. By the 1960s, a modern city had 
sprung up around this, mostly on the other side of the Vardar, which marked an 
informal divide between the Christian and Muslim parts of the city.

Recognising this, Tange intended to bridge the two parts of the city through 
what he called a “city wall” of apartment blocks, modelled partly on the curved 
walls of the fortress. Surrounding the centre like a modernised version of 
Vienna’sRingstrasse, the wall consists of interlinked blocks that provide a 
strong, defining, monumental presence.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fstory-cities-skopje-plans-future-ancient-past%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3dc46cf5009f53c4d15f06f20c5215dfb3dc183b%2F0_485_4608_2072%2F4608.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2331%3A%20Skopje%20plans%20for%20the%20future%20by%20fixating%20on%20its%20ancient%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fstory-cities-skopje-plans-future-ancient-past%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2331%3A%20Skopje%20plans%20for%20the%20future%20by%20fixating%20on%20its%20ancient%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fstory-cities-skopje-plans-future-ancient-past%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3dc46cf5009f53c4d15f06f20c5215dfb3dc183b%2F0_485_4608_2072%2F4608.jpg>
 The clustered, sculptural forms of the Cyril and Methodius University campus. 
Photograph: Owen Hatherley 
The UN’s seismic experts warned that the area around the river was the most 
vulnerable to another earthquake, so Tange planned the embankment as a green, 
open space for cultural centres, concert halls and the like, which would help 
bring the two halves together. The city wall was largely completed (by Croatian 
architects rather than Tange himself), but it never actually crossed the river.

Various of the planned central buildings were realised on both sides: the 
clustered, sculptural forms of the Cyril and Methodius University and the 
extraordinary Opera and Ballet Theatre, both designed by Slovenian architects, 
and from Macedonian designers, the Telecommunications Centre – a strange, 
individualistic example of organic brutalism – and the Trade Centre: a long, 
low shopping centre of overlapping terraces stepping subtly down to the river, 
its combination of enclosure and openness inspired by the structure of the 
bazaar.

The result was a city where the monumental “wall”, which had gardens and 
squares behind it, enclosed a loose, green centre. It had no historical 
reminisces in its details or imagery, but modelled its spaces on particular 
historical structures it found nearby, such as the bazaar and the fortress.

If the city wall was largely executed as planned, Tange’s more ambitious “city 
gate” was a failure from the start. This was to be arranged around a railway 
station which opened in 1980: a long, sleek, steel-and-concrete tube on a high 
viaduct. However, the complex system of towers and walkways that was supposed 
to lead through it to the Trade Centre, and from there to the river, was never 
realised.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fstory-cities-skopje-plans-future-ancient-past%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9110f36ee52f7890bd5025cfa947401ba143e0c%2F172_201_2579_3224%2F2579.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2331%3A%20Skopje%20plans%20for%20the%20future%20by%20fixating%20on%20its%20ancient%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fstory-cities-skopje-plans-future-ancient-past%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2331%3A%20Skopje%20plans%20for%20the%20future%20by%20fixating%20on%20its%20ancient%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fstory-cities-skopje-plans-future-ancient-past%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9110f36ee52f7890bd5025cfa947401ba143e0c%2F172_201_2579_3224%2F2579.jpg>
 An image from Kenzo Tange’s Skopje City Centre Plan. Photograph: Mondadori 
Portfolio/Getty Images 
Today this area consists of wasteland, informal housing, big box malls and 
new/old churches under reconstruction. In the 1980s, just as the reconstructed 
city had been mostly completed, the Yugoslav “economic miracle” faltered, with 
mass unemployment and a huge national debt. That exacerbated massively in the 
1990s as the pan-Yugoslav economy collapsed into war.Macedonia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/macedonia> stayed out of that, but hundreds 
of thousands of workers, mostly recent incomers from the countryside, lost 
their jobs.

Yet this alone does not explain the extreme nature of Skopje 2014.

The contrast between the two plans is best witnessed from the small park 
between the Trade Centre and the 1930s National Assembly, one of the few 
survivors of the earthquake. A flood of statuary has flowed messily into the 
space between the two, mostly celebrating Ancient Macedonia and the early 
20th-century anti-Ottoman nationalist insurgents of the Internal Macedonian 
Revolutionary Organisation (the current ruling party considers itself their 
successor), as well as sundry medieval kings and folk heroes. There is a 
rotunda decorated with Third Reich-esque golden statues; a monument to wartime 
partisans at a table on a plinth; and, of course, a Triumphal Arch, which the 
government listed as a “national treasure” as soon as it was constructed – all 
crammed into a space the size of one city square.

There is no classical or baroque symmetry in any of this; the sculptures have 
been scattered randomly. They’re the result of one of the central parts of 
Skopje 2014: an “open call” for amateur sculptors.

Populism is central to the plan, deliberately bypassing any notion of 
professionalism and expertise in favour of a heavily mediated “people’s choice” 
– though the prime minister Nikolai Gruevski has proudly proclaimed himself the 
plan’s author. Almost all the buildings surrounding these have been 
“antiquitised” to cement the connection to ancient Macedonia, with thin 
classical dressings affixed to the concrete, glass and tile underneath.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fstory-cities-skopje-plans-future-ancient-past%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d0d6b1aa975ad89b5d74a3a3b93f56a00205f6e%2F0_0_5400_3240%2F5400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2331%3A%20Skopje%20plans%20for%20the%20future%20by%20fixating%20on%20its%20ancient%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fstory-cities-skopje-plans-future-ancient-past%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2331%3A%20Skopje%20plans%20for%20the%20future%20by%20fixating%20on%20its%20ancient%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fstory-cities-skopje-plans-future-ancient-past%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d0d6b1aa975ad89b5d74a3a3b93f56a00205f6e%2F0_0_5400_3240%2F5400.jpg>
 Many landmarks of Skopje’s Old Bazaar area have been blocked out by the 
‘antiquitisation’ efforts. Photograph: JTB Photo/UIG via Getty Images 
There is nothing like this in any other democratic country – it is the sort of 
authoritarian, wildly kitsch assemblage usually seen in autocracies and 
despotisms. It gives the effect of North Korea without the planning; the 
project’s €200m (£156m) (or more, depending on who you talk to) cost borne by 
the state, albeit via massive borrowing.

Everything about Skopje 2014 is about facades; its actual historical legacy 
covered with a new narrative that concentrates on Greek-speaking warlords of 
the fourth century BC or Bulgarian revolutionaries of the 1900s.

The minarets of the Old Bazaar are screened off by ludicrously tall monuments; 
the international, modern buildings of the socialist era are given 
mock-classical dressings. The Opera and Ballet Theatre – a staggering work of 
architecture whose irregular, angled forms flowing down to the river could have 
been built yesterday – is now screened from view by structures that try (with 
impressive ineptitude) to look like they were built 2,000 years ago, with 
mock-19th century candelabras and a Roman portico with allegorical figures in 
what looks like gold lame.

I ask a member of staff at the theatre who is paying for all this, in one of 
the poorest countries inEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>? 
“Well, I’ve not been paid in nine months,” he replies. “So I guess I am.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fstory-cities-skopje-plans-future-ancient-past%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe61285799069f63ce5e37879a9bdaf676a038ef5%2F1284_0_5849_3511%2F5849.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2331%3A%20Skopje%20plans%20for%20the%20future%20by%20fixating%20on%20its%20ancient%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fstory-cities-skopje-plans-future-ancient-past%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2331%3A%20Skopje%20plans%20for%20the%20future%20by%20fixating%20on%20its%20ancient%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fstory-cities-skopje-plans-future-ancient-past%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe61285799069f63ce5e37879a9bdaf676a038ef5%2F1284_0_5849_3511%2F5849.jpg>
 Protesters outside Skopje’s Architecture Museum earlier this year. Photograph: 
Robert Atanasovski/AFP/Getty 
But how did the international project of 1965 – which saw the UN and the 
world’s finest planners and architects reconstructing a city on the most 
advanced lines – fail to leave a legacy?

Goran Janev 
<http://www.cultures-of-history.uni-jena.de/debating-20th-century-history/macedonia/skopje-2014-instrumentalizing-heritage-for-unexpected-results/>
, an anthropologist at Cyril and Methodius University, puts it down to the way 
the links created in the 1960s were forcibly closed off as former Yugoslav 
citizens – who could travel without visas to both sides of divided Europe 
before 1989 – were suddenly pushed into isolation, their new passports 
worthless. “I had five passports at one point in the 1990s,” he recalls.

Skopje 2014 has not passed without protest. The former head of the Macedonian 
Architects Association, Cigi Danica Pavlovska – who trained with Alfred Roth, a 
Swiss designer who is one of the many major international figures to have work 
in the reconstructed city – tells me with some pride how areferendum 
<http://skopjediem.com/-latest-news/25137-civil-initiative-i-love-gtc-announces-wide-campaign.html>
 managed to stop the Trade Centre being “antiquitised”.

Story of cities #32: Jane Jacobs v Robert Moses, battle of New York's urban 
titans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/28/story-cities-32-new-york-jane-jacobs-robert-moses>
However, it has all happened at breathtaking pace. While Tange’s plan took 20 
years to reach (partial) completion, Skopje 2014 has transformed the city’s 
look beyond recognition within just four years. Janev suggests this speed is 
part of the point, creating facts on the ground before municipalities or locals 
have the chance to react; a sort of urban shock doctrine (and shock is very 
much the effect). “All the nationalism and symbolism is just dust in our eyes,” 
he adds. “The point is profit.”

It easy to laugh at some of the creations, and some will surely travel to the 
city just to see the hilariously clumsy statues of painters wielding 
paintbrushes, large-breasted maidens, and the dozens of rugged warriors on 
horseback. A city which appears as if redesigned by the furnishers of MTV Cribs 
will appeal to those with a cruel sense of humour.

Yet the differences between the two plans represent a stark vision of 
contemporary priorities: equality replaced with populism, futurism with 
“antiquitisation”, spaces by facades, the sublime by the “pretty”, 
internationalism by provincialism, architecture as function by architecture as 
language.

Eccentric as it may look, the ideas behind Skopje 2014 are mainstream today, 
while those of Skopje 1965 are usually summarised as “the mistakes of the 60s”. 
The city centre of today is the terrifying end result. Anyone who thinks they’d 
like a city where the traditionalists triumph over the modernists should visit 
Skopje, and see what they think.

Does your city have a little-known story that made a major impact on its 
development? Please share it in the comments below or on Twitter using 
#storyofcities
 