
Half a century on, Shirley Chan can still picture the freeway that would have 
destroyed her old neighbourhood. “Three storeys high; eight or 10 lanes of 
traffic … you can imagine the dead zone along here,” she says, indicating with 
a sweep of her arm the swathe it would have cut through Chinatown and across 
Vancouver’s historic downtown east side.

In the 1960s, Chinatown was a vibrant, messy place. The sidewalks spilled over 
with fishmongers and fruit sellers. There were mom-and-pop grocery stores, 
benevolent societies, dim sum places, gambling parlours – even the alleyways 
had restaurants.

“The isolation would’ve slowly killed all of it. And not just here. Strathcona 
would be gone, Gastown too. We had no choice but to fight,” Chan says.

Announced in 1967, the freeway was part of a larger urban renewal scheme to 
modernise Vancouver’s road network and revitalise its then-struggling inner 
city. Had it gone through, the scheme would have razed vital neighbourhoods and 
built massive elevated roadways with an LA-style cloverleaf interchange.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fstory-cities-38-vancouver-canada-freeway-protest-liveable-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F086d5712a9e83063b02d3506da4e0037bcd9fe4b%2F0_252_3829_2298%2F3829.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2338%3A%20Vancouver%20dumps%20its%20freeway%20plan%20for%20a%20more%20beautiful%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fstory-cities-38-vancouver-canada-freeway-protest-liveable-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2338%3A%20Vancouver%20dumps%20its%20freeway%20plan%20for%20a%20more%20beautiful%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fstory-cities-38-vancouver-canada-freeway-protest-liveable-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F086d5712a9e83063b02d3506da4e0037bcd9fe4b%2F0_252_3829_2298%2F3829.jpg>
 Vancouver is now a mainstay ofglobal liveability studies 
<http://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/23/vienna-named-worlds-top-city-for-quality-of-life>
. Photograph: George Rose/Getty 
Such a plan seems unthinkable today. Known for its embrace of public space and 
pedestrian- and bike-friendly planning, Vancouver is the only major North 
American centre without an inner-city freeway. Gastown and Chinatown together 
form the cultural heart of the postcard-beautiful downtown peninsula.

But in the 1960s, Vancouver was a provincial outpost in Canada’s far west, the 
car was ascendant, and urban planning was in the thrall of modernism. Thinkers 
such as Swiss-French architect Le Corbusier, with his emphasis on master 
planning, and American town plannerRobert Moses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/28/story-cities-32-new-york-jane-jacobs-robert-moses>
, with his tear-it-down-and-build-it-up approach to urban renewal, were 
influential with city governments across the continent. Vancouver was no 
exception.

The city grew quickly after the second world war, and by the mid-60s the 
population approached one million. As car ownership spiked, people and 
businesses started to move out of the centre. The downtown business district 
began to stagnate, and the inner-city neighbourhoods, already dense and poor, 
continued their decline. Fast, direct arterial roads that would link downtown 
to the burgeoning suburbs, and link Greater Vancouver to theTrans-Canada Highway
 <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trans-Canada_Highway> – then under construction 
– seemed like the obvious solution.


Large-scale redevelopment was packaged with the freeways as an opportunity for 
a blank slate. “The thinking at the city was, tear down the blight areas and 
replace them with new, cleaner, better housing for the poor, and you increase 
access for the middle classes too,” says Gordon Price, director of Simon Fraser 
University’s city programme.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fstory-cities-38-vancouver-canada-freeway-protest-liveable-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb78ec5dc0f4e6846c7b08b9477eff07f34b5490a%2F0_0_5722_4578%2F5722.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2338%3A%20Vancouver%20dumps%20its%20freeway%20plan%20for%20a%20more%20beautiful%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fstory-cities-38-vancouver-canada-freeway-protest-liveable-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2338%3A%20Vancouver%20dumps%20its%20freeway%20plan%20for%20a%20more%20beautiful%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fstory-cities-38-vancouver-canada-freeway-protest-liveable-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb78ec5dc0f4e6846c7b08b9477eff07f34b5490a%2F0_0_5722_4578%2F5722.jpg>
 A new freeway in the 1960s would have cut through Vancouver’s Chinatown. 
Photograph: FPG/Getty Images 
The process had begun in the early 60s. Parts of Strathcona, a working class 
immigrant enclave, were bulldozed to build a public housing project. Nearly a 
thousand residents, about a third of the population, were relocated. Shirley 
Chan’s mother, Mary Lee Chan, organised some of the first protests. “As a kid, 
I remember going door to door as a translator for my mother, handing out 
flyers, hosting meetings at our house,” Chan says.

But it wasn’t until the city council announced the more ambitious – and 
destructive – freeway plan in 1967 that the resistance reached a tipping point.

Following the announcement, hundreds of people marched through Chinatown 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xTstmk3ig5E>, singing protest songs and 
brandishing anti-freeway signs.


“The Chinese community was well-represented. My mother and Harry Com [another 
organiser] made sure of that. But there were people from across the city. 
Academics, architects, students, teamsters, business people. Everyone had their 
different reasons,” Chan says. By then she was a university student and a 
community organiser in her own right.

City Hall, led by mayor Tom Campbell and chief planner Gordon Sutton-Brown, 
both establishment stalwarts, took a dim view of the opposition. The protesters 
were dismissed as left-wing malcontents: “Maoists, communists, pinkos, 
left-wingers and hamburgers,” in Campbell’s memorable, if slightly puzzling, 
formulation later on. At the same time, there was anxiety within the city 
because it had not yet secured extra funding needed from the federal and 
provincial governments for the project to go ahead.
 Video: Freeway protests in Vancouver in the 1960s 
City Hall grudgingly held public consultations while organisers within the 
protest movement made a point of demonstrating the breadth of the growing 
coalition. “We used subtle tactics, [for example] bussing in senior citizens 
from Chinatown so they could be heard,” says former British Columbia premier 
Mike Harcourt, who cut his teeth as the movement’s unofficial legal council.

The early leadership of Walter Hardwick, a respected urban geographer, and the 
support of Peter Oberlander, the Town Planning Commission chair who retired his 
post in protest at the plan, loaned credibility to the anti-freeway movement, 
as did that of forward-thinking business leader Art Philips.

Oberlander wasn’t the only ally within the municipal government. Darlene 
Marzari, a social planner with the city at the time, used her position to 
sabotage the effort to win over Strathcona residents. “My job was to relocate 
hundreds of Chinese families, to convince them the plan was okay. Instead I 
helped convince them to organise against us,” she says.

City council meetings now regularly overflowed with hundreds of concerned 
citizens. The Chinatown Freeway Debates, as the raucous, often confrontational 
sessions came to be known, continued for the rest of the year.

The first major blow to the freeway plan came in November 1967. The city was 
lobbying the federal minister for transport and housing, Paul Hellyer, for his 
support. A tour of the “blight” areas of downtown was arranged to help him 
understand the need for the project. Marzari and Chan managed to infiltrate the 
tour.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fstory-cities-38-vancouver-canada-freeway-protest-liveable-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa369562f60fa9f9dced1f3702975cdf60caaacd7%2F0_0_3000_2027%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2338%3A%20Vancouver%20dumps%20its%20freeway%20plan%20for%20a%20more%20beautiful%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fstory-cities-38-vancouver-canada-freeway-protest-liveable-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2338%3A%20Vancouver%20dumps%20its%20freeway%20plan%20for%20a%20more%20beautiful%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fstory-cities-38-vancouver-canada-freeway-protest-liveable-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa369562f60fa9f9dced1f3702975cdf60caaacd7%2F0_0_3000_2027%2F3000.jpg>
 Performers dress up during the Chinese New Year Parade in Chinatown. 
Photograph: Getty Images 
As they drove around, Chan, seated next to the minister, offered a steady 
counter-narrative: “The city people said, ‘Look at the sagging roofs of the 
houses,’ and I said [to Hellyer], ‘Yes, but look at the structures. They’re 
good.’ I told him the community had not been consulted, we were not happy about 
being moved from our homes. The people who had already been moved felt totally 
cut off.”


That same day, Hellyer announced a nationwide freeze on federal funding for 
urban renewal. It was an early victory for the anti-freeway movement in what 
would be a six-year battle.

Along the way, the movement become more ambitious in its goals. The focus 
shifted from merely stopping the expropriation of inner-city neighbourhoods to 
challenging its very approach to planning.

The dirty secret is that the freeway would’ve gone ahead if the money had been 
there
Gordon Price 
“The city simply looked south of the border and adopted what Americans did, 10 
years later. There was no critical thinking, no consultation,” says Dr V Setty 
Pendakur, professor emeritus at the University of British Columbia’s School of 
Community and Regional Planning, and a former activist. “You only needed to 
drive to Seattle to see how freeways choked the life out of neighbourhoods.”

Drawing on the experiences of local residents and the input of experts like 
Hardwick and Oberliner, the movement coalesced around the idea that 
neighbourhoods should be at the heart of city planning. The Electors’ Action 
Movement (Team) was formed to contest the municipal elections. They won two 
seats on city council in 1968 – a moral victory but not enough to change the 
way things were done at City Hall.

The city continued to push the freeway plan, revising the proposal several 
times over the next few years without ever seriously addressing the movement’s 
larger concerns. During this time, the Dunsmuir and Georgia viaducts, twin 800m 
stretches of elevated roadway, were built on the edge of Chinatown, with the 
idea that they would eventually connect to the freeway in whatever form it 
finally took. Still, federal funding was not forthcoming.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fstory-cities-38-vancouver-canada-freeway-protest-liveable-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff204feb4a94195b6e93a9843f2062461756b633c%2F0_344_5159_3098%2F5159.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2338%3A%20Vancouver%20dumps%20its%20freeway%20plan%20for%20a%20more%20beautiful%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fstory-cities-38-vancouver-canada-freeway-protest-liveable-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2338%3A%20Vancouver%20dumps%20its%20freeway%20plan%20for%20a%20more%20beautiful%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fstory-cities-38-vancouver-canada-freeway-protest-liveable-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff204feb4a94195b6e93a9843f2062461756b633c%2F0_344_5159_3098%2F5159.jpg>
 Lions Gate Bridge in Vancouver in the 1960s. Photograph: Archive Photos/Getty 
Images 
“The protests were important,” Price says, “but the dirty secret is that the 
freeway would’ve gone ahead if the money had been there.”

Tensions between the two sides culminated in a confrontation at the grand 
opening of the viaducts in 1972 
<http://www.vancouversun.com/news/look+back+1972+sees+georgia+viaduct+open/10716508/story.html>
. Protesters formed a human chain to block city officials as they made the 
inaugural trip across the new roadway.

By then, anti-freeway sentiment was widespread in Vancouver and across Canada 
— Toronto was fighting its own battle,against the proposed Spadina Expressway 
<http://www.thestar.com/news/gta/2009/03/28/how_downtown_slew_the_beast.html>. 
Team swept to power a few months later, winning a majority of seats on city 
council. Philips was elected mayor. Harcourt, Marzari and Pendakur also found 
themselves moving from the front lines to council chambers.

“The first thing we did was fire the planning department and let the freeway 
project die,” Harcourt says. It was a turning point in Vancouver’s history.

Team ushered in a number of reforms and initiatives. For a few heady years in 
the 70s, planning was radically consultative, centred around the city’s 20 or 
so neighbourhoods, with gentle densification – of the kind beingchampioned by 
Jane Jacobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/may/04/jane-jacobs-100th-birthday-saskia-sassen>
 in Toronto – the order of the day. “We brought planners out into communities 
to work with them on everything from traffic patterns to zoning to housing 
development,” Marzari says.

The city acquired huge amounts of parkland, setting up agricultural land 
reserves that to this day act as bulwarks against overdevelopment. Many of 
Vancouver’s signature attractions, including Granville Island, False Creek and 
the seawall, were developed or revitalised in the wake of the anti-freeway 
victory, either by Team or by its successors in the late 1970s and 80s.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fstory-cities-38-vancouver-canada-freeway-protest-liveable-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42daec3e8c4a73b417435d4f7216e3fd0577ccf4%2F0_69_3306_1983%2F3306.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2338%3A%20Vancouver%20dumps%20its%20freeway%20plan%20for%20a%20more%20beautiful%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fstory-cities-38-vancouver-canada-freeway-protest-liveable-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2338%3A%20Vancouver%20dumps%20its%20freeway%20plan%20for%20a%20more%20beautiful%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fstory-cities-38-vancouver-canada-freeway-protest-liveable-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42daec3e8c4a73b417435d4f7216e3fd0577ccf4%2F0_69_3306_1983%2F3306.jpg>
 Although Vancouver has been praised for its liveability, high house prices are 
forcing homeowners further out. Photograph: Getty Images 
“We weren’t smarter, we were later. We learned from the mistakes of Seattle 
and LA,” says Bing Thom, a prominent Vancouver architect. He credits the city’s 
success to, among other things, timing and sensibility.

“One of the legacies of the protests was that they created an appetite and 
appreciation for critical debate. We have had enlightened civil servants and an 
educated citizenry. Everyone has an opinion, and you can talk logic and ideas 
even if you disagree.”

Land too valuable not to redevelop

When, last year, the City of Vancouver announced that the viaducts would be 
demolished <http://vancouver.ca/home-property-development/viaducts-study.aspx>, 
it felt to Chan like a final, symbolic victory. “I feel relieved,” she said. “I 
hope … to see the community reknit across the no man’s land which has been 
there for more than 40 years.”

Symbolism aside, the reality is that the viaducts sit on land that is now too 
valuable not to redevelop. Since the late 90s, and particularly in the last few 
years, property values have soared. As the city has become famous for its 
liveability, global capital has poured in, much of it from wealthy Chinese keen 
to park their money in a beautiful andeconomically stable place 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2014/05/26/real-estate-goes-global>.

Story of cities #39: Shenzhen – from rural village to the world's largest 
megalopolis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/may/10/story-of-cities-39-shenzhen-from-rural-village-to-the-worlds-largest-megalopolis>
The average price for a detached house now exceeds C$1.4m 
<http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/british-columbia/vancouver-real-estate-house-prices-1.3564528>
 (£750,000), while household incomes have remained steady at around £40,000. 
This has precipitated an affordability crisis, with would-be homeowners moving 
further and further out of the city in search of housing.

“Let’s be clear, [the investors driving up real estate prices] are a tiny 
segment of the Chinese people who immigrate to the city; 99% face the same 
affordability issues as everyone else. It’s a class issue,” Thom says.

He doesn’t see an end to the trend anytime soon. “This is the reality of 
unchecked globalisation. Vancouver is a small city and the scale of change is 
the same as New York or London, so it affects us much more. It’s inevitable 
that people are going to start asking themselves questions,” he says.

Questions like: what is Vancouver today, and who is it for? 

Does your city have a little-known story that made a major impact on its 
development? Please share it in the comments below or on Twitter using 
#storyofcities
 