
Amid the much-mythologised graffiti that appeared around Sorbonne University 
during the French civil unrest in May 1968, one line still stands out as 
intriguing and ambiguous: “The future will only contain what we put into it 
now.”


What appears at first utopian has more than a hint of the ominous. While 
augmented reality creates a city individualised for every occupant, and 
developments in modular architecture and nanotechnology might result in rooms 
that change form and function at a whim, the problem lies in the unforeseen. 
The smart city will also be the surveillance city.

For the moment, we remain largely wedded to superficial visual futures. The 
likelihood is that the prevailing chrome and chlorophyll vision of architects 
and urbanists will become as much an enticing, but outdated, fashion as the 
Raygun Gothic of The Jetsons or the cyberpunk of Blade Runner. Rather than a 
sudden leap into dazzling space age-style cityscapes, innovations will unfold 
in real-time – and so too will catastrophes. The very enormity of what cities 
face seems beyond the realms of believability, and encourages postponement and 
denial.

“Survivability” should be added to urban buzzwords like connectivity and 
sustainability. Three quarters of all major metropolises lie on the coastline. 
In China alone,20 million people per year 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/16/world/asia/chinas-great-uprooting-moving-250-million-into-cities.html?pagewanted=all>
 move to cities, with the flood-pronePearl River Delta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/may/10/china-pearl-river-delta-then-and-now-photographs>
 now theworld’s largest urbanised area 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jan/28/china-pearl-river-delta-overtake-tokyo-world-largest-megacity-urban-area>
, according to the World Bank.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Fstory-cities-future-growing-megacities-waste-floating-smart%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F389436e3d6030d254bdb85f490a2faf9087dbc51%2F0_0_3036_1372%2F3036.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%23future%3A%20what%20will%20our%20growing%20megacities%20really%20look%20like%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Fstory-cities-future-growing-megacities-waste-floating-smart%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%23future%3A%20what%20will%20our%20growing%20megacities%20really%20look%20like%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Fstory-cities-future-growing-megacities-waste-floating-smart%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F389436e3d6030d254bdb85f490a2faf9087dbc51%2F0_0_3036_1372%2F3036.jpg>
 Blade Runner’s futuristic city scene. Photograph: Allstar/Cinetext/Warner Bros 
A recent report 
<http://www.christianaid.org.uk/Images/act-now-pay-later-climate-report-may-2016.pdf>
 by Christian Aid places more than a billion people in coastal cities 
vulnerable to severe flooding and extreme weather due to climate change by 
2070, with Kolkata, Mumbai and Dhaka topping the list. Many more people face 
the knock-on effects of severe flooding such as fresh water shortages, refugee 
crises and political instability.



Cities would be designed to allow for a co-existence between water and civic 
activities
Seth McDowell 
The question remains whether large-scale adaptation will be possible in the 
face of short electoral cycles, the abiding influence of commercial interests, 
and a sense of inertia beneficial to the status quo. Since Kenzō Tange’sTokyo 
Bay Plan <http://archeyes.com/plan-tokyo-1960-kenzo-tange/> (1960), one 
tendency has been towards proposing intriguing but as yet ephemeral “floating” 
cities. For real cities facing sea-level rise, Seth McDowell from
Mcdowellespinosa architects <http://www.mcdowellespinosa-architects.com/> 
identifies three strategies: “Defence, retreat and adaptation.”

“Cities and populations with generous resources and engineering capacity will 
likely simply take the defence strategy and build mega engineering structures 
to keep the water away – similar to theDelta Works 
<http://www.deltawerken.com/Deltaworks/23.html> in the Netherlands. For those 
with less cultural and economic investments in the water’s edge, we will likely 
see retreat as a strategy. However, I see retreat as both a horizontal and 
vertical operation. So, retreating does not just mean packing up and moving 
inland, but could also mean elevating above the water.”

Venice is the commonly quoted model for this process, but a more recent 
example (though considerably less aesthetically appealing) is the platform oil 
city ofNeft Daşhlari 
<http://www.citylab.com/design/2014/02/visit-soviet-era-oil-city-floating-caspian-sea/8512/>
 in Azerbaijan. “Water becomes a new datum – not so much a habitable space, but 
rather a fluctuating ground,” McDowell explains. “Cities would be designed or 
reconfigured to accept rising water levels and adapt … to allow for a 
co-existence between water and civic activities. You can see this strategy in 
projects like De Urbanisten’sWater Square Benthemplein 
<http://www.urbanisten.nl/wp/?portfolio=waterplein-benthemplein> in Rotterdam, 
where a public square doubles as a water storage basin.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Fstory-cities-future-growing-megacities-waste-floating-smart%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57ffeda92d03b6081fdc44d3934452db4d130cdc%2F0_0_2448_2448%2F2448.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%23future%3A%20what%20will%20our%20growing%20megacities%20really%20look%20like%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Fstory-cities-future-growing-megacities-waste-floating-smart%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%23future%3A%20what%20will%20our%20growing%20megacities%20really%20look%20like%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Fstory-cities-future-growing-megacities-waste-floating-smart%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57ffeda92d03b6081fdc44d3934452db4d130cdc%2F0_0_2448_2448%2F2448.jpg>
 Terreform One’s Ecotarium project in the North Pole is based on the premise of 
massive human migration to the north to escape severe flooding and increased 
temperatures. Photograph: Mitchell Joachim/Terreform One 
Architecture group Terreform One <http://www.terreform.org/> adopts a 
similarly counter-intuitive but practical approach in itsGovernors Hook 
<http://www.terreform.org/projects_urbanity_red_hook.html> project, where 
“instead of keeping the water out, the design allows the water in”. The 
relationship between the urban and rural must be reconsidered, co-founder 
Mitchell Joachim suggests, to prevent cities adopting a siege mentality and 
fighting a losing battle with the elements.

“We need to find these much larger soft buffer zones that are accepting of 
these two worlds of nature and city. Before Hurricane Sandy, we were using 
these ghost fleets, old military vessels as artificial reefs that would be 
embedded into the edges of our city and allow sediment and life-forms to build 
up on top of them over time and create these middle zones between land and 
sea.” The devastation wrought by Hurricane Sandy made these plans seem 
particularly pertinent, if not prophetic.

Dealing with waste

The population explosion and advances of the industrial age have produced 
unprecedented levels of waste into landfill, the sea and the sky. Countering 
measures, such as developing nanotechnology that would see buildings alleviate 
pollution at a molecular level, are still in their infancy.

In the meantime, waste is as much a testament to civilisation as our urban 
skylines.Mcdowellespinosa <http://www.mcdowellespinosa-architects.com/> 
proposes a shift in thinking: “Waste is just a material state,” McDowell says. 
“Since it tends to be unwanted, it is cheap.

We need to find these much larger soft buffer zones that are accepting of 
these two worlds of nature and city
Mitchell Joachim 
“The main issue to overcome in viewing waste as raw material is the energy 
required to transform the material from a state of refuse to a state of 
sophistication. There is also the perceptual challenge – how can waste be 
transformed to acceptable visual and performance standards? We’ve explored this 
idea in projects such asCity of Blubber 
<http://www.mcdowellespinosa-architects.com/BLUBBER.html>, which imagines 
converting Hong Kong’s food waste into a productive bioplastic material.”

What we might see as absurd is already happening through necessity in settings 
likeManshiyat Naser in Egypt <http://www.atlasobscura.com/places/garbage-city>, 
where a “Garbage City” functions on the refuse of Cairo. Mitchell Joachim 
agrees that our current approach is a problem. “There is no such thing as 
waste. Waste is supposed to go away but there is no ‘away’. We look at fully 
‘upcyclable’ cities where projects, products, concepts that we make are always 
intended to be cycled upwards again and again.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Fstory-cities-future-growing-megacities-waste-floating-smart%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d7e1f50dae485f751aac71f978d4d77e6c0601e%2F0_285_4272_2563%2F4272.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%23future%3A%20what%20will%20our%20growing%20megacities%20really%20look%20like%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Fstory-cities-future-growing-megacities-waste-floating-smart%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%23future%3A%20what%20will%20our%20growing%20megacities%20really%20look%20like%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Fstory-cities-future-growing-megacities-waste-floating-smart%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d7e1f50dae485f751aac71f978d4d77e6c0601e%2F0_285_4272_2563%2F4272.jpg>
 The City of Blubber imagines converting Hong Kong’s food waste into a 
productive bioplastic material. Photograph: Mcdowellespinosa 
This is reflected in Terreform One’s Rapid Re(f)use 
<http://www.terreform.org/projects_urbanity_rapid_refuse.html> project – a 
“future city [that] makes no distinction between waste and supply”.

Engaged in projects from the shifting pods of Peristaltic City 
<http://www.terreform.org/projects_urbanity_peristaltic.html> to the 
transformed-Arctic Ecotarium ofFuture North 
<http://www.terreform.org/projects_urbanity_futurenorth.html>, Joachim suggests 
a radical change in our economic and political systems to match our 
technological ingenuity. “They say we’re in the age of the Anthropocene but 
really it’s more accurate to say we’re in the Capitalocene. Everyone has to 
grow and show proof of growth. And we know that is impossible. Nothing grows to 
infinity. There will always be stresses whether on the market or the 
environment that will cause it to feedback.

“At Terreform One, we’re anticipating, not an endless growth system, but a 
state where waste doesn’t exist – a steady state or closed, stable economy that 
cycles back and recognises the limits of the earth’s metabolism and what we can 
take out. This would be done with footprint calculations and life-cycle 
analyses on anything we produce.”

Rather than view the city architecturally, Joachim encourages us to see it 
also as a series of interconnected metabolic systems, akin to a biological 
organism. “In a culture of biology, you just don’t design something for a 
single purpose. A cherry tree is servicing thousands of other forms of life. It 
produces thousands of cherries that get absorbed into the soil and feed all 
different types of flora and fauna. It’s connected into a web of life.”

Terreform One’s ideas and designs might seem wildly visionary on first glance 
but looking closer, they go beyond speculative concepts into proposing 
functioning models. “What we do is create very detailed fictive scenarios that 
don’t promise the future will end up this way, but rather we think about what 
the inherent issues are and bring these to the foreground and talk in a logical 
way how cities might respond.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Fstory-cities-future-growing-megacities-waste-floating-smart%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd80cbe90af82f74519609ebb67fd6fe1ea4af3a5%2F0_0_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%23future%3A%20what%20will%20our%20growing%20megacities%20really%20look%20like%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Fstory-cities-future-growing-megacities-waste-floating-smart%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%23future%3A%20what%20will%20our%20growing%20megacities%20really%20look%20like%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Fstory-cities-future-growing-megacities-waste-floating-smart%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd80cbe90af82f74519609ebb67fd6fe1ea4af3a5%2F0_0_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 The Rapid Re(f)use project supposes an extended New York reconstituted from 
its own landfill material. Photograph: Mitchell Joachim, Terreform ONE 
The obstacle in adapting cities is the same obstacle in tackling fossil fuel 
emissions; what Joachim identifies as “predatory drag”. “If you’re an oil 
company, you’re going to say ‘Yes, solar panels are great, we’ll invest in 
that. We think in 2050, we’ll all be using solar panels.’ Until then, every 
single day they are in business, there are such enormous profits for them that 
the point is to delay.”

Given how embedded these interests are in political circles, change from 
within needs an unlikely synthesis of thecommunity-orientated philosophy of 
Jane Jacobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/28/story-cities-32-new-york-jane-jacobs-robert-moses>
 and the force, connections and leverage of Robert Moses. It will likely take a 
disastrous jolt (“an environmental Pearl Harbour”) to alter the calculus of 
negligence economics, provide a rousing symbol and focus the issue, by which 
stage it might be too late.

Rather than devising more complex technologies in an escalating battle against 
nature, we adapt and invite the water in
Ostap Rudakevych 
One day, cities may be forced to follow their inhabitants in becoming mobile. 
Ron Herron’sWalking City <http://archigram.westminster.ac.uk/project.php?id=60> 
for Archigram may still suggest the outer reaches of science fiction, but the 
idea of moving a city has already happened: theSwedish town of Kiruna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jul/30/kiruna-the-arctic-city-being-knocked-down-and-relocated-two-miles-away>
 was relocated two miles away.

And with developments in the assembling of buildings through drones, 
nanotechnology-enhanced materials and industrial 3D printing, dissembling and 
deploying them elsewhere could be much easier than at present.

Changing cities

Perhaps the likeliest outcome is that cities will simply continue as they are, 
or be deserted. The costs of change may result in inundated areas simply being 
abandoned (in the model of Detroit or New Orleans) while more privileged areas 
will be protected. Sacrifice zones and ruins may form in coastal cities as the 
authorities and the rich move up or out.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Fstory-cities-future-growing-megacities-waste-floating-smart%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc57b3cab69fec8a0afd2da3cd719a248fecab34%2F0_0_2000_1850%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%23future%3A%20what%20will%20our%20growing%20megacities%20really%20look%20like%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Fstory-cities-future-growing-megacities-waste-floating-smart%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%23future%3A%20what%20will%20our%20growing%20megacities%20really%20look%20like%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Fstory-cities-future-growing-megacities-waste-floating-smart%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc57b3cab69fec8a0afd2da3cd719a248fecab34%2F0_0_2000_1850%2F2000.jpg>
 Aqualta by Clouds Architecture Office illustrates New York adapting to rising 
waters. Photograph: Clouds AO 
Containing a critique of the present, as every prophesy does, Clouds 
Architecture Office’sAqualta <http://www.cloudsao.com/AQUALTA> envisages a 
partially submerged metropolis where life nevertheless carries on. “The city 
would in effect lift its skirt allowing water to flow beneath its feet,” 
explains partner Ostap Rudakevych.

“Thinking through the ramifications – flooded subway tunnels, submerged roads 
and sidewalks, street level retail underwater – allows for new conditions to 
emerge, such as transport by boat or dirigible, suspended walkways, oyster 
beds, and a generally slower and quieter lifestyle. Perhaps fossil fuels would 
be gone by then, yielding a quieter city without the sounds of engines or 
motors.

“Rather than devising ever more complex technologies in an escalating battle 
against nature, we adapt and invite the water in.”

Story of cities #48: Cybercity, Mauritius – a vision of Africa's 'smart' 
future?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/may/23/story-cities-48-ebene-cybercity-mauritius-vision-africa-smart-future>
Beyond the initial surprise, there are sound ideas and a scathing 
perceptiveness underlying the project: “Aqualta was guided by the observation 
that people are resistant to change, especially if it means sacrificing comfort 
or convenience. Needed lifestyle adjustments have been gradual or non-existent. 
Aqualta was intended as a kind of slow-burn wake-up call, a seductive portrayal 
of where we’re headed, like it or not.”

To go beyond the superficial aspects of future cities requires seeing past the 
architectural shell and the marketing to the systems, relationships and people 
within – the citizens rather than the citadels.

“A city is more than a place in space,” Patrick Geddes pointed out, “it is a 
drama in time.” Change will be continuous, because “designing a city is like 
painting a watercolour in a stream”, says Joachim.

In order to be preserved, the city must become adaptable. So too must its 
designers and its inhabitants – but they must do so together. We are endlessly, 
fancifully predicting the future partly in order to distract ourselves from the 
fact that we’re already creating it, for good and ill.


Does your city have a little-known story that made a major impact on its 
development? Please share it in the comments below or on Twitter using 
#storyofcities
 