
Kenya’s third biggest city, after Nairobi and Mombasa, is not a city at all 
but a refugee camp – the world’s largest. This year theDadaab refugee complex 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dadaab> is 25 years old: young for a city, but 
old for a camp that was only ever supposed to be a temporary sanctuary.

Dadaab was built in 1992 for 90,000 refugees fleeing the war in Somalia. Today 
it is home to an estimated half a million people,350,000 of them registered 
refugees <http://www.unhcr.org/pages/49e483a16.html> – an urban area the size 
of Bristol, Zurich or New Orleans. Last week Kenyaannounced plans to close it 
<http://www.interior.go.ke/?p=3113#.VzNbbQ7X9oY.twitter> by May of next year, 
to theunhappiness of many who live there 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/13/refugees-urge-kenyan-leaders-to-rethink-closure-of-dadaab-camp>
.

Noor Tawane, now a middle-aged father of seven and businessman in the camp, 
was one of Dadaab’s first residents. Over the past four years, while 
researching abook about the camps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/08/city-of-thorns-nine-lives-worlds-largest-refugee-camp-dadaab-kenya-ben-rawlence-review>
, I have learned his story. He arrived in Dadaab on a donkey cart in 1992, at 
the age of seven, with his mother and father: a thin, wizened man with hennaed 
hair and light eyes called Idris.

The family had fled the violence that engulfed southern Somalia following the 
collapse of the government <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Somali_Civil_War> of 
Siad Barre. Idris was a prosperous farmer with a lot of land on the banks of 
the Juba river that he was reluctant to abandon. “The most beautiful land ever 
is that place,” Tawane says proudly – but he cannot remember directly. This is 
his father’s memory talking.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fstory-of-cities-44-dadaab-kenya-worlds-largest-refugee-camp-closed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c4dd5851dca035f9658b15a31e774e7385240e9%2F66_0_2392_1708%2F2392.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2344%3A%20will%20Dadaab%2C%20the%20world's%20largest%20refugee%20camp%2C%20really%20close%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fstory-of-cities-44-dadaab-kenya-worlds-largest-refugee-camp-closed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2344%3A%20will%20Dadaab%2C%20the%20world%27s%20largest%20refugee%20camp%2C%20really%20close%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fstory-of-cities-44-dadaab-kenya-worlds-largest-refugee-camp-closed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c4dd5851dca035f9658b15a31e774e7385240e9%2F66_0_2392_1708%2F2392.jpg>
 Noor Tawane, one of Dadaab’s first residents. Photograph: Ben Rawlence 
One day, Tawane’s elder brothers had gone to work on the farm outside their 
home town of Jama’ame. When they didn’t return, Idris went looking for them – 
and discovered his two boys lying dead amid the maize stalks, a bullet in each 
of them. So the rest of the family ran.

Refugees were massing at the border with Kenya and a town of tents and huts 
<http://www.unmultimedia.org/tv/unifeed/asset/U120/U120221b/> sprang up – a bit 
like the “Jungle” camp in Calais today. These waves of new arrivals prompted 
the Kenyan government to make a more permanent (but still temporary) 
arrangement: it invited theUN’s refugee agency 
<http://www.unhcr.org/pages/49c3646c2.html> to build three planned camps around 
the small dusty border town of Dadaab, 90km inside Kenya. And it was into one 
of these, a camp called Hagadera, that Tawane, his parents and his remaining 
brothers and sisters were shown one morning in late 1992.

 Hagadera, in Somali, means “the place of the tall trees”. It was also a place 
of sandy gullies formed by sporadic streams in the rainy season, where nomads 
brought their camels. Twelve kilometres to the north was the town of Dadaab – 
hitherto a tiny settlement of 5,000 semi-nomadic people – where the UN and the 
other aid agencies made their own camp of tents next to the police post. To the 
north of Dadaab were two more camps, Ifo and Dagahaley; like Hagadera, each was 
designed to hold 30,000 people.

There was no fence around each camp; only, in every direction, the unremitting 
desert. “It was very dry, very hot!” Idris told me.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fstory-of-cities-44-dadaab-kenya-worlds-largest-refugee-camp-closed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb338fa0be96a871c9ad9ccd45c9767f00c70bb2f%2F96_0_3404_2045%2F3404.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2344%3A%20will%20Dadaab%2C%20the%20world's%20largest%20refugee%20camp%2C%20really%20close%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fstory-of-cities-44-dadaab-kenya-worlds-largest-refugee-camp-closed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2344%3A%20will%20Dadaab%2C%20the%20world%27s%20largest%20refugee%20camp%2C%20really%20close%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fstory-of-cities-44-dadaab-kenya-worlds-largest-refugee-camp-closed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb338fa0be96a871c9ad9ccd45c9767f00c70bb2f%2F96_0_3404_2045%2F3404.jpg>
 An aerial view of the Dagahaley camp, part of a sprawling urban slum in the 
middle of the inhospitable Kenyan desert. Photograph: Thomas Mukoya/Reuters 
North-east Kenya is lonely country and the government wanted the refugees 
penned in as far away as possible from everyone else. It stopped the refugees 
from moving further into Kenya with a roadblock on the road south and another 
at the Tana river inGarissa town 
<http://qz.com/379374/my-home-town-garissa-will-suffer-again-at-the-hands-of-kenyan-authorities-but-it-wont-make-our-country-safer/>
, 100km to the south.

The UN planners designed the three camps on a grid pattern, arranged in 
lettered sections and numbered blocks bisected by roads wide enough for police 
patrol cars. The principles that have always guided the camp architecture are 
visibility and control, a bit like a prison – the camp follows the structure of 
punishment, but there has been no crime.

Tawane’s family was shown to a rectangle of sand in block E5 of Hagadera. The 
size of a plot corresponds to the number of people in each family: a UN unit of 
measurement (also used to calculate rations) known as “family–size”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fstory-of-cities-44-dadaab-kenya-worlds-largest-refugee-camp-closed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95dfc4f26cbcc71e8b15d72e0741cbd964a3d9c7%2F0_129_2592_1555%2F2592.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2344%3A%20will%20Dadaab%2C%20the%20world's%20largest%20refugee%20camp%2C%20really%20close%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fstory-of-cities-44-dadaab-kenya-worlds-largest-refugee-camp-closed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2344%3A%20will%20Dadaab%2C%20the%20world%27s%20largest%20refugee%20camp%2C%20really%20close%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fstory-of-cities-44-dadaab-kenya-worlds-largest-refugee-camp-closed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95dfc4f26cbcc71e8b15d72e0741cbd964a3d9c7%2F0_129_2592_1555%2F2592.jpg>
 Family plots in the sand are often marked out by thorn fences. Photograph: Ben 
Rawlence 
Tawane’s family was given a tent, and they set about planting thorn cuttings 
along the perimeter of their plot for a fence. Every two weeks, a truck would 
arrive with food for the distribution of rations: maize flour, wheat, beans. 
“The children couldn’t adapt to the relief food,” Idris recalled. “For six 
months they were always getting sick; I was always taking them to the hospital.”

Water arrived by truck, too, every few days, before the drilling machines came 
and boreholes were dug. In those early days, water was only 20 metres below the 
surface of the desert – but by 2016, a new borehole struck water only after 
going down 400 metres. Half a million people use a lot of water.

Soon after they were settled in Hagadera, a group of volunteers built a school 
out of wood and corrugated-iron sheets. Tawane’s earliest memories are of 
running down the sandy alleyways between the blocks, then across the open 
expanse in front of them, to the little school. “I learned my ABC there, in 
Arabic,” he said, “writing lessons on a narrow wooden board.”

In each camp, in the centre of the grid, the UN planners marked out an area 
for a market, with plots for stalls. The new arrivals had arranged themselves 
in their sections and blocks, appointing community leaders to liaise with the 
UN, the Kenyan government, and agencies that had suddenly appeared to run the 
camps’ clinics.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fstory-of-cities-44-dadaab-kenya-worlds-largest-refugee-camp-closed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f5d91e3ff339e0a5981746651791afd153268b3%2F0_0_4256_2555%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2344%3A%20will%20Dadaab%2C%20the%20world's%20largest%20refugee%20camp%2C%20really%20close%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fstory-of-cities-44-dadaab-kenya-worlds-largest-refugee-camp-closed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2344%3A%20will%20Dadaab%2C%20the%20world%27s%20largest%20refugee%20camp%2C%20really%20close%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fstory-of-cities-44-dadaab-kenya-worlds-largest-refugee-camp-closed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f5d91e3ff339e0a5981746651791afd153268b3%2F0_0_4256_2555%2F4256.jpg>
 Water is in heavy demand in the camps: a new borehole only struck a source 
after going down 400 metres. Photograph: Roberto Schmidt/AFP/Getty Images 
In many cases, those who had been in positions of authority back home, such as 
Tawane’s father, slipped easily into leadership roles in the camps. As a 
businessman with some assets, he was among those invited to set up a shop in 
the market. The UN rations are dry and many people would wish to sell them in 
order to buy other things including vegetables, meat, tea or sugar. But 
Tawane’s father refused the offer: “We’ll be going home soon,” Idris told them.

“I never had the expectation of staying in this place,” he said to me. “I know 
I have the name of ‘refugee’, but I never accepted settling here as a permanent 
solution.” Idris died earlier this year, after 25 years in the camp, still 
waiting to return to his farm.

He had, though – after some years of resistance – invested in a butchery 
business, and bequeathed his sons a network of shops around the camp, plus 
three donkey carts with insulated steel boxes on their back, each sporting the 
word “MEAT” in red paint.

The government recently required the UN to dismantle some new homes because 
they “looked too much like real houses”

In time, of course, the economy of the camp 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/news/world/africa/the-chaotic-economy-of-a-kenyan-refugee-camp-1.2532686>
 grew. People would go hungry for years in order to save the capital to start a 
business – but these days, in the market, you can buy everything from an iPhone 
to an ice-cream.

In time, too, the UN formalised the ad-hoc appointment of block and section 
leaders into municipal elections. Each camp has an elected chairman and woman, 
plus an overall chair who represents the three camps in discussions about 
everything from the siting of boreholes and problems with refuse collection, to 
communal relations between the different groups in the camp. After finishing 
high school, Tawane ran for office as youth chairman of Hagadera: “I am 
different because I have been to trainings on democracy and I know what it is 
about,” he said.

Tawane won – and used his two terms to preach a message of inclusivity and 
gender mainstreaming, buzzwords he had learned from UN workshops. “Women have 
more choice in Dadaab,” he said. “NGOs teach them about female genital 
mutilation and forced marriage and so on. Dadaab is a more free place for women 
than Somalia.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fstory-of-cities-44-dadaab-kenya-worlds-largest-refugee-camp-closed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fddeaec150acb0325d84fa3535eb9a7b54f61d25f%2F0_200_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2344%3A%20will%20Dadaab%2C%20the%20world's%20largest%20refugee%20camp%2C%20really%20close%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fstory-of-cities-44-dadaab-kenya-worlds-largest-refugee-camp-closed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2344%3A%20will%20Dadaab%2C%20the%20world%27s%20largest%20refugee%20camp%2C%20really%20close%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fstory-of-cities-44-dadaab-kenya-worlds-largest-refugee-camp-closed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fddeaec150acb0325d84fa3535eb9a7b54f61d25f%2F0_200_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 A 12-month-old girl is buried at Dadaab’s Ifo camp after dying of malnutrition 
during the 2011 famine. Photograph: Jerome Delay/AP 
These days, Dadaab is a veritable melting pot, with Sudanese, Ethiopians, 
Congolese, Ugandans and even a lone Rwandan refugee from the 1994 genocide 
adding to the mix. The camp is not a democracy, more a kind of consultative 
autocracy, with the Kenyan government and the UN the ultimate overseers – in 
some areas content to operate a kind of laissez-faire governance, but in other 
respects fierce about enforcing restrictions.

The perversity of these restrictions has grown more acute as the camps have 
aged. Tawane’s home for a quarter of a century is made of mud and sticks 
because the refugees are not allowed to pour concrete or make permanent 
structures. He has been through the Kenyan school system and acquired diplomas 
by distance learning, yet he is not allowed to work for the UN or the agencies 
that run the camp because he is not a Kenyan. “Sometimes I wonder, why has God 
left me like this?” Tawane complains.

But he has not accepted his fate lying down. While the government has always 
forbidden proper sanitation and electricity in the camp, to avoid this giant 
slum becoming “permanent”, Tawane and his friends have invested in a generator 
and provide power, illegally, to nearly 400 households for a monthly fee.

Tawane’s ingenuity exemplifies both the triumph and the tragedy of the camp 
system in dealing with large-scale refugee flows. Underlying their foundation 
is a fiction of temporariness – a fiction the Kenyan government is willing to 
enforce with bulldozers if necessary.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fstory-of-cities-44-dadaab-kenya-worlds-largest-refugee-camp-closed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5c1b837ed1645677723543129a756cac877aedd%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2344%3A%20will%20Dadaab%2C%20the%20world's%20largest%20refugee%20camp%2C%20really%20close%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fstory-of-cities-44-dadaab-kenya-worlds-largest-refugee-camp-closed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2344%3A%20will%20Dadaab%2C%20the%20world%27s%20largest%20refugee%20camp%2C%20really%20close%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fstory-of-cities-44-dadaab-kenya-worlds-largest-refugee-camp-closed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5c1b837ed1645677723543129a756cac877aedd%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 A Somali girl sings to her classmates at Illeys primary school in the 
Dagahaley refugee camp. Photograph: Jerome Delay/AP 
The government recently required the UN to dismantle some newly built homes 
because they “looked too much like real houses”, and it has torn down illegal 
power lines too. If the refugees were allowed to work, to make their businesses 
prosper, to pay tax even – it seems clear that everyone would be better off. As 
Tawane himself complained: “What could I have achieved if I hadn’t been born a 
refugee?”

Despite the restrictions, however, Dadaab is working after a fashion. And even 
though Mogadishu appears to be stabilising, for people such as Tawane, who have 
made a life – and a living – in the camp, the uncertainty of life back in 
Somalia is not an attractive alternative.

“The UN and Kenya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/kenya> government are 
saying: ‘Go back home’,” said Tawane, “But for me, go back where? The house we 
had has been taken by other clans – and Al-Shabaab is still in control.”

Moreover, the economic reach of the Dadaab camps has become a part of the 
national landscape: powerful interests have taken root. Many Kenyans are coming 
to work here – for the agencies in running water, education and health 
services; as security guards, hoteliers and drivers; and also working for 
refugee businesses in the camp market that long ago outgrew its allotted space: 
metalworkers, tailors, computer technicians, traders of everything from sugar 
to sportswear. This is the largest market between Nairobi and Mogadishu, 
turning over $20m-$30m a year.

Story of cities #5: Benin City, the mighty medieval capital now lost without 
trace
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/mar/18/story-of-cities-5-benin-city-edo-nigeria-mighty-medieval-capital-lost-without-trace>
The roads through the camp are also a hub for a multimillion-dollar smuggling 
ring 
<http://www.jfjustice.net/userfiles/file/Research/Black%20and%20White%20Kenya's%20Criminal%20Racket%20in%20Somalia.pdf>
 that enriches certain officials in the Kenyan government. Some members of the 
police, nominally in charge of security in the camps, are paid bribes to look 
the other way.

By day, a government spokesman might blame Dadaab refugees 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-32269944> for terrorist attacks in 
Kenya and call for the camp to be closed; by night, however, this illicit trade 
is pouring cash into the campaign coffers of some politicians, although the 
government has denied this. “The Kenyans are very good at smuggling,” said 
Tawane. “They prefer money rather than maintaining a good security in the camp.”

For these reasons, and because of the remoteness of a durable peace across 
much of southern Somalia, Dadaab seems very likely to remain, despite last 
week’s announcement of its impending closure.

This sprawling urban slum in the middle of an inhospitable desert – the most 
inappropriate place for a city – is sustained by a curious mix of political 
intrigue, bureaucratic inertia, and the simple fact that for two generations 
now, it has become “home”. While this refugee complex does not appear on any 
official atlas of Kenya, the Dadaab camp is, so the saying goes, very much “on 
the map”.

Ben Rawlence is the author of City of Thorns: Nine Lives in the World’s 
Largest Refugee Camp <http://portobellobooks.com/city-of-thorns>. It is 
availablefrom the Guardian Bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/370501/> for the 
reduced price of £11.99 (RRP £14.99)
 