
In September 2005, the new Cheonggyecheon Stream opened in downtown Seoul, 
looking for all the world like a modern urbanist’s dream come true: not just a 
pedestrian-only public space bringing water and vegetation into the centre of a 
dense metropolitan area of 25 million, but one built where a traffic-filled 
stretch of elevated freeway used to stand.

It also reclaimed the role of the original stream, which flowed through the 
site before the city’s aggressively development-minded government paved over it 
in the late 1950s and, two decades later, built the Cheonggye Expressway – then 
a proud symbol of urban progress for the 1970s.

As soon as the stream began flowing again (making ingenious use of the 
groundwater already pumped out by nearby subway lines), so too did praise for 
Seoul’s mayor Lee Myung-bak, the project’s highest-profile proponent – albeit 
one who’d spent nearly 30 years working for and then running Hyundai 
Construction, a company responsible for some environmentally and aesthetically 
questionable work in the South Korean capital, including the Cheonggye 
Expressway.

But in the $900m (£615m) Cheonggyecheon project (part-built by Hyundai), Lee 
found not just a vehicle for his redemption but a potential must-see tourist 
attraction for Seoul – witha big budget expressly dedicated to that purpose 
<http://theseoultimes.com/ST/?url=/ST/db/read.php?idx=2490> – and an embodiment 
of its supposed transformation into a city that prioritises quality of life.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fstory-cities-reclaimed-stream-heart-seoul-cheonggyecheon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f0850fab94671ba10f2698b4ab5937952a37409%2F0_0_1340_2048%2F1340.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2350%3A%20the%20reclaimed%20stream%20bringing%20life%20to%20the%20heart%20of%20Seoul&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fstory-cities-reclaimed-stream-heart-seoul-cheonggyecheon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2350%3A%20the%20reclaimed%20stream%20bringing%20life%20to%20the%20heart%20of%20Seoul&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fstory-cities-reclaimed-stream-heart-seoul-cheonggyecheon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f0850fab94671ba10f2698b4ab5937952a37409%2F0_0_1340_2048%2F1340.jpg>
 A Cheonggyecheon restoration launch ceremony on the elevated road which was 
demolished. Photograph: Choi Jae-Ku/AFP/Getty Images 
“Cheonggyecheon gave a certain answer to the controversial debate in urban 
planning between those who emphasised the vehicle-oriented city and those who 
believe the city should be more pedestrian-friendly,” said Kim Youngmin, 
assistant professor in the University of Seoul’s Department of Landscape 
Architecture, in a radio interview about the new Cheonggyecheon Stream on the 
10th anniversary of its opening.

“Many traffic engineers warned that demolishing the highway would be a 
disaster to inner-city traffic, and stakeholders who were afraid that the 
project might reduce their income didn’t agree with the city’s vision,” 
Youngmin added. In the event, though, “there was no armageddon, as some people 
warned. Of course it became tougher to bring cars into the inner city, but it 
became a way better place for the people who use public transportation or walk.”

Lee had won Seoul’s 2001 mayoral election in part on the back of a large-scale 
urban redevelopment plan, pitched as a key mechanism of economic revitalisation 
meant to turn Seoul into a tourism and investment and hub of northeastAsia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/asia>. The scheme included not just the 
removal of the city’s one major internal freeway, but the installation of new 
bus rapid transit infrastructure, various redevelopment projects, and several 
“new towns” to be raised whole within the capital.

With a mandate for these proposals provided by his victory, Lee set about 
executing these projects, especially the symbolic Cheonggyecheon Stream, as 
quickly as possible – a zeal that got people referring to him as “Bulldozer”. 
(In fact, he was the second mayor in Seoul history to receive that nickname; 
the first, Kim Hyon-ok, earned it in the late 1960s with such large-scale 
development projects as the Seun Sangga electronics market.)

One survey conducted by the Seoul city government indicated that 79.1% of 
residents supported the Cheonggyecheon revitalisation – although its critics 
may have believed that no number, however low, could have stopped the 
Bulldozer. Certainly, complaints about the plan had begun circulating long 
before opening day.

“What was removed for the project was more than just one overpass,” says the 
Korea Times’s Jon Dunbar, a longtime observer of Seoul’s built environment. 
“After four decades, it was woven into the fabric of the city.” Having operated 
there for almost half a century, for example, a vibrant flea market had become 
an institution, and one that proved difficult to dislodge.

“Many of the people whose livelihoods depended on this market dug in and 
resisted, ultimately leading Lee to the negotiating table. In order to get them 
out of Cheonggyecheon, he let them move into Dongdaemun Stadium nearby, which 
he said they could use as long as they liked and promised to fix up into a 
global-quality flea market area.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fstory-cities-reclaimed-stream-heart-seoul-cheonggyecheon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b327229de73adc9be91f50a49a9c2d8e62ec061%2F0_0_3745_2480%2F3745.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2350%3A%20the%20reclaimed%20stream%20bringing%20life%20to%20the%20heart%20of%20Seoul&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fstory-cities-reclaimed-stream-heart-seoul-cheonggyecheon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2350%3A%20the%20reclaimed%20stream%20bringing%20life%20to%20the%20heart%20of%20Seoul&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fstory-cities-reclaimed-stream-heart-seoul-cheonggyecheon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b327229de73adc9be91f50a49a9c2d8e62ec061%2F0_0_3745_2480%2F3745.jpg>
 The restored Cheonggyecheon stream. Photograph: Jack Malipan Travel 
Photography/Alamy 
But the renovation never happened, business foundered 
<http://koreajoongangdaily.joins.com/news/article/article.aspx?aid=2414388>, 
and after Lee’s term ended, the stadium itself faced the wrecking ball in the 
name of another prestige project, built under his successor Oh Se-hoon: Zaha 
Hadid’sDongdaemun Design Plaza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/jul/15/an-urbanists-tour-of-south-korea-from-alien-spaceship-to-discount-socks>
.


Not long before the Cheonggyecheon Stream opened, the Seoul Central District 
Prosecutor’s Office arrested vice-mayor Yang Yoon-jae, a former professor at 
Seoul National University’s Graduate School of Environmental Studies and head 
of the project between 2002 and 2004, on charges of taking at least $100,000 
worth of bribes from a developer in exchange for a relaxation in height 
restrictions in the area. Though convicted and sentenced to five years in 
prison,he received a pardon from Lee 
<http://english.hani.co.kr/arti/english_edition/e_national/507653.html>, his 
former boss who had by that time ascended to the presidency of South Korea – as 
well as an appointment to the Presidential Commission on Architecture Policy.


Alongside the political and social troubles surrounding its construction, the 
Cheonggyecheon has also drawn environmental criticism. Hailed at first as a 
“green” achievement notable for itslowering of the surface temperature of its 
surroundings as well as greatly increasing local biodiversity 
<http://www.koreatimes.co.kr/www/news/biz/2015/12/291_68399.html>, it also has 
its ecological drawbacks.

“Due to a gradually worsening algae problem, maintenance expenses for the 
Cheonggyecheon Stream have been increasing by 30% yearly,”wrote Eunseon Park 
<http://www.listentothecity.org/filter/naeseong-river/Urban-Drawings-2-Modernity-and-Humanism>
, researcher at Yonsei University’s Urban Sustainability Transitions lab and 
director of the activism collectiveListen to the City 
<http://www.listentothecity.org/>, in 2010. “Cheonggyecheon is not a natural 
stream systematically restored, but a kind of artificial fountain in which 
running water is pumped up and sent flowing along the course. Moreover, because 
the bottom of the stream is made of concrete, and therefore nearly incapable of 
performing any purification functions, it stands to reason in some sense that 
the water would become progressively unclean.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fstory-cities-reclaimed-stream-heart-seoul-cheonggyecheon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46bf1f732a6ccc3f1ec6ea50f3c47dd79b8326ca%2F0_516_4180_3372%2F4180.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2350%3A%20the%20reclaimed%20stream%20bringing%20life%20to%20the%20heart%20of%20Seoul&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fstory-cities-reclaimed-stream-heart-seoul-cheonggyecheon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2350%3A%20the%20reclaimed%20stream%20bringing%20life%20to%20the%20heart%20of%20Seoul&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fstory-cities-reclaimed-stream-heart-seoul-cheonggyecheon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46bf1f732a6ccc3f1ec6ea50f3c47dd79b8326ca%2F0_516_4180_3372%2F4180.jpg>
 Zaha Hadid’s Dongdaemun Design Plaza replaced the stadium where market traders 
were supposed to be relocated. Photograph: View Pictures/REX/Shutterstock 
“Anyone who thinks that Cheonggyecheon represents the renewal of ecology 
really needs to get their heads examined,”wrote Korea scholar Matt VanVolkenburg
 <http://populargusts.blogspot.kr/2006/10/springtime-for-cheonggyecheon.html>, 
who kept close watch on the project on his siteGusts of Popular Feeling 
<http://populargusts.blogspot.kr/>, the year after it opened.

“It represents a pleasant redevelopment project which was supposed to make the 
mayor look like a fast, can-do politician,”VanVolkenburg 
<http://populargusts.blogspot.kr/2006/10/springtime-for-cheonggyecheon.html> 
continued – sounding like a less-authoritarian Park Chung-hee, who presided 
over the country’s rapid industrialisation in the 1960s and 70s. “The project 
was supposed to conjure up the image of caring about the environment and 
history, while bulldozing actual cultural properties as they were in such a 
hurry to get it done.”

The ‘sights’ of Seoul

The widely held notion that the current Cheonggyecheon Stream represents a 
return to its idyllic, pre-freeway history also arises from a misconception. 
The stream that existed before its paving-over after the Korean War functioned 
not as a picturesque waterway but as a utilitarian open sewer for the entire 
city.

When the English traveller Isabella Bird Bishop came in the 1890s and laid 
eyes on the Cheonggyecheon – sardonically describing it as “one of the ‘sights’ 
of Seoul” – she wrote of “a wide, walled, open conduit, along which a 
dark-coloured festering stream slowly drags its malodorous length, among manure 
and refuse heaps which cover up most of what was once its shingly bed”.


Few can look at Cheonggyecheon – families, children, young couples on dates, 
office staff – and call it a net negative

Anything would have counted as an improvement over that – or, much later, over 
the Cheonggye Expressway, grim photographs of which now line the walls of the 
Cheonggyecheon Stream, lest its many strollers forget what an eyesore the city 
has replaced.

But this hardly silences those who still criticise many of the project’s 
design elements, from its difficult access for the disabled to the snail-like 
$4m Claes Oldenburg and Coosje van Bruggen sculpture installed at its source, 
to the lack of meaningful consultation with the public at any stage of the 
project.


Yet few can look at everyone enjoying Cheonggyecheon Stream today – families 
and playing children, young couples on dates, office staff having after-work 
drinks, elderly picnickers, street musicians and their audiences – and call it 
a net negative for the city.

“I think Cheonggyecheon, as an element of Seoul, has improved with time,” says 
VanVolkenburg. “To be sure, its construction was rushed and involved corruption 
and damage of cultural heritage, and the source is overly artificial-looking. 
But a decade on, it’s become a fact of daily life in downtown Seoul, and serves 
a variety of functions, from tourist attraction to park space to art gallery. 
Over the years the vegetation and trees along the stream have grown in, and as 
you move away from its source, it becomes more ‘natural’ looking.”


VanVolkenburg now sees the Cheonggyecheon as “a visual centerpiece to Seoul’s 
attempts to build a 21st-century city, with most of its humiliating 
20th-century history removed and dotted with recreations of the pre-colonial 
past.” It has certainly come to play the role of a humanising element in a city 
once globally regarded as a harsh, grey place of lookalike concrete towers, 
unceasing construction and demolition, and frequent infrastructural disaster.

From Addis to Yiwu via Manchester and Washington, the new resilient cities – 
in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/gallery/2016/may/25/resilient-cities-addis-yiwa-manchester-washington-in-pictures>
It has also served as a model for uncovering the city’s other buried streams, 
as well as for restoration projects as far away as Los Angeles and itsown 
infamous river 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/oct/23/frank-gehry-revitalise-los-angeles-la-river>
, blanketed in concrete since the 1930s.


To the extent that Lee intended it as a springboard to the presidency, the 
Cheonggyecheon also served his political ambitions well. After Lee’s election, 
theNew York Times reported 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2007/12/20/world/asia/20lee.html?_r=0>: “The man chosen 
as South Korea’s next president in Wednesday’s election owes much of his 
victory to a wildly successful project he completed as this city’s mayor ... 
The new stream became a Central Park-like gathering place here, tapped into a 
growing national emphasis on quality of life and immediately made the mayor a 
top presidential contender.”

“One can criticise the negatives,” says VanVolkenburg, “but they are inherent 
in every redevelopment in Seoul.” Dunbar calls the Cheonggyecheon Stream 
“doubtlessly an engineering and urban planning miracle, but the reason I will 
never 100% accept it is the high toll that was exacted on the local population. 
It seems immoral to me to enjoy the DDP or the Cheonggyecheon without 
remembering the human cost of building these vanity projects.”

And so other cities around the world might take Seoul’s experience as 
something to aspire to, as well as a cautionary tale. A project as ambitious as 
the Cheonggyecheon Stream may draw acclaim from all around the world – but 
sooner or later, the world will find out what you had to do to pull it off.


Does your city have a little-known story that made a major impact on its 
development? Please share it in the comments below or on Twitter using 
#storyofcities
 