
Castor Castro was 14 years old when his family moved to La Faena, a 
residential project in east Santiago, in 1967. “There was nothing here, just 
bare earth,” Castro recalls, sitting in the house his parents built back then. 
“Each family was given a plot, and they had to get on with it and build. There 
was no electricity supply and no plumbing – just land.”

Despite this rudimentary introduction to La Faena, Castor and his family were, 
in many ways, lucky. They were beneficiaries of “Operación Sitio 
<http://www.edicionesarq.cl/2014/urbanizando-con-tiza/>” (Operation Site), a 
bold housing policy rolled out by the Chilean state in the late 1960s.

Up until then, Chilean governments had tackled the country’s housing shortfall 
through conventional methods; they built low-rise, concrete residential blocks 
for scores of families. But this wasn’t enough to meet the demand, and Chile’s 
poorest simply could not afford them.

So the government switched tack. Instead of building houses, it would sell 
land. With Operation Site, it offered small plots on the outskirts of Santiago 
at knockdown prices to poor families, who paid for them in monthly instalments 
– after which the families, for the most part, had to fend for themselves. This 
marked a turning point in the urban development of the Chilean capital.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F29%2Fstory-cities-33-santiago-chile-housing-crisis-operacion-sitio-operation-chalk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F746a924af4fc0c2d05059446a0552e98f368fa93%2F0_670_5481_3288%2F5481.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2333%3A%20how%20Santiago%20tackled%20its%20housing%20crisis%20with%20'Operation%20Chalk'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F29%2Fstory-cities-33-santiago-chile-housing-crisis-operacion-sitio-operation-chalk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2333%3A%20how%20Santiago%20tackled%20its%20housing%20crisis%20with%20%27Operation%20Chalk%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F29%2Fstory-cities-33-santiago-chile-housing-crisis-operacion-sitio-operation-chalk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F746a924af4fc0c2d05059446a0552e98f368fa93%2F0_670_5481_3288%2F5481.jpg>
 Chile’s president Eduardo Frei Montalva meets Santiago construction workers in 
the mid-1960s. Photograph: Museo Eduardo Frei Montalva 
The plan did not prove popular with everyone, however. According to its 
champions, Operation Site was the only realistic way to tackle the country’s 
growing housing crisis. For its critics, it was hasty and ill-conceived.

The scheme was dubbed “Operation Chalk 
<http://www.scielo.cl/scielo.php?pid=S0717-69962014000100005&script=sci_arttext&tlng=en>
” because, in some cases, officials from the housing ministry would turn up on 
a stone-strewn stretch of land, divide it into rectangles using white chalk, 
then simply assign each rectangle to a family, who were given very little else. 
To many people, the initiative appeared demeaning – an insult to the poor.

The barest bones

Chile’s housing crisis of the 1960s had been brewing for some time. For 
decades, people had been moving from the countryside to Santiago in search of a 
better life – a process exacerbated by the collapse of the nitrate mining 
industry in the north, which forced miners and their families south in search 
of work.

Between 1940 and 1960, the population of Santiago doubled to nearly two 
million. Poor families, desperate for a place to live, started to occupy land 
illegally.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F29%2Fstory-cities-33-santiago-chile-housing-crisis-operacion-sitio-operation-chalk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc6c5e3f50f7f5ff01cdb83083e884d46aa2069ef%2F573_3104_8086_8608%2F8086.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2333%3A%20how%20Santiago%20tackled%20its%20housing%20crisis%20with%20'Operation%20Chalk'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F29%2Fstory-cities-33-santiago-chile-housing-crisis-operacion-sitio-operation-chalk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2333%3A%20how%20Santiago%20tackled%20its%20housing%20crisis%20with%20%27Operation%20Chalk%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F29%2Fstory-cities-33-santiago-chile-housing-crisis-operacion-sitio-operation-chalk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc6c5e3f50f7f5ff01cdb83083e884d46aa2069ef%2F573_3104_8086_8608%2F8086.jpg>
 Locations ofOperación Sitio around Santiago. Courtesy: University of Chile 
archive 
Successive governments tried to stem the crisis by building more houses, but 
demand constantly outstripped supply. According to the state’s housing 
corporation,Chile <https://www.theguardian.com/world/chile> faced a housing 
deficit of 170,000 units in 1953; by 1962, it topped 300,000. Something had to 
be done.

In 1964, a Christian Democrat government came to power, inspired in part by the
second Vatican council 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/andrewbrown/2012/oct/11/second-vatical-council-50-years-catholicism>
, which had opened in Rome two years earlier with the pledge to bring the 
Church closer to the people. In a bid to help the poorest in society,Eduardo 
Frei Montalva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/dec/08/murder-chile-president-frei-montalva>
, Chile’s new president, vowed to build 360,000 new homes by the end of the 
decade.

The following year, the government established Chile’s first Ministry of 
Housing <https://www.theguardian.com/society/housing> and launched Operation 
Site. To start with, the state endeavoured not only to provide people with land 
but also a modest wooden house with electricity and running water. But as time 
went on and demand grew, it offered only land. The residents would have to 
build their own houses.

Still, the benefits of the system were clear: instead of building a few decent 
homes for a handful of fortunate families, the government could, relatively 
quickly and cheaply, provide thousands of families with a patch of land and the 
barest bones of a home.

The implementation of Operation Site was patchy: “In the worst cases, the 
authorities supplied little more than a plot of land, a gravel path and a link 
to the electricity grid,” says Francisco Quintana, an architect at Santiago’s 
Pontifical Catholic University. “In some cases they went further, building a 
kitchen and bathroom with plumbing. The residents then had to build the rest of 
the house around it. And in the best cases, the authorities provided not only 
the land but also a 30 metres squared wooden house.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F29%2Fstory-cities-33-santiago-chile-housing-crisis-operacion-sitio-operation-chalk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe46a05cddf65466ce5e8c50cade084a402268c8%2F0_334_3292_1975%2F3292.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2333%3A%20how%20Santiago%20tackled%20its%20housing%20crisis%20with%20'Operation%20Chalk'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F29%2Fstory-cities-33-santiago-chile-housing-crisis-operacion-sitio-operation-chalk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2333%3A%20how%20Santiago%20tackled%20its%20housing%20crisis%20with%20%27Operation%20Chalk%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F29%2Fstory-cities-33-santiago-chile-housing-crisis-operacion-sitio-operation-chalk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe46a05cddf65466ce5e8c50cade084a402268c8%2F0_334_3292_1975%2F3292.jpg>
 Celso Oviedo and his father Haroldo, outside the house the 86-year-old built 
and still lives in. Photograph: Gideon Long for the Guardian 
Celso Oviedo, another early resident of La Faena, was eight when his family 
moved to the area in late 1966. His 86-year-old father, Haroldo, still lives in 
the modest but sturdy house they built on their plot: “Some families didn’t 
even have a house, especially in the early months,” Celso recalls. “They lived 
under plastic sheeting or in makeshift tents.”

And yet, at its best, “Operation Chalk” was transformative. Instead of 
occupying land illegally with no access to even the most basic of services, 
poor families could, for a relatively small fee, obtain tenure of their land. 
They could build without fear of eviction. They had a genuine chance of owning 
a home.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F29%2Fstory-cities-33-santiago-chile-housing-crisis-operacion-sitio-operation-chalk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40a6dd5287511381feb896e7644a46783bfaec8c%2F1728_738_1763_2404%2F1763.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2333%3A%20how%20Santiago%20tackled%20its%20housing%20crisis%20with%20'Operation%20Chalk'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F29%2Fstory-cities-33-santiago-chile-housing-crisis-operacion-sitio-operation-chalk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2333%3A%20how%20Santiago%20tackled%20its%20housing%20crisis%20with%20%27Operation%20Chalk%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F29%2Fstory-cities-33-santiago-chile-housing-crisis-operacion-sitio-operation-chalk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40a6dd5287511381feb896e7644a46783bfaec8c%2F1728_738_1763_2404%2F1763.jpg>
 Newly constructed houses, built as a result of Operation Site, in 1965. 
Courtesy: National Museum of Fine Arts, Santiago 
The project also encouraged self-help: faced with the challenge of building a 
house, residents learnt carpentry and plumbing skills which they passed on to 
their neighbours. Some set up cornershops selling window frames, sewage pipes 
and wood panels. “Everyone helped each other,” Castro recalls. “So-and-so would 
help with the roof, someone else would be good at plumbing.”

Frei was not the first Chilean president to encourage poor people to buy land 
and build their own houses; his predecessors Carlos Ibáñez del Campo and Jorge 
Alessandri Rodríguez had done something similar. The difference under Frei was 
that the policy went mainstream. During his six years in power, the state 
quadrupled the rate of land allocation, providing 380,000 of Chile’s poorest 
people with 71,000 plots of land.

But in the years that followed, Operation Site was abandoned. As the 60s 
became the 70s, the mood changed: “These were years of real social ferment in 
Chile,” saysEmanuel Giannotti 
<https://urbannext.net/contributors/emmanuel-gianotti/>, professor of 
architecture at the University of Chile. “People staged big, illegal land 
occupations and demanded more from the state. Operation Site started to 
unravel.”

With revolution in the air, the socialist government of Salvador Allende 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jul/20/salvador-allende-committed-suicide-autopsy>
 won the election of 1970, and his administration viewed Operation Site – the 
poor being asked to build their own houses – as yet another example of class 
exploitation.

Then came 1973 
<https://www.theguardian.com/chile/history/0,13843,1025953,00.html> and the 
military coup thatbrought General Augusto Pinochet to power 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/07/chile-coup-pinochet-allende>. 
Chile lurched to the right and the state was suddenly in no mood to sell land 
cheaply to the poor. Pinochet’s soldiers evicted squatters from valuable land 
in central Santiago and moved them out to the peripheries. Private construction 
firms moved in, bought up the land and developed it commercially.

A disputed legacy

Half a century after its inception, the ramifications of Operation Site are 
still forcefully debated. Critics say it fostered social segregation by lumping 
poor families together, far away from Santiago’s wealthier areas and the 
commercial heart of the city. Most of the areas allocated to Operation Site are 
close to the ring road, towards the city’s outskirts. To this day, the Chilean 
capital remains a city of deep social divisions.

“Operation Site had plenty of critics,” says Giannotti. “The construction 
industry, which was very powerful in Chile, never liked it because it didn’t 
offer them much of a role. The socialists didn’t like it because they saw it as 
divisive and demeaning.”

Back in La Faena, however, the legacy of Operation Site appears to be largely 
positive. Many people still live on plots that they or their relatives bought 
in the 1960s. Some have expanded their homes, building extra storeys and 
extensions. There are plenty of trees in the streets, planted by local 
residents, and green spaces that are well maintained. The houses are modest and 
arranged in orderly fashion, with access to a street, running water and 
electricity.

Story of cities #34: the struggle for the soul of Milton Keynes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/may/03/struggle-for-the-soul-of-milton-keynes>
Castro is clearly proud of the area. He and his neighbours are planning a 
celebration later this year to mark the 50th anniversary of the arrival of La 
Faena’s first residents. And in Quintana’s view, Operation Site helped Santiago 
avoid the worst of Latin America’s often horrendous housing problems.

“If you look at any capital city in Latin America, they have slums – the 
barriadas in Lima, the favelas in São Paulo and the villas miserias in Buenos 
Aires,” Quintana says. “That’s what happens when people occupy land illegally 
and are forced to build completely informally, without any state help.

“That didn’t happen so much in Chile, though. Yes, it’s true that Operation 
Site created pockets of poor people in Santiago – but at least those poor 
people had some initial help from the state, and a plot of land they could call 
their own. And that’s better than having no help at all.”

Does your city have a little-known story that made a major impact on its 
development? Please share it in the comments below or on Twitter using 
#storyofcities
 