
“Premium life for your dream,” announces a billboard beneath a new tower of 
serviced apartments in the heaving, traffic-choked city of Yangon. “Play in 
infinite luxury,” says another featuring a couple lolling in a pool on their 
balcony, with a badly photoshopped pagoda twinkling in the background.

Along with the arrival of democracy and the first civilian government since 
1962,Myanmar <https://www.theguardian.com/world/myanmar> is also embracing the 
novelty of unbridled speculative development. Six months on fromthe election 
that swept the Nobel prize-winning campaigner Aung San Suu Kyi’s party to power 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/23/final-myanmar-results-show-aung-san-suu-kyis-party-won-77-of-seats>
, the skyline of Yangon is bristling with cranes and concrete frames as a 
clutch of new towers rises above the mouldering rooftops of the old colonial 
centre. With the city’s population set to double to 10 million over the next 
two decades, flocks of foreign investors are circling, eager to reap the spoils 
of Asia’s “final frontier market”. The fragile historic fabric, along with the 
people it houses, has never been under such pressure.


“With every new building bidding for the best view of the Shwedagon Pagoda, 
we’re not going to have any views left,” says Daw Moe Moe Lwin, director of the 
Yangon Heritage Trust (YHT), a campaign group founded in 2012 by architects and 
historians keen to save south-east Asia’s last surviving colonial core. It has 
been an uphill battle in a place that still doesn’t have a formalised planning 
system, and where many public buildings have been swiftly privatised in deals 
that allowed the generals of the outgoing dictatorship to fill their pockets in 
the process.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fmyanmar-democracy-yangon-changing-skyline%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6643c69bcd08633b2d5a256ef0cf2fea5956dcff%2F0_183_4541_2725%2F4541.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2347%3A%20Myanmar%20rising%20%E2%80%93%20how%20democracy%20is%20changing%20Yangon's%20skyline&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fmyanmar-democracy-yangon-changing-skyline%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2347%3A%20Myanmar%20rising%20%E2%80%93%20how%20democracy%20is%20changing%20Yangon%27s%20skyline&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fmyanmar-democracy-yangon-changing-skyline%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6643c69bcd08633b2d5a256ef0cf2fea5956dcff%2F0_183_4541_2725%2F4541.jpg>
 A Yangon street scene. Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian 
Walk in any direction from the trust’s HQ on Pansodan Street, and it’s easy to 
see why Lwin is so concerned about the future of her city. Downtown Yangon is 
an enchanting, open-air museum of faded colonial grandeur – as lovingly 
documented in arecent architectural guidebook to the city 
<http://www.dom-publishers.com/products/en/Architectural-Guides/Yangon-Architectural-Guide.html>
 – but looks like it might collapse at any minute.


A few doors down from Lwin’s office stands the creamy, Italianate pile of the 
Sofaer building, built by wealthy Baghdadi Jewish merchants in 1906. It 
features steel beams made in Lanarkshire and encaustic floor tiles from 
Manchester, exotic imports that reflect the eclectic mix of shops it used to 
house, selling everything from German beer to Egyptian cigars and English 
sweets.

Once the city’s most prestigious commercial addresses, it had one of the first 
electric lifts in the country. Now, the rusty caged lift shaft is piled high 
with rubbish. The building’s light well has also become a dumping ground, its 
walls caked in soot and moss, its floor bristling with rats. Yet the place 
remains in use. Lawyers run their practices from tiny, windowless cubicles 
upstairs, an art gallery operates from the first floor, whilea fancy Japanese 
restaurant recently opened on the corner <http://gekkoyangon.com/the-building/> 
– the fit-out entailed clearing away a metre-deep pile of sewage.

“We still carry on,” says one of the lawyers, sitting in his cupboard-sized 
office, a room wallpapered with colourful posters of imaginary landscapes with 
rolling green fields merging into gushing waterfalls. “There hasn’t been any 
investment in infrastructure for half a century here, so we’re more than used 
to these conditions.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fmyanmar-democracy-yangon-changing-skyline%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad4201f571b55091420b30e8417d779d3b88387f%2F0_493_8688_5213%2F8688.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2347%3A%20Myanmar%20rising%20%E2%80%93%20how%20democracy%20is%20changing%20Yangon's%20skyline&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fmyanmar-democracy-yangon-changing-skyline%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2347%3A%20Myanmar%20rising%20%E2%80%93%20how%20democracy%20is%20changing%20Yangon%27s%20skyline&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fmyanmar-democracy-yangon-changing-skyline%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad4201f571b55091420b30e8417d779d3b88387f%2F0_493_8688_5213%2F8688.jpg>
 Lawyers work out of tiny, windowless cubicles inside the Balthazar Building. 
Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian 
The YHT wants to see buildings such as this restored to their former glory, 
but the reality is not so simple. The messy legacy of British-Indian rule, 
Japanese occupation and property nationalisation carried out by the military 
junta, and its ensuing collapse, has left the city with fiendishly complex 
patterns of ownership. Title deeds have often been lost in the mists of time – 
eaten by white ants or washed away by Cyclone Nargis are two common claims – 
meaning that most of these historic buildings are likely to remain in limbo.

Other institutions struggle on in post-apocalyptic surrounds. At the 
divisional courthouse, a palatial complex of octagonal towers and Florentine 
domes originally built as the accounting office of British Burma, the windows 
have blown out and vegetation sprouts from every nook, yet inside the decaying 
shell, the courts continue to press on. Defendants sit on plastic stools before 
the judges, while clerks hammer away on typewriters out on the street beneath 
makeshift tarpaulin canopies.

***

Under military rule, Yangon was simply left to rot. Less than half of the city 
has access to piped water, while constant power shortages mean the streets are 
clogged with backup generators. Roads were widened in the 1990s in a vain 
attempt to ease traffic flow, leaving far narrower pavements: this also made it 
harder for large numbers of people to gather, public meetings being a constant 
concern of the paranoid regime. The streets used to be lined with covered 
colonnades, providing shade from the sun and protection from monsoon rains, but 
they, too, were torn down.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fmyanmar-democracy-yangon-changing-skyline%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7515540d3ba5a90faef5aa4e02710ee32ac26d46%2F0_0_8688_5792%2F8688.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2347%3A%20Myanmar%20rising%20%E2%80%93%20how%20democracy%20is%20changing%20Yangon's%20skyline&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fmyanmar-democracy-yangon-changing-skyline%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2347%3A%20Myanmar%20rising%20%E2%80%93%20how%20democracy%20is%20changing%20Yangon%27s%20skyline&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fmyanmar-democracy-yangon-changing-skyline%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7515540d3ba5a90faef5aa4e02710ee32ac26d46%2F0_0_8688_5792%2F8688.jpg>
 A staircase inside the former Accountant-General’s Office, now the divisional 
courthouse. Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian 
What was once a perfectly walkable city is now a hostile place to navigate on 
foot. It’s not hard to see why developers are now proposing self-contained 
fiefdoms with everything supplied on site; including their own power generation 
and water supply, thereby creating hermetic worlds of offices and apartment 
towers perched on retail podiums, so you never have to leave your 
air-conditioned bubble.

The most lavish such scheme is currently being drawn up for the site of the 
former Burma Railway Company headquarters, a stately, redbrick Victorian 
building just north of downtown. Not much has changed since the 1870s; the 
current state of Burmese rail travel can be experienced by taking a ride on the 
city’s Circle line, which takes three hours to chug along a 28-mile loop around 
the city, moving no faster than a bicycle.

It will be uber luxury. We’ll have only the very best of the premium brands
Steven Purvis 
A recent deal with Japanese firm Mitsubishi will see the line upgraded, but 
the benevolence comes with a catch: in exchange for speed, the company has been 
awarded exclusive development rights to state-owned land along the tracks.A 
$500m (£344m) mixed-use scheme near the central station is now in the works 
<http://www.dealstreetasia.com/stories/mitsubishi-estate-plans-for-442m-yangon-gateway-33375/>
, which, according to one source close to the project, will look like “a chunk 
of Tokyo airlifted into Yangon”. It is no coincidence that Japan’s aid agency, 
JICA, has enthusiastically drawn up an infrastructure-heavy masterplan for 
Yangon’s development over the next 25 years, described by one aid worker as “an 
investment plan for Japanese business”.

But the Mitsubishi scheme will be a mere speck in comparison to what’s being 
dreamed up next door. Myanmar Railways is currently tendering a$2bn project of 
high-rise hotels, office towers and shopping centres across a 63-acre site 
<http://www.mmtimes.com/index.php/business/19003-short-list-for-yangon-central-railway-station-development.html>
, by far the biggest commercial development the country has ever seen, of a 
scale unthinkable a few years ago.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fmyanmar-democracy-yangon-changing-skyline%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0bd92cf4f335d075939694dbdbe60fab3f5f2ff3%2F0_416_8688_5213%2F8688.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2347%3A%20Myanmar%20rising%20%E2%80%93%20how%20democracy%20is%20changing%20Yangon's%20skyline&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fmyanmar-democracy-yangon-changing-skyline%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2347%3A%20Myanmar%20rising%20%E2%80%93%20how%20democracy%20is%20changing%20Yangon%27s%20skyline&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fmyanmar-democracy-yangon-changing-skyline%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0bd92cf4f335d075939694dbdbe60fab3f5f2ff3%2F0_416_8688_5213%2F8688.jpg>
 A journey on the Yangon Circle line, which takes three hours to get around the 
city. Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian 
“The market has really exploded,” says Tony Picon, managing director of 
Colliers International <http://www.colliers.com/en-gb/uk> in Myanmar. When he 
moved here in 2011, office rents were around $17 a square metre per month. A 
few years later, they had hit $100, making central Yangon a more expensive 
place to do business than downtown Manhattan, despite the average wage being 
just $2 a day. “Since the country opened up, more and more businesses have been 
flooding in trying to get a foothold here,” Picon says. “Supply simply can’t 
keep up with demand.”

A taste of what this steroidal supply might look like can be found in the 
offices ofYoma Strategic Holdings 
<http://www.yomastrategic.com/html/bus_estate.php>, a company owned by local 
tycoon Serge Pun 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/simonmontlake/2013/08/28/golden-return-serge-pun-constructs-a-real-estate-empire-in-myanmar/#595dc43e6c7b>
, where plans for the former Burma Railway Company site are currently being 
drawn up. Images of the scheme, boldly christened the Landmark, show the 
elegant Victorian building cowering at the base of four vast towers – more 
offices, serviced apartments and hotels – sitting on a four-storey shopping 
mall that seems to be doing its best to throttle the historic structure (which 
will itself become a five-star Peninsular hotel, impeccably restored to the 
tune of $100m).

“It will be uber luxury,” says project manager Steven Purvis. “We’ll have only 
the very best of the premium brands.” The nearby street stalls, selling the 
ubiquitous parcels of chewing tobacco wrapped in betel leaves, aren’t likely to 
last much longer. They’ll be swept away, along with their accompanying red 
saliva stains on the pavement.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fmyanmar-democracy-yangon-changing-skyline%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F66da1dcf9873d2c971dace335ee2e0bf49b19a16%2F0_0_8688_5792%2F8688.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2347%3A%20Myanmar%20rising%20%E2%80%93%20how%20democracy%20is%20changing%20Yangon's%20skyline&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fmyanmar-democracy-yangon-changing-skyline%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2347%3A%20Myanmar%20rising%20%E2%80%93%20how%20democracy%20is%20changing%20Yangon%27s%20skyline&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fmyanmar-democracy-yangon-changing-skyline%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F66da1dcf9873d2c971dace335ee2e0bf49b19a16%2F0_0_8688_5792%2F8688.jpg>
 The Balthazar Building in Yangon. Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian 
Rising to 25 storeys, the towers will be the same height as the nearby Sule 
Shangri-La hotel, a brutish megalith erected in the 1990s, whose construction 
provided the regime with a convenient excuse to level a group of coffee houses 
that were a popular hangout for the city’s activists and intellectuals. “It was 
the biggest mistake the city ever made,” says Lwin of the hotel. “The height of 
that hotel has now become the justification for every other development in 
town.”

The YHT successfully campaigned to introduce height restrictions around the 
Shwedagon Pagoda, along the lines of the building limitsaround St Paul’s 
Cathedral in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/dec/11/city-of-london-skyline-of-tomorrow-interactive>
, but the rules have no statutory power and are barely enforceable. It appears 
that the government listens only when the monks join the cries of public 
protest, as they did in February last year.

Five major construction projects in the vicinity of the pagoda were halted by 
the government 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/myanmar-scraps-real-estate-projects-under-pressure-from-monks-1436289375>
 after a powerful national Buddhist group,the Association for the Protection of 
Race and Religion 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Patriotic_Association_of_Myanmar>, claimed the 
developments would affect the foundations of the temple. It was a spurious 
accusation, with no real structural calculations to back it up, but the 
authorities were sufficiently spooked by the ire of the holy men – perhaps with
memories of the saffron revolution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/dec/15/burma.chrismcgreal>, when 
thousands of Buddhist monks rose en masse against the junta in 2007, still 
fresh in the mind.

The lawyers of Yangon could have done with a little divine intervention in 
their recent battle against the privatisation of the former high court and 
police commissioner’s office, a grand classical edifice whose ionic colonnade 
marches around an entire city block facing the waterfront on Strand Road. The 
place has a dark history; its top floors were used as torture chambers by the 
Japanese during the second world war and by the military regime in the 1960s 
and 70s. They will soon become the luxury spa of a newfive-star Kempinski hotel 
<http://www.irrawaddy.com/business/kempinski-hotel-slated-historical-rangoon-building-controversial-plan.html>
, due to open next year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fmyanmar-democracy-yangon-changing-skyline%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6bd86fe8ca98981c73dd47afb39b5bce20faa92%2F0_432_8688_5213%2F8688.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2347%3A%20Myanmar%20rising%20%E2%80%93%20how%20democracy%20is%20changing%20Yangon's%20skyline&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fmyanmar-democracy-yangon-changing-skyline%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2347%3A%20Myanmar%20rising%20%E2%80%93%20how%20democracy%20is%20changing%20Yangon%27s%20skyline&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fmyanmar-democracy-yangon-changing-skyline%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6bd86fe8ca98981c73dd47afb39b5bce20faa92%2F0_432_8688_5213%2F8688.jpg>
 ‘It’s a complete cultural cross section of Yangon in one building.’ Daw Khin 
May Lin’s family of 13 live in one room in Turquoise Mountain. Photograph: 
David Levene for the Guardian 
When the project was mooted in 2012, the Lawyers’ Network, a local group of 
outspoken attorneys, did everything in their power to stop it, filing lawsuits 
against officials and investors, and arguing that the building should remain in 
public use as a court. But their case wasswiftly kicked out 
<http://www.mmtimes.com/index.php/national-news/yangon/12821-yangon-court-rejects-suit-over-kempinski-linked-hotel.html>
. “Poor regulation and lax implementation mean that investors continue to be 
granted land obtained illegally or under dubious circumstances,” says Vani 
Sathisan, legal adviser at theInternational Commission of Jurists 
<http://www.icj.org/regions/asia-pacific/southeast-asia/>, a human rights NGO 
that has been focusing on the fate of land at the edges of the city.

“Communities that have lived on land for generations are routinely charged 
with ‘trespass’ and Myanmar’s land laws fail to adequately protect their 
rights.” Earlier this year, a mass eviction in a shanty town in Yangon’s 
Mingaladon Township caused several hundred families to be homeless without 
compensation or resettlement plans.

“I’ve not seen such a bad situation anywhere in the world,” says Mike 
Slingsby, an adviser toUN Habitat <http://unhabitat.org/>, whose career has 
taken him from slums in Vietnam and Cambodia to Bangladesh, India and 
Afghanistan. “Yangon is the only city where for the last 50 years no one has 
done anything to improve the lives of the slum dwellers. NGOs simply haven’t 
been allowed in.”

“Myanmar is not a poor country,” Slingsby adds. “The rich are extremely rich. 
It’s just a question of how they spend their money.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fmyanmar-democracy-yangon-changing-skyline%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff08a6a27b300749325fb816623fd5c162e82a34e%2F0_0_5400_3564%2F5400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2347%3A%20Myanmar%20rising%20%E2%80%93%20how%20democracy%20is%20changing%20Yangon's%20skyline&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fmyanmar-democracy-yangon-changing-skyline%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2347%3A%20Myanmar%20rising%20%E2%80%93%20how%20democracy%20is%20changing%20Yangon%27s%20skyline&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fmyanmar-democracy-yangon-changing-skyline%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff08a6a27b300749325fb816623fd5c162e82a34e%2F0_0_5400_3564%2F5400.jpg>
 Another ‘premium location’ development. Photograph: David Levene for the 
Guardian 
The signs of wealth are everywhere, from the luxury gated village of the Pun 
Hlaing Golf Estate <http://www.punhlainggolfestate.com/> to the towers around 
swimming pools ofStar City <http://www.starcityyangon.com/english/index.html>, 
both projects of the Pun empire. Across Strand Road from the future Kempinski, 
emblazoned across a construction hoarding on the waterfront, is an advert for 
the Vintage Luxury Yacht Hotel, offering its customers the chance to “be a king 
in 30 seconds”.

***

Poor regulation … means investors continue to be granted land obtained 
illegally or under dubious circumstances
Vani Sathisan 
There is another way; one that doesn’t involve luxury hotels, corrupt generals 
or mass evictions. A block north of the waterfront on Merchant Road, workmen up 
ladders are carefully painting corinthian capitals with yellow limewash and 
adjusting teak window frames, putting the finishing touches to a restoration 
project that offers a different model for saving heritage structures, while 
training local builders in the process.

Over the last eight months, the Turquoise Mountain foundation 
<http://turquoisemountain.org/project-entries/turquoise-mountain-myanmar> – a 
regeneration trust founded in Afghanistan by the Prince of Wales and former 
Afghan president Hamid Karzai – has been working to restore the building in 
partnership with its residents and users, all of whom have been able to stay on 
site during the process and, crucially, will be allowed to remain.

“It’s a complete cultural cross section of Yangon in one building,” says 
project director Harry Wardill, pointing out the tea shops on each corner – one 
Hindu, one Christian – the little motel, a Buddhist monks’ memorabilia shop, a 
Muslim photocopy shop and a cafe serving upmohinga, the local fish stew 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/mar/07/aung-san-suu-kyi-fish-soup-breakfast-champions>
. The lofty first floor was long ago carved up into a series of apartments, all 
of which will remain, despite most residents not having title deeds.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fmyanmar-democracy-yangon-changing-skyline%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F239602b91a3ab7c05bcf400cb59598f1f2440705%2F0_391_8688_5213%2F8688.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2347%3A%20Myanmar%20rising%20%E2%80%93%20how%20democracy%20is%20changing%20Yangon's%20skyline&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fmyanmar-democracy-yangon-changing-skyline%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2347%3A%20Myanmar%20rising%20%E2%80%93%20how%20democracy%20is%20changing%20Yangon%27s%20skyline&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fmyanmar-democracy-yangon-changing-skyline%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F239602b91a3ab7c05bcf400cb59598f1f2440705%2F0_391_8688_5213%2F8688.jpg>
 Authors, poets, and cartoonists meet for a weekly discussion at a tea house. 
Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian 
“Before the renovations, it felt like we were camping,” says Daw Khin May Lin, 
who lives here with her extended family of 13 in a room that used to be 
sheltered by tarpaulins hanging from the ceiling, channelling water from the 
leaking roof into a central gutter that poked through the window. Since the 
roof was fixed, they can live normally, safe in the knowledge that they won’t 
be evicted, nor their home bulldozed.

Funded by the Canadian government’s department of foreign affairs, the project 
has seen more than 250 local craftspeople trained to international conservation 
standards, in workshops covering everything from traditional lime plaster to 
architectural carpentry, brickwork and roofing. It has been a steep learning 
curve, not least because of the different attitude to using reclaimed 
materials, which are plentiful, high quality and easily sourced, compared with 
expensive imported ones.


“One of our main challenges was overcoming the suspicion of anything 
recycled,” Wardill says. “There’s a superstition about using old building 
components, because people think there might be evil spirits in the material 
from its past life.”

The project is due to be completed this month, providing the city with the 
first physical example of how a building such as this can be renovated in 
collaboration with its existing residents. But can it be replicated without 
Canadian philanthropy?

The great leap upward: China's Pearl River Delta, then and now
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/may/10/china-pearl-river-delta-then-and-now-photographs>
“There are plenty of residents in Yangon who can afford to do up their 
buildings, but don’t have the confidence, or just don’t think it’s possible,” 
Wardill says, a view shared by Lwin. “This provides a model and shows that it’s 
eminently doable – that if people get together, they can overcome all the 
obstacles.”

The foundation now has bigger plans on the horizon, currently eyeing up the 
crumbling courthouse at the bottom of Pansodan Street as a potential site for 
an expanded project, which could see a cultural centre, along with retail units 
for small businesses and startup office space, all managed by a local 
charitable trust that would plough any profits back into the building.

Outside the Merchant Street building, a lively gathering of writers and 
literary agents spills out on to the pavement from the Hindu teashop, where 
they have met on a weekly basis for the last 15 years, drawn here partly in 
honour of the fact that radical journalist and champion of press freedomU Sein 
Win 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/10/19/world/asia/u-sein-win-champion-of-myanmar-press-freedom-dies-at-91.html?_r=0>
 used to live in the building.

“It’s nice to see life brought back to this place,” says Wei May Hla, a member 
ofthe Myanmar Literature Admirers’ Association 
<http://www.yangondirectory.com/en/my-yangon/khit-yangon/arts/item/463-myanmar-literature-associations.html>
, through a broad grin of betel-stained teeth. “We’re optimistic about the 
future, now that we have a new government. Maybe the rest of the city could be 
like this one day.”

Does your city have a little-known story that made a major impact on its 
development? Please share it in the comments below or on Twitter using 
#storyofcities
 