
In the late hours of 14 August 1947, on the eve of Indian independence, 
Jawaharlal Nehru stood at the podium of the Constituent Assembly anddelivered 
his vision <https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2007/may/01/greatspeeches> 
for a new capital city. “We have to build a noble mansion of free India where 
all her children may dwell,” said the country’s inaugural prime minister.

Just outside parliament, however, Nehru’s mansion was crumbling.

In Delhi’s old city, mobs of young men rioted through Muslim neighbourhoods 
with impunity. Families fled from their homes, stuffing themselves into train 
cars or marching from the city centre by foot. A few kilometres to the south, 
thousands more poured into Mughal ruins atPurana Qila 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/mar/26/delhi-purana-qila-fort-history-cities-buildings>
 andHumayun’s Tomb <http://www.humayunstomb.com/>. Fleeing violence in their 
home states, these families found refuge in the makeshift colonies sprouting on 
Delhi’s periphery.

The city appeared, according to a report in the Daily Mirror, “like a 
battlefield with blazing houses, hordes of refugees, dead cattle and horses and 
the rattle of automatic weapons”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F20%2Fstory-cities-23-delhi-india-modernist-fantasy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8a41bbdc7cdef4de0d67271e902c3fd37493a12%2F88_0_1808_1086%2F1808.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2326%3A%20Delhi's%20modernist%20dream%20proves%20a%20far-fetched%20fantasy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F20%2Fstory-cities-23-delhi-india-modernist-fantasy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2326%3A%20Delhi%27s%20modernist%20dream%20proves%20a%20far-fetched%20fantasy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F20%2Fstory-cities-23-delhi-india-modernist-fantasy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8a41bbdc7cdef4de0d67271e902c3fd37493a12%2F88_0_1808_1086%2F1808.jpg>
 Hundreds of Muslim refugees crowd on a train leaving New Delhi for Pakistan in 
September 1947. Photograph: AP 
The departure of the British left a subcontinent divided 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/interactive/2012/sep/06/india-pakistan-partition-interactive>
. In the aftermath, 350,000 Muslims fled Delhi for Pakistan, while 500,000 
non-Muslims arrived in the city in 1947 alone. It was labelled “history’s 
greatest migration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/century/1940-1949/Story/0,,105131,00.html>”. It 
was also a scale of transformation for which the city was entirely unprepared. 
Services came to a standstill: trains, buses, hospitals, even phonelines. 
Without trains, the food supply dwindled to just two days’ worth of wheat.

The entire city is taken over as a public project. They want to create an 
imperial capital
Partha Mukhopadhyay 
Yet Nehru and his team of planners remained undeterred. Over the course of the 
coming decade, they would develop the most ambitious masterplan in India’s 
history: a capital city free of poverty and slums. “Delhi was to be Nehru’s 
‘all-India’ city,” says Ashutosh Varshney,professor of political science 
<http://watson.brown.edu/people/faculty/varshney> at Brown University. “It was 
to be the first city that belonged to the independent India.”

The ingredients of Delhi’s ambitious plan were, however, imported. Far away 
from the tumult of independence, eight British and American consultants from the
Ford Foundation <https://www.fordfoundation.org/> had gathered in Berkeley, 
California, to review maps, draw up plans, and mock up drafts of India’s new 
capital city.Albert Mayer <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Albert_Mayer_(planner)>
, the head of the programme, was a prominent New York planner and architect. 
They called their project the “Delhi imperative” – their imperative being to 
bring the ideas of England’sgarden city movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2014/mar/17/ebbsfleet-garden-city-george-osborne>
 to bear on Delhi’s chaotic and sprawling urban form.

Of course, almost none of the committee members had worked in India before. 
The Berkeley meetings were, in many ways, briefings on Delhi and its centuries 
of disjointed urbanisation. YetDelhi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/delhi> 
has a long history of outsourcing its vision to foreign planners.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F20%2Fstory-cities-23-delhi-india-modernist-fantasy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffba58337707a95405d6da53922f6ff451933cb2d%2F0_0_3433_5150%2F3433.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2326%3A%20Delhi's%20modernist%20dream%20proves%20a%20far-fetched%20fantasy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F20%2Fstory-cities-23-delhi-india-modernist-fantasy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2326%3A%20Delhi%27s%20modernist%20dream%20proves%20a%20far-fetched%20fantasy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F20%2Fstory-cities-23-delhi-india-modernist-fantasy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffba58337707a95405d6da53922f6ff451933cb2d%2F0_0_3433_5150%2F3433.jpg>
 Parliament House, New Delhi. Photograph: Alamy 
A half-century earlier, when it became the capital of the British Raj, Edwin 
Lutyens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/jul/13/biography.highereducation1> 
arrived as chief architect of the Delhi town planning committee. Over the 
course of two months, he assessed the city on theback of his elephant 
<https://www.architecture.com/image-library/RIBApix/image-information/poster/george-s-c-swinton-edwin-lutyens-and-sir-herbert-baker-on-an-elephant-at-raisina-new-delhi/posterid/RIBA11124.html>
, then withdrew, satisfied, to the mountains, to reshape Delhi in his image of 
a “proper European capital <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lutyens%27_Delhi>” – 
wide avenues, axial vistas, parks and roundabouts, just like his beloved 
Champs-Élysées. Lutyens’ portion of the city became known as New Delhi.

The Ford Foundation committee similarly sought to reconstruct the city anew. 
“Delhi was to become the model of development for India,” says AK Jain, a 
former commissioner of planning at theDelhi Development Authority <> (DDA). 
“The masterplan was Nehru’s showpiece.”

On paper, the masterplan 
<http://rgplan.org/delhi/MASTER-PLAN-FOR-DELHI_1962.pdf> is a high modernist 
dream. Six “ring towns” grow from Delhi’s periphery, each with its own 
“economic, social and cultural ties with the central city”.

Under the guidance of the newly founded DDA, each town should hit its targets 
for population, manufacturing and employment for each of the next 30 years of 
urban growth. And, of course, they would be beautiful – in the words of the 
plan, beauty “should pervade the design of all public and private buildings: 
modern industrial buildings in attractively landscaped grounds, pleasing 
shopping centres, simple and beautifully designed schools and homes.”

This was a social vision as much as an architectural one. “Tamils should be 
there, Telugus should be there, Assamese should be there,” Varshney explains. 
“The city was to incorporate all the languages and all the regions ofIndia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>.” For Delhi’s planners, the key to 
implementing this vision was centralisation. Until then, they argued, Delhi had 
“evolved in a haphazard manner, more often that not without the benefit of 
planning development in the public interest. Private interests run rampant, 
overlooking or not being concerned with the efficiencies and facilities that 
are required.”

The DDA would take over the sole responsibility for directing Delhi’s growth. 
“As the development authority takes shape, two things happen,” says Partha 
Mukhopadhyay, a senior fellow at theCentre for Policy Research 
<http://www.cprindia.org> in New Delhi. “First, there is a fair degree of land 
acquisition and eminent domain. Second, almost all private development in the 
city comes to a halt.” Delhi’s major developers, who had constructed colonies 
through the south of the city, were no longer allowed to build. Instead, the 
DDA amassed more than 50,000 acres of land for its various construction and 
redevelopment projects.

 “The entire city is taken over as a public project,” Mukhopadhyay says. “Once 
the DDA starts growing, there is a much more intentional effort to reshape the 
city. They want to create an imperial capital.”

Grand overambition

Outside of the development authority, however, the masterplan remained a 
fantasy. “The promise was so seductive: a large land nationalisation, formal 
employment in the government, and the state building all levels of housing to 
construct a more equal and mixed city than a real-estate market would have,” 
says Gautam Bhan, professor at theIndian Institute of Human Settlements 
<http://iihs.co.in/> in Bangalore. “But many parts of it fell apart slowly.”

At the root of the issue was the fact that the Delhi government – like city 
governments around the country – was close to bankruptcy. “They just didn’t 
have the resources,” says Mukhopadhyay. “The pressure on the city is growing. 
But the DDA is overwhelmed.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F20%2Fstory-cities-23-delhi-india-modernist-fantasy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa60e1f4dd2b9e5e22ba4107cc33bb1d74b446f99%2F44_0_2930_1758%2F2930.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2326%3A%20Delhi's%20modernist%20dream%20proves%20a%20far-fetched%20fantasy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F20%2Fstory-cities-23-delhi-india-modernist-fantasy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2326%3A%20Delhi%27s%20modernist%20dream%20proves%20a%20far-fetched%20fantasy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F20%2Fstory-cities-23-delhi-india-modernist-fantasy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa60e1f4dd2b9e5e22ba4107cc33bb1d74b446f99%2F44_0_2930_1758%2F2930.jpg>
 Men rest on a construction site for residential apartments that was halted, 
unfinished, in 2011. Photograph: Adnan1 Abidi/Reuters 
The total revolving fund at the height of its masterplanning was no more than 
50 million rupees – or roughly $1million: “Not enough to build more than a few 
metres of metro railway,” says Mukhopadhyay.

The result was that, over the course of the coming decade, the DDA 
consistently fell short. It promised to develop 30,000 acres for residential 
use, but delivered only 13,000. Where it did succeed in developing housing 
stock, it was rarely for Delhi’s poorest. A mere 10% of the DDA’s housing plots 
were designated for its low-income group between 1960 and 1970.

Where the poor would live, what facilities would be made for them – it never 
featured. The plan was purely fictional
Ashutosh Varshney 
Without support from the state, the refugee crisis that had spurred Nehru to 
action at Independence intensified. “The pressure on the city – the 
attractiveness of the city as a destination – is growing, and the DDA is 
aggressively planning to stop the bleeding,” says Mukhopadhyay. “But given 
India’s politics … it just can’t stop people from coming in.”

Each year, more than 200,000 new migrants arrived in Delhi from the 
surrounding countryside. Tent cities that first appeared in the early days of 
independence grew into larger neighbourhoods, as residents built up fromkutcha 
houses of mud and wood topukka houses of brick and stone. Relatives joined 
their families, built new rooms, and Delhi’s periphery steadily urbanised 
outward. It had become a “partition city”, and its migrants had become 
residents. But the DDA refused to recognise them. Under its public ownership of 
the city,informal settlements were illegal 
<http://cprindia.org/sites/default/files/policy-briefs/Categorisation-of-Settlement-in-Delhi.pdf>
, and their residents were invaders. In many cases, the authority moved toevict 
and relocate <http://eau.sagepub.com/content/21/1/127.short?rss=1&ssource=mfc> 
these illegal occupants to make way for its new projects. In others, Delhi’s 
slum-dwellers were left unacknowledged.

They could apply for legal titles to the land, known as “regularisation 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=0ahUKEwiRr_mGoLvLAhWJHxoKHXYEClcQFggcMAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fdelhi.gov.in%2Fwps%2Fwcm%2Fconnect%2Fdoit_udd%2FUrban%2BDevelopment%2FOur%2BServices%2FUnauthorized%2BColonies%2BCells%2B(UC)%252>
”. But moving through the bureaucracy would take them years, if not decades. 
The DDA trapped them in a double bind: it outlawed informal construction, but 
failed to provide formal accommodation to replace it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F20%2Fstory-cities-23-delhi-india-modernist-fantasy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c2eae7a47c9d0e1664749fc979ec5d746abfaed%2F0_49_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2326%3A%20Delhi's%20modernist%20dream%20proves%20a%20far-fetched%20fantasy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F20%2Fstory-cities-23-delhi-india-modernist-fantasy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2326%3A%20Delhi%27s%20modernist%20dream%20proves%20a%20far-fetched%20fantasy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F20%2Fstory-cities-23-delhi-india-modernist-fantasy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c2eae7a47c9d0e1664749fc979ec5d746abfaed%2F0_49_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
 Guards stand in the Mughal gardens of the Indian Presidential Palace. 
Photograph: Eric Feferberg/AFP/Getty Images 
According to Ashutosh Varshney, providing for the urban poor was never part of 
the DDA’s vision. “Where the poor were to be located, what kind of facilities 
were to be made for them – I don’t think those questions were discussed, or 
featured in that imagination.”. Furthermore, Delhi’s planners never adapted to 
the new reality. “At independence, the ideal of this planned, modern city makes 
some sense,” says Mukhopadhyay. “But that ideal has been continuously 
confronted with a different reality. A lot of the DDA’s planning is purely 
fictional.”

Yet the city’s planners buried their heads in the original masterplan, and 
continued to pursue their original targets. “The biggest failure was that it 
took 30 years for the next plan to come,” says Bhan. “So the essence of 
planning – review, course correction, adjustment – vanished. There is no plan 
that can shape a city for 30 years, no matter how good.”

‘We are building the world-class city’

Even five decades after its first masterplan, the DDA was waxing poetical 
about its accomplishments in its2006/07 annual report 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=2&ved=0ahUKEwi9pbnNoLvLAhVHPBoKHWFtA8UQFggiMAE&url=https%3A%2F%2Fdda.org.in%2Fddanew%2Fpdf%2FAnnual_Reports%2FAREnglish%202006-07.pdf&usg=AFQjCNEj2ogxUvYfL91jBxg1pqgo6o-vIQ&sig2=H-yB_6vcGotX4>
: “In the 50 years of its relentless efforts to maintain the pace of 
development and match steps with the best cities of the present era, DDA has 
crossed one milestone after another. Emperors have come and emperors have gone, 
history has been written and rewritten, but Delhi has continued to grow in 
glory and spread its warmth.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F20%2Fstory-cities-23-delhi-india-modernist-fantasy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb41147ab4624279176600780b54e37d610684159%2F0_57_2000_1311%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2326%3A%20Delhi's%20modernist%20dream%20proves%20a%20far-fetched%20fantasy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F20%2Fstory-cities-23-delhi-india-modernist-fantasy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2326%3A%20Delhi%27s%20modernist%20dream%20proves%20a%20far-fetched%20fantasy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F20%2Fstory-cities-23-delhi-india-modernist-fantasy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb41147ab4624279176600780b54e37d610684159%2F0_57_2000_1311%2F2000.jpg>
 Labourers work at a construction project in Delhi. Photograph: Gurinder Osan/AP
Even to the most casual observer, that report is a masterpiece of magical 
thinking. Much as it was on the eve of independence, Delhi today is the site of
frenzied urbanisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jun/05/urban-india-gurgaon-water-electricity>
. Skyscrapers, malls and gated communities sprout from farmland on thecity’s 
eastern edge <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2005/mar/30/india.randeepramesh>
. Trucks flow from highways intofactories along its north 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/28/india-sweated-labour>. 
Throughout, new informal settlements continue to crop up, housing roughly half 
of Delhi’s 18 million residents.

Yet the DDA remains largely blind to these changes. At Vikas Sadan, where its 
headquarters are located, Nehru’s urban planning apparatus remains intact, a 
fossil of a different era. Bureaucrats shuffle through long, dark hallways. 
Stacks of rotting files line hallways and closets; triplicate traces of 
decades-old applications. In one office, four engineers sit cross-legged behind 
their desks, drinking chai and examining new plans for a housing development. 
“With this, we are buildingthe world-class city,” one tells me. He pulls out a 
copy of themasterplan 2021 <https://dda.org.in/planning/mpd-2021.htm>, which 
promises to “make Delhi a global metropolis”: a centre of IT innovation, green 
parks and new high-rise housing.

Story of cities #27: Singapore – the most meticulously planned city in the 
world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/21/story-cities-singapore-carefully-planned-lee-kuan-yew>
Outside, lines of housing applicants 
<http://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/Delhi/dda-to-keep-tab-on-frequent-visitors-to-vikas-sadan/article6714853.ece>
 snake around the block, holding thick folders of forms, bills and photocopies. 
Their joke is always the same: if you apply for a house from the DDA, your 
great-great-great-great-great-granddaughter will live to inhabit it.

Modern Delhi was born of this contrast – great vision, and little 
implementation. From the outset, Delhi’s planners have imagined a vibrant 
capital city with ordered growth and universal housing. Yet in doing so, they 
planned for a city that did not exist, and they left the city’s actual 
residents without a plan.

According to Mukhopadhyay, this is the “original sin” of Delhi’s urban 
conception. “You can imagine going wrong for five, 10 or even 30 years. But at 
which point do you start recognising reality?”

Does your city have a little-known story that made a major impact on its 
development? Please share it in the comments below or on Twitter using 
#storyofcities
 