
On 12 May 2015, a Singapore <https://www.theguardian.com/world/singapore> 
court sentenced Amos Yee, an outspoken 16-year-old video blogger who had been 
tried as an adult, to four weeks in jail.

Yee had been hauled up six weeks earlier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/31/singapore-teenager-amos-yee-pang-sang-charged-critical-lee-kuan-yew-video>
 on charges related to materials he had posted online: one for violating 
Section 298 of the country’s penal code by making “remarks against 
Christianity, with the deliberate intention of wounding the religious feelings 
of Christians in general”; another for obscenity; and another for violating the 
Protection from Harassment Act 2014 by making “remarks aboutMr Lee Kuan Yew 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/22/lee-kuan-yew> which were 
intended to be heard and seen by persons likely to be distressed”.

Most of this came as a result of Lee Kuan Yew Is Finally Dead! 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6TZPdM3xn24>, a video posted four days after 
the death of the first prime minister of Singapore. In it, Yee offered a 
withering assessment of the independent city-state’s founding father, which was 
in stark contrast to the laudatory tributes pouring forth from elsewhere.

“On the surface, he seemed quite successful,” says Yee in the video. “He 
turned Singapore from a small seaport into a bustling metropolis, rife with 
skyscrapers and its own casino. World leaders seemed to like him, most notably 
Margaret Thatcher, and many foreigners and millionaires wish to invest in 
Singapore. But you look deeper, and you find out what the true nature of Lee 
Kuan Yew’s Singapore is.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fstory-cities-singapore-carefully-planned-lee-kuan-yew%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33e57f5ceeeb5c47e2c3c8c89478fc091a3ebd9c%2F1231_612_2691_1615%2F2691.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2327%3A%20Singapore%20%E2%80%93%20the%20most%20meticulously%20planned%20city%20in%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fstory-cities-singapore-carefully-planned-lee-kuan-yew%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2327%3A%20Singapore%20%E2%80%93%20the%20most%20meticulously%20planned%20city%20in%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fstory-cities-singapore-carefully-planned-lee-kuan-yew%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33e57f5ceeeb5c47e2c3c8c89478fc091a3ebd9c%2F1231_612_2691_1615%2F2691.jpg>
 Teenager Amos Yee awaits sentencing last year. Photograph: Wallace Woon/EPA 
Yee’s complaints about his homeland – and there are many – include its long 
working hours, high income inequality and poverty rates, high taxes, low 
government spending on healthcare and social security, thoroughgoing 
materialism – and its government’s tendency to slap critics down with libel 
suits.

He sees it all personified in Lee Kuan Yew, who “honestly thought that money 
and status equated to happiness … His failure to understand how false that was 
really showed, leading us to become one of the richest countries in the world, 
and one of the most depressed. Ultimately, how do you quantify a great leader? 
It is by how he creates a place where people are able to live happily and 
prosper based on their own unique attributes. And he hasn’t.”

A fourth-generation Singaporean of Chinese descent, and a Cambridge University 
and London School of Economics graduate, Lee was once called “the best bloody 
Englishman east of Suez 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/news/lee-kuan-yew-leader-of-singapore-who-brought-wealth-and-stability-to-the-new-state-at-the-cost-of-10128809.html>
” by the British foreign secretary George Brown. But his years as a student in 
England taught him not to revere the people who ran Singapore throughout his 
youth: “I saw no reason why they should be governing me,” he later said. 
“They’re not superior.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fstory-cities-singapore-carefully-planned-lee-kuan-yew%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F84c5aa63e2ec448f0fb44981958e0911eda05c9f%2F0_111_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2327%3A%20Singapore%20%E2%80%93%20the%20most%20meticulously%20planned%20city%20in%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fstory-cities-singapore-carefully-planned-lee-kuan-yew%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2327%3A%20Singapore%20%E2%80%93%20the%20most%20meticulously%20planned%20city%20in%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fstory-cities-singapore-carefully-planned-lee-kuan-yew%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F84c5aa63e2ec448f0fb44981958e0911eda05c9f%2F0_111_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 Mourners queue to pay their respects after the death of Lee Kuan Yew in 2015. 
Photograph: Roslan Rahman/AFP/Getty Images 
Lee first took Singapore’s reins when he led the People’s Action party (PAP), 
a coalition strategically formed with pro-communists, to victory in the 
elections of 1959 after Britain granted the island limited self-rule. Allied 
bombing of the Japanese-occupied island during the second world war had reduced 
it to a blank slate for all manner of economic, social and urban planning, and 
it remained shabby for years: “Utter filth and poverty,” reported the travel 
magazine Asia Scene in 1960. “One must see with his own eyes to believe it.”

Lee’s PAP, especially after Singapore’s expulsion from its short-lived 
federation with Malaysia in 1965, seized the opportunity to take the ruined 
former British trading post and build not just a new, modern, independent 
country – but the most carefully planned city in the world.

The New Yorker’s Robert Shaplen 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1988/05/16/obituaries/robert-shaplen-71-writer-for-new-yorker-dies.html>
, reporting from Singapore in the 1960s, described Lee as “a brilliant, 
impulsive, and sometimes irascible man”, possessed of an intellectual 
brilliance “that has kept him remote from all but a few of his followers” – and 
a dream of turning his country into the economic engine of south-east Asia.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fstory-cities-singapore-carefully-planned-lee-kuan-yew%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F019b7536dbd715da03d218273d50d3fd547d436a%2F0_0_2802_1680%2F2802.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2327%3A%20Singapore%20%E2%80%93%20the%20most%20meticulously%20planned%20city%20in%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fstory-cities-singapore-carefully-planned-lee-kuan-yew%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2327%3A%20Singapore%20%E2%80%93%20the%20most%20meticulously%20planned%20city%20in%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fstory-cities-singapore-carefully-planned-lee-kuan-yew%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F019b7536dbd715da03d218273d50d3fd547d436a%2F0_0_2802_1680%2F2802.jpg>
 ‘The best bloody Englishman east of Suez’ … Lee Kuan Yew. Photograph: Laurence 
Harris/AP 
But according to Shaplen: “One of Singapore’s – and Lee’s – problems [was] a 
lack of any constructive political opposition.” He would spend the rest of his 
career minimising the chances of its emergence, crafting a political and media 
environment in which the PAP could, through free and fair elections, keep a 
vice-like grip on its claim to power and legitimacy. In the process, Lee 
ensured a degree of direct control over the built environment unseen in the 
rest of the democratic world.

The great housing project

Singapore, which the colony’s founder, Sir Stamford Raffles, envisioned in 
1819 as a “Manchester of the east”, had become a boomtown under British rule. 
It struggled to accommodate wave after wave of immigrants who settled there, 
growing haphazardly until Raffles ordered up its first proper urban plan – with 
gridded streets, commercial zones and ethnically segregated residential 
districts – in 1822.

But Singapore’s housing woes deepened for more than a century – up to the 
reign of Lee’s PAP and its establishment of the mighty Housing and Development 
Board (HDB) in 1960, the division of the Ministry of National Development 
charged with building public housing. It immediately began putting up 10 to 
15-storey tower blocks, adding more than 50,000 units of housing to the city 
within the first five years of its existence.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fstory-cities-singapore-carefully-planned-lee-kuan-yew%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b9650accf76243e22d2297c0db479501e091821%2F163_405_3173_1904%2F3173.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2327%3A%20Singapore%20%E2%80%93%20the%20most%20meticulously%20planned%20city%20in%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fstory-cities-singapore-carefully-planned-lee-kuan-yew%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2327%3A%20Singapore%20%E2%80%93%20the%20most%20meticulously%20planned%20city%20in%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fstory-cities-singapore-carefully-planned-lee-kuan-yew%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b9650accf76243e22d2297c0db479501e091821%2F163_405_3173_1904%2F3173.jpg>
 An old public housing estate flat in Singapore’s Katong area, built by the 
HDB. Photograph: Tim Chong/Reuters 
Since its inception, the HDB has built more than a million flats on the 
island, taking the concept of social housing to a level unparalleled in any 
city. Today, more than 80% of Singapore’s population live in HDB buildings, and 
the organisation itself describes public housing as “a Singapore icon 
<http://www.hdb.gov.sg/cs/infoweb/about-us/our-role/public-housing--a-singapore-icon>
”.

First, though, the HDB had to tackle the issue of 240,000 squatters, many of 
them migrants from Malaysia, who had appeared in Singapore during the 1950s. 
Their presence necessitated, to the minds of the planners in charge, a 
programme of aggressive slum clearance, which provoked the kind of racially 
charged resistance typical of such sweeping urban-renewal efforts.

The HDB made it a priority to house low-income groups first, subsidising rents 
on the flats and later providing assistance from the Central Provident Fund, 
Singapore’s compulsory savings plan, to purchase them, creating a nation of 
stability-loving homeowners. But it couldn’t convince the squatters to vacate 
their informal settlements for the new high-rises as quickly as it would have 
liked.

Singapore is close to the ideal model of land-use planning in the 21st century
Edward Glaeser, urban economist 
Then came the still unexplained Bukit Ho Swee fire of 1961 
<http://kaengsuaten.blogspot.co.uk/2013/07/background-information-of-1961-bukit-ho_29.html>
, which swept through the slum, killing four, injuring 85, leaving around 
16,000 homeless, and providing the government with a chance to demonstrate the 
speed with which it could relocate the victims – which it did in just over two 
weeks – and build new housing on the site of the disaster, which it did over 
the next four years.

“Singapore must be one of the few places in the world where a statutory board 
satisfactorily completed everything it set out to do in its first five-year 
plan,” says the narrator of a triumphant1965 Singapore Ministry of 
Culture-produced newsreel <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-VosvrTlw7c> on the 
HDB’s first wave of buildings. “Nowhere in the world, except in Russia and 
Germany, is the rate of rehousing faster than in Singapore.”


The film cuts to a celebratory exhibition presenting renderings and models of 
the HDB’s plans for the next five years and beyond: “By far the most 
stimulating and exciting is the far-reaching scheme to rebuild a new city on 
the site of the old, dilapidated buildings and unhealthy slums.”

The footage shows Lee Kuan Yew himself amid these visions of ever-growing 
towers to house families and workers, and the narrator quotes Lee’s 
pronouncement: “The people of Singapore demand high standards of their 
governments, and they are prepared to work hard and are capable of higher 
skills. For them, the sky is the limit.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fstory-cities-singapore-carefully-planned-lee-kuan-yew%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbb687b558456c014b56cdbb9550ddaa3f115753%2F0_0_2268_1360%2F2268.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2327%3A%20Singapore%20%E2%80%93%20the%20most%20meticulously%20planned%20city%20in%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fstory-cities-singapore-carefully-planned-lee-kuan-yew%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2327%3A%20Singapore%20%E2%80%93%20the%20most%20meticulously%20planned%20city%20in%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fstory-cities-singapore-carefully-planned-lee-kuan-yew%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbb687b558456c014b56cdbb9550ddaa3f115753%2F0_0_2268_1360%2F2268.jpg>
 Singapore imposes corporal punishment for acts of vandalism and has a ban on 
the importation of chewing gum 
From the beginning of Lee’s three-decade run as prime minister until its end 
in 1990, Singapore’s total number of public housing units grew from 22,975 to 
557,575. They remain organised by ethnicity, but unlike in Raffles’ day, the 
PAP’s idea wasn’t to separate the Chinese, the Malays, the Indians and the 
rest, but to carefully integrate them – so the demographics of each block 
reflect the demographics of Singapore as a whole, in theory preventing the 
formation of volatile ethnic enclaves.

Singapore’s gross national product per capita also grew astonishingly under 
Lee’s rule, from US $1,240 to $18,437. External trade increased from $7.3bn to 
$205bn. Life expectancy rose from 65 to 74 years in a population that nearly 
doubled, from 1.6 million to 3 million.

Lee cultivated a reputation, as some leaders of less than fully democratic 
regimes do, of being able to get things done, especially when it came to 
infrastructure projects. He alsodidn’t hesitate to talk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/23/lee-kuan-yew-the-best-quotes-from-singapores-founding-father>
 about his belief in Machiavelli’s theories of ruling by fear and what he saw 
as the necessity of locking up people without trial, “whether they are 
communists, whether they are language chauvinists, whether they are religious 
extremists. If you don’t do that, the country would be in ruins”. Chinese 
leader Deng Xiaoping reportedly fell for the “Singapore model”when he visited 
in 1978 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-03-23/china-s-love-of-lee-s-singapore-model-ran-deep-for-decades>
.

Planner’s dream or gleaming dystopia?

“Today’s Singapore is far more precisely the result of Lee Kuan Yew’s vision 
than the Manchester of the East ever was of Sir Stamford Raffles’,”wrote 
science fiction author William Gibson <http://www.wired.com/1993/04/gibson-2/> 
in Wired magazine in 1993, three years after Yew stepped down. “Imagine an 
Asian version of Zurich operating as an offshore capsule at the foot of 
Malaysia; an affluent microcosm whose citizens inhabit something that feels 
like, well, Disneyland. Disneyland with the death penalty.”

Gibson’s bleakly vivid view of Singapore as a stern, moralistic, highly 
regimented accretion of gleaming shopping malls resonated with readers and 
presumably gave the Singaporean government cause to reflect on the consequences 
of its decisions – though not before banning Wired from the island.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fstory-cities-singapore-carefully-planned-lee-kuan-yew%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F75a465506454859dea702f78066c49c41bbcc695%2F0_156_3832_2300%2F3832.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2327%3A%20Singapore%20%E2%80%93%20the%20most%20meticulously%20planned%20city%20in%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fstory-cities-singapore-carefully-planned-lee-kuan-yew%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2327%3A%20Singapore%20%E2%80%93%20the%20most%20meticulously%20planned%20city%20in%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fstory-cities-singapore-carefully-planned-lee-kuan-yew%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F75a465506454859dea702f78066c49c41bbcc695%2F0_156_3832_2300%2F3832.jpg>
 Singapore has embraced height. Photograph: Roslan Rahman/AFP/Getty Images 
Singapore had by that time become a byword for cleanliness, efficiency and 
safety. Gibson, however, compared it unfavourably toKowloon Walled City 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2139914/A-rare-insight-Kowloon-Walled-City.html>
, the infamous ungoverned and informally constructed Hong Kong urban settlement 
– “traditionally the home of pork-butchers, unlicensed denturists and dealers 
in heroin” – which stood until the 1990s as the most densely populated place on 
Earth.

But the city-state that Lee built has also won, and continues to win, favour 
with urban planners and those in their realm, such as theHarvard urban 
economist Edward Glaeser 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/may/21/what-are-cities-doing-so-right-and-so-wrong-the-experts-go-head-to-head>
, who makes no secret of his admiration for Singapore – not for its style of 
government, but for the urban form, structure and functionality it has 
achieved. “Singapore is close to being an ideal model of what good land-use 
planning looks like in the 21st century,”said Glaeser in one interview 
<http://www.hks.harvard.edu/news-events/publications/insight/social/glaeser>, 
pointing specifically to its embrace of height. “It is filled with high-density 
dwellings, both in the inner-city and in more suburban areas, where high-rise 
public housing is the model of choice.”

A high degree of economic freedom has also made Singapore “one of the most 
avowedly free-market countries in the world, regularly coming top or near top 
of surveys for liberalisation of markets”,wrote economic journalist and author 
John Lanchester <http://www.lrb.co.uk/v34/n07/john-lanchester/marx-at-193>. Yet 
“the government owns most of the land in the country and the overwhelming 
majority of the population lives in socialised housing. It’s the world capital 
of free markets and also of council flats.”

“We’re not Disneyland by a long shot,” said the opposition politician Kenneth 
Jeyaretnam 
<http://www.wired.com/2012/04/opinion-jeyaretnam-disneyland-death-penalty/> in 
response to Gibson’s piece almost a decade later. “But it is probably true to 
say that if George Orwell and Philip Dick had an illegitimate child of a theme 
park, then this would be it.”

The Economist assesses Singapore, where the PAP has run the show for more than 
half a century, as a “flawed democracy”. The degree of state power that has 
enabled such extensive and rapidly executed feats of urban planning has also 
led to policies that appear to the rest of the world as draconian, such as 
corporal punishment for acts of vandalism, a ban on the importation of chewing 
gum, urine detectors installed in elevators, and expression-limiting laws of 
the kind that put Amos Yee on trial.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fstory-cities-singapore-carefully-planned-lee-kuan-yew%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9b5dcf6081c061191d99c5034009bc0b8b588c3%2F0_502_3500_1767%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2327%3A%20Singapore%20%E2%80%93%20the%20most%20meticulously%20planned%20city%20in%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fstory-cities-singapore-carefully-planned-lee-kuan-yew%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2327%3A%20Singapore%20%E2%80%93%20the%20most%20meticulously%20planned%20city%20in%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fstory-cities-singapore-carefully-planned-lee-kuan-yew%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9b5dcf6081c061191d99c5034009bc0b8b588c3%2F0_502_3500_1767%2F3500.jpg>
 Commuters head home from Singapore’s financial district during the evening 
rush hour. Photograph: Edgar Su/Reuters 
In the years since Gibson’s visit, the population of this 278 sq mile 
city-state (up, thanks to land reclamation, from 224.5 square miles at the time 
of independence) has increased by almost three million, many of the newcomers 
manual labourers in a land with no minimum wage. But the government’s 1990s 
designs to nurture the city into a global information-technology powerhouse 
appear to have stalled, resulting in something of a reversion to a 
manufacturing and tourism economy. “I’m afraid,” said Jeyaretnam, “we’re very 
much just another overcrowded Asian city with infrastructure and amenities 
stretched to the limit by a population bursting at the seams.”

But Singapore being Singapore, the current government has ideas about how to 
plan its way out of the doldrums. The HDB has begun using special software to 
help design its newest housing projects so as to minimise their environmental 
impact. It also plans to mitigate the deadening effects of strict delineation 
of segments of the city by creatingmixed-use neighbourhood centres 
<http://www.hdb.gov.sg/cs/infoweb/press-releases/hdb-unveils-new-generation-of-neighbourhood-centres>
 using “new design ideas and concepts to provide a complete 
live-work-play-learn environment for residents”.

Story of cities #28: how postwar Warsaw was rebuilt using 18th century 
paintings
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/22/story-cities-warsaw-rebuilt-18th-century-paintings>
It has also continued to upgrade the rigour and real-time responsiveness of 
its congestion charging system,first implemented in 1975 
<http://www.dac.dk/en/dac-cities/sustainable-cities/all-cases/transport/singapore-the-worlds-first-digital-congestion-charging-system/>
, which now brings in a revenue of $50m a year and has encouraged 65% of 
commuters to use public transport rather than private cars. “As a result,” said 
Glaeser, “you have the second densest country in the world, that has virtually 
uncongested streets.”

Aware of having drawn such acclaim, Singapore urges tourists to visit the 
Singapore City Gallery <https://www.ura.gov.sg/uol/citygallery> – the 
city-state’s monument to its achievements in urban planning, which offers “10 
thematic areas and more than 50 audiovisual and interactive exhibits”, 
providing “an exciting, multi-sensory learning experience into Singapore’s 
planning journey”.

In keeping with the enduring legacy of the man Amos Yee called a dictator who 
“managed to fool most of the world to think he was democratic”, that journey is 
sure to fascinate – and confuse – the world’s urban planners for a long time 
yet.

Does your city have a little-known story that made a major impact on its 
development? Please share it in the comments below or on Twitter using 
#storyofcities
 