
There is a story told about Dubai’s World Trade Centre. It is about a 
businessman who came to the city in the early 1970s. He entered the court of 
Sheikh Rashid bin Saeed al Maktoum and asked for a piece of land on which to 
build. The sheikh consented, and sent a surveyor to show the businessman the 
site. The following day, the businessman returned to court and declined the 
offer saying, as politely as he could, that he had expected a site much closer 
to the city centre.

Months later, upon seeing how quickly Dubai had sprawled outwards, he returned 
to court and grovelled. He had failed to see the sheikh’s magnanimity, he said, 
and wished to have the lot after all. The sheikh informed him that the original 
site was now already spoken for, but offered another in its place. Once again, 
the businessman was taken to the site, this one much further out than the 
original offer. He turned his face in disgust and never returned. The second 
piece of land was the site of theWorld Trade Centre 
<http://www.dwtc.com/en/pages/default>. 

Caught in a reverse telling of Tantalus, reaching for but never willing to 
pluck fruit from a bountiful tree, the businessman wasn’t alone in scoffing at 
Dubai’s future expansion. The city at the time seemed still focused on the 
hustle around the waters of what was known as Dubai Creek. When the World Trade 
Centre came along, it was often photographed as marooned in a distant patch of 
desert – a desert that somehow was also kind of swampy; there was a bad 
mosquito problem. Thewriter Jonathan Raban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/sep/20/featuresreviews.guardianreview11>
 saw the tower as he entered the city from Abu Dhabi. He called it “smug”.

Now the World Trade Centre is the gateway to the most memorable stretch of 
Dubai’sSheikh Zayed Road, or E11 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/feb/18/marcus-lyon-best-photograph-sheikh-zayed-road-dubai>
, lined by duelling skylines and the subject of endless gleaming photographs 
pitched to investors: two rows of skyscrapers, in fractious opposition, facing 
off across a 12-lane highway. With an exterior that is like a lattice made of 
ivory, the World Trade Centre is Sheikh Zayed Road’s opening act – but for 
decades it stood as a signpost, a marker for where Dubai’s development would 
eventually reach and surpass.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fstory-of-cities-43-dubai-world-trade-centre-turned-sand-gold-uae%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc92a5c3720aff9f6dbeff71837b35988fc0f0121%2F0_0_5242_3385%2F5242.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2343%3A%20how%20Dubai's%20World%20Trade%20Centre%20sold%20the%20city%20to%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fstory-of-cities-43-dubai-world-trade-centre-turned-sand-gold-uae%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2343%3A%20how%20Dubai%27s%20World%20Trade%20Centre%20sold%20the%20city%20to%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fstory-of-cities-43-dubai-world-trade-centre-turned-sand-gold-uae%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc92a5c3720aff9f6dbeff71837b35988fc0f0121%2F0_0_5242_3385%2F5242.jpg>
 Dubai has long been an important port city for foreign traders. Photograph: 
Sipa Press/Rex/Shutterstock 
Today it is magisterial, if also a little quaint. At 150m, its height barely 
qualifies it as a skyscraper. Up close you feel you could almost put your arms 
around it. When a new celebrity architect arrives in town, he is often asked 
what he (it’s almost always a he) thinks of Dubai’s architecture. If he is 
sensible enough to conjure up a compliment, he will express admiration for the 
World Trade Centre. It will become a hip place some day soon. For now, its 
meaning derives from another era.

In 1974, Dubai <https://www.theguardian.com/world/dubai> was a very different 
place than it is today. Oil had been discovered in the emirate only eight years 
previously, and the former trading town – which only saw its first asphalt road 
in 1960 – was rapidly growing into a modern city. Banks vied with international 
hotel chains for a view over the creek. Europeans, Arabs, North Americans and 
south Asians were arriving by plane and boat to profit from a city whose 
population had doubled in four years.

The World Trade Centre was an early version of the city-within-the-city. You 
could live, work and play there

And yet you could still watch wooden dhows from Pakistan, Iran and India 
shipping rice and canned goods, and residents still used the old souks for at 
least some of their shopping – asking a favourite tailor to copy this season’s 
London fashions, for example, or getting a radio repaired. Traffic was becoming 
unbearable. Dubai’s wealthier residents had begun to catch suburban fever, and 
city officials claimed the city needed to quadruple in size to meet demand. The 
Financial Times grumbled that Dubai was “a city under strain”. Western 
expatriates were known to complain of “hissing empty taps, the blackouts, and 
the telex breakdowns”.

Sheikh Rashid – who the British press liked to call the “merchant prince” and 
had travelled to enough financial capitals to witness the ongoing merging of 
business with leisure – commissioned his trusted architect, John Harris, to 
design an exhibition centre for trade fairs. Within a few months, Harris 
returned with a campus of six-storey buildings. Rashid demanded a tower, and 
Harris – who had entered with a proposal for an exhibition centre – left the 
meeting with the mandate to design a “World Trade Centre”, a de facto franchise 
of the now world-famous brand.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fstory-of-cities-43-dubai-world-trade-centre-turned-sand-gold-uae%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8380fcd78cbcd597fb53920b2f8be149945dfeec%2F0_232_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2343%3A%20how%20Dubai's%20World%20Trade%20Centre%20sold%20the%20city%20to%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fstory-of-cities-43-dubai-world-trade-centre-turned-sand-gold-uae%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2343%3A%20how%20Dubai%27s%20World%20Trade%20Centre%20sold%20the%20city%20to%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fstory-of-cities-43-dubai-world-trade-centre-turned-sand-gold-uae%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8380fcd78cbcd597fb53920b2f8be149945dfeec%2F0_232_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Sheikh Zayed Road viewed from the 154th floor of the Burj Khalifa, currently 
the world’s tallest building. Photograph: David Cannon/Getty Images 
He dutifully visited the ones in New York and in Tokyo, and set about building 
a 33-storey giant, by the far the tallest building in Dubai at the time. 
Halfway into construction, Sheikh Rashid insisted it be taller. It eventually 
topped out at the equivalent of 39 storeys.

If a skyscraper helps convince the world your city is for real, the World 
Trade Centre convinced Dubai that it was open for business. The complex 
included all the elements supposedly needed by a global city: a luxury hotel, 
three towers of expensive apartments, an exhibition centre, a parking garage, 
tennis courts. You came in from the desert via a ramp, arriving at a raised 
entrance that kept sand off the marble floors and emphasised how the World 
Trade Centre was leaving the old ways behind: the city was going inside. 
Twenty-four hour management, security guards, a businessman’s club, a travel 
agency, a post office, a cinema, all of it promised smooth commercial 
transactions. Air-conditioning no longer meant a boxy unit hanging out of the 
window, but a temperature-controlled environment where it was always 22C.

The World Trade Centre was an early version of the city-within-the-city. You 
could live, work and play there. And every interior space – not to mention the 
“oasis” gardens – was carefully calculated into your management fees. The floor 
of the exhibition centre itself was modular – it could become an ice-skating 
rink or a boxing ring with stadium seating.

Recreation merged smoothly into work. Marketing consultants suggested a 
mezzanine lounge with a “rich Middle Eastern decor [and] free coffee”. Shared 
spaces offered “desks, local telephones, news service tickers, and notice 
boards … [to] help visitors adjust to unfamiliar surroundings”. Sheikh Rashid’s 
advisers stressed to Harris “the importance of amenity and recreation … in the 
interest of trade”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fstory-of-cities-43-dubai-world-trade-centre-turned-sand-gold-uae%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6630bc16d970924072dd47c7ffd99cb3b30695c5%2F0_0_4092_2456%2F4092.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2343%3A%20how%20Dubai's%20World%20Trade%20Centre%20sold%20the%20city%20to%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fstory-of-cities-43-dubai-world-trade-centre-turned-sand-gold-uae%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2343%3A%20how%20Dubai%27s%20World%20Trade%20Centre%20sold%20the%20city%20to%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fstory-of-cities-43-dubai-world-trade-centre-turned-sand-gold-uae%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6630bc16d970924072dd47c7ffd99cb3b30695c5%2F0_0_4092_2456%2F4092.jpg>
 Dubai’s economy was based on revenues from trade until oil was discovered in 
1966. Photograph: Paul Popper/Popperfoto/Getty Images 
The Hilton, meanwhile, offered minibars and room service – standard today, but 
at the time businessmen were known to arrive in Dubai to discover that they had 
reserved not a room, but a bed in a room. Stories abound of British purveyors 
and consultants arriving to drum up business in the 1960s and 1970s and having 
to sleep on stoops and freshen up in a public men’s room before the pitch 
meeting the next day. With the opening of the World Trade Centre, there was now 
a temporary glut of high-end rooms. Dubai’s global businessmen could eat Maine 
lobster, chilled on ice. The complex even ran on its own power plant.


It was also an operating city, especially when the 500 luxury apartments – 
furnished by the Hilton – opened next door, allowing you to live like a guest 
who pays for his own hospitality. Owned by Dubai’s ruler, the entire complex 
was meant to function independently from the rest of the city. The sheikh even 
owned the management company whose marketing campaigns in British newspapers 
pitched the superstructure as the “natural centre” of the Arab world.

But if the complex functioned as its own city, it wasn’t abandoned outside the 
rest of the city. It was connected, by Dubai’s largest roundabout, to the vast 
staging site for Port Rashid, a 15-year building project. Between the tower and 
the port lay Quonset huts and temporary warehouses, mounds of earth, tents and 
sheds assembled for labourers, forgotten debris from earlier phases of 
construction; all of it manned by a small army of south Asian men wearing 
loose-fitting clothes and sandals. The World Trade Centre offered a sky box to 
watch the show. From the windows of the tower, it was apparent that Dubai’s 
ruler was taking modernisation away from the existing city. The old Dubai Creek 
– the existing centre of the city that the apocryphal businessman wanted so 
badly – had vanished behind a cloud of construction dust.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fstory-of-cities-43-dubai-world-trade-centre-turned-sand-gold-uae%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37c3ebb91fb36308f60f5a4f0fd6d42ef48ad0ba%2F0_36_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2343%3A%20how%20Dubai's%20World%20Trade%20Centre%20sold%20the%20city%20to%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fstory-of-cities-43-dubai-world-trade-centre-turned-sand-gold-uae%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2343%3A%20how%20Dubai%27s%20World%20Trade%20Centre%20sold%20the%20city%20to%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fstory-of-cities-43-dubai-world-trade-centre-turned-sand-gold-uae%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37c3ebb91fb36308f60f5a4f0fd6d42ef48ad0ba%2F0_36_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 The Dubai World Trade Centre in 1999. Photograph: Rabih Moghrabi/AFP/Getty 
Images 
Cordoned off from the rest of the city, Dubai’s most modern tower and port 
were the testing ground for a new kind of urbanism: for the first time, large 
tracts of land were being disengaged from the city. Urbanisation was now linked 
to the non-urban.

One might reduce the World Trade Centre – at the time, the tallest building in 
the Middle East – to an early example ofDubai’s pursuit of superlatives 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2005/10/17/the-mirage>, which in the 
subsequent decades of theBurj Khalifa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/10/dubai-plans-skyscraper-taller-than-burj-khalifa>
 andPalm Jumeirah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/dec/03/dubai-palm-jumeirah-islands-palm-trees-from-space>
 would reach such a frenzy of hubris and, eventually, spectaculardebt-saddled 
collapse <http://www.newyorker.com/news/news-desk/dubai-in-debt>. But that 
would miss the fact that the tower was a message: a restrained, cost-efficient 
facade that “incorporated an Islamic character” in its pointed arches, but 
radiated the international signs of a place of business. The radio spire on the 
pinnacle made the World Trade Centre seem to be receiving and sending signals 
to other confluences of financial power. The sheikh bought advertising space in 
the Times and Financial Times, not just to sell space in the building, but also 
to sell Dubai to the world.

Story of cities #27: Singapore – the most meticulously planned city in the 
world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/21/story-cities-singapore-carefully-planned-lee-kuan-yew>
One way he sold it was to stress its “British-built quality”. Historically, 
Dubai’s development had always relied on mastering trade routes, acting as a 
hub for hardwood, steel, food, labour. The World Trade Centre, on the other 
hand, was about just one connection: Dubai’s access to British design and 
engineering. The heating, ventilation and air conditioning equipment, glass, 
aluminium fittings and kitchen appliances were all manufactured in Britain and 
shipped into Port Rashid. Press releases reassured that British engineers were 
even overseeing the mixing of concrete. The only major part of the building 
that wasn’t British were the people who assembled it: mostly from Pakistan, 
living temporarily in barracks at the tower’s base.


In 1981, Margaret Thatcher, on a visit to sell arms to Abu Dhabi, made a brief 
stop in Dubai. Sheikh Rashid took her to the top of his tower. They squinted 
out at the newest development, Port Jebel Ali, the world’s largest manmade 
port, newly operational 30km away, another example of British engineers and 
financiers delivering the infrastructure that would help ensure Dubai’s global 
ascendancy.

Peering outward, Thatcher could see the thin line of asphalt stretch away from 
the tower and vanish. That asphalt would later swell to become what is today’s 
Sheikh Zayed Road. At the time, city officials didn’t yet know how it was going 
to supply the 23 million gallons of water it would need to keep its citizens 
hydrated daily. A convincing, singular tower would do its part to trumpet 
Dubai’s viability, and secure its future line of credit.

Does your city have a little-known story that made a major impact on its 
development? Please share it in the comments below or on Twitter using 
#storyofcities
 