
“I’d never been to that neighbourhood before. It was a new world to me.” The 
architect Luis Miguel Velez Wiesner is recalling the first time he set foot in 
Santo Domingo, one of Colombia’s most notoriouscomunas (slums), when the 
Medellín cable car opened in 2004. “The first time, I felt like I was going to 
be kidnapped. Now it’s quite different – there are lots of places to eat and 
shop. It feels safe now.”

For intrepid residents such as Wiesner, stepping off the cable car to enter 
the once out of bounds “other side” of Medellín, was a seminal moment in the 
history of their city.

Their photos in front of Giancarlo Mazzanti’s dramatic new España library 
<http://www.archdaily.com/2565/espana-library-giancarlo-mazzanti> in Santo 
Domingo sent an altogether different image of Medellín to the world. The 
long-entrenched division between the gridded city in the valley and the 
informal settlements on the hills was finally disappearing. The world’s most 
dangerous city had become accessible, and safe.

“I always lived in a gated compound,” Wiesner says. “When we were young, my 
mother was afraid when we had to leave the house. We were in a shopping mall 
once when a bomb exploded. It was quite normal. It’s really different now 
though – they’re not shooting everyone, everywhere.”

Medellín’s revival is a story of dynamic interplays between key figures on 
either side of the divide – not least mayors Luis Perez, Sergio Fajardo and 
Alonso Salazar, and the drug lordsPablo Escobar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/sep/29/colombia.drugstrade> and Don 
Berna 
<http://colombiareports.com/don-berna-claims-brother-killed-pablo-escobar/> – 
and of radical experiments in urban planning and participatory forms of 
governance.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fstory-cities-pablo-escobar-inclusive-urbanism-medellin-colombia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F321a0ba92ba17cf07d50352b92aa075addddc28c%2F0_0_1017_610%2F1017.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2342%3A%20Medell%C3%ADn%20escapes%20grip%20of%20drug%20lord%20to%20embrace%20radical%20urbanism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fstory-cities-pablo-escobar-inclusive-urbanism-medellin-colombia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2342%3A%20Medell%C3%ADn%20escapes%20grip%20of%20drug%20lord%20to%20embrace%20radical%20urbanism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fstory-cities-pablo-escobar-inclusive-urbanism-medellin-colombia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F321a0ba92ba17cf07d50352b92aa075addddc28c%2F0_0_1017_610%2F1017.jpg>
 Police and military forces storm the rooftop where Pablo Escobar was shot dead 
in 1993. Photograph: Jesus Abad-El Colombiano/AFP/Getty Images 
No account of Medellín can be written without considering Escobar’s role in 
masterminding and controlling the city’s fortunes. It might seem a little 
unorthodox to consider one of the world’s most powerful and violent criminals 
an urban planner, but to ignore his role in the story of Medellín’s development 
would be to grossly distort history.

Escobar and his cartels helped set the conditions for urban change to happen. 
They led Medellín to the brink of disaster, then demanded it change. In 1982, 
Escobar launched his“Medellín Without Slums” programme 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=V1rjd3cBI84C&pg=PA136&lpg=PA136&dq=Medellin+Without+Slums+pablo+escobar+project&source=bl&ots=6v6NPSILXw&sig=71UZZsxhwRKOmIGAsnSj67_6i8A&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwi-8cqxsdLMAhXEdCwKHSFeCrEQ6AEIOzAH#v=onepage&q=Medellin%20Without%20Slums%20pablo%20escobar%20project&f=false>
 – a politically motivated but nonetheless heartfelt campaign to rid the city 
of its slums and provide a “life of noble dignity” for the urban poor who, in 
Escobar’s words, had been living in an “inferno of garbage”.

Besides increasing his popularity, power and even election-winning potential – 
Escobar waselected to Colombia’s house of representatives 
<http://colombiareports.com/pablo-escobar/> for a brief period in 1982, before 
his associations with drug trafficking had him expelled – Medellín Without 
Slums was the first effort to make change for the poor from within. Through it, 
Escobar – who was eventually shot and killed by security forces in December 
1993 – gave the city’s comunas a political voice and a vehicle through which to 
demand change.

He radicalised, politicised and militarised the poor, turning them against the 
citizens of the formal city in all-out civil war. Escobar’s legacy, in planning 
terms, was this transformation of the spatial divide between formal and 
informal territories, between rich and poor, into a violent opposition of 
territories.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fstory-cities-pablo-escobar-inclusive-urbanism-medellin-colombia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e5c4969c35d7136c771f7278d3fc51b2801e3eb%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2342%3A%20Medell%C3%ADn%20escapes%20grip%20of%20drug%20lord%20to%20embrace%20radical%20urbanism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fstory-cities-pablo-escobar-inclusive-urbanism-medellin-colombia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2342%3A%20Medell%C3%ADn%20escapes%20grip%20of%20drug%20lord%20to%20embrace%20radical%20urbanism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fstory-cities-pablo-escobar-inclusive-urbanism-medellin-colombia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e5c4969c35d7136c771f7278d3fc51b2801e3eb%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Biblioteca España, the striking public library on the hillsides of Santo 
Domingo, one of Medellín’s poorer neighbourhoods. Photograph: Alamy 
At one point, Medellín was the most dangerous city on earth 
<http://www.iadb.org/en/topics/citizen-security/impact-medellin,5687.html>. 
From 1990 to 1993, more than 6,000 people were murdered annually, and not just 
in the slums. Drive-by shooting was regular and indiscriminate. The accounts of 
suffering and violence are truly obscene – not simply of warfare between gang 
lords and drug criminals, but of children being tortured and mutilated for 
accidentally crossing an invisible territorial boundary, of growing up with 
homicides taking place in their bedrooms, of bullets flying through their 
curtains at dinner.

The need for change was urgent – and perhaps only such extreme conditions 
could have led to such radical urban experimentation. According to Colombian 
architect andUCL lecturer 
<http://www.bartlett.ucl.ac.uk/people/?school=dpu&upi=CORTI78> Catalina Ortiz, 
who worked on Medellín’s strategic city plans of 2005 and 2013 under Mayor 
Fajardo, the critical moment came a quarter of a century ago.

“For me, 1991 was a key turning point for the whole country. It was the worst 
and the best moment – a time of complete crisis and a moment of hope,” Ortiz 
says. “It was truly a moment where everyone felt it could not get any worse – 
we had to do something.”

Medellín’s security issues could not be dealt with through policy measures 
alone
Catalina Ortiz 
The country’s new constitution, ratified that year 
<http://www.constitutionnet.org/country/constitutional-history-colombia>, gave 
greater independence to local governments to elect their own leaders, offering 
more control over urban development to local people with local knowledge and 
expertise. It was also the moment when the national government, with 
international support from the United Nations, started to intervene in 
Medellín, dismantling and demobilising guerrilla paramilitary groups.

“The interest of the national government was an acknowledgement that the 
situation was out of control,” Ortiz explains. “They recognised that governance 
in Medellín had been lost.”

But this was also a key moment for urban planning – the point at which the 
city’s issues were considered a matter of urban design. “The government 
recognised that Medellín’s security issues could not be dealt with through 
policy measures alone. It was the point at which the governing entities started 
to recognise and address the urban context of the problem,” Ortiz says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fstory-cities-pablo-escobar-inclusive-urbanism-medellin-colombia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8fc5f6cd919b3db1c1e315ea9f7385e45aeded78%2F0_278_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2342%3A%20Medell%C3%ADn%20escapes%20grip%20of%20drug%20lord%20to%20embrace%20radical%20urbanism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fstory-cities-pablo-escobar-inclusive-urbanism-medellin-colombia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2342%3A%20Medell%C3%ADn%20escapes%20grip%20of%20drug%20lord%20to%20embrace%20radical%20urbanism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fstory-cities-pablo-escobar-inclusive-urbanism-medellin-colombia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8fc5f6cd919b3db1c1e315ea9f7385e45aeded78%2F0_278_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 A Colombian police officer patrols the streets of Comuna 1, a comuna that had 
one of the highest rates of violence. Photograph: Raul Arboleda/AFP/Getty Images
Medellín’s authorities started a series of radical programmes to reorganise 
the social fabric of the comunas and mobilise the poor. The city’s planners 
began addressing its endemic violence and inequity through the design of public 
spaces, transit infrastructure and urban interventions into the slums.

Key to their approach was a commitment to the public realm as a truly shared 
space, and a faith that they could transform Medellín’s public spaces from 
sites of segregation and warfare into spaces where communities would come 
together.

But Medellín’s social urbanism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/apr/11/colombia-architecture-bogota-medellin>
 stretches way beyond the more modest experiments with participatory planning 
andcommunity consultation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/jul/21/codesign-help-peckham-community-consultation-failed>
 that are now vogue in cities across the globe. The sheer enormity and 
complexity of the issues here demanded something unique – an urbanism of 
inclusion, where the dispossessed became partners in driving urban change.

Influenced by European regeneration models, notably in Barcelona, Medellín’s 
1995 and 1999 strategic plansset a new agenda for the city 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/31/medellin-colombia-fast-track-slums-escalators>
. “They redefined the realm of what ‘public work’ is. Participatory planning 
became a key question of social equity,” Ortiz explains.

In 1998, it became constitutional law in Colombia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/colombia> that every municipality had to 
develop a masterplan, and that planning could not happen without social 
participation.

Into this situation parachuted mayor Fajardo and the architect Alejandro 
Echeverri. Fajardo surrounded himself by a team of experts and specialists at 
his Urban Development Corporation (EDU), working with architects, planners, 
engineers and sociologists to collectively manage Medellín’s change. On many 
projects, the design team worked with a “man on the ground” – a community 
representative who was mouthpiece and interpreter for the community in which 
interventions were being proposed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fstory-cities-pablo-escobar-inclusive-urbanism-medellin-colombia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d7a6c138d596c8a2f7ecef66f720ad7aa463622%2F0_0_4287_2847%2F4287.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2342%3A%20Medell%C3%ADn%20escapes%20grip%20of%20drug%20lord%20to%20embrace%20radical%20urbanism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fstory-cities-pablo-escobar-inclusive-urbanism-medellin-colombia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2342%3A%20Medell%C3%ADn%20escapes%20grip%20of%20drug%20lord%20to%20embrace%20radical%20urbanism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fstory-cities-pablo-escobar-inclusive-urbanism-medellin-colombia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d7a6c138d596c8a2f7ecef66f720ad7aa463622%2F0_0_4287_2847%2F4287.jpg>
 Cable cars and escalators now carry tens of thousands of people a day between 
Medellín’s comunas and the city centre. Photograph: imagebroker/Alamy 
Echeverri says this level of collaboration and integration of professions and 
disciplines was fundamental to the success of Medellín’s projects – which meant 
also having to “call on the bad guys” to help. He explains: “Often the person 
we needed to deliver the plan was one of the bad guys, part of the problem.”

In a context as divided and oppositional as this, where the establishment was 
hated and figures of authority treated with distrust, the gulf between the rich 
and the poor, the authority and the individual, had to be bridged through joint 
decision-making and co-design.

Unlike previous political figures, Fajardo was often present at community 
meetings in the comunas. His team held “imagination workshops” in which comuna 
dwellers were given the opportunity to imagine alternatives; to redesign where 
they lived. The EDU achieved a truly integrated form of participatory planning, 
establishing a common ground between once warring factions and a common will to 
make change.

The projects were seen as chains of interventions that stitched the city 
together. Integrated mobility systems consisting of elevated metros, cable 
cars, bridges and escalators were planned to keep the city moving and link 
previously disconnected neighbourhoods. These were accompanied by socially 
minded, architectural-scale interventions in the poorest areas: libraries, 
community buildings and cultural centres – places for people to come together, 
interact and learn.

Fajardo invested in Medellín’s civic centre as well as the slums; a 
two-pronged approach that legitimated the previously neglected comunas by 
treating them as equal parts of the whole city.

Architecturally, one of Echeverri’s major successes was striking a balance 
between the embedded and the iconic – integrating spaces, places and systems 
into the social fabric of the city on the one hand, while also creating 
buildings of international quality which would be photographed again and again.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fstory-cities-pablo-escobar-inclusive-urbanism-medellin-colombia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a68c7dc279a24967f1251449d61c788096a4da8%2F1231_0_6236_3744%2F6236.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2342%3A%20Medell%C3%ADn%20escapes%20grip%20of%20drug%20lord%20to%20embrace%20radical%20urbanism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fstory-cities-pablo-escobar-inclusive-urbanism-medellin-colombia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2342%3A%20Medell%C3%ADn%20escapes%20grip%20of%20drug%20lord%20to%20embrace%20radical%20urbanism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fstory-cities-pablo-escobar-inclusive-urbanism-medellin-colombia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a68c7dc279a24967f1251449d61c788096a4da8%2F1231_0_6236_3744%2F6236.jpg>
 Former mayor Sergio Fajardo focused on developing downtown Medellín as well as 
the comunas. Photograph: Alamy 
But as well as sending a new image of the city to the world, changing its 
reputation and attracting a tourist economy, there is a more subtle design 
intelligence at play here. Watching people slide up and down the brightly 
coloured escalators in Comuna 13 (still believed to be one of Medellín’s most 
dangerous comunas), with their decorative metal canopies, air-conditioning and 
soft music, set against the haphazard irregularity of the slum, is a collision 
of worlds. And perhaps this is key to the success of the projects: bringing two 
alien worlds together and forcing them to interact, adjust to one another, and 
forge a new identity.

Fajardo was something of a political anomaly. A maths professor with no 
previous background in politics, he managed to overcome the traditional 
political parties, all rife with corruption, to become mayor in 2003 with no 
tarnish.

He used this autonomy well, entering political and spatial territories that 
were previously out of bounds. His independence enabled people to accept him 
and get to know him – the new mayor from nowhere who walked in the city’s 
slums. Many explain Medellín’s relative stability between 2003 and 2009 as 
thanks to an accord between the city’s two independent leaders, Fajardo and 
drug lord Don Berna – both of whom commanded peace and calm from different 
sides of Medellín’s divide.

In establishing the EDU, Fajardo instigated a bureaucratic independence – free 
of Medellín’s corrupt and inefficient ways – that was key to the city’s 
successes. This independence allowed the EDU to look freely at the city as a 
whole, enabling its experimental and visionary approach that exceeded what 
previous authorities had achieved. In this, it is a lesson to cities around the 
world of the importance of independent design bureaus working alongside local 
authorities.

Story of cities #43: how Dubai's World Trade Centre sold the city to the world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/may/16/story-of-cities-43-dubai-world-trade-centre-turned-sand-gold-uae>
Another crucial form of independence concerns autonomy of funding, in the form 
of thepublic utilities company EPM 
<http://www.epm.com.co/site/Home/Institucional/EdificioEPM.aspx>. A unique 
institution, the EPM is owned by the city municipality, and is a wealthy 
institution that exports energy to the rest of Colombia and other parts of 
South America too. The 1991 constitution decided that the EPM would contribute 
30% of its profit to the city for municipal use – a crucial source of funding 
that subsequent mayors have been able to use to power their urban interventions.

“Several entities were crucial for physical change in Medellín,” Ortiz says. 
“The centralised agencies of the state, with their strategic city plans, and 
the semi-autonomous entities like the EDU and EPM, who had less accountability.”

But also key to Medellín’s transformation was an attitude towards urbanism as 
a tool for promoting social mobility and equity – a process in which comuna 
dwellers became clients, participants and stakeholders in the city, with the 
chance to design their own destiny.

This approach succeeded in crossing boundaries where political policy, social 
strategy, policing and corruption had previously failed. The city transformed 
itself by allowing the people to stitch it back together themselves.


Alex Warnock-Smith is founding director of Urban Projects Bureau 
<http://www.urbanprojectsbureau.com/>, and course master of the Architectural 
Association Graduate School’s 
<http://www.aaschool.ac.uk/STUDY/GRADUATE/graduate.php> Housing & Urbanism 
programme.

Does your city have a little-known story that made a major impact on its 
development? Please share it in the comments below or on Twitter using 
#storyofcities
 