
When Wen Jiabao visited the small Irish town of Shannon in 2005, it was like a 
religious pilgrimage for the then Chinese premier and arguably the world’s 
second most powerful man. He was the latest in a long line of high-level 
Chinese dignitaries to come and pay their respects to the site on the west 
coast of Ireland where they believeChina’s rise to superpower status 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jun/18/china-birth-of-superpower> 
really began.

In the buildup to the visit, the Chinese ambassador had told his Irish hosts 
that they wanted time to allow Wen to pause for reflection on the “plateau” – a 
spot on Tullyglass Hill that overlooks a grey, windswept, industrial estate. 
“To us it was just this nondescript place on the top of a hill, but for the 
Chinese, they wanted to see where it all started,” said Kevin Thompstone, 
president of theShannon Chamber of Commerce <http://www.shannonchamber.ie/>, 
pausing at the memory of this incongruous spectacle. “This was the leader of 
China, a country with a population of 1.3 billion!”


Shannon is a tiny town with a population of just 9,673 in the middle of rural 
County Clare. But it is famous in the history of economic development, widely 
considered the site of the first modern “special economic zone” (SEZ). The 
industrial estate that Wen would have gazed upon that day is the Shannon Free 
Zone — a 2.5 sq km stretch of land that was carved out and given to foreign 
investors in the late 1950s, an audacious attempt to attract investment in 
exchange for tax holidays, tariff reductions and other incentives.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fstory-of-cities-25-shannon-ireland-china-economic-boom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F579afc3accb5468a73d30bf66bfa2a13979daac5%2F1059_0_2113_2640%2F2113.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2325%3A%20Shannon%20%E2%80%93%20a%20tiny%20Irish%20town%20inspires%20China%E2%80%99s%20economic%20boom&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fstory-of-cities-25-shannon-ireland-china-economic-boom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2325%3A%20Shannon%20%E2%80%93%20a%20tiny%20Irish%20town%20inspires%20China%E2%80%99s%20economic%20boom&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fstory-of-cities-25-shannon-ireland-china-economic-boom%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F579afc3accb5468a73d30bf66bfa2a13979daac5%2F1059_0_2113_2640%2F2113.jpg>
 Chinese vice president Xi Jinping visits Shannon in 2012. Photograph: Peter 
Muhly/AFP/Getty Images 
Today there are thousands of these zones around the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/aug/23/taxes-northern-territory>
, the best-known of whichare in China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/29/china-shanghai-free-trade-zone> 
where they are credited with helping fuel the country’s dramatic economic boom 
over the past quarter century. The zones have attracted millions of people from 
around China looking for work and in the process created hundreds of new cities.
Shenzhen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/jun/13/inside-shenzen-china-silicon-valley-tech-nirvana-pearl-river>
, the country’s first SEZ, which opened in 1980, currently harbours 300,000 
migrant workers, while Pearl River Delta Economic Zone is home to 42 million 
people. These areas have been integral to China’s rapid urbanisation in recent 
decades.


“Obviously they took it to a much bigger scale than anything that we did,” 
said Thompstone. “The Chinese were able to develop and grow on the back of this 
model from this little place called Shannon … and there’s something in their 
spirit that says, ‘You know those people who went before us, where did it 
start? Where did it come from?’”


The story goes back to the 1940s, when most of the first transatlantic flights 
would arrive inEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and 
refuel at Shannon airport, before continuing on to their final destinations. 
But within decades aerospace technology had improved and planes were able to 
fly longer distances. With the increasing use of jet engines in civilian 
aircraft, there was no longer any need to stop in Shannon, and the town faced 
economic collapse.


Enter one of the region’s most celebrated innovators – the man who, in 
Shannon’s origin myth, is the town’s Founding Father. Everyone who has lived 
here long enough has their own anecdote about Brendan O’Regan, whose initials 
BOR have, in Shannon, come to mean “Bash On Regardless”. “He was a great person 
to motivate other people,” said Tom Kelleher, an economist who worked with 
O’Regan in the late 60s and 70s. “Anything was considered, no matter how 
outlandish.”

A former caterer, O’Regan had a long string of innovations behind him, 
including the establishment of the world’s first duty free shop at the Shannon 
airport in 1947 after the Irish parliament passed a new law 
<http://www.moodiereport.com/pdf/twr_3.pdf>, the Customs Free Act, which 
exempted transit and embarking passengers, goods and aircraft from normal 
customs procedures.


Faced with the prospect that planes would now fly over the town, O’Regan 
famously argued that Shannon would have to “pull the airplanes out of the sky”. 
His proposal for doing this was to create a small zone just outside the airport 
where foreign investors could be free of onerous regulations and taxation from 
the central government in Dublin.


The Shannon Free Zone offered companies tax breaks and exemptions on 
value-added tax on imported goods and goods used for the production of exports. 
Corporate taxes were also cut. Grants were offered to companies to support 
research and development in the zone. Over the years, companies including 
Zimmer, and subsidiaries of DeBeers, GE, Intel and Lufthansa set up shop there. 
Despite this influx, the population of Shannon never ballooned as it has in 
other SEZs around the world, as many skilled workers ended up commuting from 
nearby cities such as Limerick and Galway.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fstory-of-cities-25-shannon-ireland-china-economic-boom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0381ccb7cc37bff68c5810b0f0c5d528cfe16686%2F0_127_3238_1944%2F3238.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2325%3A%20Shannon%20%E2%80%93%20a%20tiny%20Irish%20town%20inspires%20China%E2%80%99s%20economic%20boom&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fstory-of-cities-25-shannon-ireland-china-economic-boom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2325%3A%20Shannon%20%E2%80%93%20a%20tiny%20Irish%20town%20inspires%20China%E2%80%99s%20economic%20boom&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fstory-of-cities-25-shannon-ireland-china-economic-boom%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0381ccb7cc37bff68c5810b0f0c5d528cfe16686%2F0_127_3238_1944%2F3238.jpg>
 A TWA passenger plane at Shannon airport in the 1950s Photograph: Clarke/Getty 
Images 
“Even at my own school, we would have children from all over the world because 
their dads or moms were working or doing research in Shannon,” says Mary, 63, a 
retired school principal. “They might just come for a year, they might come for 
six months, they might come for five years, but we would have people from all 
over.” Sitting with a friend in a small cafe next to the historic Shannon Free 
Zone on a weekday afternoon, Mary, who was born in Shannon, says it’s been an 
exciting place to live.

The airport – which, thanks to the Free Zone and the traffic that it brought, 
did not end up closing – added a touch of glamour, too. “We thought we were in 
the middle of the world!” says Mary. “Flights coming in from New York and 
Boston … I remember when President Kennedy came through, oh my God, the whole 
country stopped. Thousands of people went to the airport, it was amazing.” She 
chuckles. “It wasn’t quite the same when Ronald Reagan came.” Other dignitaries 
to have come through Shannon over the years include Fidel Castro and Barack 
Obama.

US troops are coming through Shannon on planes, carrying weapons. Ireland is 
prostituting itself
Edward Horgan, activist 
Paul Ryan, an economic consultant who grew up in the town, describes Shannon 
as “Ireland’s first new town in 300 years … built from scratch and very much 
Milton Keynes-esque, The 1960s approach of, ‘Let’s turn it around, make the 
back of the house the front,’ all of these green areas, common areas – it was 
all very much in that style.”


Today SEZs are found worldwide, from Argentina 
<http://www.zflapampa.com.ar/en/institucional/> to Cambodia 
<http://www.adb.org/publications/cambodia-special-economic-zones>. But in 1959 
the idea was revolutionary. O’Regan entered history as the man who created this 
model – which would eventually be a major policy prescription recommended to 
poor countries by the World Bank.


Many of the world’s SEZs have been set up with advice from consultants from 
Shannon. Ryan, who works for a firm calledShannon International Development 
Consultants <http://www.sidc.ie/> (SIDC), says the attraction of these zones is 
the possibility of testing policies out in a small area, before rolling them 
out nationwide. “Let’s say you want to try something, in a developing country, 
and you want to introduce new ways of doing business … having a zone, having an 
area that is ringfenced and set aside from the rest of the economy, where you 
can try new approaches, is part of what makes it work,” he said.


One of the keys to Shannon’s success, says Ryan, was the construction of a 
second zone. Smithstown, an industrial estate next to the free zone, was 
developed as a satellite location for mainly Irish businesses who became 
sub-suppliers to the larger businesses. “You have to provide the Smithstown, 
you have to provide that indigenous industry starting point,” he said. 
Otherwise, local businesses and the local economy might not benefit much from 
having an SEZ in the area.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fstory-of-cities-25-shannon-ireland-china-economic-boom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44d438e0ce0597b064047e51b979edc66b89a5c5%2F0_46_1263_758%2F1263.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2325%3A%20Shannon%20%E2%80%93%20a%20tiny%20Irish%20town%20inspires%20China%E2%80%99s%20economic%20boom&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fstory-of-cities-25-shannon-ireland-china-economic-boom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2325%3A%20Shannon%20%E2%80%93%20a%20tiny%20Irish%20town%20inspires%20China%E2%80%99s%20economic%20boom&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fstory-of-cities-25-shannon-ireland-china-economic-boom%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44d438e0ce0597b064047e51b979edc66b89a5c5%2F0_46_1263_758%2F1263.jpg>
 Jiang Zemin (front row, third from right) pictured on his visit to Shannon in 
1980. Photograph: Courtesy of Shannon Group Plc 
As early as the 60s and 70s, advisers from Shannon worked on projects for free 
zones in Taiwan, Malaysia, Egypt and Sri Lanka. Training courses on how to 
develop free zones were also organised in Shannon, attended by representatives 
from dozens of countries. Jiang Zemin, who would later become China’s 
president, visited as a junior customs official in 1980 and took a three-week 
training programme on how to set up an industrial free zone. At that time, 
Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping was experimenting with opening up the country’s 
economy and the idea of “testing” reforms in specific areas was appealing. The 
Shenzhen SEZ – China’s first – opened the same year Zemin returned from Shannon.


But according to some, Shannon’s status as the first modern SEZ is just a 
convenient narrative for those who favour its expansion across the world. 
Patrick Neveling, a social scientist at Utrecht University in the Netherlands, 
argues that the first SEZ in modern timeswas actually established 
<http://www.focaalblog.com/2014/07/17/capitalism-the-most-recent-seventy-two-years-by-patrick-neveling/>
 more than a decade earlier than Shannon’s, in Puerto Rico in 1947. But its 
status as a de facto American colony might have made the model look like an 
imperial imposition.


“In the 1950s or 60s it was advisable to have Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> – a country that can portray itself 
as a victim of English imperialism – come up with this concept, or to make it 
look like they came up with it,” says Neveling. “They were not a non-aligned 
country, but they were a nation that was supposedly outside of the western 
world – they were the poorhouse of Europe and so forth. This way you could sell 
this SEZ model to the rest of the world as a kind of postcolonial endeavour, 
whereas in Puerto Rico of course it looks very much like a colonial endeavour.”


The World Bank and other multilateral organisations that promote the 
establishment of SEZs also use examples of historical “free zones” in Roman 
antiquity as a different way of making this model seem natural, Neveling 
suggests. “It’s like saying: ‘Ever since we exited the Stone Age we’ve done 
this.’”


At a crossroads

Walking around Shannon today, it is hard to square the town’s disproportionate 
international influence – symbolic or otherwise – with its tiny size. Ryan 
suggests that Shannon stayed small precisely because of its success in 
attracting foreign investment to Ireland. “Shannon grew to a certain point, and 
then what worked in the free zone could be applied to the rest of the country. 
So you could spread that economic development to other towns and cities, and 
the need to have Shannon, this controlled area, went away. But Shannon 
continued to be an excellent brand – even today it is a big name.”
 Since 2001, the use of Shannon airport by the US military been the subject of 
protest from antiwar campaigners. Photograph: Niall Carson/PA 
Since 2005 the Free Zone has had the same 12.5% corporate tax rate as the rest 
of Ireland. Now most businesses in the zone are in services, not manufacturing. 
Incentives on offer to companies in the zone are on the whole no different to 
those offered in the rest of the Irish economy. EU state aid rules have also 
made it illegal in most cases to carve out specific territories and afford them 
special laws or exemptions to regulations.


“The nature of the business has changed and over time the fence that was 
around the zone, and the custom control points, they disappeared,” says 
Thompstone at the Chamber of Commerce. “They were originally set up because of 
the 0% tax rate, that then was extended to other parts of the country … then we 
joined the EU in 1973 and the free zone regime no longer fitted with that, but 
even at that point we didn’t need it anymore. So the fences came down and the 
benefits of a free trade zone were no longer so relevant because most of the 
exports were going to the EU, which was duty-free anyway. Really, today the 
Shannon Free Trade Zone name that you see on the entrance, is there more for 
marketing.”


There is another dynamic that has put Shannon in the headlines in recent 
years. Since 2001 the Irish government has let the US use Shannon airport for 
its military planes, andan estimated 2.5 million US troops 
<http://www.thenation.com/article/these-irish-anti-war-protesters-are-fed-up-with-having-the-us-military-in-their-country/>
 have since passed through. An activist group calledShannonwatch 
<http://www.shannonwatch.org/> has formed, which campaigns against “the use of 
Shannon airport by the US military on their way to and from their wars in 
Afghanistan and Iraq”.

Edward Horgan, a long-time activist with Shannonwatch, walks with us to the 
gates of the airport. “That’s one right there,” he says blithely, peering 
through binoculars at a plane across the runway. “The bulk of troops would have 
passed through on chartered civilian aircraft [but] we do know that those 
troops are carrying those weapons with them on the planes.” Among the planes to 
have gone through Shannon is the Lockheed C-130 Hercules military aircraft, 
which can come in various configurations, including weaponised versions.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fstory-of-cities-25-shannon-ireland-china-economic-boom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b093d5ee847c01f92164657f5d207f3354003a3%2F0_20_1589_953%2F1589.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2325%3A%20Shannon%20%E2%80%93%20a%20tiny%20Irish%20town%20inspires%20China%E2%80%99s%20economic%20boom&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fstory-of-cities-25-shannon-ireland-china-economic-boom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2325%3A%20Shannon%20%E2%80%93%20a%20tiny%20Irish%20town%20inspires%20China%E2%80%99s%20economic%20boom&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fstory-of-cities-25-shannon-ireland-china-economic-boom%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b093d5ee847c01f92164657f5d207f3354003a3%2F0_20_1589_953%2F1589.jpg>
 A US Hercules Transporter military aircraft parked at Shannon airport. 
Photograph: John Cogill/AP 
For Horgan, Ireland’s loan of Shannon airport to US warplanes is a violation 
of Irish neutrality, as stated inArticle 28.3 of the country’s constitution 
<http://www.taoiseach.gov.ie/eng/Historical_Information/The_Constitution/February_2015_-_Constitution_of_Ireland_.pdf>
. It is also similar to the Free Zone and Shannon’s history of welcoming 
foreign corporations to set up shop tax-free. “Ireland is prostituting itself,” 
he says.


In 2016, Shannon seems once again to be at a crossroads. In a world of trade 
liberalisation and the proliferation of tax havens, there is very little states 
can now offer private capital that differentiates them and makes them a better 
candidate for investment.


Story of cities #26: Delhi's modernist dream proves a far-fetched fantasy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/20/story-cities-23-delhi-india-modernist-fantasy>
“In the modern EU environment there is very little differentiation that we can 
achieve as a general purpose free zone, so that isn’t going to cut it,” says 
Patrick Edmonds, Shannon Group’s strategy director and the man tasked with 
devising the future model. “Ireland is already an attractive location for 
[foreign direct investment] for national-level reasons. So how do we actually 
differentiate Shannon?” The Shannon Group’s brass will need all their 
creativity to come up with workable proposals to this dilemma.


In many respects, Shannon seems like a microcosm of world history, touched in 
strange and unlikely ways by the grand currents that have driven global events 
since the end of the second world war. From the industrial free zone innovation 
that would spur China’s rise to power in the 21st century to becoming part of 
the infrastructure in US conflicts in the Middle East, Shannon has been 
involved in some way. But attracting the coveted hot money – a preoccupation 
for policymakers around the world – means Shannon needs a new O’Regan more than 
ever. Can plucky Shannon innovate its way out of this one?

 * This article was amended on 20 April 2016 to clarify Ireland’s 
constitutional position on neutrality

Travel for this story was supported by the Pulitzer Center on Crisis Reporting


Does your city have a little-known story that made a major impact on its 
development? Please share it in the comments below or on Twitter using 
#storyofcities
 