
In 1933, 32-year-old Adriano Olivetti took over as general manager of the 
typewriter factory his father had founded outside of the picturesque Italian 
town of Ivrea, in the foothills of the Alps.


At the time, it was a small family business. But, in the next 30 years under 
Adriano, the Olivetti company would become a global phenomenon, and Ivrea the 
focus of ambitious experiments in how to build what he called a more “human” 
industrial city.


“The street, the factory, the house are the most substantial and visible 
elements of a civilisation in evolution,” Olivetti argued in his bookCitta 
dell’Uomo <http://www.edizionidicomunita.it/citta-delluomo/> (City of Man). He 
complained that Italy’s cities had been expanding “incoherently for uniquely 
selfish goals, materialistic, speculative, without a real plan coming from a 
general vision of life”.


Published in January 1960, just weeks before he died, it called for urban 
development “on a human scale”, with the goal being “harmony between private 
life and public life, between work and the home, between centres of consumption 
and centres of production”.


By then Olivetti had become a massive company, with factories in five 
countries anddistribution in more than 100 
<http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/05775132.1958.11468801?journalCode=mcha20>
. Best known for its stylish, portable typewriters, beloved by writers from 
John Updike toCormac McCarthy 
<http://www.newyorker.com/books/page-turner/great-writer-great-machine>, its 
machines were already considered icons of postwar Italian design.


And Ivrea had been transformed. From a small provincial town it became a major 
hub of Italian manufacturing, attracting engineers, designers and factory 
workers from across the country. By the late 1950s there were more than 14,000 
people working for Olivetti inItaly <https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy>, 
most of whom were in Ivrea. Between the 1930s and 1960s, the town’s population 
roughly doubled, from around 15,000 to 30,000, with many more in the 
surrounding areas.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fstory-cities-21-adriano-olivetti-ivrea-italy-typewriter-factory-human-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8769b5afeac6c2ada5dacf8efe6431a90d00b3ed%2F34_203_1566_940%2F1566.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2321%3A%20Olivetti%20tries%20to%20build%20the%20ideal%20'human%20city'%20for%20its%20workers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fstory-cities-21-adriano-olivetti-ivrea-italy-typewriter-factory-human-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2321%3A%20Olivetti%20tries%20to%20build%20the%20ideal%20%27human%20city%27%20for%20its%20workers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fstory-cities-21-adriano-olivetti-ivrea-italy-typewriter-factory-human-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8769b5afeac6c2ada5dacf8efe6431a90d00b3ed%2F34_203_1566_940%2F1566.jpg>
 Olivetti hired Italy’s leading architects to design blocks of flats with no 
more than four storeys. Photograph: Claire Provost 
But instead of large tower blocks and grey industrial estates, Ivrea was 
filled with bright, avant-garde architecture. Hiring some of the country’s 
leading architects, Olivetti built new neighbourhoods for its workers, 
carefully planned with abundant green space and small blocks of flats with just 
three or four storeys.


New factory buildings were erected almost entirely of glass, because workers 
inside “had to be able to see the mountains, the valleys, where they come from 
... and also so that people outside the factory could see what was happening 
inside,” explains Beniamino de Liguori, Olivetti’s grandson.


“All the factories and the places of private production were absolutely 
integrated into the urban fabric of the city,” De Liguori says. He described 
his grandfather’s goal as nothing less than finding a way “to combine and to 
harmonise man and machine ... to use technology in a human way, because it was 
really at the service of man”.


Inside the factories, workers were paid more and conditions were better than 
at other companies at the time, says Federico Bellono, a representative at the 
Fiom metalworkers trade union. “Then there was this system of services that was 
more structured than elsewhere.”


Olivetti’s new factories were designed with in-built space for cafeterias, 
playgrounds, rooms for debates and film screenings, and libraries with tens of 
thousands of books and magazines. Outside, an extended network of social 
services was constructed including nursery schools, Ivrea’s first hospital, and 
mountaintop retreats for workers’ children.


Olivetti also helped finance the first masterplans for the city and 
surrounding area. In 1959 a new plan for Ivrea was approved, organising it into 
a network of integrated residential areas and proposing a ring road, a new 
bridge over the river Dora, extensive and decentralised industrial expansion, 
and the renewal of the historic centre.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fstory-cities-21-adriano-olivetti-ivrea-italy-typewriter-factory-human-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa3c979486301d084326f58f3f8a6bb01ccfce5ce%2F0_0_4882_2929%2F4882.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2321%3A%20Olivetti%20tries%20to%20build%20the%20ideal%20'human%20city'%20for%20its%20workers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fstory-cities-21-adriano-olivetti-ivrea-italy-typewriter-factory-human-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2321%3A%20Olivetti%20tries%20to%20build%20the%20ideal%20%27human%20city%27%20for%20its%20workers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fstory-cities-21-adriano-olivetti-ivrea-italy-typewriter-factory-human-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa3c979486301d084326f58f3f8a6bb01ccfce5ce%2F0_0_4882_2929%2F4882.jpg>
 Workers at Ivrea. Photograph: Alinari/Rex/Shutterstock 
“From the 1930s until he died in the 1960s … [Olivetti] said that to organise 
the city you have to plan it,” says Patrizia Bonifazio, professor of urban 
planning at the Politecnico di Milano. “The factory economically supported the 
studies and the urban planning proposals, but these were never confined 
exclusively to the interests of the factory; they always concerned the city in 
general.”


In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, thousands of small towns and cities 
across Europe and North America were transformed by industrialisation. Along 
with the archetypal, exploitative “company town”, there were also a number of 
experiments in more benevolent developments such asBournville 
<https://www.bvt.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2011/03/The-Bournville-Story.pdf> in 
the UK, near Birmingham, built by the Cadbury family of Quakers as a “model 
village”.


For Olivetti, urban planning was part of a broader political project. In the 
late 1940s he founded a new party called Movimento Comunità (Community 
Movement), and was elected mayor of Ivrea in 1956. Two years later he became a 
member of parliament in the national government.


He argued that Italian politics should be fundamentally restructured around a 
federation of relatively autonomous municipalities, or “communities”. The ideal 
community, he said, would havebetween 75,000 and 150,000 inhabitants 
<http://www.edizionidicomunita.it/ordine-politico-delle-comunita/>.


“The giant factories, the overcrowded metropolises, the centralised and 
monolithic states, the mass parties ... are without a doubt the leviathans of 
our time, also destined to disappear to leave room for forms of life that are 
more agile, more harmonious and, in one word, more human,” Olivetti concluded 
in Citta dell’Uomo.


After his death, the Olivetti company moved into electronics, producing 
calculators and some of the world’s first personal computers. And in Ivrea, it 
continued building.

In 1971, it unveiled one of the city’s more unusual constructions: a housing 
estate best known locally by its nickname “Talponia” (Moleville) for the fact 
that it is built almost entirely under a hill, with only one face exposed. From 
the nearby road the only thing visible is a series of glass domes, poking out 
of a stretch of land covered with concrete tiles, like futuristic mole hills.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fstory-cities-21-adriano-olivetti-ivrea-italy-typewriter-factory-human-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b40cb6b157cd9f93a6cea317883ca84e9209e5e%2F0_203_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2321%3A%20Olivetti%20tries%20to%20build%20the%20ideal%20'human%20city'%20for%20its%20workers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fstory-cities-21-adriano-olivetti-ivrea-italy-typewriter-factory-human-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2321%3A%20Olivetti%20tries%20to%20build%20the%20ideal%20%27human%20city%27%20for%20its%20workers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fstory-cities-21-adriano-olivetti-ivrea-italy-typewriter-factory-human-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b40cb6b157cd9f93a6cea317883ca84e9209e5e%2F0_203_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
 Talponia (‘Moleville’) was so named because it is built almost entirely under 
a hill. Photograph: Claire Provost 
The La Serra complex was also opened – one of the few Olivetti constructions 
in the city centre. An enormous cultural centre, it had an auditorium, cinema, 
hotel and restaurant. Built in steel grey with bright yellow detailing, it was 
designed to resemble a typewriter, with its hotel rooms in pods that stick out 
from the building as if they were keys.


Cadigia Perini started working at Olivetti in 1982, in a department that 
produced user manuals and other documentation for the company’s products. 
“These were still years of great expansion,” she says, adding, “The city was 
full, there wasn’t a storage room that was empty.”


Perini lived in the Bellavista neighbourhood, built by Olivetti in the 1960s 
and 70s. “It was incredible ... Those areas of Turin and other cities, what are 
they? Huge blocks of flats one after another. Instead, here the tallest 
building had three or four floors, there was a lot of green, there were sports 
fields ... for us it was extraordinary.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fstory-cities-21-adriano-olivetti-ivrea-italy-typewriter-factory-human-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec835c7b25936d258a2605d1554946a9880f85e8%2F0_240_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2321%3A%20Olivetti%20tries%20to%20build%20the%20ideal%20'human%20city'%20for%20its%20workers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fstory-cities-21-adriano-olivetti-ivrea-italy-typewriter-factory-human-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2321%3A%20Olivetti%20tries%20to%20build%20the%20ideal%20%27human%20city%27%20for%20its%20workers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fstory-cities-21-adriano-olivetti-ivrea-italy-typewriter-factory-human-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec835c7b25936d258a2605d1554946a9880f85e8%2F0_240_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
 The Olivetti factory in Ivrea, as it looks today. Photograph: Claire Provost 
After moving into electronics and computers, in the 1990s the Olivetti company 
shifted into telecommunications. Over the years it was split into different 
parts, with branches sold off to new owners; thousands lost their jobs at the 
company’s factories.


Today, “for sale” signs are ubiquitous in Ivrea. Some of the most iconic 
buildings commissioned by Olivetti lie empty and abandoned, including most of 
the La Serra complex. Olivetti is now a small part of the Telecom Italia group, 
selling tablets and IT services. In 2014,it reported 
<http://www.olivetti.it/IT/Page/t03/view_html?idp=148> revenues of under 230 
million euro (£180m), and said it had just 582 employees.

Most recently, it has been in the news in Italy as more than a dozen former 
Olivetti managers go on trial over the deaths of former employees,linked to the 
use of asbestos 
<http://www.lastampa.it/2016/02/15/cronaca/riprende-il-processo-amianto-allolivetti-wGCtSYY4ggoJiOAsVMbRmK/pagina.html>
 in the company’s factories. The case is ongoing.

In Ivrea, Perini says the city has not been able to recover from the decline 
of Olivetti. “By now it’s more than 20 years since the factories closed and the 
city has not readjusted,” she says.


At the Archivio Storico Olivetti historical archive in Ivrea, Antonio Perazza 
described Ivrea as “a little city that, with Olivetti, became a pulsing centre 
of industrial activity ... and now it’s returned to being a little provincial 
city”.


Perazza worked for Olivetti in the 1980s, and remembers Ivrea as “a very 
varied world, very alive, very active culturally” – with his colleagues “coming 
from all over Italy, but also from all over the world”.


“Unfortunately, in these years, these things have been lost a bit,” he says 
diplomatically. “Concretely, there has been a return to an antique situation, a 
situation that there was 70 years ago, when Olivetti was still a small company.”


Story of cities #22: how Hitler's plans for Germania would have torn Berlin 
apart
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/14/story-of-cities-hitler-germania-berlin-nazis>
The UN is now considering granting Ivrea status as a World Heritage Site. In 
the city’s bid for this status 
<http://www.ivreacittaindustriale.it/ivrea-citta-industriale-xx-secolo/>, it 
described Ivrea between the 1930s and 60s as an “alternative model and unique 
industrial city based on a social and productive system inspired by ... a way 
of work, a way of life, in which economic-productive and social spaces existed 
harmoniously”.


Bonifazio says the bid is an important way for the city to preserve its 
history. The stories of many innovative cities are “completely unknown, or they 
have entered into these political and ideological reversals and risk being 
forgotten forever,” she says.


For Bellono, the Fiom trade unionist, “Industrial models also have to be 
appraised on their capacity to survive.” Having grown up in Ivrea, he suggests 
in the case of Olivetti, it was “very centred on ... the person of Adriano 
Olivetti, and the moment when that reference model disappeared, the cracks 
began.


“Time tends to turn things into myths: Olivetti’s is as a great industrial but 
also cultural and social experience,” Bellono says. But, he adds, it was 
isolated and short-lived, peaking in the 1950s and 60s: “And the heritage ... 
is unfortunately a territory in crisis.”

Travel for this article was supported by the Pulitzer Centre on Crisis 
Reporting.

Does your city have a little-known story that made a major impact on its 
development? Please share it in the comments below or on Twitter using 
#storyofcities
 