
In the late 1960s, Brasília 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/dec/01/iconic-origins-brazil-capital-city-brasilia-picturing-place>
 cast a long shadow across Brazil. Built from scratch in just four years, the 
city was a symbol of modern, rational, functional planning. “President 
Kubitschek wanted to build a new capital,” architectOscar Niemeyer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/oscar-niemeyer> said in a BBC 
interview <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-20632277>. “He wanted a city that 
would represent Brazil. So I dedicated myself to finding a new solution, 
something that would attract attention.”

Niemeyer, along with the architect Lúcio Costa 
<http://www.archdaily.com/tag/lucio-costa>, designed the city to look like a 
bird in flight – a network of highways in the wings, and the administrative 
offices in its head. Among political elites,if not all architecture critics 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1988/01/03/arts/brasilia-a-city-of-the-future-grapples-with-a-troubled-present.html>
, Brasília was viewed as a triumph over Brazil’s urban chaos.

A thousand miles to the south in the city of Curitiba, capital of the 
agricultural state of Paraná, urban planners were hard at work replicating the 
Brasília model. New lanes would be added to Curitiba’s downtown roads, with 
historic buildings demolished to make room for them. A new viaduct would link 
with the central square at Rua Quinze de Novembro to ease traffic congestion.


 “But we said no!” exclaims Jaime Lerner. The former mayor of Curitiba is 
speaking over the phone from his office in Curitiba, where he now directs his
eponymous private architecture firm <http://www.jaimelerner.com/projects.html>. 
Back then, Lerner was a recently graduated architecture student, leading a 
movement against the existing mayor’s vision of a Curitiba for cars. “We were 
starting to lose our history, our identity,” he says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fstory-of-cities-37-mayor-jaime-lerner-curitiba-brazil-green-capital-global-icon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6bc62d71df47b865b341af387b6e16701e78c465%2F0_0_5051_3668%2F5051.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2337%3A%20how%20radical%20ideas%20turned%20Curitiba%20into%20Brazil's%20'green%20capital'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fstory-of-cities-37-mayor-jaime-lerner-curitiba-brazil-green-capital-global-icon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2337%3A%20how%20radical%20ideas%20turned%20Curitiba%20into%20Brazil%27s%20%27green%20capital%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fstory-of-cities-37-mayor-jaime-lerner-curitiba-brazil-green-capital-global-icon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6bc62d71df47b865b341af387b6e16701e78c465%2F0_0_5051_3668%2F5051.jpg>
 Alden Square in Curitiba. One of Lerner’s first major projects as mayor was to 
pedestrianise parts of the city. Photograph: Alamy 
 Over the next two decades – first as planner, then as mayor – Lerner would 
develop a radically different vision for Curitiba: “It was a change in the 
conception of the city. Working, moving, living leisure ... we planned for 
everything together. Most cities in South America separate urban functions – by 
income, by age. Curitiba was the first city that, in its first decisions, 
brought everything together.”

 Today, while Brasília is viewed as a white elephant city, Curitiba has become 
the gold standard in sustainable urban planning: variously the “green capital 
<http://www.dac.dk/en/dac-cities/sustainable-cities/all-cases/green-city/curitiba-the-green-capital/>
”, the “greenest city on Earth 
<http://www.theecologist.org/green_green_living/2299325/curitiba_the_greenest_city_on_earth.html>
”, and the “most innovative city in the world 
<http://articles.latimes.com/1996-06-03/news/mn-11410_1_world-city>”. 

“Curitiba is not a paradise,” Lerner insists. “But it is a model for many 
cities in the world. Why?” He takes a long, dramatic pause: “Because in about 
two decades, a few young professionals made some very important changes.”

From chaos to creativity

Curitiba is an unlikely setting for such radical innovation. For centuries, 
the city was little more than an outpost for travellers moving between São 
Paulo and the surrounding agricultural regions. Curitiba was the “sleeping 
city”, a place where cattle drivers would hibernate in the winter en route to 
their next destination.

When a wave of European immigration hit southern Brazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil>, Curitiba’s sleepy farmland was an 
obvious attraction. Germans arrived in the 1830s, Polish and Italians arrived 
in the 1870s, and Ukrainians two decades later. Each group occupied a section 
of the city, developing their own local industries and beginning to populate 
the downtown area with churches, shops and restaurants.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fstory-of-cities-37-mayor-jaime-lerner-curitiba-brazil-green-capital-global-icon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F977ae0e78f1c14774462ddc780219df3083e6e86%2F138_458_3311_4138%2F3311.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2337%3A%20how%20radical%20ideas%20turned%20Curitiba%20into%20Brazil's%20'green%20capital'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fstory-of-cities-37-mayor-jaime-lerner-curitiba-brazil-green-capital-global-icon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2337%3A%20how%20radical%20ideas%20turned%20Curitiba%20into%20Brazil%27s%20%27green%20capital%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fstory-of-cities-37-mayor-jaime-lerner-curitiba-brazil-green-capital-global-icon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F977ae0e78f1c14774462ddc780219df3083e6e86%2F138_458_3311_4138%2F3311.jpg>
 Jaime Lerner was mayor of Curitiba three times. Photograph: Alamy 
 By the 1940s, however, Curitiba’s growth was impossible to contain. The 
mechanisation of soybean production pushed Paraná’s agricultural workers off 
their land and into the city. Between 1940 and 1960, the city’s population more 
than doubled – from 140,000 to 360,000 residents. Curitiba was quickly becoming 
the archetypal Brazilian mid-size city. Favelas grew around its periphery; cars 
jammed into its centre.

Curitiba’s planners could do little to regulate their city’s chaos. In 1964, 
followingBrazil’s military coup 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1964_Brazilian_coup_d%27%C3%A9tat>, mayor Ivo 
Arzua solicited a new masterplan to guide Curitiba toward growth, order, and 
extra room for the automobile. Over the course of several months, his 
government held a series of seminars known as “Curitiba of Tomorrow”, seeking 
to convince the public on the merits of the new masterplan.

“But as usual, from 1965 to 1970, nothing happened,” says Jonas Rabinovitch, a 
UN senior adviser and former planner at the Curitiba Research and Urban 
Planning Institute <http://www.ippuc.org.br/> (IPPUC). Despite Arzua’s best 
intentions the plan remained in the drawer, and the IPPUC, set up in 1965 to 
implement this masterplan, remained largely idle. “The institute was basically 
colouring paper, producing plans, examining studies,” Rabinovitch says.

Lerner and a team of architects at the IPPUC were, however, determined to turn 
this tide – “and they started at the exact right time,” according to 
Rabinovitch. “Had they waited 10 or 15 more years, it could have been too late 
for Curitiba.”

Under the new military regime, Lerner was appointed mayor, and the IPPUC moved 
into the driving seat: “When Jaime became mayor, the plan finally began to 
transform into a reality,” Rabinovitch says.

Lerner’s first project in 1972 earned him an early reputation as an enforcer. 
He proposed transforming the Rua Quinze de Novembro from an automobile 
thoroughfare into a pedestrian mall. “At first, the shopkeepers were furious 
with the mayor,” Rabinovitch says. “People had the habit of stopping their cars 
in front of the stores, buying what they wanted, and then getting back into 
their cars. But that meant that when the shops closed down, the city centre was 
dead.”

The shopkeepers organised resistance to the new plan, and resolved to file an 
injunction to stop it – a typical tactic for arresting the implementation of 
urban projects in Brazil.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fstory-of-cities-37-mayor-jaime-lerner-curitiba-brazil-green-capital-global-icon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8052612833599649c268ceae19d9a9e77c7aa4a0%2F0_0_5019_3011%2F5019.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2337%3A%20how%20radical%20ideas%20turned%20Curitiba%20into%20Brazil's%20'green%20capital'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fstory-of-cities-37-mayor-jaime-lerner-curitiba-brazil-green-capital-global-icon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2337%3A%20how%20radical%20ideas%20turned%20Curitiba%20into%20Brazil%27s%20%27green%20capital%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fstory-of-cities-37-mayor-jaime-lerner-curitiba-brazil-green-capital-global-icon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8052612833599649c268ceae19d9a9e77c7aa4a0%2F0_0_5019_3011%2F5019.jpg>
 Curitiba became a model for quality public transport, with policies including 
the rapid bus transit system. Photograph: Alamy 
 “Every time, you always have a big resistance,” Lerner says. “When we first 
proposed the project, we tried to convince the merchants. We showed them 
designs, information ... it was a big discussion. Then we realised we had to 
have a demonstration effect.”

So Lerner took the plan to his director of public works, saying: “I need this 
[built] in 48 hours ... He looked at me and asked, ‘Are you crazy? It will take 
at least four months.’”

If you want creativity, cut one zero from the budget. If you want 
sustainability, cut two zeros!
Jaime Lerner 
Regardless, Lerner and his team – impatient, wily or both – prepared to begin 
work at sundown that very Friday, waiting only until after the city’s 
courthouse had closed so that shopkeepers could no longer file their injunction.

“If I’d received a juridical demand to stop the project, we would never have 
made it,” Lerner recalls. “So we finished in 72 hours – Friday night to Monday 
night. And at the end, one of the merchants who wrote the petition to stop the 
work told me: ‘Keep this petition as a souvenir, because now we want the whole 
street, the whole sector pedestrianised!’”

The project encapsulates Lerner’s planning philosophy: act now, adjust later. 
“We had to work fast to avoid our own bureaucracy, and to avoid our own 
insecurity, because sometimes we start to think: ‘That’s a good idea but I 
cannot make it happen.’ So the key issue in Curitiba was to start – we had the 
courage to start.”

When I press Lerner on the political implications of this kind of 
strong-arming – which some have described as a “technocratic approach without 
participation <https://nextcity.org/daily/entry/cracks-in-the-curitiba-myth>” – 
he has a ready response: “Democracy is not consensus. Democracy is a conflict 
that is well managed. It’s about how you manage that conflict – sometimes for 
the minority, sometimes for the majority. But it has to happen.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fstory-of-cities-37-mayor-jaime-lerner-curitiba-brazil-green-capital-global-icon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd744090bcadb37d3af1846db993a493d75d929bf%2F0_264_5546_3327%2F5546.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2337%3A%20how%20radical%20ideas%20turned%20Curitiba%20into%20Brazil's%20'green%20capital'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fstory-of-cities-37-mayor-jaime-lerner-curitiba-brazil-green-capital-global-icon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2337%3A%20how%20radical%20ideas%20turned%20Curitiba%20into%20Brazil%27s%20%27green%20capital%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fstory-of-cities-37-mayor-jaime-lerner-curitiba-brazil-green-capital-global-icon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd744090bcadb37d3af1846db993a493d75d929bf%2F0_264_5546_3327%2F5546.jpg>
 Today Curitiba boasts more than 50 sq metres of green space per person. 
Photograph: Alamy 
Guided by this learning-by-doing philosophy, Curitiba became a laboratory for 
urban planning innovation. In 1974, Lerner and the IPPUC introduced a new 
street design that provided express lanes for buses. Passengers would board 
from new stations along the medians of the city’s main streets, so that buses 
could move uninterrupted through the city.


At the time, most planners were calling for the development of extensive 
subway systems as the cutting-edge mode of urban transport. But Lerner was – 
and remains – a major advocate of surface transport, while critical of subway 
projects that drain public funds and disrupt city life. As one of his most 
oft-cited sayings goes: “If you want creativity, cut one zero from the budget. 
If you want sustainability, cut two zeros!”

With the new bus transit scheme, public ridership grew steadily, as buses 
became both the cheapest and fastest mode of transport. But Lerner and his 
planners were not satisfied. In the late 1980s, he observed that the inflow and 
outflow of passengers was dragging the speed of the bus at each station.

Three innovations followed: a new system of raised platforms (the futuristic 
“tube” station system for which Curitiba has grown famous) that allow 
passengers to move straight from the station into the bus without the hassle of 
stairs; longer buses to add extra capacity to the fleet; and a system of 
pre-payment so that bus drivers do not have to issue tickets and collect money 
on the go.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fstory-of-cities-37-mayor-jaime-lerner-curitiba-brazil-green-capital-global-icon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33b901c6f5437662bdcd901842da46a67ea7fcf5%2F0_0_4606_2764%2F4606.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2337%3A%20how%20radical%20ideas%20turned%20Curitiba%20into%20Brazil's%20'green%20capital'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fstory-of-cities-37-mayor-jaime-lerner-curitiba-brazil-green-capital-global-icon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2337%3A%20how%20radical%20ideas%20turned%20Curitiba%20into%20Brazil%27s%20%27green%20capital%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fstory-of-cities-37-mayor-jaime-lerner-curitiba-brazil-green-capital-global-icon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33b901c6f5437662bdcd901842da46a67ea7fcf5%2F0_0_4606_2764%2F4606.jpg>
 Curitiba’s futuristic ‘tube’ station system for buses. Photograph: Alamy 
The impact was marked: today, roughly 85% of Curitiba uses the Bus Rapid 
Transit (BRT). “It’s about creating a complete network,” Lerner explains. “We 
are transporting two million each day, while the London subway carries three 
million.” His pride in the system is clear: “We started BRT in 1974; now 300 
cities around the world are using it.”

For Lerner and his team, the social implications for the city were 
all-important. “We realised people were taking such a long time to get to the 
city centre,” Rabinovitch says. “So the idea was to incorporate the essential 
features of a subway system – and in doing that, people coming from the 
periphery were spending 20 to 25 minutes less per journey.”

Other projects have built on this social mission. Under the Green Exchange 
<http://www.curitiba.pr.gov.br/conteudo/cambio-verde-smab/246> programme, 
developed by Lerner’s assistant Nicolau Klüppel in 1989, Curitiba residents 
trade trash for tokens – four pounds of trash for a pound of produce. Today, 
90% of the city participates in its recycling programme, and more than 10,000 
residents make use of the trash-for-tokens exchange. Where most cities develop 
mountains in landfills along the periphery, Curitiba recycles 70% of its 
garbage. “We can’t have landfills forever, and we can’t ask others to accept 
our trash,”Lerner said 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/roberta-brandes-gratz/curitiba_b_3713953.html>. 
“Garbage removal is a citizen responsibility.”

Alongside these efforts to clean the city were new programmes to green it. 
Back in 1971, Curitiba had only one park at the Passeio Público downtown; today 
it has more than 50 sq metres of green space per person – compared to 
neighbouring Buenos Aires’s two per person. Lerner and his team were aggressive 
in developing parks and city gardens, and in protecting the city’s main river 
Iguacu from being channelised along concrete walls.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fstory-of-cities-37-mayor-jaime-lerner-curitiba-brazil-green-capital-global-icon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd96f5f3da067f1be0307897d41216a1c09c37cc7%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2337%3A%20how%20radical%20ideas%20turned%20Curitiba%20into%20Brazil's%20'green%20capital'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fstory-of-cities-37-mayor-jaime-lerner-curitiba-brazil-green-capital-global-icon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2337%3A%20how%20radical%20ideas%20turned%20Curitiba%20into%20Brazil%27s%20%27green%20capital%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fstory-of-cities-37-mayor-jaime-lerner-curitiba-brazil-green-capital-global-icon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd96f5f3da067f1be0307897d41216a1c09c37cc7%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 According to Lerner: ‘When you look at the parks the architecture is just 
great, because it is silent architecture.’ Photograph: Alamy 
Lerner focuses less on these big projects, however, than on the smallest 
details of sustainable planning. “If you visit Curitiba, the private 
architecture is normal – some terrible buildings, some good ones. But when you 
look at the parks, the architecture is just great, because it is silent 
architecture. We bought treated, wooden poles from the energy company and used 
them for all the architecture in the parks – so, existing tree poles could 
substitute concrete poles ... Like I said, if you want creativity, cut some 
zeros!”

A sustainable future

Among many observers, Curitiba’s list of accolades generates some suspicion. 
Can it all be true? Did Curitiba really avoid so many pitfalls of planning in 
Latin America?


 The short answer, according to Bill McKibben – an environmentalist and author 
who writes extensively on the city inHope, Human, and Wild 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Hope-Human-Wild-Stories-Lightly/dp/1571313001> – is 
yes: “Curitibanos were cynical themselves, and somewhat introverted – they are 
not the gregarious Brazilians of Rio or Recife. But against their own 
conservatism, they came to like their city a lot.”

“Many people ask me about how Curitiba did all this,” says Rabinovitch. “They 
say the population of Curitiba is more educated, or more European. But what we 
usually say is that the population is not made by Swiss clockmakers. Up to 8% 
of Curitiba still lives in favelas; it is not a socio-economic island within 
the Brazilian context.”

Story of cities #38: Vancouver dumps its freeway plan for a more beautiful 
future
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/may/09/story-cities-38-vancouver-canada-freeway-protest-liveable-city>
Yet for Rabinovitch and many others, Curitiba still offers inspiration: “When 
I go to visit my mother-in-law in Jardim dasAmericas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/americas>, I can see parakeets, birds, trees 
in her backyard. In other Brazilian capitals, this doesn’t happen – growth was 
unplanned, and uncontrollable.”

 Since Lerner’s departure, Curitiba has begun a backslide 
<http://www.citylab.com/commute/2012/06/has-south-americas-most-sustainable-city-lost-its-edge/2195/>
 that threatens its status as the singular case of enlightened planning. 
Car-use is up, bike- and bus-use down, and crime statistics continue to linger 
around national averages.

 Yet Curitiba’s early accomplishments remain. “Administrations change, people 
change, leaders change. But there is still ownership by the population,” says 
Rabinovitch. “The city centre is already preserved. No one would be so crazy as 
to eliminate the pedestrian streets now, or to pull down the old buildings and 
construct high-rises, as they were doing in the 60s and 70s.”

 “Politics is about providing a collective dream,” Lerner says, “and creating 
a scenario that everyone can understand and see is desirable. Then they will 
help you make it happen.”

Does your city have a little-known story that made a major impact on its 
development? Please share it in the comments below or on Twitter using 
#storyofcities
 