
The last train on the last line of greater Los Angeles’ Pacific Electric 
streetcar network made its last run on 9 April 1961. You can see the final days 
of this once-robust public transport system for yourself in the short filmRide 
the Last of the Big Red Cars <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ebboO52In1w>.

This footage of the remaining “red cars” (as the Pacific Electric’s fleet was 
commonly known) strikes an elegiac tone, especially to modern Angelenos. They 
have little more than history books and the rose-tinted memories of old-timers 
from which to reconstruct the heyday of urban rail inLos Angeles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/los-angeles>, a city which spent decades 
after the disappearance of the red cars saddled with the reputation as a 
car-dependent, smog-choked, freeway-bound yet traffic-paralysed dystopia – and 
not without cause.

The Pacific Electric, along with the “yellow cars” of the Los Angeles Railway 
<http://www.pacificelectric.org/>, made up the young southern California 
metropolis’ rail transit system throughout the first half of the 20th century. 
At the peak of their combined coverage and accessibility, they made Los 
Angeles’ public transportation the best in the country, if not the world. Why, 
then, did they vanish from the cityscape by the mid-1960s, their tracks yanked 
from the streets and their rolling stock tossed on the heap (or sent toArgentina
 
<http://www.latimes.com/local/california/la-me-california-retrospective-red-car-20160103-story.html>
)? What forces could have replaced the proud red and yellow cars with a fleet 
of plain old buses, the likes of which so many Angelenos still disdain today? 
It looks, to some, like the work of aconspiracy 
<http://articles.latimes.com/2003/mar/23/local/me-then23>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DebboO52In1w&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DebboO52In1w>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DebboO52In1w&media=>
 One of the last journeys on Pacific Electric’s Long Beach line, filmed on 31 
March 1961 
 Between 1938 and 1950, one company purchased and took over the transit 
systems of more than 25 American cities. Their name, National City Lines, 
sounded innocuous enough, but the list of their investors included General 
Motors, the Firestone Tire and Rubber Company, Standard Oil of California, 
Phillips Petroleum, Mack Trucks, and other companies who stood to benefit much 
more from a future running on gasoline and rubber than on electricity and 
rails. National City Lines acquired the Los Angeles Railway in 1945, and within 
20 years diesel buses – or indeed private automobiles – would carry all the 
yellow cars’ former passengers. Does that strike you as a coincidence?

Angelenos are rightfully frustrated by being forced to buy cars and sit in 
traffic to get around
Ethan Elkind 
 It didn’t look that way to the Federal District Court of Southern California, 
which in 1947 indicted nine corporations and seven individuals on counts of 
“conspiring to acquire control of a number of transit companies, forming a 
transportation monopoly” and “conspiring to monopolise sales of buses and 
supplies to companies owned by National City Lines” in violation of the 1890
Sherman Antitrust Act <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sherman_Antitrust_Act>. 
The conviction came in 1949, with GM, Firestone, Standard Oil of California, 
Phillips Petroleum, and Mack Trucks found guilty and subsequently slapped on 
the wrists. (GM paid a fine of $5,000.)

The 1988 film Who Framed Roger Rabbit? set its story in the year 1947, pitting 
workaday Los Angeles private detective Eddie Valiant against the villain Judge 
Doom, a cadaverous, black-clad personification of all these backroom-dealing 
companies. In the film’s final act, Judge Doom reveals to Valiant his plot to 
build “eight lanes of shimmering cement running from here to Pasadena”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fstory-cities-los-angeles-great-american-streetcar-scandal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31f139feb2cf67736238ae9befd77e91349e5c49%2F0_0_3654_4628%2F3654.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2329%3A%20Los%20Angeles%20and%20the%20'great%20American%20streetcar%20scandal'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fstory-cities-los-angeles-great-american-streetcar-scandal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2329%3A%20Los%20Angeles%20and%20the%20%27great%20American%20streetcar%20scandal%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fstory-cities-los-angeles-great-american-streetcar-scandal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31f139feb2cf67736238ae9befd77e91349e5c49%2F0_0_3654_4628%2F3654.jpg>
 A streetcar on Broadway in 1930. Photograph: Paul Popper/Popperfoto/Getty 
Images 
 And who, asks Valiant, would drive on such a monstrosity when they could ride 
the Pacific Electric – “the best public transportation system in the world” – 
for five cents? “Oh, they’ll drive,” replies Judge Doom. “They’ll have to. You 
see, I bought the Red Car so I could dismantle it.”

 The notion of a plot not just to monopolise the bus-and-supply market but to 
deliberately destroy the rail transit systems of urban America only came to 
wide attention in 1974, when a young anti-trust attorney named Bradford Snell 
argued to the US Senate that the introduction of “noisy, foul-smelling buses 
turned earlier patrons of the high speed rail systems away from public transit, 
and, in effect, sold millions of private automobiles” – and that “General 
Motors’ destruction of electric transit systems across the country left 
millions of urban residents without an attractive alternative to automotive 
travel”.

 Snell called upon testimony from Los Angeles mayor Tom Bradley, which he gave 
in absentia but in unambiguous terms, describing GM as having, through its 
subsidiaries, “scrapped the Pacific Electric and Los Angeles streetcar systems, 
leaving the electric train system totally destroyed.” GM, in the face of such 
harsh accusations, made no recorded public response except to admit to its 
investment in American City Lines, a company with which National City Lines 
merged in 1946.

 It didn’t matter that National City Lines, even with GM’s money, never 
actually got around to buying the Pacific Electric system like they bought the 
Los Angeles Railway, nor that the public Los Angeles Metropolitan Transit 
Authority oversaw the last of its dismantling; the “Great American Streetcar 
Scandal” was already well on its way to the public consciousness.

In the second half of the 20th century, Los Angeles had little or nothing in 
the way of rapid transit infrastructure, and certainly nothing of the 
efficiency that car-owning Angelenos felt could compare to simply driving 
themselves. “Transit had been reduced largely to poor service on decrepit 
buses,” writes Brian Ladd in Autophobia: Love and Hate in the Automotive Age. 
“Why had American mass transit, especially the streetcars that were once the 
envy of the world, been so thoroughly dismantled? How could Americans have been 
so shortsighted?”

The answer begins with the very nature of the Pacific Electric and the Los 
Angeles Railway: neither began as the sort of publicly owned and operated 
transit systems we expect in the 21st century, but as mere tools in a larger, 
for-profit, real-estate development development operation. Both entered service 
in 1901, as the descendants of the electric trolleys that first appeared in Los 
Angeles in its booming 1880s, under the ownership of magnate and Southern 
California booster Henry E Huntington. Unprofitable in and of themselves, 
Huntington’s streetcars grew into such an extensive system in large part 
because he needed them to take newly minted Angelenos out to far-flung tracts 
where they could purchase a lot of their own – from the massively land-owning 
Huntington himself. The streetcar system itself, in other words,was a kind of 
conspiracy 
<http://99percentinvisible.org/episode/episode-70-the-great-red-car-conspiracy/>
.

Just as the Pacific Electric-connected land around Los Angeles sold off and 
built up, the automobile craze swept through America. “Los Angeles embraced the 
automobile at a much faster rate than in other places around the country,” says 
Ethan Elkind, author of Railtown: The Fight for the Los Angeles Metro Rail and 
the Future of the City, “in part because of the flat terrain and nice climate, 
but also because the previous streetcar system subdivisions ironically lent 
themselves well to automobile driving as an appealing alternative to the 
streetcars, at least in the beginning when the population was small and traffic 
was minimal.” And when even 10% of Los Angeles’ population got behind the 
wheel, their presence so slowed the streetcars, which lacked their own lanes, 
that they could no longer make their schedules, andtheir level of service 
declined overall 
<http://articles.latimes.com/1987-09-13/opinion/op-7777_1_los-angeles-railway>.

All across America, writes Ladd, streetcar transit “had been expected to pay 
for itself, but after ridership ceased to grow in the 1920s, the private 
franchises that operated most transit systems were unable to make money under 
the regulations imposed on them by local governments. As they cut service, 
former passengers bought cars, ridership and fare revenue declined further, and 
a death spiral ensued, leaving cities to pick up the bankrupt pieces and offer 
grudging subsidies to keep a bare-bones system running,” even as, due to their 
much lower infrastructure and operating costs, “transit companies across the 
country, whoever controlled them, were seeking to switch many lines to the 
promising new technology of motor buses.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fstory-cities-los-angeles-great-american-streetcar-scandal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c187328c1384d02c5ecba548478fbd2af8cf674%2F53_37_3066_1839%2F3066.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2329%3A%20Los%20Angeles%20and%20the%20'great%20American%20streetcar%20scandal'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fstory-cities-los-angeles-great-american-streetcar-scandal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2329%3A%20Los%20Angeles%20and%20the%20%27great%20American%20streetcar%20scandal%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fstory-cities-los-angeles-great-american-streetcar-scandal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c187328c1384d02c5ecba548478fbd2af8cf674%2F53_37_3066_1839%2F3066.jpg>
 An early evening traffic jam on an LA freeway. Photograph: Dan Chung for the 
Guardian 
This conversion process had begun well before General Motors and the others 
involved in National City Lines started buying up streetcar systems. By the end 
of the 1920s, about 20% of the country’s cities used buses only, and even in 
1923 the Pacific Electric had put their order in for buses to run instead of 
trains on some routes. NCL did indeed replace more trains with buses after 
purchasing the financially troubled Los Angeles Railway in 1945, but that just 
continued a process that had begun much earlier, and which took place similarly 
across the country and indeed the world. Streetcars vanished in almost every 
metropolitan area in the United States, and only in 10% of those cases did NCL 
have anything to do with it.

 One can confidently accuse General Motors and their National City Lines of 
nothing worse than scheming to profit from a trend already in motion. As far as 
who took away the streetcars, more of the blame lies at the feet of the United 
States federal government, whose suite of anti-urban post-war policies from 
building freeways on a colossal scale to incentivise single-family home 
ownership – not to mention the local voters who both refused to bring the Los 
Angeles’ rail systems under public ownership in the 1920s and repeatedly shot 
down rapid-transit proposals in favour of improved automotive infrastructure 
for decades thereafter.

Story of cities #30: how this Amsterdam inventor gave bike-sharing to the world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/26/story-cities-amsterdam-bike-share-scheme>
Yet even without strong evidence 
<http://www.citylab.com/commute/2013/06/be-careful-how-you-refer-so-called-great-american-streetcar-scandal/5771/>
 of a car company-driven streetcar-dismantling conspiracy, we can see all 
around us, especially in America, that just the well-documented social and 
economic forces acting on cities in the mid-20th century – an obsession with 
cars and the consequent rise of auto-centric planning along with “white flight” 
from the central cities and the suburban living that the Pacific Electric 
itself encouraged – did more damage than could even the most malevolent cabal.

 So why does the Great American Streetcar Scandal live on in the hearts and 
minds of Los Angeles? “Angelenos are rightfully frustrated by being forced to 
buy cars and sit in traffic to get around, and many feel like this situation 
was foisted on them without the consent of residents,” says Elkind. “It’s easy 
to blame car companies because they’re the logical economic beneficiary of this 
car-oriented system. But the reality is more complex, and if there’s any 
conspiracy here, it’s on the part of local officials who kept approving 
sprawling subdivisions that have led to the present inefficient land use 
patterns.”

 Or, in the words of Judge Doom, to strings of “gas stations, inexpensive 
motels, restaurants that serve rapidly prepared food. Tire salons, automobile 
dealerships and wonderful, wonderful billboards reaching as far as the eye can 
see. My god, it’ll be beautiful.”

Does your city have a little-known story that made a major impact on its 
development? Please share it in the comments below or on Twitter using 
#storyofcities
 