
The bulldozers arrived in Sophiatown at five o’clock on the morning of 9 
February, 1955. Behind them in the darkness, police commanders lined up with 
piles of paper – lists of names and addresses, eviction notices, and 
assignments to new plots in the Meadowlands suburb, 15 kilometres away on the 
northern edge of Soweto.

Behind the commanders, an army of 2,000 police carried rifles and batons, 
ready to enforce the eviction and clear Sophiatown of its black residents. “
Maak julle oop!” they shouted in Afrikaans. “Open up!”

By sunrise, 110 families had been forced to remove all belongings from their 
homes, pile into police trucks and move out to the Meadowlands, where hundreds 
of matchbox homes awaited them.

Sophiatown was one of the last remaining areas of black home-ownership in 
Johannesburg. Five years earlier, the South African parliament had passed the 
Group Areas Act, which sought to purge black South Africans from developed 
neighbourhoods and establish “urban apartheid”. In Johannesburg, the act gave 
license to the city’s government to push middle-class black residents out of 
northern areas including Sophiatown into southern townships such as Soweto, 
where the majority of poor black residents already lived.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fstory-cities-19-johannesburg-south-africa-apartheid-purge-sophiatown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6346a2947c0c7599360850e72e8116bab4cbbb9d%2F0_96_3736_2242%2F3736.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2319%3A%20Johannesburg's%20apartheid%20purge%20of%20vibrant%20Sophiatown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fstory-cities-19-johannesburg-south-africa-apartheid-purge-sophiatown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2319%3A%20Johannesburg%27s%20apartheid%20purge%20of%20vibrant%20Sophiatown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fstory-cities-19-johannesburg-south-africa-apartheid-purge-sophiatown%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6346a2947c0c7599360850e72e8116bab4cbbb9d%2F0_96_3736_2242%2F3736.jpg>
 Sophiatown in 1955, when black South Africans were being forced out to 
southern townships. Photograph: Bettmann/Corbis 
“Sophiatown was the antithesis of what they wanted for this country,” 
remembered Don Mattera, a poet and former resident, inSophiatown Speaks 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Sophiatown-speaks/dp/0620100095>. “Sophiatown had the 
black people – meaning Coloured, Indians, Blacks of all tribes – and the whites 
living together.”


And the suburb fought hard to preserve this community. For months, the African 
National Congress and 5,000 of its freedom volunteers had been organising, 
petitions and marches through Sophiatown’s Freedom Square. “Asihambi! We are 
not leaving!” the people chanted. Throughout the town, across homes and 
churches and cinemas, residents painted their protest: “We Won’t Move.”

But the march of apartheid was swift. Within two decades, more than three 
million black South Africans around the country were forcibly removed from 
their homes and neighbourhoods. Sophiatown would become Triomf, Afrikaans for 
triumph – the brutal triumph of apartheid over black upward mobility in 
Johannesburg.

“Some were leaving behind family, others were leaving behind friends and 
lovers. And I cried. I cried because my friends were going,” Mattera 
remembered. “And then suddenly, I’m the only person in the whole street … and 
there the trucks go.”

The Chicago of South Africa

Apartheid planning in Johannesburg was founded on a contradiction. On the one 
hand, black South Africans were the backbone of the city’s industries; gold 
mining along the “Golden Arc” – a long stretch from Welkom in the south up to 
Witswatersrand in the north – relied on a steady flow of black migrants to work 
in the mines. By the start of the first world war, roughly 100,000 black South 
Africans were working in mines, factories and homes across the city.

 On the other hand, the government sought to check this inflow through “influx 
controls” that imposed harsh restrictions on black mobility. Through the 1920s, 
political pressure from lower-class whites was intensifying to legislate white 
privileges into the economy, reserving high-skilled and highly-paid jobs for 
white residents.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fstory-cities-19-johannesburg-south-africa-apartheid-purge-sophiatown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e0b4f0d8a7d422265c38ad097f6ad935dd9f5ca%2F0_0_1069_1302%2F1069.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2319%3A%20Johannesburg's%20apartheid%20purge%20of%20vibrant%20Sophiatown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fstory-cities-19-johannesburg-south-africa-apartheid-purge-sophiatown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2319%3A%20Johannesburg%27s%20apartheid%20purge%20of%20vibrant%20Sophiatown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fstory-cities-19-johannesburg-south-africa-apartheid-purge-sophiatown%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e0b4f0d8a7d422265c38ad097f6ad935dd9f5ca%2F0_0_1069_1302%2F1069.jpg>
 Miners leaving work at the Sallies mine near Johannesburg. Photograph: 
Bettmann/Corbis 
“Johannesburg is one of the major metropolises of significant size that is 
built in the middle of nowhere,” explainsBenjamin Bradlow 
<https://www.brown.edu/academics/sociology/benjamin-bradlow>, a fellow at Brown 
University in the US. “It was essentially a mining town, and therefore the 
basis for conflict was: who was going to work in the mines, and where were they 
going to live?”

In 1923, the South African government passed the Native (Urban Areas) Act, 
proclaiming its cities as “white” and stripping black residents of ownership 
rights. Black residents were forced to carry permits, or “passes” – with their 
fingerprint, photograph and the name of the white employer that had given 
permission for passage into the city. Failure to produce the permit resulted in 
arrest or expulsion.

Evicted from the central-city neighbourhoods, many migrants were relocated to 
townships such as Soweto. There, the national government developed thousands of 
“ticky-tacky houses” – small, two-bedroom homes in row after row – that black 
South Africans could occupy but never own outright.

With the intensification of migration, these townships became increasingly 
dense. Residents constructed shacks in backyards to accommodate growing 
families, and migrants developed makeshift housing in empty lots. Despite 
strict limits on economic activity in the townships, grocery shops and corner 
stores popped up to serve the local community.


According to Professor Susan Parnell 
<http://www.africancentreforcities.net/people/prof-susan-parnell/>, a 
geographer at the University of Cape Town, there is a “myth of segregation” in 
many portraits of apartheid. “The focus on race should not mask the fact that 
Johannesburg was made of many people from many places,” Parnell explains. “It 
has always been a diverse city in both inter-racial and intra-racial terms.”

While many black residents were excluded from Johannesburg’s growth by influx 
controls, some lived side-by-side with white families as domestic workers, 
while others were rising into a black middle class. “What apartheid policies 
said and what apartheid policies did were always very different,” Parnell says.

Sophiatown, along with a handful of other townships to the north, was one such 
exception. In 1897, an investor named Herman Tobiansky purchased 237 acres of 
land a few kilometres from Johannesburg. He named the area after his wife, 
Sophia, and named the streets after his children.

Not long after the purchase, however, the Johannesburg City Council decided to 
develop its sewage disposal plant next door. Wealthier white people began to 
lose interest in the new colony, so Tobiansky was left with little choice but 
to offer plots in Sophiatown to black residents. Alongside their white 
neighbours, these residents constructed homes and fences in a neighbourhood 
that looked much like other Johannesburg suburbs.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fstory-cities-19-johannesburg-south-africa-apartheid-purge-sophiatown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cfd9f65be6d77a2c0ec8ccbfa60ca21ed7c772c%2F0_0_5421_3254%2F5421.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2319%3A%20Johannesburg's%20apartheid%20purge%20of%20vibrant%20Sophiatown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fstory-cities-19-johannesburg-south-africa-apartheid-purge-sophiatown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2319%3A%20Johannesburg%27s%20apartheid%20purge%20of%20vibrant%20Sophiatown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fstory-cities-19-johannesburg-south-africa-apartheid-purge-sophiatown%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cfd9f65be6d77a2c0ec8ccbfa60ca21ed7c772c%2F0_0_5421_3254%2F5421.jpg>
 A row of ‘ticky-tacky’ houses in Sophiatown, where black and white South 
Africans once lived side-by-side. Photograph: Ullstein Bild/Getty Images 
By 1950, the pressures of apartheid planning had pushed thousands more into 
Sophiatown, and the average number of families on each property swelled to 
eight. On these subdivided plots, residents leased out backyard rooms and, as 
in other townships, constructed makeshift dwellings to increase occupancy.

For Trevor Huddlestone, an English bishop who lived in Sophiatown throughout 
the 1940s and 50s, conditions often appeared dire. “Home was a row of 
corrugated iron shacks built in the very restricted area behind someone else’s 
house,” Huddlestonewrote 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Naught-Your-Comfort-Trevor-Huddleston/dp/1179433734>. 
“It was not much of a home: hot in summer when the sun struck down on the iron 
roof and there was no ceiling to protect you; cold in winter, because the wind 
penetrated the joints and angles and there were no walls save the iron itself.”

Sophiatown was far from paradise, but it offered black residents freehold 
tenure – a safety of place that many state-owned territories lacked. And this 
sense of ownership bred a culture all its own: “In Sophiatown, however 
impromptu it was, there always seemed to be a party,” remembers Anthony 
Sampson, a former editor ofDRUM magazine <http://drum.co.za/>, one of the only 
voices of South African townships in the 1950s.

House Back of the Moon, House of Truth, House of Saints: Sophiatown was home 
to scores of speakeasies, or Shebeens, that hosted live music and local 
meetings. These were largely run by what became known as Shebeen Queens, who 
brewed and sold liquor in the bar. The 1927 Liquor Act had prohibited Africans 
and Indians from entering bars, let alone hosting them – but that did little to 
stop Sophiatown’s residents.

Americans, Berliners, Russians: Sophiatown was also home to a number of gangs 
that patrolled its streets. “If you were not a big-shot in Sophiatown, you 
could not stay in Sophiatown,” remembers George Mbalweni, aka “Kort Boy” – a 
member of the Americans – in Sophiatown Speaks. “It’s like New York; [there’s] 
fighting all the time in Sophiatown … You can’t stay if you can’t box.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fstory-cities-19-johannesburg-south-africa-apartheid-purge-sophiatown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1fc4cc281a98e6d46b22a8052fb5c2cec4d124c3%2F0_0_3000_1549%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2319%3A%20Johannesburg's%20apartheid%20purge%20of%20vibrant%20Sophiatown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fstory-cities-19-johannesburg-south-africa-apartheid-purge-sophiatown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2319%3A%20Johannesburg%27s%20apartheid%20purge%20of%20vibrant%20Sophiatown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fstory-cities-19-johannesburg-south-africa-apartheid-purge-sophiatown%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1fc4cc281a98e6d46b22a8052fb5c2cec4d124c3%2F0_0_3000_1549%2F3000.jpg>
 A family watches as demolition workers tear down a row of neighbourhood homes 
in Sophiatown, 1955. Photograph: AP 
For its cultural vibrancy, Sophiatown became known as the Chicago of South 
Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica>. “Cinema, dancing, 
American culture and jazz were very important in the cultural life of 
Sophiatown,” said the South African writer Es-kia Mphahlele in Sophiatown 
Speaks. “It was a place where people could express themselves more freely than 
in any other place … It was never a shanty town. It was a real suburb with 
front gates which said, ‘This is how I want to live.’”

Social relations in Sophiatown defied the apartheid ideal. “There was a 
Shangaan, a Zulu and a Coloured family living in the back and we lived happily 
together,” recalled Jane Dakile, a teacher in Sophiatown. “There was no 
friction; our children played well together and even went to school together.”

Politically, Sophiatown became a target. From Desmond Tutu to Nelson Mandela, 
its residents were among the loudest and most active in the struggle against 
apartheid. Freedom Square was the site of protests, speeches and consistent 
congregation of the ANC; it was where Mandela called publicly on the ANC to 
take up arms against apartheid.

Sophiatown had become a “political corn inside the apartheid boot”, according 
to resident William “Bloke” Modisane in his book, Blame Me on History. The 
government began planning its eviction in the early 1950s, citing poor living 
conditions and violence in the colony. The ANC mobilised often against the 
eviction, but there was little they could do to save the Chicago of SouthAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>.

A ‘neo-apartheid’

In February 2006 – on the 50th anniversary of the eviction – Mayor Amos 
Masondo changed the name of Triomf back to Sophiatown. “The name Sophiatown 
evokes memories of a vibrant, creative, multi-cultural community; a place where 
artists, writers and musicians flourished, against the odds, in an atmosphere 
of racial intolerance,” Masondo said.


But in many ways, post-apartheid repairs such as this have been cosmetic. 
“Apartheid is a distant memory for many people,” saysProfessor Owen Crankshaw 
<http://www.sociology.uct.ac.za/owen-crankshaw>, a sociologist at the 
University of Cape Town. “But it persists in certain respects. The apartheid 
spatial order was characterised by the suburbanisation of black townships far 
from centres of employment. This spatial order has persisted because new, 
low-cost housing developments were also built on the suburban edge of the 
cities.”

Story of cities #20: the secret history of Magnitogorsk, Russia's steel city
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/12/story-of-cities-20-the-secret-history-of-magnitogorsk-russias-steel-city>
Many white residents, meanwhile, moved further north, taking with them the 
bulk of the city’s service-sector industries – and prompting a proliferation of 
gated communities. In a2008 study 
<http://intl-usj.sagepub.com/content/45/8/1692.abstract> of Johannesburg’s 
northern neighbourhoods, black residents accounted for only 3% of purchases 
between 1993 and 2000; many view this lingering segregation as evidence of 
“neo-apartheid”.

But according to Parnell, Johannesburg today cannot be defined exclusively in 
terms of black and white: “Race is a necessary but not sufficient explanation 
for Joburg’s history and its current challenges,” he says.

As was the case before apartheid, many of Johannesburg’s black residents are 
moving into the middle class, while many more remain excluded from the fruits 
of the global economy. “It is a myth that apartheid treated all ‘black’ people 
the same way,” Parnell says, “and that has ramifications for the impact of 
neo-apartheid policies.”

The future of Johannesburg may depend, then, on how the city addresses these 
inequalities. “Ultimately, despite a lot of good effort, the question of 
transformation has not been addressed,” Bradlow says. “What kind of economy is 
Johannesburg going to have? Will it rely on reserve labour and reinforce social 
divides? Or will it decide to integrate, and make a new social fabric that is 
both productive and inclusive for the people who live there?”

Does your city have a little-known story that made a major impact on its 
development? Please share it in the comments below or on Twitter using 
#storyofcities
 