
At first glance, this North Carolina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/northcarolina> town would have looked much 
like the thousands of others that were built across America’s vast countryside 
in the decades following the second world war. It would have consisted of 
single family homes on curvilinear streets within walking distance of manmade 
lakes, shopping centres and industry. In short, a 1970s vision of suburbia.


One key factor would have made this town different, however. The 
self-contained, racially integrated community would be planned, developed and 
managed by black people. Those black foundations would be celebrated in the 
town’s name: Soul City.

The idea was dreamed up by Floyd McKissick: attorney, civil rights activist 
and force of nature. In January 1969, amid the waning days of US president 
Lyndon B Johnson’s administration, McKissick strolled into a Washington DC news 
conference with secretary of agriculture Orville Freeman and announced plans to 
build Soul City on 5,000 acres of rural land in impoverished Warren County, 
just over an hour’s drive from Raleigh, North Carolina.

That was the easy part. While Johnson supported the effort and pledged 
government help, McKissick’s real task began five days later when a new 
president was sworn in: the politically conservative Richard Nixon.
 Floyd McKissick poses with an architect’s rendering of the Soultech 1 
industrial park. Photograph: Harold Valentine/AP 
Having secured the US’s southern states, including North Carolina, in the 1968 
presidential election using a decidedly anti-blackcampaign tactic called the 
“southern strategy” 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2014-12-04/birth-of-the-southern-strategy>
, the prospect of Nixon backing $14m-worth (£9.7m) of federal loan guarantees 
to support the construction of this new town – built and managed by black 
people and called, of all things, Soul City – looked remote. Yet that’s exactly 
what happened.

Construction on this “southern utopia 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=LQV8M0QkalAC&lpg=PA22&dq=soul+city,+nc&pg=PA22&redir_esc=y#v=onepage&q&f=false>
” began within a few years. And for a while at least, it looked as if McKissick 
– an African American who had marched with Martin Luther King in the violent 
south and successfully sued for admission to the University of North Carolina 
School of Law – had prevailed again.

“The black man has been searching for identity and destiny in the cities,” 
McKissick said in that 1969 news conference. “He should be able to find it in 
the plains of Warren County.”

The rise of soul

Soul City came at time when black culture was taking a larger role in the 
American mainstream. In 1968, ashow called Soul! 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Soul!> – conceived as a black version of the 
Tonight Show with Johnny Carson – had premiered on New York public television. 
There were black sitcoms, and soul music began to cross over to the pop charts 
with frequency. The nationally syndicateddance show Soul Train 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qXbP4JBf8To> premiered in 1971.


Major cities such as Los Angeles and Atlanta elected black mayors for the 
first time. Also, in 1971, hair care companyChicago’s Johnson Products 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1993/06/15/business/a-leader-in-black-business-johnson-products-to-be-sold.html>
 became the first minority-owned firm to be listed on the New York Stock 
Exchange. Given the context, a black city did not seem out of the realm.
 American civil rights activists Martin Luther King, Floyd McKissick and 
Stokely Carmichael in Canton, Mississippi. Photograph: Everett Collection 
Historical/Alamy Stock Photo 
McKissick foresaw a town that would grow to 44,000 residents by 2004. There 
would be homes and industry surrounded by trees, hills and lakes. Above all, 
there would be no prejudice, poverty or slums, according to a Soul City 
brochure. For a black person in the segregated urban ghettos of the north, the 
message was clear: “Come back home.”

Floyd McKissick Jr, son of the Soul City founder and formerly the 
development’s planning chief, says that company officials visited and made 
direct appeals to black families in the north – many of whom had left the south 
just a generation earlier.

“It’s interesting, we’d give a ‘dog a pony’ show (a slide presentation) that 
could be used exactly for that purpose,” McKissick Jr recalls. “People living 
in Harlem and in Newark ... even if they were working hard and making a living, 
the price of buying a home was unaffordable. And if they did buy something, 
they weren’t getting much for their money.”

Despite its name, Soul City was never intended to be an all-black town, but 
rather, a multi-racial community built and managed by black people. To tamp 
down perceptions that he was building a racially exclusive town, the senior 
McKissick briefly considered changing its name to Open City.

Soul City was born under the federal government’s Model Cities programme 
<http://www.encyclopedia.chicagohistory.org/pages/832.html>, which began in 
1966. A plank in President Johnson’s anti-poverty efforts, it funded housing, 
employment, infrastructure and planning. Of the programme’s 14 new 
developments, Soul City was the only one to be built from scratch, with no 
pre-existing infrastructure – and the only one by a black developer.
 An ad for Soul City. Illustration: HUD 
McKissick hired the black New York architecture firm Ifill, Johnson & Hanchard 
to turn the rolling North Carolina acreage into Soul City. The project got 
urban planning assistance from the very school he had sued more than 20 years 
earlier: the University of North Carolina.

“It had probably looked pretty much the same since the 1700s and 1800s,” 
McKissick Jr says of the site. “So you were transforming the land, laying out 
plans for it.”

In a county where slaves toiled in cotton and tobacco plantations barely a 
century earlier, the planners envisioned a broad Soul City boulevard leading 
south into the development from nearby Interstate 85. The road would pass Soul 
City’s executive office complex and the industrial park Soultech 1. After 
passing a manmade lake, recreational buildings, and a shopping centre (to be 
developed later), the boulevard would connect to Opportunity Lane – leading 
into the residential areas of Soul City.

A county-wide high school and bike trails were also planned. Land was set side 
to grow food. Soul City would have a freight rail spur, new water purification 
and sewage treatment facilities, and even a fire department.

“You were going to bring to bear, in a rural area, urban types of interactions 
and economic opportunities,”recalled Eva Clayton 
<http://docsouth.unc.edu/sohp/C-0084/excerpts/excerpt_7614.html#citing>, former 
executive director of the Soul City Foundation, in 1989, as part of the 
University of North Carolina’sDocumenting the American South 
<http://docsouth.unc.edu/sohp/index.html> project. “You were going to have 
houses, you were going to have shops, you were possibly going to have the 
schools.”

A new, “limited purpose” governance structure was also planned as part of the 
experiment. This new town government would create the infrastructure, but the 
operation and law-making capabilities would be left to Warren County.

According to McKissick Jr: “It would have been a very liveable, planned 
community ... something you’d see in many places throughout America – but which 
was very unique for Warren County.”

Visionary and bold

The new President Nixon supported Soul City – and on closer examination, it’s 
not hard to see why. The Republican party still courted black voters now and 
again, and the business-oriented McKissick, a believer in capitalism and free 
markets, had become more Republican-like.

He had also grown disenchanted with the traditional civil rights movement, the 
Black Power movement and the Democratic party. By 1972, he was a full-on member 
of the Republican party who supported Nixon’s re-election.

One year after Nixon was returned to power, Soul City – armed with those $14m 
loan guarantees that enabled it to raise capital and sell bonds to begin 
construction – broke ground in a November 1973 ceremony.
 Soul City as it looks today, an unfinished memorial to McKissick’s grand 
urban ambitions. Photograph: James Cheadle/www.unionmag.co.uk 
“It was a very exciting period,” McKissick Jr remembers. “The governor of the 
state flew in on a helicopter and spoke.”


“Oh, it was visionary,” Clayton said in the 1989 interview. “It was bold.”

Gini Richards is one of a team of three filmmakers who are completing a 
20-minute documentary <http://www.soulcityfilm.com/> on Soul City: “I think a 
lot of people mentioned the groundbreaking as this wonderful moment because it 
happened several years into the project,” she says. “Up until that point, it 
had been such a struggle to get buy-in and funding – you can’t build it unless 
you have people; but if you don’t have buildings, nobody is going to come.”

After the groundbreaking, Soul City’s first houses went up, along with a water 
system plant, a health clinic, and the Soultech 1 industrial centre. A few 
residents from Richmond, Virginia and Newark heeded the call and moved into 
this revolutionary new development.

Constructed at its main entrance on US Highway 1 and Soul City Boulevard was 
the “Soul City marquee” – a 20-ft tall, rectangular concrete monument with the 
town’s name written in a stylish, rounded 1970s font. “I’m extremely happy with 
our progress at this stage,” said the elder McKissick in 1973.
 An aerial view of Soul City in 1975. Photograph: US General Accounting Office 
He was tempting fate. Getting the private sector and the necessary homebuyers 
to come in, sit down and invest was already proving a struggle. Then the 
project was dealt a heavier blow by the 1974 US oil crisis, which caused the 
cost of petrol to skyrocket, taking the prices of plastic piping and asphalt 
with it.

“You’d see 200 or 300% increases in costs almost overnight,” McKissick Jr 
says. “That meant you might as well throw the projections out of the window.”

After the Watergate scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jan/18/watergate-timeline-richard-nixon-frost>
 had pushed Nixon from office in 1974, and with the project’s finances now 
skewing, the Raleigh News & Observer newspaper accused the elder McKissick of 
misspending Soul City’s government funding.

Then the state’s US senator Jesse Helms – a Republican and noted 
segregationist – demanded a federal audit of Soul City, bringing the project to 
a near-standstill. Alleging financial waste and mismanagement, Helms called 
Soul City “an insult to the hard-pressed taxpayers of North Carolina, and the 
nation”.

The probe found no wrongdoing, but the delay further weakened the project’s 
viability. With 30-year home mortgages rising above 10% in 1978, Soul City was 
to all intents and purposes finished – despite the arrival in April of that 
year of Welmetco, a manufacturer of backpacks and duffel bags.

Amid severe criticism that the project wasn’t progressing, the US Department 
of Housing and Urban Development finally pulled its funding in 1979. The agency 
took over Soul City’s ownership the following year and auctioned off the town 
for $1.5m.

McKissick, who sued the department and later settled, kept a few properties 
under his control. Throughout the 1980s he continued to push the Soul City 
concept, even after becoming a judge. He died in 1991 aged 69, and was buried 
in Soul City.

Related: Story of cities #42: Medellín escapes grip of drug lord to embrace 
radical urbanism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/may/13/story-cities-pablo-escobar-inclusive-urbanism-medellin-colombia>

More than 6 million black people left the south in the first two-thirds of the 
20th century. They escaped theharsh boot of Jim Crow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/10/history-of-lynchings-and-racial-violence-continues-to-haunt-us>
 to find a better life in the north of the country, reshaping everything from 
art to politics in the process.

In this century, however, the trend is reversing. It is a phenomenon that 
would have been unthinkable 50 years ago; black people in their tens of 
thousands are returning to America’s southern states.

And Soul City is still there, unfinished. It’s now part of the city of Manson, 
North Carolina, with Soultech 1 making up a section of the county’s jail 
complex. But the streets, the giant Soul City sign, and other reminders of 
those heady days are still there.

Portions of the area resemble a ghost town, rotting – or perhaps waiting. 
Could Soul City ever be resurrected?

“I could see it occurring,” says McKissick Jr. “It’s just a matter of whether 
it’s in this decade or the next, or if it takes longer. If Soul City could all 
be reassembled, it could have great potential.”


Does your city have a little-known story that made a major impact on its 
development? Please share it in the comments below or on Twitter using 
#storyofcities
 