
In July 1931, Ibragim Akhmetzyanov arrived in Magnitogorsk in a wooden boxcar 
with his wife and eight children. The sight that greeted them was bleak.

In the middle of the frigid, windswept steppe, a cluster of tents and 
ramshackle barracks stood at the foot of the ominous “Magnetic Mountain”, a 
landform so full of iron ore that compasses could not function near it and 
birds avoided flying over it.

Between the mountain and the shallow Ural River, workers were erecting the 
crown jewel of the Soviet leader’s first Five-Year Plan, the Stalin 
Magnitogorsk Metallurgical Complex – one of the largest steel plants in the 
world.

The “first builders” of Magnitogorsk have been lauded in poetry, film and 
song; Soviet propaganda stressed the contribution of young communist volunteers 
and members of the Komsomol, a national youth movement that started largely in 
Magnitogorsk.

But Akhmetzyanov was not a volunteer. He was a dispossessed peasant who had 
been kicked off his farm in Tatarstan by the communist authorities and sent to 
Magnitogorsk, where he and his family were forced to work and live in a 
settlement surrounded by guards and barbed wire. It was the forced labour of 
these so-called “special resettlers” that made the record-quick construction of 
the plant possible.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fstory-of-cities-20-the-secret-history-of-magnitogorsk-russias-steel-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd12580099feebb547b247ea1ec8aa15541659ced%2F0_354_5159_3095%2F5159.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2320%3A%20the%20secret%20history%20of%20Magnitogorsk%2C%20Russia's%20steel%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fstory-of-cities-20-the-secret-history-of-magnitogorsk-russias-steel-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2320%3A%20the%20secret%20history%20of%20Magnitogorsk%2C%20Russia%27s%20steel%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fstory-of-cities-20-the-secret-history-of-magnitogorsk-russias-steel-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd12580099feebb547b247ea1ec8aa15541659ced%2F0_354_5159_3095%2F5159.jpg>
 Selling cabbages from a motorcycle in Magnitogorsk, 1993. Photograph: Shepard 
Sherbell/Corbis Saba 
They lived in tents for the autumn, then an earth-floored barrack through the 
harsh winter and hot summer, without basic amenities or medical care. According 
to Akhmetzyanov’s grandson Salavat, a historian who recently wrote a book about 
these special resettlers, 10,000 people died of hunger, cold and disease in the 
first five years of construction, including a son and daughter born to Ibragim 
and his wife.

“The story of thousands of resettlers has been forgotten,” Akhmetzyanov says. 
“When it comes to the war we don’t hide our losses and retreats, but here, on 
the topic of the 1930s, they’ve been tiptoed around.”


“If the regime had been interested in the people, the city would have built on 
less aggressive deadlines, and without the colossal amount of human 
casualties,” says Gennady Vasilyev, a local history teacher who compiles “books 
of memory” with the names of Magnitogorsk residents who suffered from Soviet 
repressions. “We have a saying that the victors aren’t judged, but this wedo 
need to judge.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fstory-of-cities-20-the-secret-history-of-magnitogorsk-russias-steel-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F239897eebb214a4cc1b5f603ad869e7726bb6c4c%2F0_151_4728_2837%2F4728.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2320%3A%20the%20secret%20history%20of%20Magnitogorsk%2C%20Russia's%20steel%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fstory-of-cities-20-the-secret-history-of-magnitogorsk-russias-steel-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2320%3A%20the%20secret%20history%20of%20Magnitogorsk%2C%20Russia%27s%20steel%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fstory-of-cities-20-the-secret-history-of-magnitogorsk-russias-steel-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F239897eebb214a4cc1b5f603ad869e7726bb6c4c%2F0_151_4728_2837%2F4728.jpg>
 Gennady Vasilyev compiles ‘books of memory’. Photograph: Alec Luhn 
Celebrated as the “steel heart of the motherland”, Magnitogorsk is a city that 
has yet to face down its past – and not just the history of the forced labour 
during its construction. Decades of heavy industry have polluted the air and 
water, but few questions are asked of the now privately owned Magnitogorsk Iron 
and Steelworks (MMK). More than 30,000 of the city’s 400,000 residents still 
work at MMK, and with official unemployment atonly 1.44% 
<http://magnitogorsk.rusplt.ru/index/bezrabotitsa-v-magnitogorske-sostavlyaet-144-502332.html>
, the city hasn’t suffered the urban blight of other run-down factory towns.

Magnitogorsk lies near the northern edge of the steppe: the tawny, featureless 
grasslands that extend west toward the Volga River and east into nearby 
Kazakhstan. Many people commute fromEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> to Asia for work each day, 
travelling from the residential western side of the Ural River to the steel 
mill on the eastern side. A small Cossack fort was founded here in 1743, but 
the area remained mostly untouched by the outside world until the “year of the 
great break” in 1929, when the Bolsheviks made it the focal point of their 
first five-year plan to pull the still largely agrarian Soviet Union into the 
industrial age.

Iron and steel became the watchwords of the era. “We are becoming a country of 
metal,” Stalin declared, and this metal was to be forged in Magnitogorsk. It 
became the very embodiment of the push to create an industrialised, socialist 
society.

“Magnitogorsk was no mere business for generating profits; it was a device for 
transforming the country: its geography, its industry, and above all its 
people,” historian Stephen Kotkin writes in his book Magnetic Mountain. 
“Magnitogorsk was the October revolution itself, the socialist revolution, 
Stalin’s revolution.”

Ironically, to make this socialist revolution, the Soviet Union had to call on 
its capitalist rival, hiring the American firm Arthur McKee & Co in 1930 to 
design the steel plant and train Soviet engineers to build it. Magnitogorsk was 
reportedly inspired by the US Steel plant in Gary, Indiana, then the largest in 
the world. The first years of construction, however, were chaos, as the 
impossibly short deadlines set by Moscow collided with the total lack of 
infrastructure, chronic fires and a shortage of skilled workers and equipment.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fstory-of-cities-20-the-secret-history-of-magnitogorsk-russias-steel-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6e01e17e311152a73aaf2bd8e706aac58a38237%2F0_71_1024_629%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2320%3A%20the%20secret%20history%20of%20Magnitogorsk%2C%20Russia's%20steel%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fstory-of-cities-20-the-secret-history-of-magnitogorsk-russias-steel-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2320%3A%20the%20secret%20history%20of%20Magnitogorsk%2C%20Russia%27s%20steel%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fstory-of-cities-20-the-secret-history-of-magnitogorsk-russias-steel-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6e01e17e311152a73aaf2bd8e706aac58a38237%2F0_71_1024_629%2F1024.jpg>
 Magnitogorsk department store, 1959: ‘The city was an urban planning 
catastrophe with the chaotic outlaw atmosphere of a frontier town.’ Photograph: 
vk.com/magnitogorskoldfoto 
Magnitogorsk’s builders staged “socialist competitions” to complete tasks on 
unbelievably tight deadlines. The results were rarely of top quality: a 
competition between teams on the left and right banks of the river in 1930 
produced a dam that wasn’t deep enough, and was eventually submerged by a 
larger one. But the main thing was that another victory could be chalked up to 
the Bolshevik project, and workers were filled with “labour enthusiasm”, as 
Kotkin reports.

All the labour enthusiasm in the world couldn’t keep workers amid the harsh 
conditions, however, and tens of thousands fled. The state solved this labour 
shortage through a campaign to dispossess allegedly wealthy “kulak” peasants of 
their land, which began in 1930 and expanded in 1931.

The first boxcars of “special resettlers” arrived in Magnitogorsk in May 1931. 
According to Vasilyev, 40,000 families of dispossessed peasants were sent to 
the Chelyabinsk region, many of them Turkish-speaking Tatars and mostly to 
Magnitogorsk. Their “special” settlements, encircled in barbed wire, were 
Magnitogorsk’s own small islands in the vast “Gulag archipelago” of labour 
camps described byAlexander Solzhenitsyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/aug/04/solzhenitsyn.dies>. In addition, 
more than 26,000 non-political convicts had been sent to Magnitogorsk by the 
end of 1933.

The overcrowded, mostly dirt-floored tents and ramshackle barracks in which 
early residents lived were buffeted by blizzards in the winter and dust storms 
in the summer. Rats, bed bugs and lice tormented their occupants. Other 
newcomers reverted to rural ways, building mud huts dug deep into the ground.

Crowded, cold, filthy conditions, combined with the lack of clean water and 
scarcity of food and medical care, resulted in epidemics of typhus, malaria and 
scarlet fever. Meanwhile, party officials enjoyed a comparatively luxurious 
life in the wooded “American town” that was originally built for specialists 
from the United States in 1930.

“Special carts went around the barracks and asked, ‘Do you have any dead 
today?’ And everyday they took bodies,” Akhmetzyanov says of the winter of 
1931. “Children died first of all, and the elderly.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fstory-of-cities-20-the-secret-history-of-magnitogorsk-russias-steel-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69eb9bad2864fe7d0dfadbc91ffa367da5fca349%2F0_173_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2320%3A%20the%20secret%20history%20of%20Magnitogorsk%2C%20Russia's%20steel%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fstory-of-cities-20-the-secret-history-of-magnitogorsk-russias-steel-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2320%3A%20the%20secret%20history%20of%20Magnitogorsk%2C%20Russia%27s%20steel%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fstory-of-cities-20-the-secret-history-of-magnitogorsk-russias-steel-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69eb9bad2864fe7d0dfadbc91ffa367da5fca349%2F0_173_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 A monument commemorating Magnitogorsk’s contribution to victory in the second 
world war. Photograph: Alec Luhn for the Guardian 
While the existence of the special resettlers isn’t denied, it’s not readily 
discussed either, and a recent drive to put up a monument to them has yet to 
bear fruit. The administration of one district barred Vasilyev from speaking 
with descendants there, and he can’t find a sponsor to publish his books on a 
larger scale. Even today, the Magnitogorsk Iron and Steelworks website makes no 
mention of this forced labour on its history page.

“We need to immerse children in this topic; they are the ancestors, they 
should know who they are,” Vasilyev says. “The subtitle of each of my books is, 
‘This should never happen again.’”

“People say, ‘Why dig this up, even if it’s true?’” Akhmetzyanov explains. 
“The problem is that no one is giving money; all the study of these topics is 
done on [researchers’] own funds.”

The ‘socialist city’

The factory was erected in record time thanks to the first builders’ labour. 
On 31 January 1932, in temperatures below -20 degrees, blast furnace number one 
was blown in; the following year, it had to be shut down again and completely 
rebuilt.

Although officials were reluctant to allocate labour or resources away from 
the factory, a city still had to be built around it. According to a 1930 
Magnitostroi propaganda pamphlet, the city would be the centre of a “deep 
inculcation of the new socialist way of life”. To this end, it was to be the 
world’s first completely planned city.

In 1930, Moscow enlisted the help of German architect Ernst May, who had won 
acclaim building egalitarian housing settlements in Frankfurt with 
standardised, prefabricated materials. May drafted a plan for a linear city, 
with a green belt between bands of residential and industrial areas. But when 
he arrived on site in October 1930, May found that not only was the designated 
site unsuitable for his plan, but that local officials had already begun 
construction.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fstory-of-cities-20-the-secret-history-of-magnitogorsk-russias-steel-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f2d8c20aae9393c4ee174f0175b6ee34df2a5e4%2F0_312_5200_3121%2F5200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2320%3A%20the%20secret%20history%20of%20Magnitogorsk%2C%20Russia's%20steel%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fstory-of-cities-20-the-secret-history-of-magnitogorsk-russias-steel-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2320%3A%20the%20secret%20history%20of%20Magnitogorsk%2C%20Russia%27s%20steel%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fstory-of-cities-20-the-secret-history-of-magnitogorsk-russias-steel-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f2d8c20aae9393c4ee174f0175b6ee34df2a5e4%2F0_312_5200_3121%2F5200.jpg>
 Inside the MMK iron and steel works; more than 30,000 of Magnitogorsk’s 
400,000 residents still work here. Photograph: Gerd Ludwig/Corbis 
The supposedly highly planned building process turned out to be highly 
erratic. Constrained by the existing construction and the factory facilities, 
May built what has become known as theSotsgorod 
<http://ru-sovarch.livejournal.com/678699.html>, or “socialist city”; a 
superblock of rectangular three- and four-storey flat buildings, south of the 
factory.

The large open areas in between the buildings – designed on May’s principle 
that every resident should have the maximum amount of light – are not 
well-adapted to the local climate, exposing all who come and go to the bitterly 
cold winds of the Ural steppe. Although the buildings are run-down, flats here 
are still in demand today, since they are constructed of brick rather than 
concrete panels like many later flat blocks. The site has now been proposed for 
Unesco World Heritage status.

At the time, May’s standardised, unembellished buildings were criticised as 
too plain. When commissar of industry Sergo Ordzhonikidze visited the site in 
1933, he was disgusted by May’s superblock, which due to the lack of plumbing 
was surrounded by smelly outhouses, declaring, “You have named some manure a 
socialist city.” He ordered residential construction to be moved to the west 
bank of the river, but amid the vagaries of the Soviet leadership – not even 
the smallest decisions could be made without Moscow’s approval – a masterplan 
for this second attempt at a socialist city was slow to emerge.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fstory-of-cities-20-the-secret-history-of-magnitogorsk-russias-steel-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8ae1a6957e8e2d2d2a3c07c1a8053b1db13fd5f%2F0_2038_2969_2630%2F2969.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2320%3A%20the%20secret%20history%20of%20Magnitogorsk%2C%20Russia's%20steel%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fstory-of-cities-20-the-secret-history-of-magnitogorsk-russias-steel-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2320%3A%20the%20secret%20history%20of%20Magnitogorsk%2C%20Russia%27s%20steel%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fstory-of-cities-20-the-secret-history-of-magnitogorsk-russias-steel-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8ae1a6957e8e2d2d2a3c07c1a8053b1db13fd5f%2F0_2038_2969_2630%2F2969.jpg>
 Photo project by local newspaper Magnitogorsk Metal. Photograph: Alec Luhn 
Meanwhile, settlements of rickety barracks kept springing up next to each new 
enterprise that was built on the east bank, earning names such as “Fertiliser 
Settlement,” “Ore-Enriching Station” and “Lattice-Wood Town”, and stretching 
the city out more than 12 miles from north to south. The start of the first 
streetcar in 1935, bearing a portrait of Stalin – Magnitogorsk would eventually 
have the largest streetcar network in the country after Leningrad – was not 
enough to make up for the lack of paved roads and vehicles. By 1939 
Magnitogorsk, already a city of 200,000, still had only one temporary hospital, 
and robberies were common. Far from a well-designed socialist city, this was an 
urban planning catastrophe with the chaotic outlaw atmosphere of a frontier 
town.

On the other hand, the housing and social services, while always too scarce, 
began to establish a more collectivised way of life, with public baths, 
laundries, cafeterias and nurseries. Along with the landmark Magnit cinema, a 
dozen workers’ clubs with libraries, games, movie projectors and study circles 
were built to try to broaden the cultural horizons of the poorly educated 
masses, while also teaching them the Soviet creed.

This Soviet urban ideal was eventually realised on the west bank of the river, 
with its wide prospects, squares and promenades, and abundance of five-storey 
“Khrushchev” flat blocks, laid out on a grid and connected to the factory side 
by streetcars and four major bridges. Today, property prices on the east side, 
which is where the wind blows the bulk of the factory’s emissions, are lower, 
and flat blocks there are generally in worse condition.

But the bulk of the west bank construction had to wait until after the second 
world war. Of 56,000 men in Magnitogorsk, more than 30,000 were sent to the 
front, with women taking their places in the factory.

“They worked at the factory as if they were on the front. My grandmother said 
sometimes they slept at the factory and didn’t go home,” remembers local 
activist Vyacheslav Gutnikov, whose grandmother worked in the coke-chemical 
section of the steel mill – known as the “hell division” because of the harmful 
gases.

Magnitogorsk’s role in the war is commemorated by the town’s main monument 
overlooking the river, “Homefront to the Front”: a 50-foot bronze sculpture of 
a worker handing a giant sword to a Soviet soldier. Locals are still fond of 
bragging that every second tank and every third shell during the conflict was 
built with Magnitogorsk steel.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fstory-of-cities-20-the-secret-history-of-magnitogorsk-russias-steel-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5d83decbe9999a0dc23d8ce09b742d54e29f822%2F323_194_4861_2917%2F4861.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2320%3A%20the%20secret%20history%20of%20Magnitogorsk%2C%20Russia's%20steel%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fstory-of-cities-20-the-secret-history-of-magnitogorsk-russias-steel-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2320%3A%20the%20secret%20history%20of%20Magnitogorsk%2C%20Russia%27s%20steel%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fstory-of-cities-20-the-secret-history-of-magnitogorsk-russias-steel-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5d83decbe9999a0dc23d8ce09b742d54e29f822%2F323_194_4861_2917%2F4861.jpg>
 Ernst May’s Sotsgorod (‘socialist city’), the oldest residential area of 
Magnitogorsk. Photograph: Alec Luhn for the Guardian 
It would be hard to overestimate the role that steelmaking plays in the life 
of the city, where members of nearly every family have worked at the plant. The 
beloved ice hockey team, which has won the national championship five times and 
for which local boys dream of playing, is called Metallurg.

On the eastern bank, the sheer size of MMK, which includes every step of the 
steelmaking process, is astounding. One workshop is more than a mile long, all 
under one roof. The plant produces 400 different types of steel and turned out 
13 million tonnes of crude steel in 2014 and 12.2 tonnes of commercial steel 
products.

But metallurgy is a dirty business. In February, Leonardo DiCaprio reposted 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BBa11ngKxNG/?taken-by=leonardodicaprio&hl=en> a 
National Geographic Instagram photograph of ice fishermen in front of dozens of 
smokestacks at MMK and a caption about pollution. DiCaprio’s repost caused a 
furore in Magnitogorsk. Chelyabinsk region governor Boris Dubrovsky, himself a 
former director of MMK, wrote a post on his own Instagram that the photo had 
been taken 22 years ago and that many of the smokestacks have since been 
removed, inviting DiCaprio to visit.

Yet any new arrival to the city is likely to notice an industrial tinge to the 
air, like the whiff of a charcoal brazier and an acrid dryness at the back of 
the throat. Russia’s state statistics service ranked Magnitogorsk the third 
most polluted city in Russia in 2015, finding that the level of benzopyrene, a 
carcinogen that has been linked to lung cancer, in the air was23 times the 
allowed amount <http://www.rosbalt.ru/piter/2016/02/26/1493613.html>. In 
addition, millions of cubic metres of industrial waste water is pumped into the 
Ural River each year, according to environmentalists, polluting it with heavy 
particles, nitrites and other chemicals.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fstory-of-cities-20-the-secret-history-of-magnitogorsk-russias-steel-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d3b202b02642339b8c3dd8a441767fc362d49e8%2F0_233_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2320%3A%20the%20secret%20history%20of%20Magnitogorsk%2C%20Russia's%20steel%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fstory-of-cities-20-the-secret-history-of-magnitogorsk-russias-steel-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2320%3A%20the%20secret%20history%20of%20Magnitogorsk%2C%20Russia%27s%20steel%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fstory-of-cities-20-the-secret-history-of-magnitogorsk-russias-steel-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d3b202b02642339b8c3dd8a441767fc362d49e8%2F0_233_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Magnitogorsk residents meet at sunset, with the MMK plant in the background. 
Photograph: Sergei Karpukhin/Reuters 
Information on the health effects of this pollution is extremely difficult to 
find, but according to Anna Rozhkova, head of the environmental group 
EcoMagnitka, onlyone in 20 children 
<http://www.greenpatrol.ru/ru/novosti/ekologiya-v-magnitogorske-topchemsya-na-meste-ili-idem-vpered>
 born in the city is completely free of health problems and allergies. The head 
of Magnitogorsk’s oncological hospital said in a 2012interview 
<http://mgorsk.ru/text/person/502846.html> that “people around the world are 
susceptible [to cancer], but we unfortunately outpace all others.”

Alexander Morozov, chairman of the city council, tells the Guardian these 
claims of widespread health problems are greatly exaggerated, arguing that the 
environmental conditions had greatly improved. An MMK spokesperson says the 
company spent 2.5 billion roubles in 2013-15 on systems to reduce its 
environmental impact, and would invest more than 10.5 billion roubles (£110 
million) in 2016-18.

When asked about the environment, locals tend to answer that at least it’s 
better than it used to be, remembering how the factory emissions used to turn 
the snow rust-coloured or black.

“Earlier, cucumbers and cabbage wouldn’t even grow,” recalls Nina Ivanovna, a 
cashier at a bakery on the east bank of the river. “They yellowed and wilted 
right away.”

But a fisherman selling minnows by the kilogram near MMK suggests the river is 
still polluted. “Yesterday they pumped out some filth, and there were lots of 
dead fish, a whole layer of them,” says the man, who would give his name only 
as Igor.

Story of cities #21: Olivetti tries to build the ideal 'human city' for its 
workers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/13/story-cities-21-adriano-olivetti-ivrea-italy-typewriter-factory-human-city>
According to Pavel Verstov, editor of the local independent news site 
Verstov.info, the city administration should make MMK take more aggressive 
measures to solve these and other problems, but it is “under the factory’s 
thumb”.

Despite the city’s near-total dependence on the steel plant, diversifying the 
economy is not an issue that worries many. Asked what will happen to the city 
if the plant ever shuts down, city council chairman Morozov is blunt: “Detroit 
... But we don’t think this will happen. We don’t think the factory could have 
such a crisis that it would stop.”

MMK has remained profitable 
<https://www.moodys.com/research/Moodys-upgrades-MMKs-rating-to-Ba2-positive-outlook--PR_341463>
, unlike many Soviet industrial plants. But the company suffered losses in Q4 
of 2015, hit by Russia’s economic recession and record lows in global steel 
prices, and the situation is unlikely to improve this year. Many fear a return 
to the cuts of the financial crisis of 2008, when the company laid off3,000 
workers <http://www.vesti.ru/doc.html?id=214754>.

Yet locals remain fiercely patriotic and hopeful for their city. “There are 
things to criticise [Magnitogorsk] for, but I criticise it with love, so that 
it will get better,” says Oleg Frolov, editor of the MMK-sponsored local 
newspaper Magnitogorsk Metal. “It produces the GDP, the might of the country. 
It’s not for nothing that they call us the steel heart of the motherland.”

Does your city have a little-known story that made a major impact on its 
development? Please share it in the comments below or on Twitter using 
#storyofcities
 