
The people of Hiroshima have developed a verbal shorthand for describing their 
city’s layout. A particular street is “about 1.5 kilometres away”; a building 
“500 metres north”. No further explanation is required. The unspoken reference 
point is the hypocentre of the world’s first nuclear attack.

At first glance, visitors arriving by bullet train to Hiroshima’s main railway 
station might have little inkling of the city’s singularly tragic past. On a 
warm spring evening, groups of European tourists pause outside restaurants 
offering special deals on oysters – a local delicacy – and board pleasure boats 
toMiyajima <http://www.miyajima.or.jp/english/spot/spot01.html>, an island 
famous for its wild deer and “floating” Shinto shrine. But reminders of 
history’s antithesis to these quotidian pleasures are never far away.

South-west of the station, visitors to the city’s Peace Memorial Museum fall 
silent in front of steps retrieved from the ruins of Sumitomo Bank, the“shadow” 
of a human <http://worldwar2database.com/gallery/wwii1439> etched into the 
stone. Display cases show the shredded remains of a junior high-school uniform, 
the irradiated contents of a lunchbox and the frame of a tricycle – the small 
boy riding it was incinerated by the blast.


These harrowing exhibits are among the few physical reminders of the 
devastation that greeted survivors after the US B-29 bomber Enola Gay released 
Little Boy, a 16-kilotonne atomic bomb, overHiroshima at 8.15am on 6 August 1945
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/from-the-archive-blog/2015/aug/06/hiroshima-atomic-bomb-guardian-1945-archive>
.


Humans destroyed Hiroshima, but humans also rebuilt it
Kazumi Matsui 
Less than a minute later, the bomb exploded 600 metres above Shima Hospital, 
creating a wave of heat that momentarily reached 3,000-4,000 degrees centigrade 
on the ground. Winds of up to 440 metres per second roared through the entire 
city. Within half an hour, almost every building within a two-kilometre radius 
of the hypocentre was in flames. About 90% of the city’s 76,000 buildings were 
partially or totally incinerated, or reduced to rubble. Of the 33m square 
metres of land considered usable before the attack, 40% was reduced to ashes.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Fstory-of-cities-hiroshima-japan-nuclear-destruction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46e1c07af41b8199da06b82de520cfe258c70d4d%2F0_0_4748_3441%2F4748.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2324%3A%20how%20Hiroshima%20rose%20from%20the%20ashes%20of%20nuclear%20destruction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Fstory-of-cities-hiroshima-japan-nuclear-destruction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2324%3A%20how%20Hiroshima%20rose%20from%20the%20ashes%20of%20nuclear%20destruction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Fstory-of-cities-hiroshima-japan-nuclear-destruction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46e1c07af41b8199da06b82de520cfe258c70d4d%2F0_0_4748_3441%2F4748.jpg>
 Hiroshima in October 1945, April 1946, December 1948 and February 1953. 
Photographs: Yoshita Kishimoto/Hiroshima Peace Memorial Museum 
The bombed city was barely recognisable. What a day earlier had been a 
sprawling military city and transportation hub, wedged between mountain ranges 
to the north and the Seto inland sea to the south, was now a nuclear wasteland. 
Wooden homes had been burnt to the ground by firestorms; the city’s rivers were 
filled with the corpses of people desperately seeking water before they died. 
With the exception of a handful of concrete buildings, Hiroshima had ceased to 
exist.


A day after the attack, Keiko Ogura, then an eight-year-old schoolgirl, could 
barely believe her eyes as she looked down on her hometown from a hill. “The 
entire city had been burned to the ground,” says Ogura, one of manyhibakusha – 
the Japanese name given to people exposed to radiation – who pass on their 
experience to visitors. “None of us could comprehend what had happened … we 
kept asking ourselves how an entire city could have been destroyed by a single 
bomb.”


Ogura, whose home narrowly escaped the firestorms, recalls seeing people shorn 
of their skin, almost indistinguishable from what remained of their clothes. 
While her father cremated hundreds of corpses in the open, Ogura gave water to 
the severely injured, only to watch them die in front of her.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Fstory-of-cities-hiroshima-japan-nuclear-destruction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd901ec691601fd23d8db14c49178638ebce0fb09%2F316_0_2303_2878%2F2303.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2324%3A%20how%20Hiroshima%20rose%20from%20the%20ashes%20of%20nuclear%20destruction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Fstory-of-cities-hiroshima-japan-nuclear-destruction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2324%3A%20how%20Hiroshima%20rose%20from%20the%20ashes%20of%20nuclear%20destruction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Fstory-of-cities-hiroshima-japan-nuclear-destruction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd901ec691601fd23d8db14c49178638ebce0fb09%2F316_0_2303_2878%2F2303.jpg>
 Survivor Keiko Ogura was eight in 1945 
“That was the beginning of a trauma that would stay with me for many years,” 
she says. “Talking about it now is a way of healing the psychological scars. It 
feels like I am doing something useful on behalf of the people who died.”


The blast instantly killed 80,000 of the Hiroshima’s 420,000 residents; by the 
end of the year, the death toll would rise to 141,000 as survivors succumbed to 
injuries or illnesses connected to their exposure to radiation.


Yet even as they struggled to comprehend the horror visited on their homes, 
businesses, public buildings and fellow citizens, evidence emerged ofremarkable 
acts of courage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/31/japan-atomic-bomb-survivors-nuclear-weapons-hiroshima-70th-anniversary>
 and resourcefulness. Incredible though it may seem, looking at the handful of 
black-and-white photos taken in the immediate aftermath of the attack, 
Hiroshima’s resurrection began just hours after it was effectively wiped from 
the map.

The lights came back on in the Ujina area on 7 August, and around Hiroshima 
railway station a day later.Power was restored to 30% of homes 
<http://www.hiroshimapeacemedia.jp/?bombing=hiroshima-70-years-after-the-a-bombing-donated-records>
 that had escaped fire damage, and to all households by the end of November 
1945, according to records kept by theHiroshima Peace Institute 
<http://www.hiroshima-cu.ac.jp/modules/peace_e/index.php>.


Water pumps were repaired and started working again four days after the bombing
 <http://www.hiroshimapeacemedia.jp/?p=47988>, although damaged pipes created 
vast puddles among the ashes of wooden homes. The central telephone exchange 
bureau was destroyed and all of its employees killed, yet essential equipment 
was retrieved and repaired, and by the middle of August 14 experimental lines 
were back in operation.

Eighteen workers and a dozen finance bureau employees at the Hiroshima branch 
of the Bank of Japan, one of the city’s few concrete buildings, died instantly,
yet the bank reopened two days late 
<http://www.hiroshima-navi.or.jp/en/sightseeing/hibaku_ireihi/tatemono/21383.php>
r, offering floor space to 11 other banks whose premises had been destroyed. 
Tellers worked under open skies in clear weather, and beneath umbrellas when it 
rained.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Fstory-of-cities-hiroshima-japan-nuclear-destruction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d13e30b98ee4724be176f5a03cfb2d5e03ff2c4%2F157_170_5339_3770%2F5339.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2324%3A%20how%20Hiroshima%20rose%20from%20the%20ashes%20of%20nuclear%20destruction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Fstory-of-cities-hiroshima-japan-nuclear-destruction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2324%3A%20how%20Hiroshima%20rose%20from%20the%20ashes%20of%20nuclear%20destruction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Fstory-of-cities-hiroshima-japan-nuclear-destruction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d13e30b98ee4724be176f5a03cfb2d5e03ff2c4%2F157_170_5339_3770%2F5339.jpg>
 A map of Hiroshima showing degree of damage on 6 August 1945. Photograph: 
Courtesy of Hiroshima Peace Museum 
A limited streetcar service resumed on 9 August, the same day Nagasaki was 
destroyed by a plutonium bomb, killing more than 70,000 people. With the need 
to move people and supplies into the city growing more urgent by the hour, the 
Ujina railway line started moving again on 7 August; a day later, trains on the 
Sanyo Line started running the short distance between Hiroshima and Yokogawa 
stations.


Higashi Police Station, despite being inside the two-kilometre radius, was 
commandeered by the prefectural government and turned into the nerve centre for 
search and rescue and relief operations.


Historians say the quick resumption of services was a civic effort, helped by 
the arrival of large numbers of volunteers. “I do not think the restoration of 
basic services was simply due to coercion from the authorities,” says Yuki 
Tanaka, a historian and former professor at Hiroshima City University. 
“Hiroshima received a lot of help from people in neighbouring towns and cities 
such as Fuchu, Kure, and even Yamaguchi. In this sense, the response was 
similar to that seen after the2011 Tohoku earthquake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/mar/15/japan-earthquake-tsunami-humanitarian-effort>
, when many people throughout Japan went to the devastated areas and helped the 
victims.”

Weeks after Hiroshima felt the unforgiving force of nuclear fission, nature 
compounded the city’s misery. Makurazaki, an unusually powerful typhoon, swept 
through the city on 17 September, flooding large areas and ruining many of the 
temporary hospitals set up on the outskirts. “The only good thing that came of 
it was that it washed a lot of the residual radiation into the sea,” says 
Tanaka. “After the typhoon, radiation levels fell considerably.”

After the A-bomb: Hiroshima and Nagasaki then and now – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2015/aug/06/after-the-atomic-bomb-hiroshima-and-nagasaki-then-and-now-in-pictures>
It was inevitable, given the scale of destruction, that early attempts to 
re-establish a semblance of civic life on the scorched earth of ground zero 
were marked by chaos and confusion. The mayor, Senkichi Awaya, was among the 
dead, leaving the city without a leader; thousands of public servants, teachers 
and health professionals were also among the victims. On 6 August the municipal 
government office employed about 1,000 people; the following day just 80 
reported for duty.

“They alone had to deal with emergency medical treatment, establish a food 
supply and retrieve and cremate corpses,” says Tanaka. “They were incredibly 
difficult times.” Attempts to care for the dying and seriously wounded verged 
on the futile: 14 of Hiroshima’s 16 major hospitals no longer existed; 270 of 
298 hospital doctors were dead, along with 1,654 of 1,780 registered nurses. 
Demand for housing turned the area near the hypocentre into a shantytown of 
10,000 homes that were little more than wooden shacks, with sanitary facilities 
shared among several households.

US soldiers arrived in Hiroshima in 1946, but direct control of the city was 
given to troops from the British Commonwealth Occupation Force, headquartered 
in the nearby port city of Kure. “There are no records of foreign troops 
actually helping with reconstruction, but they were vital to the flow of 
emergency supplies,” says Ariyuki Fukushima ofthe Peace Memorial Museum 
<http://www.pcf.city.hiroshima.jp/top_e.html>’s curatorial division. “And the 
[US-led] occupation forces facilitated the recovery in a broad sense, since 
they gave final approval to public works projects.”

Although it was initially one of five Japanese cities under consideration by 
US president Harry Truman and his advisers, there are compelling reasons why 
the Americans targeted Hiroshima. Having begun as a castle town at the end of 
the 1500s under the rule of the feudal warlord Mori Terumoto, by the end of the 
19th century it served as a regional garrison for the Imperial Japanese Army; 
as a major manufacturing centre, it helped fuel the Japanese empire’s military 
efforts in the Asia-Pacific.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Fstory-of-cities-hiroshima-japan-nuclear-destruction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1b61aaec3b92e4f0b6b56763106d1c19258165b%2F0_50_1131_679%2F1131.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2324%3A%20how%20Hiroshima%20rose%20from%20the%20ashes%20of%20nuclear%20destruction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Fstory-of-cities-hiroshima-japan-nuclear-destruction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2324%3A%20how%20Hiroshima%20rose%20from%20the%20ashes%20of%20nuclear%20destruction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Fstory-of-cities-hiroshima-japan-nuclear-destruction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1b61aaec3b92e4f0b6b56763106d1c19258165b%2F0_50_1131_679%2F1131.jpg>
 Labourers working on the restoration of Hiroshima’s Aioi Bridge in 1949. 
Photograph: Yoshita Kishimoto 
Slow transformation

It was only after the strained tones of Emperor Hirohito confirmed Japan’s 
surrender <https://www.theguardian.com/world/1945/aug/15/japan.secondworldwar> 
in a radio broadcast on 15 August 1945 that reconstruction replaced war as the 
nation’s clarion call. With factories commandeered for the war effort now back 
in private ownership, local authorities launched a five-year recovery plan to 
dramatically raise production. Ironically, it was another conflict, on the 
Korean peninsula, that gave the local economy a fillip, as demand soared for 
canned food, cars and other goods. A second boom came in 1952, when the 
departing Allied occupation authorities lifted the ban on Japanese shipbuilding.

The idea of transforming a large area of Hiroshima into a memorial to the 
A-bomb dead gained traction in 1946, when the local Chugoku Shimbun newspaper 
ran a competition soliciting readers’ visions for the city. First prize was 
awarded toSankichi Tōge <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sankichi_T%C5%8Dge>, a 
poet, peace activist and A-bomb survivor – although some have speculated that
his brother contributed 
<http://www.hiroshimapeacemedia.jp/mediacenter/article.php?story=20140107150822216_en>
 many of the ideas in his essay. Tōge, who died in 1953 aged 36, envisioned a 
peace plaza memorial, a library, museum and a place where visitors from around 
the world could come together to dedicate themselves to peace. About 40% of the 
city should be covered in greenery, he said.

The city government was sympathetic to Tōge’s utopian vision, but lacked the 
money to act. Tax revenue had plummeted by 80% from pre-attack levels and parts 
of the city, including a military base near Hiroshima castle, still belonged to 
the state. The turning point came in 1949, when national politicians, 
recognising Hiroshima’s special status, passed thePeace Memorial City 
Construction Law <http://www.pcf.city.hiroshima.jp/Peace/E/pHiroshima2_4.html>, 
Article 1 of which states: “Hiroshima is to be a peace memorial city 
symbolising the human idea of the sincere pursuit of genuine and lasting peace.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Fstory-of-cities-hiroshima-japan-nuclear-destruction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa55b0178a0a06f1aa31adb0cbf4917204a458aaa%2F0_73_5026_3016%2F5026.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2324%3A%20how%20Hiroshima%20rose%20from%20the%20ashes%20of%20nuclear%20destruction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Fstory-of-cities-hiroshima-japan-nuclear-destruction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2324%3A%20how%20Hiroshima%20rose%20from%20the%20ashes%20of%20nuclear%20destruction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Fstory-of-cities-hiroshima-japan-nuclear-destruction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa55b0178a0a06f1aa31adb0cbf4917204a458aaa%2F0_73_5026_3016%2F5026.jpg>
 Today, Hiroshima’s busy roads and high-rise office blocks give the impression 
of a thriving city at peace with its history. Photograph: Justin McCurry for 
the Guardian 
Sources of funding once closed to city planners were opened, and the central 
government agreed to turn over state and military-owned land free of charge. If 
the reconstruction law resolved questions of land ownership and removed the 
financial obstacles that had slowed Hiroshima’s recovery, Japan’s postwar 
economic miracle heralded an age of breakneck construction. In 1958, the city’s 
population returned to its pre-war level of 410,000. “That was a kind of 
springboard for recovery,” says Fukushima.

But work on the peace memorial city project exposed social divisions that 
predated the bombing. The demolition of thousands of wooden shacks in the area 
earmarked for development forced residents – among them forced Korean labourers 
and members of theburakumin underclass 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2004/jul/31/japan.justinmccurry1> – to 
relocate to the banks of the Ota River. Within months, more than 3,000 people 
were living on the riverbank with no access to running water or electricity. 
Fires regularly swept through the ramshackle huts, which remained until the 
local government built high-rise flats in 1970.


Hiroshima is to be a peace memorial city symbolising the human idea of the 
sincere pursuit of genuine and lasting peace

As Tōge and others had envisaged, Hiroshima Peace Memorial Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2012/feb/03/hiroshima-peace-memorial-park-japan>
 occupies prime real estate south-west of the main railway station, with the 
100m-wide peace boulevard, which traverses the city centre, running along the 
park’s southern boundary. Designed by the Japanese architectKenzō Tange 
<http://www.pritzkerprize.com/1987/bio> and completed in the late 1950s, the 
three-acre site now houses a museum, a conference hall and a cenotaph honouring 
the victims of the bombing and every survivor who has since died. As of last 
August that number had reached 297,684.

City planners, though, faced a dilemma: how to incorporate Hiroshima’s tragic 
history within its postwar reincarnation. Kenji Shiga, director of the 
Hiroshima Peace Memorial Museum, said some officials favoured removing every 
last physical remnant of the tragedy, while others insisted on preserving 
evidence of the atomic bomb’s destructive power.

The outcome of that debate is visible in the remains of the Hiroshima 
Prefectural Industrial Promotion Hall, better known these days asthe A-bomb Dome
 <http://visithiroshima.net/world_heritage/a-bomb_dome.html>. “Some people 
thought it should be torn down and that Hiroshima should be a completely new 
city,” says Shiga. “Thehibakusha in particular didn’t want to see reminders of 
what had happened. That was one example of how difficult it was – and still is 
– to strike a balance between recognising the facts of history and building a 
modern city.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Fstory-of-cities-hiroshima-japan-nuclear-destruction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a696cdc15c9844aa5f82386559c61ae6e3b7946%2F0_33_4978_2987%2F4978.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2324%3A%20how%20Hiroshima%20rose%20from%20the%20ashes%20of%20nuclear%20destruction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Fstory-of-cities-hiroshima-japan-nuclear-destruction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2324%3A%20how%20Hiroshima%20rose%20from%20the%20ashes%20of%20nuclear%20destruction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Fstory-of-cities-hiroshima-japan-nuclear-destruction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a696cdc15c9844aa5f82386559c61ae6e3b7946%2F0_33_4978_2987%2F4978.jpg>
 The A-bomb Dome on the banks of the Ota, Hiroshima’s main river. Photograph: 
Justin McCurry for the Guardian 
The A-bomb Dome’s future was secured in the mid-1960s, when officials agreed 
to preserve it; in 1996it became a Unesco world heritage site 
<http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/775>. Today, it stands as one of the few relics 
of a Hiroshima that not many of its 1.2 million residents are now old enough to 
remember. Younger citizens fret over the fortunes of the local baseball and 
football teams, the Hiroshima Toyo Carp and Sanfrecce Hiroshima. Their hometown 
is now considered so typical of Japan’s cities that firms often market new 
products here before deciding whether to sell them nationwide.


The A-bomb Dome, the Peace Park and preserved buildings such as the former 
Hiroshima branch of the Bank ofJapan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> 
are the only architectural reminders of the attack. Elsewhere, Hiroshima looks 
much like any other Japanese city: featureless office and apartment blocks, 
pockets of neon-lit nightlife, and the ubiquitous convenience stores and chain 
coffee shops. Looking down from a pedestrian bridge at trams and taxis 
negotiating their way through streets lined with office buildings and chain 
restaurants, the overriding impression is of a prosperous, friendly city that 
has come to terms with its past. But with adult survivors now in their 80s and 
90s, fears are growing that memories of the city’s dark history will die out 
along with the last of those who bore witness to the violent dawn of the atomic 
age.

Story of cities #25: Shannon – a tiny Irish town inspires China’s economic boom
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/19/story-of-cities-25-shannon-ireland-china-economic-boom>
The 183,519 registered hibakusha of Hiroshima and Nagasaki are entitled to a 
monthly allowance and free medical care. Many are succumbing to illnesses that 
are associated with old age but which could be connected to their exposure to 
radiation, as documented by theRadiation Effects Research Foundation 
<http://www.rerf.jp/radefx/index_e.html>, a Japan and US-funded body set up in 
1975 to investigate the health effects among Japan’s nuclear survivors.


“The cancer rate among elderly A-bomb survivors is high,” according to Tanaka. 
“Many A-bomb survivors have been fighting various cancers and other illnesses 
typically caused by radiation, such as heart problems, cataracts and leukaemia. 
There are very few survivors who have not experienced health problems as 
they’ve grown older.”

The city they leave behind will be lasting testament to the horror they 
experienced, and to their determination to rebuild against the odds, according 
to Hiroshima’s mayor, Kazumi Matsui. “Humans destroyed Hiroshima, but humans 
also rebuilt it,” he says. “This is a holy site … somewhere people can come to 
compare the horrors of the past with the city Hiroshima has become today.”


Does your city have a little-known story that made a major impact on its 
development? Please share it in the comments below or on Twitter using 
#storyofcities
 