
The ground heaved sharply upward and children swarmed out of classrooms like 
bees from a hive. They hung off fences to stop themselves from falling, and 
watched as the swimming pool sloshed half its water out on to the ground. Then 
the earth jolted back downward. It was 10.37am on 2 February 1931 – the first 
day back from holidays.

Guy Natusch, then 10 years old, stood outside his Napier school and watched as 
the pavement rose up and surged at him. “It was just an extraordinary event,” 
the 95-year-old remembers now. “It sticks in your mind.”

His teacher had showed “remarkable control” when the quake initially struck, 
as children shot to their feet. “She said, ‘Sit down,’ and we did. Then when it 
eased off, we quietly filed outside. I will never forget that.” That’s when the 
second wave hit.

“We were overwhelmed by the events,” Natusch says. “The teachers marshalled us 
together and said: ‘Those of you who know the way home can go.’” So he did. But 
when he got back, the little boy found his home was shattered. “It suffered 
pretty badly,” Natusch says, with some understatement.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fstory-of-cities-napier-disaster-art-deco-renaissance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74ab20b08dabedea61cb9919e81a5f9d417487e5%2F0_95_1697_2121%2F1697.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2323%3A%20how%20disaster%20sparked%20Napier's%20art%20deco%20renaissance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fstory-of-cities-napier-disaster-art-deco-renaissance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2323%3A%20how%20disaster%20sparked%20Napier%27s%20art%20deco%20renaissance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fstory-of-cities-napier-disaster-art-deco-renaissance%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74ab20b08dabedea61cb9919e81a5f9d417487e5%2F0_95_1697_2121%2F1697.jpg>
 Vehicles lie in a collapsed road after the Hawke’s Bay earthquake. Photograph: 
Napier Art Deco Trust 
When the Hawke’s Bay earthquake 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1931_Hawke%27s_Bay_earthquake> was finally over, 
it would prove to be New Zealand’s most devastating natural disaster. The force 
was equivalent to the detonation of 100m tonnes of TNT.

Buildings throughout Napier were levelled under the power of the 7.8 magnitude 
quake. Structures swayed, their walls swelling before falling to pieces in the 
streets, crushing vehicles and people. The ornate parapets, facades and 
cornices of the city’s Edwardian and Georgian architecture crumbled. When the 
rocking finally stopped and the official count was made, 256 people across the 
region were dead.

The army built makeshift shelters. An emergency hospital 
<http://paperspast.natlib.govt.nz/cgi-bin/paperspast?a=d&d=AS19310204.1.7&e=03-02-1931-13-02-1931--10--1----0earthquake-->
 was set up at the local racecourse, where doctors operated on victims beneath 
the grandstand. A newspaper reporter arrived at night to find “a city of the 
dead, except for the glow of a land fire, and the lights of ships”.

Natusch’s father, a local architect, eventually took his son back into Napier 
to see what had been wrought. Natusch remembers rubble all around them as they 
wandered through the streets of their broken city.

But aside from the buildings, he also saw a changed landscape. The earth had 
been forced up from the sea – more than 2,000 hectares pushed up an average of 
two metres. The spit that once punctuated the seafront had disappeared; the 
water had receded back and swampland had been drained, creating an entirely 
new, blank canvas for the coastal city. And Napier’s response was as creative 
as it was dramatic.

‘Like walking through a film set’

When tourists visit Napier today, they come to appreciate the results of the 
rebuild. Pastel-coloured facades are inlaid with car-bonnet like ornamentation. 
Large arches are adorned with bold, square lettering. A copper dome sits atop a 
corner clock tower. Even the local McDonald’s is housed inside a building where 
customers are welcomed through two thick columns.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fstory-of-cities-napier-disaster-art-deco-renaissance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1976aba56ef4a40f1a6c7dc30b738a4b3fb9bc5a%2F746_0_3542_2125%2F3542.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2323%3A%20how%20disaster%20sparked%20Napier's%20art%20deco%20renaissance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fstory-of-cities-napier-disaster-art-deco-renaissance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2323%3A%20how%20disaster%20sparked%20Napier%27s%20art%20deco%20renaissance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fstory-of-cities-napier-disaster-art-deco-renaissance%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1976aba56ef4a40f1a6c7dc30b738a4b3fb9bc5a%2F746_0_3542_2125%2F3542.jpg>
 Napier as it looks today. Photograph: Alamy 
The city now has one of the most striking collections of art deco buildings in 
the world. More than 160 were built in the years after the earthquake; 120 
still remain. It is common to hear tourists say that it’s like walking through 
a film set.

When guide Maxine Anderson, a fourth generation Napier resident, takes those 
visitors on walking tours of the city, she is regularly asked the same 
question: “How did these design features get down here in the midst of the 
Great Depression?”

Much of that rests on the shoulders of Stanley Natusch, Guy Natusch’s uncle, 
who in 1925 had visited theExposition of Modern Industrial and Decorative Arts 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_Exposition_of_Modern_Industrial_and_Decorative_Arts>
 in Paris. It first showcased a new style to the world. It was bold and simple 
but, in its way, ornate. Its architecture featured simple block-like buildings 
stylised with distinctive facades. It was also cheap. The style was not yet 
known as art deco, but it was the one that Stanley thought would suit the great 
new experiment of Napier.

The rebuilders achieved a miracle. Napier was a small city and the earthquake 
was devastating
Guy Natusch 
Plans were drawn up under the guidance of new city commissioners that the 
government put in place in the earthquake’s wake. Five rival architects, 
includingCT Natusch and Sons 
<http://www.teara.govt.nz/en/biographies/3n2/natusch-charles-tilleard> (which 
was a major practice in the region), were brought together to work on a scheme 
that would unify Napier under a common theme. The new buildings would be 
partially inspired by the work of architectsFrank Lloyd Wright  
<http://www.biography.com/people/frank-lloyd-wright-9537511>and Louis Sullivan 
<http://louissullivanfilm.com/sullivan/>. There would be hints of Spanish 
mission style and stripped classical but the dominant style would be art deco.

“In the devastation of the city they were starting from scratch,” says Guy 
Natusch. “The art deco style was almost a natural evolution … it was just a 
coincidence, if you like.”

He says that in 1931, just like any time in history, architects would detail 
their buildings using the decorative motifs of that age. “It was expected that 
they would use their experience and adapt to the conditions.” The architects 
didn’t realise they were doing anything other than their job. But nowhere else 
was there a city being entirely rebuilt in the middle of thegreatest ever 
global financial crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/jun/17/remember-great-depression-no-doesnt-seem-anyone-does>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fstory-of-cities-napier-disaster-art-deco-renaissance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1bf33bed124669cdb63406df9adc968673bcb94%2F0_317_5042_3027%2F5042.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2323%3A%20how%20disaster%20sparked%20Napier's%20art%20deco%20renaissance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fstory-of-cities-napier-disaster-art-deco-renaissance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2323%3A%20how%20disaster%20sparked%20Napier%27s%20art%20deco%20renaissance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fstory-of-cities-napier-disaster-art-deco-renaissance%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1bf33bed124669cdb63406df9adc968673bcb94%2F0_317_5042_3027%2F5042.jpg>
 Napier’s clock tower and Masonic Hotel. Photograph: Alamy 
During the creation of the new plans, New Zealand’s building code was also 
rewritten to include much morestringent measures 
<http://www.nzsee.org.nz/db/Bulletin/Archive/31(3)0139.pdf> for protection 
against earthquakes. Reinforced concrete had been used in buildings throughout 
Napier as a cost effective alternative to brick. Many low-rise buildings that 
had been built with this method were ones that had proved sturdiest through the 
earthquake.

Art deco structures are generally built from reinforced concrete and in Napier 
most were low rise.Such buildings 
<http://theconstructor.org/earthquake/earthquakes-effects-reinforced-concrete-buildings/3790/>
 are typically made using a concrete frame. Earthquakes generate inertia in 
buildings but with reinforced concrete structures and their frames, most of the 
building mass is at floor level. This helps disperse that inertia into the 
foundations and into the ground.

The new building code added to this by recommending standards of design and 
construction. Masonry buildings, for example, had to be firmly bonded, with 
parts tied together so the entire structure would move as a unit. There are 
still only four buildings in Hawke’s Bay taller than five storeys. Art deco, it 
seems, was practical as well as vogue.

Six months after the earthquake, construction of the city’s first new building 
began – designed by CT Natusch and Sons.The Market Reserve Building 
<http://www.napier.govt.nz/services/planning-and-resource-consents/heritage-buildings/building?rid=28>
 was grand and bold with wide window arches. But its creators wanted to be even 
bolder. So instead of welding its steel frame, as was the norm, they decided to 
use rivets. It would be louder, a statement. The whole city would know that the 
rebuild had begun.

While the government offered relief through an emergency earthquake fund and 
loans, many building owners were forced to continue paying off the mortgage on 
their old, destroyed buildings, as very few had insurance. They also had to pay 
off their new building. “It’s a wonder that they could afford to spend anything 
on beautifying them,” says Sally Jackson, the general manager of the city’sArt 
Deco Trust <http://www.artdeconapier.com/>. “But they did.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fstory-of-cities-napier-disaster-art-deco-renaissance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1883089991a1349b0040297993687e1220fcc51d%2F0_351_7000_4321%2F7000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2323%3A%20how%20disaster%20sparked%20Napier's%20art%20deco%20renaissance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fstory-of-cities-napier-disaster-art-deco-renaissance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2323%3A%20how%20disaster%20sparked%20Napier%27s%20art%20deco%20renaissance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fstory-of-cities-napier-disaster-art-deco-renaissance%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1883089991a1349b0040297993687e1220fcc51d%2F0_351_7000_4321%2F7000.jpg>
 Concrete structures, such as Napier’s National Tobacco Company building, tend 
to stand up firmly under pressure. Photograph: Tim Whittaker Photography 
Ltd/Napier Art Deco Trust 
From the creation of that first structure, the rebuild accelerated – within 
two years, the whole central city had been reconstructed. “They achieved a 
miracle, really,” Natusch says. “Napier was a small city of 30,000, so the 
earthquake was devastating.” He puts this impressive feat down to the vision of 
the commissioners, and the follow-through of the architects.

People soon swarmed to the region to find work in a booming building sector. 
Factory wages rose along with productivity and by early 1933 the city was 
celebrating a “New Napier”.

The earthquake’s destruction had allowed the city’s planners to make some 
changes. Streets were widened, veranda widths were standardised to keep kerbs 
free from obstruction, and power and phone lines were buried under footpaths. 
Trams and tramlines that had previously been a financial burden to the council 
were removed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fstory-of-cities-napier-disaster-art-deco-renaissance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F509017f7d5318d26255c010b0f8a43d674952767%2F0_184_3840_4800%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2323%3A%20how%20disaster%20sparked%20Napier's%20art%20deco%20renaissance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fstory-of-cities-napier-disaster-art-deco-renaissance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2323%3A%20how%20disaster%20sparked%20Napier%27s%20art%20deco%20renaissance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fstory-of-cities-napier-disaster-art-deco-renaissance%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F509017f7d5318d26255c010b0f8a43d674952767%2F0_184_3840_4800%2F3840.jpg>
 A parade works its way down Napier’s main streets as part of the city’s annual 
art deco festival. Photograph: Napier Art Deco Trust 
Debris that had been left by landslides and collapsed buildings became the 
land on which the city’s seaside promenade was built. Gardens, memorials and a 
soundshell were all constructed there.

Then, the people who had been evacuated from the city in the earthquake’s 
aftermath came back. What they saw was a city changed. Gone were the showy 
buildings that had once characterised the town centre. In their place were 
bright colours and sharp, block-like creations.

At first it was hard to reconcile. “It was all quite a shock for them,” says 
Anderson. She remembers stories her grandmother and mother would tell about 
coming home to Napier: “It was bare, to their eyes. The streets were wide. The 
wires and poles were gone. Above all, the buildings were coloured. It was a 
huge change.”

Its citizens became accustomed to their new surroundings. Children like 
Anderson grew up with them, and their curious pocket of 1930s architecture 
became the norm.

Natusch, who grew up to design many of Napier’s buildings himself at the 
family practice, says there was a tendency in architectural circles to view art 
deco in a cynical light. “Substantially, it is an applied decoration to simple, 
straightforward buildings … but 50 years later people started to open their 
eyes and say, ‘Gosh, aren’t these fascinating’.”

It was not until the 1980s that its residents started to realise that Napier 
was quite unique. “People were finally getting their heads around this style 
that they had lived with for so long, but hadn’t appreciated,” says Jackson. At 
that time, some of the city’s “outdated” art deco buildings were being pulled 
down by developers who wanted to put more modern glass and aluminium office 
blocks in their place. Citizens planned a protest; a walk through the city was 
organised to show support for retaining Napier’s distinctive character. Around 
200 people were expected. Roughly 1,100 turned up. “It gave the city 
confidence,” Jackson says. “People saw the importance of the city in terms of 
its heritage.”

Story of cities #24: how Hiroshima rose from the ashes of nuclear destruction
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/18/story-of-cities-hiroshima-japan-nuclear-destruction>
The Art Deco Trust was formed on the back of that movement. It now organises 
the walking tours Anderson leads and puts on an annual art deco festival which 
has been going 28 years and attracts up to 40,000 people from around the world. 
Last year’s event drew $11m (£5.3m) in economic value to the city.

Jackson says the next step is to get Napier recognised as a Unesco world 
heritage site. <http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/> She has travelled to other art 
deco centres, like New York andsouth beach in Miami 
<http://www.miaminewtimes.com/arts/the-ten-best-art-deco-buildings-in-miami-beach-6517806>
, “but they are art deco in the glamour era. Ours is Depression-era art deco,” 
she says. “Napier has a completely different look and feel.”

When tourists ask Anderson how a small city in the South Pacific came to house 
the highest concentration of art deco buildings in the world she takes her time 
to answer. She shows them around Napier, pointing out each building’s unique 
characteristics and how they were created from the rubble of devastation. There 
was something good and special to come out the disaster that struck on that 
school morning of 1931.

“It’s like a renaissance,” Anderson says of the rebuild. “It has given us a 
sense of identity and a sense of pride.”


Does your city have a little-known story that made a major impact on its 
development? Please share it in the comments below or on Twitter using 
#storyofcities
 