
Take an old bicycle. Paint it white. Leave it anywhere in the city. Tell 
people to use it. This was the firsturban bike-sharing 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_bicycle-sharing_systems> concept in 
history. Launched in Amsterdam in the 1960s, it was called theWitte Fietsenplan 
(the “white bicycle plan”). And it was not a great success.

In fact, the plan was just another wild initiative by which Provo 
<http://www.bl.uk/learning/histcitizen/21cc/counterculture/assaultonculture/provo/provo.html>
, an infamous group of Dutch anarchist activists, wanted to provoke the 
establishment and change society. But eventually the idea would revolutionise 
public transport across the world. Nowadays,hundreds of cities 
<https://www.statista.com/chart/3325/bike-sharing-systems-worldwide/> have 
bike-sharing systems, and the phenomenon is still growing.

 The original idea was floated on a summer’s day in 1965 as Provo’s answer to 
the perceived threats ofair pollution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/16/winter-smog-hits-worlds-cities-air-pollution-soars>
 and consumerism. In the middle of Amsterdam, the activists painted a small 
number of used bikes white, and issued a pamphlet stating that “the white bike 
symbolises simplicity and hygiene as opposed to the gaudiness and filth of the 
authoritarian car”. The white bicycles were left unlocked around the city, to 
be used by anyone in need of transport.

 “I was inspired by what happened in 17th-century Amsterdam,” explains 
industrial engineer Luud Schimmelpennink. The inventor of theWitte Fietsenplan 
is now an energetic octogenarian with keen, blue eyes under bushy eyebrows, and 
who still lives – and cycles – in the Dutch capital.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fstory-cities-amsterdam-bike-share-scheme%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6efe21aad91ceee98bf3e95259bc632ed59c2d2e%2F38_22_2041_2944%2F2041.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2330%3A%20how%20this%20Amsterdam%20inventor%20gave%20bike-sharing%20to%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fstory-cities-amsterdam-bike-share-scheme%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2330%3A%20how%20this%20Amsterdam%20inventor%20gave%20bike-sharing%20to%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fstory-cities-amsterdam-bike-share-scheme%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6efe21aad91ceee98bf3e95259bc632ed59c2d2e%2F38_22_2041_2944%2F2041.jpg>
 White-bike wedding: Sara Duijs’ unconventional marriage to Rob Stolk, October 
1965. Photograph: AP 
 “In that era, Amsterdam doubled in size in a relatively short time, and it 
became blocked by all the carriages trying to get through. So the council set 
up ‘carriage squares’ on the outskirts of the city, where people could leave 
their carriage in order to continue by foot. This was exactly what Provo 
wanted: to make people leave their cars behind in order to continue by white 
bike.”

 “We were young and we thought we could change the world,” remembers Sara 
Stolk-Duijs, who was involved in Provo as a teenager. “The white bike was a 
statement against the growing number of cars, which was areal problem in 
Amsterdam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/may/05/amsterdam-bicycle-capital-world-transport-cycling-kindermoord>
. The city simply deal couldn’t with all that traffic. It polluted the air and 
children couldn’t safely play in the streets any more.”

 Stolk-Duijs even got married on a white bike, which caused a sensation in her 
hometown of Zaandam due to Provo’s notoriety. “To get married was very 
bourgeois of course, but in those days you had to if you wanted to live 
together as a couple. So we decided to do something fun. We took the bike of my 
future husband’s recently deceased grandfather, painted it white and rode it to 
the town hall, where we were met by fellow Provos. There was a lot of press.”

 The Witte Fietsenplan may have attracted much attention, but it was 
short-lived. The free white bikes were quickly removed by the police, who were 
hostile to Provo’s anarchist initiatives. But for Schimmelpennink, and for 
bike-share schemes, this was just the beginning.

“The first Witte Fietsenplan was just a symbolic thing,” he says. “We painted 
a few bikes white, that was all. Things got more serious when I became a member 
of the Amsterdam city council two years later.”

 Schimmelpennink seized this opportunity to present a more elaborate Witte 
Fietsenplan. “My idea was that the municipality of Amsterdam would distribute 
10,000 white bikes over the city, for everyone to use,” he explains. “I made 
serious calculations. It turned out that a white bicycle – per person, per 
kilometre – would cost the municipality only 10% of what it contributed to 
public transport per person per kilometre.”

 The council unanimously rejected the plan. “They said that the bicycle 
belongs to the past. They saw a glorious future for the car.” Schimmelpennink 
laughs heartily as he remembers – but he was not in the least discouraged.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0gIs-HNA_rk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0gIs-HNA_rk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0gIs-HNA_rk&media=>
 Luud Schimmelpennink launching his electricWitkarren scheme in 1974 
“I said, ‘You people don’t understand the power of this system. It’s a form of 
individual public transport. But if you want, I can do the same with cars.’” 
And so he went on to develop a system for sharing small electric cars, known as
Witkarren.

 Thanks to the influence of the socialist politician Ed van Thijn, who 
believed in the project, Schimmelpennink got the chance to realise his idea in 
1974 – but with only one station and four electric cars. To be able to use a
witkar, one needed to become a member and pay a small contribution per mile. 
The whole thing functioned on a computer system that was primitive, but way 
ahead of its time.

 “It was a miracle we were able to pull it off,” Schimmelpennink recalls. “In 
the beginning, the police would drive behind thewitkarren to see if anything 
would go wrong. At night we would park the cars in a church, because we were 
afraid they would be stolen. But in order to make it a success, we needed to 
have a network of at least 25 stations – and in the end, we were unable to 
finance the extension of the network. That’s why it didn’t work out. But there 
werewitkarren on the streets for 10 years, and we proved that a system like 
that could function.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fstory-cities-amsterdam-bike-share-scheme%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F813e69c560c834dc7d10e84e04099e2f1274d848%2F0_97_1675_2092%2F1675.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2330%3A%20how%20this%20Amsterdam%20inventor%20gave%20bike-sharing%20to%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fstory-cities-amsterdam-bike-share-scheme%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2330%3A%20how%20this%20Amsterdam%20inventor%20gave%20bike-sharing%20to%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fstory-cities-amsterdam-bike-share-scheme%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F813e69c560c834dc7d10e84e04099e2f1274d848%2F0_97_1675_2092%2F1675.jpg>
 John Lennon and Yoko Ono with a white bicycle during their visit to Amsterdam 
in 1969. Photograph: AFP/Getty Images 
 Schimmelpennink never stopped believing in bike sharing either, and in the 
mid 90s, two Danes asked for his help to set up a system in Copenhagen. The 
result was the world’s first large-scale bike-share programme. It worked on a 
deposit: “You dropped a coin in the bike and when you returned it, you got your 
money back. A lot of bikes got stolen though, because the users could remain 
anonymous.”

After setting up the Danish system, Schimmelpennink decided to try his luck 
again in theNetherlands <https://www.theguardian.com/world/netherlands> – and 
this time, he succeeded in arousing the interest of the Dutch Ministry of 
Transport. “Times had changed,” he recalls. “People had become more 
environmentally conscious, and the Danish experiment had proved that bike 
sharing was a real possibility.”

 A new Witte Fietsenplan was launched in 1999 in Amsterdam. Riding a white 
bike was no longer free of charge; it cost oneguilder 
<http://www.britannica.com/topic/guilder> per trip and payment was made with a 
chip card developed by Postbank, a Dutch bank. Schimmelpennink designed 
conspicuous, sturdy white bikes locked in special racks which could be opened 
with the chip card – the plan started with 250 bikes, distributed over five 
stations.

 “It was great to work with Schimmelpennink; he was very enthusiastic, full of 
ideas and always one step ahead,” says Theo Molenaar, a system designer for the 
project. “I remember when we were testing the bike racks, he announced that he 
had already designed better ones. But of course, we had to go through with the 
ones we had.”

 The system, however, was prone to vandalism and theft. “After every weekend 
there would always be a couple of bikes missing,” Molenaar says. “I really have 
no idea what people did with them, because they could instantly be recognised 
as white bikes.”

 But the biggest blow came when Postbank decided to abolish the chip card, 
because it wasn’t profitable. “That chip card was pivotal to the system,” 
Molenaar says. “To continue the project we would need to set up another system, 
but the business partners lost interest.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fstory-cities-amsterdam-bike-share-scheme%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53bea7c7b65ff003c8e7f4fda5f39dd9dbc12013%2F0_16_4148_2488%2F4148.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2330%3A%20how%20this%20Amsterdam%20inventor%20gave%20bike-sharing%20to%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fstory-cities-amsterdam-bike-share-scheme%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2330%3A%20how%20this%20Amsterdam%20inventor%20gave%20bike-sharing%20to%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fstory-cities-amsterdam-bike-share-scheme%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53bea7c7b65ff003c8e7f4fda5f39dd9dbc12013%2F0_16_4148_2488%2F4148.jpg>
 China is now the world leader in shared bikes. Photograph: Lucas 
Schifres/Getty Images 
 Schimmelpennink was disappointed, but – characteristically – not for long. In 
2002 he got a call from the French advertising corporation JC Decaux, who 
wanted to set up his bike-sharing scheme in Vienna. “That went really well. 
After Vienna, they set up a system in Lyon. Then in 2007, Paris followed. That 
was a decisive moment in the history of bike sharing.”

 The huge and unexpected success of the Parisian bike-sharing programme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2008/oct/18/cyclingholidays-ethicalholidays-paris>
 (which now boasts more than 20,000 bicycles) inspired cities all over the 
world to set up their own schemes, all modelled on Schimmelpennink’s. “It’s 
wonderful that this happened,” he says. “But financially I didn’t really 
benefit from it, because I never filed for a patent.”

 By the end of 2014, the number of shared bikes in the world amounted to 
almost one million 
<https://www.statista.com/chart/3325/bike-sharing-systems-worldwide/>. China 
led the charts with more than 750,000 shared bikes in 237 cities, followed by 
France with almost 43,000 bikes in 38 cities. Britain was seventh highest with
almost 11,000 bikes 
<http://bike-sharing.blogspot.nl/2015/01/the-bike-sharing-world-2014-year-end.html>
. Only last month, the Dutch city of Rotterdam announced yet anotherWitte 
Fietsenplan, this time using more than 450 electric bicycles and 20 stations, 
to be implemented in 2017.

Nowadays 38% of all trips are made by bike in Amsterdam and, along with 
Copenhagen, it is feted as one of the two most cycle-friendly capitals in the 
world – but the city never got anotherWitte Fietsenplan. “I guess the reason 
why it never worked out is that everybody in Amsterdam already has a bike,” 
says Molenaar.

Story of cities #31: Skopje plans for the future by fixating on its ancient 
past
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/27/story-cities-skopje-plans-future-ancient-past>
“Nonsense,” says Schimmelpennink. “People who travel on the underground 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amsterdam_Metro> don’t carry bikes around. But 
often they need additional transport to reach their final destination. If a 
bike-sharing system could take care of that, it would reduce the costs of 
public transport enormously.

“I really think it’s strange and unreasonable that Amsterdam doesn’t have a 
proper bike-sharing system. In the 60s we didn’t stand a chance because people 
were prepared to give their lives to keep cars in the city. But that mentality 
has totally changed. Today everybody longs for cities that are not dominated by 
cars.”

 At 80 years of age, Schimmelpennink is still active – and still hopeful. The 
godfather of bike sharing is currently working on a new system of shared 
electric cars that will connect theAmsterdam Hermitage 
<http://www.hermitage.nl/en/> with the Van Gogh <http://www.vangoghmuseum.nl/en>
 andStedelijk <http://www.stedelijk.nl/en> museums. He has already found a 
business partner.

“I have always had a passion for progress,” he says. “So I am giving it one 
more try. It would be great if I could make this work before I die.”

Does your city have a little-known story that made a major impact on its 
development? Please share it in the comments below or on Twitter using 
#storyofcities
 