
Given the opera’s predilection for consumptive courtesans and misogynistic 
murderers, scheduling one for the festive season can be a tricky business. But 
Richard Strauss’s 1911 Der Rosenkavalier might be the ideal choice. It has 
waltzes, a glamorous Viennese setting and a love story with a (largely) happy 
ending. And yet beneath its veil of nostalgia there lurks a more urgent, 
politically minded work, emphasised in directorRobert Carsen’s new production 
<http://www.roh.org.uk/productions/der-rosenkavalier-by-robert-carsen>, which 
is set at the time of composition.

Strauss is not always associated with political savvy. He was infamously 
connected to the Nazis in later life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/may/23/richard-strauss-composer-classical-music-nazi-war-criminal>
, as the first president of their “state music bureau”. But at the start of his 
career, he refused to kowtow to authority. His theatrical breakthrough, the 
queasily erotic Salome (1905), prompted Kaiser Wilhelm to warn Strauss that he 
could get into a lot of trouble. Elektra, which followed in 1909, was no less 
pugnacious, with the Freudian connotations of Hugo von Hofmannsthal’s libretto 
framing the ancient House of Atreus as a possible allegory for a crumbling 
dynastic Europe. But when Strauss and Hofmannsthal followed that discordant 
tragedy with Der Rosenkavalier, a bawdy farce with a whimsical streak, many 
thought the pair had taken a feeble step back from the brink.

Inspiration came in part from Claude Terrasse and Louis Artus’s now forgotten 
operetta, L’Ingénu libertin, which Count Harry Kessler, Hofmannsthal’s friend 
and (uncredited) collaborator, had seen in Paris in early 1908. Mixing elements 
from that popular comedy with Molière and Hogarth, Hofmannsthal placed the 
action in a “half-imaginary, half-real” Vienna during the 1740s, “the early 
years of the reign of Maria Theresa”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fstrauss-rosenkavalier-a-dance-to-the-music-of-time-gavin-plumley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16cdc562cb62890dd74f2111bde2405ee919b3f9%2F0_370_3501_2100%2F3501.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Strauss's%20Rosenkavalier%3A%20a%20dance%20to%20the%20music%20of%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fstrauss-rosenkavalier-a-dance-to-the-music-of-time-gavin-plumley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Strauss%27s%20Rosenkavalier%3A%20a%20dance%20to%20the%20music%20of%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fstrauss-rosenkavalier-a-dance-to-the-music-of-time-gavin-plumley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16cdc562cb62890dd74f2111bde2405ee919b3f9%2F0_370_3501_2100%2F3501.jpg>
 Amanda Roocroft as the Marschallin and Sarah Connolly as Octavian in ENO’s Der 
Rosenkavalier by David McVicar, 2012. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the 
Guardian 
The story begins with the Marschallin, the wife of an Austrian prince and 
soldier. A night of unbridled passion with Count Octavian, the princess’s young 
lover, is interrupted by the arrival of her cousin, the boorish and lecherous 
Baron Ochs. He has chosen to marry the nouveau-riche Sophie and asks the 
Marschallin to select an emissary for his silver rose, the traditional symbol 
of engagement. But when the chosen Octavian arrives at Sophie’s palace, they 
immediately fall in love, and a plan is hatched to expose the two-faced Ochs so 
that the young couple can live happily ever after.

Der Rosenkavalier is a tale of social and sexual hypocrisy

Such a delicious confection might seem nothing more than a fable of “the old 
Vienna” described at the beginning of The Third Man, “with its Strauss music, 
its glamour and easy charm”. The Strauss to which Graham Greene refers is not 
the Bavarian Richard, of course, but the native Johann, the city’s “Waltz 
King”, though his namesake was quick to mimic those triple-time dances in Der 
Rosenkavalier. Rather than the waltz’s courtly associations, however, Strauss 
emphasises the transgressive side of Austria’s most cherished dance, with its 
breathless caesuras and scandalously intimate hold, not least when Baron Ochs 
sings his own version in Act II, “with me, with me, no night is too long”.

The whole opera is a happy mishmash of Viennese memories, including references 
to Mozart’s Le Nozze di Figaro, first seen in the imperial capital in 1786. 
But, like Figaro, like the cross-society couplings of Arthur Schnitzler’s 
scandalous La Ronde, published in Vienna in 1903 and promptly banned by the 
censors, Der Rosenkavalier is a tale of social and sexual hypocrisy. Only sex 
can cross the class distinctions manifest in Hofmannsthal’s libretto, “with its 
ceremony, its social layers, its manner of speaking”. During the last act, when 
Ochs is discovered in flagrante delicto with Mariandel – supposedly the 
Marschallin’s maid, though really Octavian in disguise – that structure 
collapses. Not least as the Baron’s undoing is witnessed by everyone, “from 
police constable and innkeeper to the great lady, from the palace through the 
backstairs world of the footmen to the peasant in the farmyard”, as 
Hofmannsthal explained to Strauss.

This is, after all, a society on the threshold of change – the Enlightenment 
or the modern era – described by cultural historianCarl Schorske 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/30/carl-e-schorske> as “the passing 
of the aristocracy to the ennobled bourgeoisie [which] must learn to yield 
power to the new forces of democracy in the 20th century”. Born in Vienna, 
Hofmannsthal knew well the shifting forces of his city during the fin de 
siècle. From an early age, he was a central figure in Jung Wien, a literary 
group including Schnitzler and the acidic satirist Karl Kraus that gathered 
daily at the Café Griensteidl, where they sat elbow to elbow with the 
philosopher and social reformer Rudolf Steiner, Theodor Herzl, the father of 
Zionism, and composer Arnold Schoenberg, the city’s self-appointed emancipator 
of dissonance.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fstrauss-rosenkavalier-a-dance-to-the-music-of-time-gavin-plumley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd207dad6fff7d97b826facc110278f2292d9efdd%2F0_343_2692_3362%2F2692.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Strauss's%20Rosenkavalier%3A%20a%20dance%20to%20the%20music%20of%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fstrauss-rosenkavalier-a-dance-to-the-music-of-time-gavin-plumley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Strauss%27s%20Rosenkavalier%3A%20a%20dance%20to%20the%20music%20of%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fstrauss-rosenkavalier-a-dance-to-the-music-of-time-gavin-plumley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd207dad6fff7d97b826facc110278f2292d9efdd%2F0_343_2692_3362%2F2692.jpg>
 Lars Woldt as Baron Ochs and Tara Erraught as Octavian in Richard Jones’s 2014 
production for Glyndebourne. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
This band of modernists had come of age in trying times. The year in which 
both Hofmannsthal and Schoenberg were born, 1874, was one of particular 
upheaval, following the Panic of 1873, beginning in Vienna’s stock exchange and 
quickly spreading worldwide. Then, as now, opportunistic rightwing politicians 
blamed the liberals and their permissive credit policies for the troubles, all 
the time stoking antisemitic feeling. Imbalance and inequality were rife, but 
rather than addressing the tensions in his empire, Franz Josef I favoured 
political stagnation and monarchical constitutionalism, even to the extent of 
maintaining his right of veto over any law. Hofmannsthal was unabashed in 
expressing his dismay at the yawning gap that consequently emerged between a 
“ruling dynasty that is no longer connected by a single thread to any other 
people or any other race other than its own ancestors” and “the great, 
economically impoverished, mutually inimical masses”, as he explained to 
Kessler.

Strauss and Hofmannsthal constantly remind us that change, good or bad, is 
inevitable.

Although Hofmannsthal kept these thoughts at an allegorical distance in his 
literary and theatrical work, Carsen’s new production of Der Rosenkavalier 
promises to bring them into sharper focus. By setting the opera at the time of 
its creation, Carsen shows Vienna not as a nostalgic playground but as a 
teeming metropolis on the cusp of modernity, war and the end of empire. When, 
in act one, the Marschallin tells Octavian that she gets up in the middle of 
the night to stop the clocks, she is not only pondering the end of their 
relationship, but also of the world as she knows it. Strauss’s quicksilvering, 
melancholy harmonies during that scene and the urgent, conflicted music of the 
final act, when Octavian finally leaves the Marschallin, speak volumes.

What awaits the count and his beloved Sophie after the curtain falls? In the 
1740s, a young nobleman such as Octavian would doubtless have gone on to lead 
the militia in the casualty-strewn Silesian wars. His 20th-century counterpart 
could likewise have found himself commanding troops, but in a very different, 
even more dangerous conflict. It is telling that in her final line, Sophie 
sings, “it’s a dream; it cannot be real that we two are together”. And in 1911, 
that dream might not have lasted very long at all. Regardless of the prism 
through which we view Der Rosenkavalier, Strauss and Hofmannsthal constantly 
remind us that change, good or bad, is inevitable. Only the Marschallin appears 
to have learned that vital lesson. “One must be light, light of heart, light of 
hand, holding and taking, holding and letting go,” she tells her young lover. 
“Life punishes those who are not so and God has no mercy upon them.”

Like Octavian, we should heed her counsel and prepare for the future.

• Der Rosenkavalier is in rep at the Royal Opera House, London, from 17 
December to 24 January 
<http://www.roh.org.uk/productions/der-rosenkavalier-by-robert-carsen>. Box 
office: 020-7304 4000.

 