
Janette Sadik-Khan, who in alliance with her then-boss, New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> mayor Michael Bloomberg, 
arguably did as much to transform the city’s streetscape as anyone in its 
recent history, recalls an early moment when she wondered whether people were 
ready for such rapid change.

It was August 2008 and the city was experimenting with a so-called summer 
streets programme 
<http://www.nyc.gov/portal/site/nycgov/menuitem.c0935b9a57bb4ef3daf2f1c701c789a0/index.jsp?pageID=mayor_press_release&catID=1194&doc_name=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.nyc.gov%2Fhtml%2Fom%2Fhtml%2F2008a%2Fpr229-08.html&cc=unused1978&rc=1194&ndi=1>
, where almost seven miles of central streets were closed off to cars for three 
Saturday mornings in a row. The idea was not new – Bogotá introduced its 
equivalent,the Cicloviá 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/green-living-blog/2010/jun/16/cycling-ethical-living>
, in the 1970s – but it was entirely untested in New York.


“I remember, hours and hours before it opened, being out on the streets with 
my team and looking around, thinking, ‘What if no one shows up? What if this is 
a disaster?’,” said Sadik-Khan, who was Bloomberg’s transport commissioner from 
2007 until he left office in 2013.

“I remember being truly relieved when I saw people walking and biking, and 
kids out there playing. It turned out New Yorkers knew exactly what to do with 
their streets. We had 300,000 people coming to play, and cha cha, and take 
basketball lessons.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F11%2Fcycling-fights-new-york-mean-streets-janette-sadik-khan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc95fa9198d651843773cfaec51b7f10fcc372f7b%2F0_0_4288_2573%2F4288.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Streetfighting%20woman%3A%20inside%20the%20story%20of%20how%20cycling%20changed%20New%20York&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F11%2Fcycling-fights-new-york-mean-streets-janette-sadik-khan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Streetfighting%20woman%3A%20inside%20the%20story%20of%20how%20cycling%20changed%20New%20York&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F11%2Fcycling-fights-new-york-mean-streets-janette-sadik-khan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc95fa9198d651843773cfaec51b7f10fcc372f7b%2F0_0_4288_2573%2F4288.jpg>
 Brooklyn’s Prospect Park cycle lane – once described as ‘the most 
controversial slab of cement outside the Gaza Strip’. Photograph: Alamy 
Sadik-Khan remains best known for the rapid rollout of around 400 miles of 
cycling routes during her six-and-a-half years in charge of the $2bn (£1.4bn) 
annual budget of New York City’s Department of Transportation, and the later 
opening of theCiti Bike cycle share scheme <https://www.citibikenyc.com/>.


But in parallel she also oversaw a series of new rapid bus routes and the 
carving out of dozens of pedestrianised plazas from space previously reserved 
for cars, including the initially controversial remodelling of Times Square.

People take their streets very personally. They treat every parking space like 
it was their first-born child
Janette Sadik-Khan 
Sadik-Khan now advises other cities how to follow suit via the ex-mayor’s 
self-styled philanthropic consultancy 
<http://www.bloombergassociates.org/principal/janette-sadik-khan/>, Bloomberg 
Associates. She has also condensed her vision into a book,Streetfight: Handbook 
for an Urban Revolution 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Streetfight-Handbook-Revolution-Janette-Sadik-Khan/dp/0525429840>
.

She describes the approach as re-writing “the operating code of the street”. 
It is a perhaps uncomfortable philosophy for those, like previous generations 
of New Yorkers, used to being able to drive and park their cars more or less 
where they choose.

Urban transport is, Sadik-Khan argues, amid a “Copernican revolution” in which 
streets are remodelled around human beings, whether walking, cycling or on 
buses, rather than alone inside a speeding metal box.

“In the United States we spent the last century building our cities around the 
car, but we damaged our cities in the process and were really getting 
diminishing returns on that investment,” she said.


“If city residents don’t have a choice but to drive everywhere then our cities 
don’t stand a chance of surviving in this century. So we really do need to 
provide new choices for people to get around. We need to face the fact that the 
way our streets are designed has, in the past, made the decision for its 
residents.”

The intention under Bloomberg, she says, was “kind of flipping the script in 
how our streets were designed and who are they designed for”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F11%2Fcycling-fights-new-york-mean-streets-janette-sadik-khan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff41a003781cbe53fc05be4872b2b219ee57d6280%2F0_0_5544_3744%2F5544.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Streetfighting%20woman%3A%20inside%20the%20story%20of%20how%20cycling%20changed%20New%20York&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F11%2Fcycling-fights-new-york-mean-streets-janette-sadik-khan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Streetfighting%20woman%3A%20inside%20the%20story%20of%20how%20cycling%20changed%20New%20York&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F11%2Fcycling-fights-new-york-mean-streets-janette-sadik-khan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff41a003781cbe53fc05be4872b2b219ee57d6280%2F0_0_5544_3744%2F5544.jpg>
 A woman enjoys her morning coffee in the middle of Broadway in Times Square 
after it was closed to cars. Photograph: Seth Wenig/AP 
Such a revolution was, inevitably, not without controversy. All sorts of local 
lobby groups battled plans for separated cycle lanes, most famously over one 
eventually built outside Brooklyn’s Prospect Park, a route once described as 
“the most controversial slab of cement outside the Gaza Strip”.

A good deal of the obloquy focused personally on Sadik-Kahn, even though her 
strategy came fromBloomberg’s PlaNYC 
<http://www.nyc.gov/html/planyc/html/about/about.shtml>, his 2007 vision for 
making an expanding city more green and liveable. But she came to exemplify his 
shift on cycling issues, which had seen little focus under his first transport 
commissioner, Iris Weinshall.

Some critics labelled Sadik-Khan “brusque” 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2011/03/06/nyregion/06sadik-khan.html?_r=0> and 
uncompromising; others wondered whether such labels tend to stick more easily 
to the relatively rare women in positions of power.


“It’s fair to say that I grew a second skin over the course of six-and-a-half 
years,” she said. “There’s 8.4 million people in New York and I sometimes felt 
there were 8.4 million traffic engineers.

“People take their streets very personally. They treat every parking space 
like it was their first-born child. So it’s a fight. All 180 acres of streets 
that we gave back to people on foot and people on bikes and transit meant a 
hard-fought battle. I get it – transportation is local. People are passionate 
about their street, and when you talk about new ways to get around which aren’t 
about driving a lot of people really erupt.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F11%2Fcycling-fights-new-york-mean-streets-janette-sadik-khan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fffe7db387e4de264dea708e2b972d05b4701bfa9%2F0_85_5121_3072%2F5121.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Streetfighting%20woman%3A%20inside%20the%20story%20of%20how%20cycling%20changed%20New%20York&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F11%2Fcycling-fights-new-york-mean-streets-janette-sadik-khan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Streetfighting%20woman%3A%20inside%20the%20story%20of%20how%20cycling%20changed%20New%20York&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F11%2Fcycling-fights-new-york-mean-streets-janette-sadik-khan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fffe7db387e4de264dea708e2b972d05b4701bfa9%2F0_85_5121_3072%2F5121.jpg>
 Bike lane on Brooklyn Bridge. Photograph: imageBROKE/Rex/Shutterstock 
These days, she says with some justified satisfaction, polls show the changes 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/08/18/nyregion/what-new-yorkers-think-of-mayor-bloomberg.html?pagewanted=2&_r=0>
 are generally popular with New Yorkers. Other statistics are impressive, too.

Sadik-Khan’s old department produces a simple and illustrative graph 
<http://www.nyc.gov/html/dot/html/bicyclists/bikestats.shtml#statistics> 
plotting the changing risk of injury when cycling in New York against the 
number of cyclists doing it. From 2007 onwards the two lines diverge at steep 
angles. Even as cyclist numbers have more than doubled, the number of serious 
injuries has actually fallen.

Fittingly, as the employee of a billionaire entrepreneur, she sees such 
changes as not so much socially just as economically vital: “Transportation is 
not an ideology, it’s not a left or right thing. It’s about taking a look at 
the capital asset we have and using it in the most effective way possible.

You don’t have to have the most visionary mayor, a billion-dollar budget or 
years and years of modelling
Janette Sadik-Khan 
“For so long the way we measured transportation, the way we measured our 
streets, had been about the flow of traffic, how fast was traffic going, which 
ignores all the other ways a street is used.

“Our streets have been in this kind if suspended animation. They’re seen as 
there for all time. The result is that you’ve got dangerous, congested, 
economically under-performing streets. That strikes at the heart of the 
liveability and competitiveness of a city.”


In her new role Sadik-Khan has advised cities including Rio de Janeiro, Los 
Angeles, Mexico City and Detroit. One of her key messages, she says, is that 
radical changes need not necessarily take a long time or a big budget, or even 
a mayor like Bloomberg.

“There’s no question having a strong leader does help in establishing that 
vision, and supporting change when the status quo blowback begins,” she said. 
“But in New York we fundamentally rewrote the operating code of the streets, 
not with mega-projects and billions of dollars, but by adapting the space that 
was already there.

“That’s a really important lesson in many, many cities: you don’t have to have 
the most visionary mayor, you don’t have to have a billion-dollar budget, you 
don’t have to have years and years of modelling. Just by adapting the space 
that’s there you can make a huge difference.

“A lot of cities are wary of trying things, as they’re afraid they might not 
work. But there’s a lot you can do with paint, and planters and stones from old 
bridge projects. We closed Broadway from Times Square in a few months using 
only the materials we had in the transportation department’s arsenal.


“You can change a street on a trial basis using materials that are easily 
adjusted or can be removed if it doesn’t work out. It’s available and it can be 
done.”

Ride, hustle, kill, repeat: the underground cycle gangs of Los Angeles
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/sep/04/ride-hustle-kill-repeat-the-underground-cycle-gangs-of-los-angeles>
An example of this was the part-pedestrianisation of Times Square from 2009, 
achieved through the simple measure of blocking off Broadway with orange 
barrel-bollards. Even here, she recalls, there wasspace for last-minute 
improvisation <http://www.nytimes.com/2009/06/11/nyregion/11chairs.html>.

“When we were closing Times Square, and we were rolling out the orange 
barrels, we looked out at this two football fields-worth of asphalt and 
thought, ‘Oh my God, that’s a lot of space, and there’s nothing there.’ And 
that’s what led to the beach chairs.’”


The near-400 folding chairs, bought from a local hardware shop for about $11 
each when more permanent street furniture failed to arrive on time, showed the 
fundamental adaptability of New Yorkers, Sadik-Khan said.

“Again, the inspiration came out of necessity. But putting out those $11 beach 
chairs on Times Square was an interesting moment. People came out, and all 
people talked about was those chairs – the colour, the design. Not that we’d 
closed Times Square to cars.


“It was the same experience in so many of our projects: when you adapt the 
street, people adopt it. It’s almost like it’s always been there. You go to 
some of these plazas now and people have forgotten the way it used to be.”

Streetfight: Handbook for an Urban Revolution 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Streetfight-Handbook-Revolution-Janette-Sadik-Khan/dp/0525429840>
 by Janette Sadik-Khan was published this week

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion

 