
I grew up in suburban Toronto, the home of the largest streetcar network in 
the western hemisphere. As a child, I thought streetcars were the coolest way 
to get around the city, especially the older “red rocket” cars the Toronto 
Transit Commission (TTC) operated into the 1980s. The streetcars served the 
city’s most interesting neighbourhoods, adding a quiet rumble as they glided 
along its streets. Even the mazes of tracks and webs of overhead wires were 
visually striking.

After finishing school, however, I moved downtown and found myself relying on 
those streetcars that I loved as a child. At that point, the novelty soon wore 
out.

Toronto’s streetcar system, originally designed for a much smaller, 
pre-automobile city, quickly became a nuisance to ride. In rush-hour traffic, 
streetcars are slow, crowded, unreliable and prone to the dreaded “short-turn” 
– where they turn back before reaching their destination, in an attempt to 
stick to the schedule. What seemed unique and exciting as a child quickly 
became a hassle for the regular user.

And yet, Toronto’s streetcars – better known as trams in Europe – are an 
integral part of city life here. Nearly 300,000 daily passengers are served by 
the 250-strong fleet, with some routes scheduled to run at two-minute intervals 
during peak times. In Toronto, as in Amsterdam, Melbourne and Prague, trams are 
an essential part of the urban transport system – but why exactly? To tackle my 
long-held skepticism of America’s streetcar projects, I determined to take a 
road trip from Toronto to Miami to visit four streetcar cities: Detroit, 
Cincinnati, Atlanta andTampa <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/tampa>.

Toronto's streetcars are equivalent to New York’s yellow taxicabs or the 
gondolas of Venice, a symbol of the city

Clearly, streetcars do offer some advantages over buses. They provide a 
smoother ride, can carry more passengers (the TTC would require three buses to 
provide the same capacity as the one new, low-floor streetcarcurrently being 
added 
<http://metronews.ca/voices/ford-for-toronto/1105453/derailing-old-arguments-for-getting-rid-of-streetcars/>
 to the fleet), and run on clean electricity. They aren’t any slower than 
comparable bus routes on other streets – and, of course, they’re charming. 
Arguably, the streetcars of Toronto are equivalent to New York’s yellow cabs or 
the gondolas of Venice, an internationally recognised symbol of the city.

After the second world war, however, most North American cities abandoned 
their streetcar networks as ridership declined, car ownership soared, and the 
cost to renew streetcar infrastructure – footed mostly by cash-strapped private 
transit operators – proved too steep. In 1947 the cars were immortalised in 
Tennessee Williams’s playA Streetcar Named Desire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/78196/streetcar.named.desire>, sneered 
at by Blanche DuBois as “rattle-trap street-cars that bang through the [French] 
Quarter”. By 1965, only Toronto and a handful of US cities still operated these 
apparently outmoded means of urban transport.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F20%2Fstreetcars-of-desire-why-are-americans-obsessed-with-building-trams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F19%2F1424342950653%2F171c6c79-9f11-43eb-9d3e-4042643a1e7a-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Streetcars%20of%20desire%3A%20why%20are%20American%20cities%20obsessed%20with%20building%20trams%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F20%2Fstreetcars-of-desire-why-are-americans-obsessed-with-building-trams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Streetcars%20of%20desire%3A%20why%20are%20American%20cities%20obsessed%20with%20building%20trams%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F20%2Fstreetcars-of-desire-why-are-americans-obsessed-with-building-trams%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F19%2F1424342950653%2F171c6c79-9f11-43eb-9d3e-4042643a1e7a-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A streetcar on Spring Street, Melbourne. Photograph: David Wall/Alamy 
Yet by the late 1980s, streetcar lines were once again popping up in cities 
across the country. Originally, many of these new lines were short, “vintage” 
streetcar routes, mimicking New Orleans’ famousSt Charles Streetcar 
<http://www.neworleansonline.com/tools/transportation/gettingaround/streetcars.html>
 line. These heritage streetcars use antique or replica equipment and were 
mainly intended to cater to tourists, or to support downtown commerce or 
redevelopment.

Portland’s streetcar, opened in 2001, was the first new, modern streetcar 
system built in North America, and the operation – separate from the older 
Tri-Met light rail system – features sleek low-floor trams running on downtown 
streets. ThePortland <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/portland> service was 
not designed so much to appeal to tourists, but part of a strategy to foster 
redevelopment of its central core and inner city neighbourhoods.

The streetcar’s first phase connected the Pearl District, a declining 
industrial area north of Portland’s downtown core, to the city centre, the 
light rail system, and Portland State University. Today, the Pearl District is 
a vibrant residential and commercial area, with new condominiums and loft 
conversions replacing factories and disused rail yards. Nearly all streetcar 
systems in the US that opened after Portland’s followed the same model of a 
modern circulatory streetcar.

Walker’s prediction – that it would be faster to walk to the other end of the 
line – rang true

Today, the Portland system serves 20,000 riders daily. In 2007, it was 
credited in the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2007/10/24/automobiles/autospecial/24streetcar.html> 
for spurring $2.4bn in new commercial and residential projects in the Pearl 
District and South Waterfront, thoughsome critics claim 
<http://www.thetransportpolitic.com/2012/09/18/dont-forget-the-zoning/> that 
innovative zoning regulations and local demand should take most of the credit .


Seattle soon followed Portland’s lead and at the time of writing, Tacoma, 
Washington, Salt Lake City, Tuscon and Atlanta have also opened new modern 
streetcar lines, while Washington DC, Kansas City, Cincinnati, Detroit, St 
Louis, Milwaukee, and Charlotte, North Carolina are building or planning their 
own.


So why are American cities now rushing to build streetcars? According to 
prominent transit advocate Jarrett Walker 
<http://www.humantransit.org/2009/07/streetcars-an-inconvenient-truth.html>, a 
Portland native, streetcars attract more riders than buses. They’re fun to 
ride, and quieter and cleaner than diesel buses.According to Walker 
<http://www.myajc.com/news/news/opinion/streetcar-is-cool-but-will-it-be-useful/nXp6Y/#54fd191d.3910190.735604>
, politicians and planners in these cities hope that the “pleasant experience 
of riding the streetcar will make people value transit as a whole, as well as 
making downtown a more attractive place to live, shop, work and play.” But he 
also argues that streetcars are not fulfilling the role of providing quality 
transit.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F20%2Fstreetcars-of-desire-why-are-americans-obsessed-with-building-trams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F19%2F1424343291977%2F377288b9-7841-4ad2-ba3f-f2d90a671b7c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Streetcars%20of%20desire%3A%20why%20are%20American%20cities%20obsessed%20with%20building%20trams%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F20%2Fstreetcars-of-desire-why-are-americans-obsessed-with-building-trams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Streetcars%20of%20desire%3A%20why%20are%20American%20cities%20obsessed%20with%20building%20trams%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F20%2Fstreetcars-of-desire-why-are-americans-obsessed-with-building-trams%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F19%2F1424343291977%2F377288b9-7841-4ad2-ba3f-f2d90a671b7c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Streetcar construction in Detroit, Michigan. Photograph: Benjamin 
Beytekin/Corbis 
When I arrived in Atlanta, the third stop on my road trip, the new streetcar 
had been open for only a week. I waited 15 minutes for the next car to arrive 
after just missing it on its 3.7 kilometre one-way loop, which is too short to 
be of much practical use. Walker’s prediction – that it would be faster to walk 
to the other end of the line – rang true.

There are long-term plans to expand Atlanta’s streetcar system, although after 
costing nearly $100m to build, its future phases are yet to be funded. Right 
now, the system does little more than connect several of Atlanta’s top tourist 
attractions.

Of the four cities I visited, it’s Motor City’s line that holds the most 
promise. Unlike Atlanta or Cincinnati, the Detroit M-1 Rail Line runs in a 
straight 5.3-kilometre corridor, connecting Detroit’s financial, cultural, 
entertainment, and educational hubs that line Woodward Avenue. The backers of 
the Detroit project hope it will generate over $3bn in economic developmentover 
10 years <http://m-1rail.com/faq/>, promoting new residential and commercial 
construction along the corridor. The route is expected to cost $140m to build, 
and about $5.5m a year to operate.

Streetcars have an emotional appeal, and despite my frustrations I will always 
have a soft spot for Toronto’s trams

Despite my scepticism, I can see why such streetcar projects are popular. They 
possess an emotional and aesthetic allure that most other forms of city 
transport just don’t have. Crucially for civic leaders, they also represent a 
highly visible investment in urban development. Perhaps that is why, despite 
there being more than a whiff of vanity about some of these projects, the 
streetcar remains a feature of many American cities.

First and foremost, though, transit should be about moving people. The 
operating streetcar systems I visited in Tampa and Atlanta don’t do this job 
particularly well, and I don’t have high hopes for Cincinnati’s new project 
either.

In most US cities, meanwhile, the bus services offered are infrequent and 
unattractive. Ultimately, it is surely far more effective to serve existing 
transit riders with more frequent buses, than chase new ones by investing in 
fancy streetcar lines.
 