
Gentrification? “There’s an app for that 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=szrsfeyLzyg>,” as the saying goes. The 
proliferation of apps that deliver all kinds of on-demand services in urban 
areas – from laundry to restaurant food – just might be exacerbating the 
gentrification of certain neighbourhoods in many western cities. If 
descriptions like “the startup is diversifying its black cab app with a
bubbles-and-flutes delivery service available to users in selected postcodes 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/lifestyle/esmagazine/the-30-best-apps-for-londoners-from-coffee-meets-bagel-to-uber-a3101986.html>
” no longer sound like a joke to you, you probably live in one of them.

We already know the impact Uber has had on taxis 
<http://www.techinsider.io/more-proof-that-uber-is-killing-the-taxi-industry-2016-1>
, Airbnb on hotels, and even, perhaps,dating apps for gay bars and queer culture
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/15/goodbye-to-all-the-gay-bars-are-dating-apps-killing-queer-culture>
. But apps are also taking on long-standing local independent businesses that 
may not be standing for much longer: everything from cobblers (with theShoe Drop
 
<http://chicagoinno.streetwise.co/2015/06/17/how-chicago-startup-shoe-drop-wants-to-bring-innovation-to-the-shoe-care-industry/>
 app) and barbers (Shortcut,“Uber for haircuts” 
<http://uk.businessinsider.com/uber-for-haircuts-shortcut-app-review-2014-11?r=US&IR=T>
) to launderettes and dry cleaners (Laundrapp 
<http://www.techworld.com/startups/laundrapp-wants-take-out-uks-dirty-laundry-3634178/>
, ZipJet).

Should these on-demand services really catch on, it will be a serious 
challenge for a whole swathe of independent businesses offering everyday 
services that are already suffering. If we no longer need to walk to the local 
shops to get our groceries, drop off our dry cleaning and fix our shoes, just 
how long will it be before the cafes charging extortionate prices for cups of 
coffee swoop in to take their place?

When you assume that no one needs laundrettes anymore because you can get your 
laundry picked up and delivered through an app (like one reported Google
employee did in a telling tweet 
<https://twitter.com/eparillon/status/628028715159691264/photo/1?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
), you’re automatically annulling a big swathe of the population who actually 
need them. What’s more, the transformation of these services from physical 
spaces to simple deliveriestakes away some important inclusive places for 
social interaction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/apr/03/long-live-launderette-washing-dirty-laundry-laundrapp>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fstreets-without-shops-apps-changing-neighbourhoods-gentrification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7742cf680bfacbecd28ba049eaf6f07c2bf31de3%2F0_144_960_576%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Streets%20without%20shops%3A%20how%20apps%20are%20transforming%20our%20local%20neighbourhoods&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fstreets-without-shops-apps-changing-neighbourhoods-gentrification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Streets%20without%20shops%3A%20how%20apps%20are%20transforming%20our%20local%20neighbourhoods&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fstreets-without-shops-apps-changing-neighbourhoods-gentrification%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7742cf680bfacbecd28ba049eaf6f07c2bf31de3%2F0_144_960_576%2F960.jpg>
 Redundant? An empty launderette in Clapton, London. Photograph: Dave Hill for 
the Guardian 
In New York, it is clear that neighbourhoods like the West Village gentrified 
long before smartphones, with rents being the determining factor, but 
technology “might be the nail in their coffin”, suggested Peter Moskowitz in the
New Republic <https://newrepublic.com/article/124556/app-around-corner>. “Apps 
don’t start the process, but they do enable neighbourhoods to retain their real 
estate value without having any local value,” he argued.

“The Village, and so many other neighbourhoods around the world, can function 
without having to work at a street level. The internet as it relates to 
locality is of course not totally bad. I’ve used Yelp countless times to find 
restaurants and shops I would have never otherwise gone to. But good or bad, 
the effect is the same: locality and the need for local knowledge is lost.”

Neighbourhoods around the world can now function without having to work at a 
street level.
Peter Moskowitz 
As a result, there might not be a need for you to leave your house – but even 
when you do, there won’t be much of practical use. In highly gentrified areas 
like the Village or Williamsburg, or London’s Shoreditch, galleries, high-end 
boutiques, and destination restaurants abound. This is beautiful as a 
playground for tourists, but very problematic for neighbours who actually need 
to use services on a budget.

As a thriving website and app, Airbnb is already putting a strain on rents – 
and some saycontributing to gentrification 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/22/airbnb-san-francisco-wanted-posters-chinatown>
. By renting apartments out to tourists, its users are,whether they like it or 
not 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/carolineodonovan/the-rent-is-too-damn-high-the-truth-about-airbnbs-impact-on?utm_term=.hwdQOwld18#.jiMQPeEmO7>
, contributing to a lack of affordable housing. Cities including Berlin and 
Barcelona have already taken measures likebanning it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/08/berlin-ban-airbnb-short-term-rentals-upheld-city-court>
 altogether or heavilycracking down 
<http://www.citylab.com/housing/2015/12/barcelona-airbnb-tourism/421788/> on 
illegal flats on the site.


Like everything related to the g-word, these processes are far from black and 
white. For a lot of independent businesses, namely restaurants, getting on the 
app bandwagon seems to have worked well, helping them stay put and not rely 
solely on foot traffic. Apps like Deliveroo, the food delivery service that has 
taken the high street by storm, or Uber’s food delivery branch 
<https://ubereats.com/london/>, are only a couple of years old, and are growing 
rapidly 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/freddiedawson/2016/02/26/delivering-25-month-on-month-growth-the-deliveroo-success-story/#455f76004590>
 andemploying armies of (precarious) workers 
<http://tech.newstatesman.com/guest-opinion/deliveroo-disaster>. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fstreets-without-shops-apps-changing-neighbourhoods-gentrification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe716a73c69f3cd29ff32b67abce4748df7ceb32%2F0_170_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Streets%20without%20shops%3A%20how%20apps%20are%20transforming%20our%20local%20neighbourhoods&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fstreets-without-shops-apps-changing-neighbourhoods-gentrification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Streets%20without%20shops%3A%20how%20apps%20are%20transforming%20our%20local%20neighbourhoods&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fstreets-without-shops-apps-changing-neighbourhoods-gentrification%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe716a73c69f3cd29ff32b67abce4748df7ceb32%2F0_170_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 A takeaway shop in the gentrified neighbourhood of Hoxton, east London. 
Photograph: Fiona Hanson/PA 
The supervisor of a Hackney and Finsbury Park-based noodle restaurant, which 
is now on Deliveroo, commented anonymously: “I don’t think any London 
restaurant would survive these days with current rent prices without Deliveroo 
or similar apps. It simply brings the orders up. Even if they’re new, or a 
chain, or an old Turkish place, they all use it now. London rent is too crazy 
not to.”

Yet a simple walk around the area proves otherwise, as does Deliveroo’s 
policy: “The only thing you will not find is low-quality takeaway restaurants.” 
Asking numerous owners of takeaways who aren’t on the app, they all seem 
relaxed; they still rely, they tell me, on a local, family-orientated clientele.

Of course, the demographics of those who use apps – young and wealthy 
<https://techcrunch.com/2012/09/26/forrester-iphone-app-users-young-and-wealthy-android-app-users-skew-older/>
 – coincide with the kind of people who can pay extra for the convenience of 
getting things delivered or enjoy £3 coffees. It all plays a part in the 
homogenisation of neighbourhoods in cities throughout the western world, 
facilitated by social media. Being from Barcelona, I’m dismayed to find New 
York-stylehipster aesthetics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/06/hipster-aesthetic-taking-over-world>
 taking over there, too. Does a Mediterranean city really need to lose its 
unique identity to that?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fstreets-without-shops-apps-changing-neighbourhoods-gentrification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe0fbae6e8b43f53705d6640be27dfedc2258a6fe%2F0_402_6613_3969%2F6613.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Streets%20without%20shops%3A%20how%20apps%20are%20transforming%20our%20local%20neighbourhoods&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fstreets-without-shops-apps-changing-neighbourhoods-gentrification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Streets%20without%20shops%3A%20how%20apps%20are%20transforming%20our%20local%20neighbourhoods&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fstreets-without-shops-apps-changing-neighbourhoods-gentrification%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe0fbae6e8b43f53705d6640be27dfedc2258a6fe%2F0_402_6613_3969%2F6613.jpg>
 The ‘hipsterisation’ of neighbourhoods ... a coffee shop in Ghent, Belgium. 
Photograph: Linda Nylind for the Guardian 
In parallel, scientists have started to look at whether there is a 
relationship between our digital culture and what citizens share, and physical 
gentrification. A group of researchers led by Desislava Hristova from Cambridge 
University have, in fact, found that location-based social networks are a great 
tool to track the physical progress of urban change.

“Social media and location-based technology are certainly not causing 
gentrification,” explains Hristova, “but from my studies there does seem to be 
a relationship between the typical young professional tech-savvy people who use 
these apps, the places they go, the information they share about those places – 
and what those places are and how they develop over time.”

Tools like Google Street View 
<http://gizmodo.com/tracking-brooklyns-rapid-fire-gentrification-with-googl-1594799132>
 have long been used to track the striking visual changes that come with 
gentrification. Hristova and other scientists havepublished a paper 
<http://www.cam.ac.uk/research/news/predicting-gentrification-through-social-networking-data>
 tracking Foursquare and Twitter data in London and found that the more 
check-ins that were made in a neighbourhood by non-locals, the more likely its 
chances of soon becoming gentrified.

The 'Airbnb effect': is it real, and what is it doing to a city like Amsterdam?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/oct/06/the-airbnb-effect-amsterdam-fairbnb-property-prices-communities>
“London areas like Hackney or Newham were the most diverse (in terms of how 
many people from other areas visit the area) based on our metrics, but also 
some of most deprived neighbourhoods in London.” Two metrics that go hand in 
hand in predicting the phenomenon.

This raises many questions: how and when should urban planners step in? Will 
tech change the uses, design, and demographics of cities? Ultimately, what’s 
most exciting is, Hristova says, that “these are all questions we’re still 
trying to answer”.

Are you experiencing or resisting gentrification in your city? Share your 
stories in the comments below,through our dedicated callout 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/cities/2016/sep/19/city-resist-gentrification-displacement>
, or on Twitter using #GlobalGentrification
 