
TERRIBLE, AWFUL, INCREDIBLE, WONDERFUL

As the final whistle blew, the BBC commentator Alistair Mann let rip. “It’s an 
incredible result inFA Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> 
history! Plymouth Argyle of the fourth tier of the English game have held the 
mighty Liverpool at Anfield!”

Oh give it a rest. Not only does a goalless draw, however admirably it was 
acquired 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2017/jan/08/plymouth-argyle-manager-best-defensive-performances-anfield-video>
, not hold comparison with the greatest results in the long and glorious 
history of the world’s oldest and greatest domestic knock-out jamboree, under 
the rules of the FA Cup it wasn’t even a result. It was a mildly dramatic, 
bookmaker-defying, financially beneficial pressing of a pause button. The 
excitement with which this result was greeted – outside Plymouth, where a 
little excess enthusiasm was to be expected – was beyond bewildering. What we 
had here wasn’t so much a case of making a mountain out of a molehill, it was 
an example of making a mountain out of a mole that had failed to even attempt 
to construct a hill but that had been offered the opportunity to have another 
go, and in slightly more hill-friendly conditions next time.


Sutton United’s Paul Doswell urges BBC to ‘get it right’ for FA Cup replay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/08/sutton-united-doswell-bbc-wimbledon-fa-cup>
The glory of the FA Cup is its unpredictability. This is the competition that 
can send one of the game’s pampered giants to squirm uncomfortably in some 
down-at-heel rusting non-league hovel like a Kardashian in a curryhouse, which 
is why we all love it so. Only sometimes it doesn’t. This weekend 80% of the 20 
Premier League teams played at current Premier League grounds and 10% played at 
recent Premier League grounds, leaving Bournemouth and Arsenal to cope with the 
savage environs of Millwall and Preston, which to a greater or lesser extent 
they failed to do.


There’s no need to prettify the general air of drama-free predictability that 
ensued with wild accusations of greatness. What made this year’s third-round 
weekend a little dull was precisely what has made it great in the past and will 
make it great again in the future. Chelsea 4-1 Peterborough United and Chelsea 
2-4 Bradford City (which was in the fourth round in 2015, but still) are two 
sides of the same coin. Sometimes it lands drama-side up, sometimes it falls 
drama-side down. We can either revel in the competition’s glorious uncertainty, 
or we can try to convince each other that the 90 minutes of obvious drama-down 
we’ve just endured was in fact drama-up, an essentially worthless and 
unfulfilling enterprise, like stringing tinsel around a broom handle and 
telling your children it’s as nice as the neighbour’s Norwegian spruce.


Mann’s overenthusiasm was just one problem on a poor weekend for the nation’s 
sporting broadcasters. Their four chosen top flight v other flight matches 
finished 8-1 in the favourites’ favour. The manager of one other televised team 
admitted he found the prospect of the match so boring he “struggled to get out 
of bed”. Alan Shearer, the first expert analyst to voice his opinion at 
half-time of Tottenham’s humdrum win over Aston Villa, started by dryly 
announcing that “it’s been terrible, you can’t get away from it. It’s been 
awful.”


Terrible, awful, incredible, wonderful. Ladies and gentlemen, the FA Cup. 
Magic, innit?

LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE

Follow the draw for the fourth round of the FA Cup with Rob Bleaney from 7pm.  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football>

QUOTE OF THE DAY

“[Expanding the World Cup to 48 teams] gives each country the dream and it 
renews the passion for football, it appears to me to be a fantastic idea” – 
Diego Maradona’s judgment isn’t getting any better with age.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fstringing-tinsel-around-a-broom-handle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F072fc00087e0410f2677ea67d7a3e10c1da04196%2F0_31_1959_1175%2F1959.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stringing%20tinsel%20around%20a%20broom%20handle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fstringing-tinsel-around-a-broom-handle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stringing%20tinsel%20around%20a%20broom%20handle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fstringing-tinsel-around-a-broom-handle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F072fc00087e0410f2677ea67d7a3e10c1da04196%2F0_31_1959_1175%2F1959.jpg>
 Lads. Photograph: Walter Bieri/AP 
FIVER LETTERS

“I actually went and looked to see when your hilarious tea-time email, The 
Fiver, would start hitting my inbox a full week before it resumed publication. 
Am I missing it or does my medication need tweaking?” – Chris Richardson.

“I know that everyone was raving about Olivier Giroud’s goal  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2017/jan/01/olivier-giroud-back-heel-goal-art-wenger-video>
but it is worth reminding younger Fiver readers (yes, both of them) of what a 
truly great New Year’s Day performance is. Ladies and gentlemen, I give you the 
greatDavid Hirst 
<http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.thestar.co.uk%2Fsport%2Ffootball%2Fsheffield-wednesday%2Fnew-year-s-day-1990-sheffield-wednesday-s-david-hirst-drinks-eight-glasses-of-champagne-scores-against-manchester-city-ends-up-in-goal-and-keeps-a-clean-sheet-with-a-broken-finger-1-7526172&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNHLhpjHM_fYVldwlop2HoDGUtDvbQ>
 … “ – Noble Francis.

“For some reason my copy of the Fiver has stopped arriving in my inbox. 
Despite re-signing up on three separate occasions the tea-time missive is no 
more. Please sort this out asap. Yours in desperation” – Paul Allen (and no 
others).


“One of the most inane and constantly employed comments after the woodwork has 
been hit is the commentator screeching ‘the crossbar came to his rescue,’ 
requiring a mental picture of the aforesaid implement adjusting itself on 
behalf of the team in question” – Chris Oakley.

• Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com 
<mailto:the.boss@theguardian.com>. And if you’ve nothing better to do you can 
also tweet The Fiver.Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’the day is … 
Rollover.

SUPPORT THE GUARDIAN

Producing the Guardian’s thoughtful, in-depth journalism – the stuff not 
normally found in this email, obviously – is expensive, but supporting us 
isn’t. If you value our journalism, please support us by making aone-off 
<https://contribute.theguardian.com/uk?INTCMP=co_uk_Fiver_Fiver_copy> or 
recurring contribution 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/uk/supporter?INTCMP=mem_editorial_Fiver_copy>
.

BITS AND BOBS

José Mourinho will not throw himself head-first into the transfer window 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/09/manchester-united-jose-mourinho-centre-back-marcos-rojo-injury>
 to find cover for Marcos Rojo despite Manchester United now having only Chris 
Smalling and tragi-comedy’s Phil Jones available at centre-back.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fstringing-tinsel-around-a-broom-handle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed38f9ed933441cbb4a3a6f809810cd8bbbe69f2%2F633_70_1363_818%2F1363.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stringing%20tinsel%20around%20a%20broom%20handle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fstringing-tinsel-around-a-broom-handle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stringing%20tinsel%20around%20a%20broom%20handle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fstringing-tinsel-around-a-broom-handle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed38f9ed933441cbb4a3a6f809810cd8bbbe69f2%2F633_70_1363_818%2F1363.jpg>
 How could it possibly go wrong? Photograph: Catherine Ivill - AMA/Getty Images 
In news that will surprise absolutely no one the Fifpro 2016 team of the year 
has exactlyno Premier League players in it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/09/global-players-poll-fifa-awards-snubs-premier-league>
.

Another victory for Zlatan Ibrahimovic! A Swedish court has found the former 
head coach of the country’s athletics teamguilty of aggravated libel against 
the Manchester United forward 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/09/zlatan-ibrahimovic-wins-libel-case-ulf-karlsson-doping-claims-juventus>
 for suggesting he used performance-enhancing substances at Juventus.

Liverpool players have been reminded to flick their burglar alarms on before 
they head off to play Southampton on Wednesdayafter it emerged that Roberto 
Firmino was relieved of £70,000 worth of jewellery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/09/roberto-firmino-liverpool-burgled-drink-driving>
 and clothes on 22 December, a couple of days before he was arrested for 
drink-driving.

The good ship Do One is doing a roaring trade in 2017. The latest manager to 
have been bundled aboardis Northampton’s Rob Page 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/09/northampton-sack-manager-rob-page-men-against-girls-comment>
, who sets sail a couple of days after he apologised for his “men against 
girls” comment in the wake of the 5-0 defeat by Bristol Rovers.

FA chairman Greg Clarke has spoken to gay footballers and suggested the idea 
of a group of players coming out together 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/09/greg-clarke-fa-keen-conditions-gay-footballers-come-out>
. “The Premier League, the Football League and the FA could do it at the start 
of the season,” he said. “At the start of the season everybody thinks it is 
their season, the crowds are happy, the sun is shining.”

Having recently reappeared again after his disappearing act in Manchester, 
Mesut Özil says his future at Arsenal may depend on whether Arsène Wenger 
bothers to ink another contract 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/08/mesut-ozil-arsenal-contract-arsene-wenger>
 after his annual game of ‘will-he-won’t-he’ with hacks.

And José Fonte has been left out of Southampton’s Milk Cup semi-final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/09/jose-fonte-out-of-southampton-squad-efl-semi-final-liverpool>
 squad after telling the club he wants to do his defending elsewhere. Which is 
good news for Liverpool, who have Philippe Coutinhofit again after recovering 
from ankle knack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/09/philippe-coutinho-liverpool-return-efl-cup-southampton>
.

RECOMMENDED LISTENING

AC Jimbo is in Zurich schmoozing it up at the Fifpro awards so join Max 
Rushden and co for your Monday dollop of Football Weekly. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/series/footballweekly>

STILL WANT MORE?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fstringing-tinsel-around-a-broom-handle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa8457b7b71e833aabfceae4e280d2b36e2d6d0aa%2F96_255_5291_3175%2F5291.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stringing%20tinsel%20around%20a%20broom%20handle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fstringing-tinsel-around-a-broom-handle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stringing%20tinsel%20around%20a%20broom%20handle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fstringing-tinsel-around-a-broom-handle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa8457b7b71e833aabfceae4e280d2b36e2d6d0aa%2F96_255_5291_3175%2F5291.jpg>
 Plymouth fans give it the big one at Anfield. Photograph: Jason 
Cairnduff/Reuters 
“I still don’t understand how I got through it alive” – Josh Widdicombe is not 
referring to his time at Fiver Towers, buthis Anfield experience 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/09/plymouth-argyle-liverpool-fa-cup-josh-widdicombe>
 as a Plymouth supporter.


Ten talking points just won’t cut it on a Cup weekend, so here are 15 thoughts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/09/fa-cup-third-round-talking-points>
 on the third round.

Phil Thompson thinks Hull’s appointment of Marco Silva is “astonishing”, 
“baffling” and “embarrassing” but why would any club promote an Englishman?asks 
Paul Campbell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/09/english-managers-premier-league-hull-city-marco-silva>
.

Gerard Piqué jabbed a finger in the direction of La Liga’s chief suit as 
Villarreal pushed the title out of Barcelona’s hands,writes Sid Lowe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/09/barcelona-villarreal-gerard-pique-sid-lowe>
.

Atalanta’s Papu Gómez wears his customised captain’s armbands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/09/serie-a-atalanta-papu-gomez-leads-by-example>
 with aplomb, says Paolo Bandini.


Pep Guardiola is short on creative midfielders and fancies Barcelona’s Ivan 
Rakitic,according to today’s Mill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/09/football-transfer-rumours-manchester-city-to-sign-ivan-rakitic-from-barcelona>
.


Jamie Jackson ponders what’s next for Wayne Rooney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/08/wayne-rooney-manchester-united-record-future>
 after equalling Bobby Charlton’s record …

… and apropos of nothing, here’s Ed Aarons on the players chasing that cash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/08/chinese-super-league-spending-materialism-extravagance>
 all the way to China.

Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace
 <https://www.facebook.com/guardianfootball>. AND INSTACHAT, TOO 
<https://www.instagram.com/guardian_sport/>!


WHERE’S JD’S FIRST-PERSON PIECE?
 