
The US supreme court <https://www.theguardian.com/law/us-supreme-court> on 
Monday struck down one of the harshest abortion restrictions in the country and 
potentially paved the way to overturn dozens of measures in other states that 
curtail access, in what might be the most significant legal victory for 
reproductive rights advocates since the right to abortion was established in 
1973.

The 5-3 ruling will immediately prevent Texas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/texas> from enforcing a law that would 
have closed all but nine abortion clinics. But in a coup for abortion rights 
supporters, the court also in effect barred lawmakers from passing health 
measures backed by dubious medical evidence as a way of forcing large numbers 
of abortion clinics to close.

Justice Stephen Breyer wrote the opinion for the majority and was joined by 
justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Sonia Sotomayor, Elena Kagan, and Anthony 
Kennedy, whose support was key to determining if the liberal or conservative 
bloc of the court would prevail.

“We conclude that neither of these provisions offers medical benefits 
sufficient to justify the burdens upon access that each imposes,” Breyer’s 
opinion read. “Each places a substantial obstacle in the path of women seeking 
a previability abortion, each constitutes an undue burden on abortion access … 
and each violates the Federal Constitution.”

The opinion went on to note that attorneys for Texas failed to mount any 
evidence that the law had made abortion safer.

The case began in 2013, when Texas Republicans, on the heels of an 11-hour 
filibuster by state senator Wendy Davis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/25/texas-senator-wendy-davis-filibuster-abortion>
, passed one of the most expansive abortion restrictions in the country. The 
bill, known as House Bill 2, requires abortion providers to have staff 
privileges at a hospital within 30 miles of the clinic and requires clinics to 
meet expensive, hospital-like building and equipment standards.

Lawmakers claimed these were critical safety measures. But abortion providers 
argued that HB 2 was a gambit designed to shut clinics down in large numbers. 
On the day the admitting privileges requirement took effect, in November 2013, 
the number of Texas abortion clinics plummeted from 41 to 22. Today, there are 
18. Had the requirement for clinics to meet hospital-like rules gone into 
effect, another nine would have shut down.
Texas abortion ruling 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/06/abortion-texas-map-1/> 
In its opinion on Monday, the majority agreed that Texas had failed to 
demonstrate a medical justification for its restrictions.

“We have found nothing in Texas’ record evidence that shows that, compared to 
prior law … the new law advanced Texas’ legitimate interest in protecting 
women’s health,” the opinion read. “We add that, when directly asked at oral 
argument whether Texas knew of a single instance in which the new requirement 
would have helped even one woman obtain better treatment, Texas admitted that 
there was no evidence in the record of such a case.”

The same argument was echoed in a concurring opinion by Ginsburg. “It is 
beyond rational belief that HB 2 could genuinely protect the health of women,” 
she wrote.

Monday’s ruling could give abortion providers across the county ammunition to 
strike down similar restrictions in the lower courts. Admitting privileges 
requirements and hospital-like regulationsthreaten to shutter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2016/jun/03/texas-abortion-supreme-court-interactive>
 more than a dozen abortion clinics in Alabama, Arkansas, Louisiana, 
Mississippi, Oklahoma, Tennessee and Wisconsin.
Texas abortion ruling 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/06/abortion-map-regional/> 
But after Monday’s ruling, those laws will almost certainly be struck down in 
the lower courts. Many more restrictions that have been in effect for years may 
also be in the crosshairs now.


At the heart of this case was a two-decade old dispute over how strictly 
states can regulate abortion, so long as they claim to be doing so for health 
purposes. A 1992 supreme court decision, Planned Parenthood v Casey, gave 
states the right to restrict abortion to protect women’s health as long as it 
didn’t create an “undue burden” for women seeking abortion. “An undue burden 
exists,” that decision reads, “and therefore a provision of law is invalid, if 
its purpose or effect is to place substantial obstacles in the path of a woman 
seeking an abortion.”

But the court never fully clarified the meaning of “undue burden”. Texas 
abortion providers argued that a law is an undue burden if it is medically 
unnecessary. Attorneys for Texas argued that courts should defer to the 
legislature’s knowledge of what is medically unnecessary, and a law is only an 
undue burden if it significantly impacts abortion access.

On Monday, the majority ruled that courts should in fact scrutinize the 
medical evidence behind burdensome abortion restrictions.

The decision was greeted with cheers from throngs of young women and 
reproductive rights activists gathered on the steps of the supreme court.

“I am beyond elated,” said Amy Hagstrom Miller, who runs the group of abortion 
clinics, Whole Woman’s Health, that headed up the lawsuit to overturn Texas’s 
abortion law. “With this clinic shutdown law, politicians forced Texas women 
seeking abortion to go to clinics that are further away or in another state, 
take more days off of work, lose income, find childcare, and arrange and pay 
for transportation to travel hundreds of miles. Today’s decision marks a 
turnaround for Texas and for our country.”

The decision will have a particularly great impact on low-income Latinas, who 
were thought to have the most trouble overcoming barriers to abortion access 
under HB 2, said Jessica González-Rojas, director of the National Latina 
Institute for Reproductive Health. “These are people who are least able to 
drive hundreds of miles to an abortion clinic,” she said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fus-supreme-court-texas-abortion-ruling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44e5a886c49f3ab97bdd1bfccfb2c39098bbc116%2F0_155_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Strict%20Texas%20abortion%20law%20overturned%20in%20major%20supreme%20court%20ruling&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fus-supreme-court-texas-abortion-ruling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Strict%20Texas%20abortion%20law%20overturned%20in%20major%20supreme%20court%20ruling&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fus-supreme-court-texas-abortion-ruling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44e5a886c49f3ab97bdd1bfccfb2c39098bbc116%2F0_155_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Abortion rights activists Morgan Hopkins of Boston, left, and Alison Turkos of 
New York City, celebrate on the steps of the US supreme court on Monday. 
Photograph: Pete Marovich/Getty Images 
In 2014, US district judge Lee Yeakel sided with Whole Woman’s Health and 
ruled key parts of HB 2 unconstitutional. A three-judge panel from the fifth 
circuit court of appeals, the most conservative circuit in the US, overturned 
his decision in June 2015. The four liberal justices plus Justice Anthony 
Kennedy blocked that requirement until the court could resolve the case. The 
supreme court agreed to take up the case in November and heard oral arguments 
on 2 March 2016.

Abortion <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abortion> clinics and their allies 
have mounted significant evidence that HB 2’s restrictions were both medically 
unnecessary and “devastating” to abortion access, in Miller’s words.

Briefs to the court from leading medical groups, such as the American Medical 
Association, emphasized that hospital admitting privileges are generally 
reserved for doctors who treat patients in an inpatient setting. Because 
abortion is an outpatient procedure with a low complication rate – the risk of 
a serious complication is between 0.05% and 0.2% – abortion providers rarely 
meet a hospital’s particular requirements.

In March, researchers with the Texas Policy Evaluation Project at the 
University of Texas-Austin found that with parts of HB 2 in effect, the average 
number of miles that many women traveled to get an abortion nearlyquadrupled 
<http://liberalarts.utexas.edu/txpep/releases/impact-of-clinic-closures-release-.php>
.

If Whole Woman’s Health had lost and the law had gone into effect, abortion 
access would have been restricted entirely to the large metropolitan centers of 
Dallas, Fort Worth, Austin and San Antonio. There wouldn’t have been a single 
clinic for 500 miles between San Antonio and the border with New Mexico.

Chief Justice John Roberts, Justice Samuel Alito and Justice Clarence Thomas 
dissented from Breyer’s opinion, with Thomas indicating that he would have 
voted to uphold the entire law. Roberts and Alito would have remanded the case 
back down to the lower courts for additional findings. On Monday, Alito took 
the rare step of reading his dissent aloud from the bench. He accused the 
majority of being hasty to rule and bending procedural rules because the topic 
was abortion.


This case was one of the most highly anticipated of this supreme court term, 
with legal experts of all ideological stripes expecting the outcome to set a 
major precedent on abortion rights. The US solicitor general, Donald Verrilli, 
joined oral arguments on the side of the abortion clinics. The court had not 
considered such a monumental abortion rights case since Casey in 1992. In that 
case, the court affirmed the right to abortion but laid a blueprint for decades 
of restrictions on the procedure.

Following the death of Justice Anontin Scalia, who likely would have voted to 
uphold the law, many observers expected the court to deadlock in this case 
along ideological lines. For abortion providers, this was a kind of doomsday 
scenario: A split would have upheld the fifth circuit court of appeals decision 
of June 2015 and forced half of Texas clinics to close.

A split also would have sent strong signals that abortion providers would lose 
their ongoing case against an admitting privileges law in Louisiana, which is 
also in the fifth circuit with Texas. That law threatens to close two out of 
four Louisiana abortion clinics; the provider with admitting privileges at a 
third abortion clinic has said he would quit and leave the state with only one 
clinic.
 