
The contrast between the farmers' milk price dispute and other trade disputes 
revealed in the coverage in the Guardian and elsewhere could not be more marked 
(Dairy farmers step up pressure at plants over milk price cuts, 21 July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/jul/20/dairy-farmers-protest-price-milk?newsfeed=true>
). There are blockades of milk plants, but no restrictions on numbers of 
protesters. There is no requirement to hold a ballot. Ministers rush to arrange 
meetings with the parties within 48 hours, with no condemnation of the action. 
Strangest of all, there is no sight of those usually so quick and loud to 
criticise any trade union action involving people trying to protect their 
livelihoods. Kelvin McKenzie, Digby Jones, theTaxpayers' Alliance 
<http://www.taxpayersalliance.com/>, and the CBI <http://www.cbi.org.uk/>, 
where are you?
Peter Skyte
London

• Your editorial about milk prices (Dairy industry: milking the market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/jul/23/dairy-industry-market-editorial>
, 24 July) implicitly supports (possibly illegal) picketing action by farmers 
in the runup to the Olympic Games. No condemnation of action that could lead to 
shortage of milk in the shops. Your leader could be reworded easily to attack 
short-term profit-making in many other areas including job cuts in the civil 
service. I look forward to reading of your support for workers in the UK Border 
Agency who are to strike against short-sighted job cuts that put our borders at 
risk or those in HM Revenue and Customs that risk collection of billions of 
pounds regardless of the timing. History will reflect on government motives as 
we are now over the Thatcher/Reagan policies that led to the current practices 
in the financial sector, where bringing the country to its knees is punished by 
a slap on the wrists.
Paul Kennedy
Guiseley, West Yorkshire

• The state of the dairy industry and its consequences for all of us – let 
alone cows – surely mean we should question our apparent dependence on milk and 
ask whether that should continue. Your editorial did neither – not even in 
passing.
Dr Alex May
Manchester
 