
Hats off to Oldham <https://www.theguardian.com/football/oldham> Athletic’s 
captain, Peter Clarke, for attempting to sweeten a dog’s dinner this week. A 
sprinkling of optimism is sorely needed around Boundary Park where the club’s 
chairman, Simon Corney, was in such a steaming funk after elimination from the 
FA Cup by non-league Lincoln City on 5 December that he cancelled the club’s 
Christmas party.

Oldham are bottom of League One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball>, winless in seven 
league matches, subject to a transfer embargo and due to play at second-place 
Sheffield United on Boxing Day. But Clarke, keen to look up, ventured it could 
be to their advantage that few people expect them to win at Bramall Lane on 
Monday. Without riffing on anyone’s woe – in the interests, indeed, of helping 
a down‑on‑its-luck club – let us see if we can lower expectations for Oldham 
even further. A look at their Boxing Day history should do the trick.

Sad to say, Oldham are football’s Boxing Day punchbag. They have not lost more 
than any other English team on that day, it is just that their defeats tend to 
be thrashings. They have been beaten in 35 of their 80 Boxing Day matches, 
which does not even put them among the 10 most hapless (Burnley and Newcastle 
United have the worst records, both having lost 42), but Oldham have conceded 
more goals on 26 December than any other team in League history. Sheffield 
United, as it happens, are fourth-highest in the all-time scoring charts for 
that day.

Sheffield United on the up thanks to Chris Wilder’s old school approach
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/12/billy-sharp-sheffield-united-wilder-old-school-approach>
It all started misleadingly well for Oldham. Their first Boxing Day fixture, 
in 1907, came in their first season after admission to theFootball League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league> and they celebrated with 
a 3-2 victory over Blackpool in the Second Division, a fine way to get 
Christmas Day’s 4-1 defeat by Leicester City out of their system. The following 
year they lost 3-0 at Tottenham Hotspur. Then, in 1910, with Oldham now in the 
top flight, came a positive omen that Clarke may or may not wish to invoke: a 
2-1 Boxing Day win over Sheffield United. But then the ill‑starred stuff really 
started.

In 1911, amid what was otherwise an encouraging period for Oldham, the Latics 
lost 6-1 against Aston Villa. The two clubs met again at the same time in 1912, 
whereupon Villa made even more merry, winning 7-1.

Oldham recorded a thumping Boxing Day win in 1914, beating Bradford Park 
Avenue 6-2. They went on to miss out by a single point on being crowned English 
champions, finishing second to Everton.

In 1915 competitive football was suspended because of the first world war and 
it would be 14 years before Oldham, by then back in the Second Division after 
relegation in 1923, won another Boxing Day match – a 4-1 victory against 
Millwall in 1928. In that first season after going down they were thrashed 5-0 
by Leeds United on Boxing Day.

Oldham were not destined to return to the top flight for 68 years and when 
they did, 1991‑92 was an admirable first season back but Boxing Day again 
proved memorable for the wrong reasons as Joe Royle’s team lost 6-3 at home to 
Manchester United.

Promotion in 1991 had come at the end of a long journey, much of it spent in 
lowly surroundings. In 1935 they sank to the Third Division North after a 
season in which they had beaten Blackpool 4-0 on Christmas Day 1934, only to 
lose to the same opposition 3-2 the following day. The contrast between festive 
fixtures would be even starker in 1935: on Christmas Day Oldham beat Tranmere 
Rovers 4-1 at home; on Boxing Day they renewed hostilities at Prenton Park and 
Oldham lost 13-4.

They did not have the rub of the green that day (not that there was much 
green, the pitch being “ankle-deep in mud”, according to the Liverpool Daily 
Post). One of their defenders, Norman Brunskill, suffered an injury in the 
fifth minute and had to go off for treatment. Tranmere took full advantage of 
his 15-minute absence, increasing the score from 1-0 to 6-0. Then Oldham 
mounted a comeback of a kind and scored four goals while restricting Tranmere 
to merely another seven.

Oldham’s right-half, Tommy Williamson, later said that his team’s goalkeeper, 
Lewis Caunce, “played a blinder”. Caunce even saved a penalty from Robert 
“Bunny” Bell, a feat that prevented the striker from bringing his personal goal 
tally for the match to double figures. Still, his nine goals earned Bell a 
chorus of For He’s A Jolly Good Fellow from the supporters at Prenton Park, 
some of whom carried him shoulder high to the director’s office at full-time, 
when he was presented with a match ball signed by both teams. No doubt Bell was 
also later treated to some hearty pats on the back at the Liverpool shipping 
office where he worked, having turned down an opportunity to play football 
professionally just two weeks before enjoying his Boxing Day leisure time at 
the expense of Oldham.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Foldham-boxing-day-blues-sheffield-united%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F731f8f54ba46a052bd3a4eec2dcaec5e64ac8529%2F0_191_4224_2534%2F4224.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Struggling%20Oldham%20urgently%20seek%20a%20solution%20to%20their%20Boxing%20Day%20blues&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Foldham-boxing-day-blues-sheffield-united%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Struggling%20Oldham%20urgently%20seek%20a%20solution%20to%20their%20Boxing%20Day%20blues&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Foldham-boxing-day-blues-sheffield-united%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F731f8f54ba46a052bd3a4eec2dcaec5e64ac8529%2F0_191_4224_2534%2F4224.jpg>
 The Oldham team from the 1914-15 season beat Bradford Park Avenue 6-2 on 
Boxing Day and ended the season as runners-up to First Division champions 
Everton.
 Photograph: Colorsport/Rex/Shutterstock 
On Boxing Day 1963 many sides threatened to surpass Tranmere’s tally – more 
goals were scored than on any other day in the history of the Football League 
led by 66 in the First Division alone – although none managed to do so. 
Perversely, Oldham managed to beat Notts County 2-0 in the Third Division.

At the risk of reviving expectation, we must also draw your attention to 
Boxing Day 1961. Oldham, then in the Fourth Division, beat Southport 2-1 at 
home and spanked them 5-0 on New Year’s Eve, which meant they were confident 
they had Southport’s number by the time they met again on Boxing Day 1962. Sure 
enough, on a pitch that Southport’s players later compared to an ice rink, 
Oldham skated to an 11-0 win. Bert Lister scored six, all with his trusty right 
foot, and was later voted player of the season as Oldham gained promotion.

Southport, it turned out, also pulled off a stunning feat that season. 
Shipping 11 goals at Oldham, seven at Tranmere and six on four other occasions 
meant that the figure in their goals against column at the end of the season 
was the worst in the League – 106 – yet they still finished in mid-table, 13th 
out of 24 teams. It shows that no matter how many goals a team concedes in 
losing, they can survive if they score enough to win other matches. That is 
likely to be of little comfort to Oldham, who are presently the lowest scorers 
in the Football League.

It seems highly unlikely that a team who have managed just 12 goals in 21 
matches will trouble a Sheffield United side who have only lost once in the 
League since 20 August. But if they can defy expectation and keep things 
uncharacteristically tight, they might just edge their way to a first Boxing 
Day win since 2008 and haul themselves off the foot of League One. That might 
even hoist them off the bottom of the all-time Boxing Day chart for goals 
conceded, as the next two most porous teams, West Bromwich Albion (154 goals 
conceded) and Sunderland (151), are respectively away to Arsenal, who need a 
big victory to ease the traditional winter grumbling about Arsène Wenger, and 
Manchester United, the highest Boxing Day scorers in League history.
 