
Stuart Lancaster returns on Friday night to an English club ground in an 
official capacity for the first time since England were knocked out of last 
year’s World Cup andhe lost his job as head coach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/11/stuart-lancaster-england-head-coach-leaves-post>
 in what was euphemistically described at the time as a mutual decision.

Now a senior coach with Leinster after taking time out in the new year to 
study coaching methods in the southern hemisphere, Lancaster will be at 
Franklin’s Gardens for the European Champions Cup match with Northampton and a 
reunion with a player hecontroversially left out of his World Cup squad on 
disciplinary grounds, England’s current captain, Dylan Hartley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/02/dylan-hartley-quit-international-rugby-england-world-cup>
, who will be on the bench after his autumn series exertions.

Hartley has a 100% record as captain, with England winning all 14 matches they 
have played since being knocked out of the World Cup by Australia, 13 under
Eddie Jones <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/eddie-jones> who, after last 
weekend’s victory over the Wallabies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/03/england-australia-autumn-internationals-match-report>
 marked an unbeaten 2016, praised the contribution of his predecessor.

Stuart Lancaster’s England were always a team of nearly men
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/nov/11/stuart-lancaster-england-tenure-nearly-men-head-coach>
“I am not surprised at England’s success,” said Lancaster in return. “Very few 
international teams have been on that sort of winning run and it is fantastic. 
Eddie and his coaches have done a brilliant job in getting the best out of a 
very experienced team. In the World Cup [when England had the youngest squad in 
the tournament] we had around 450 caps in the starting side: now it is 600-700.

“I always said the new phase of English rugby would be successful but nothing 
happens by chance and I think the coaches, Eddie in particular, deserve the 
credit. I sat down with Eddie not long after I had lost the role of head coach 
and told him he had a good group of players. He has brought his own personality 
and style to the team and they have benefited from it.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Feddie-jones-says-england-are-determined-to-be-no1-in-world-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eddie%20Jones%20says%20England%20are%20determined%20to%20be%20No1%20in%20world%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Feddie-jones-says-england-are-determined-to-be-no1-in-world-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eddie%20Jones%20says%20England%20are%20determined%20to%20be%20No1%20in%20world%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Feddie-jones-says-england-are-determined-to-be-no1-in-world-video&media=>
Eddie Jones says England are determined to be No1 in world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/dec/03/eddie-jones-says-england-are-determined-to-be-no1-in-world-video>
“You are pleased the hard work has paid off and good luck to them for the Six 
Nations. I know from working over here how competitive that Six Nations 
programme is going to be. Being in Ireland now, all roads are leading to the 
Aviva on St Patrick’s Day [England play there the day after]. It will be some 
Six Nations, which is great for the competition but also for the Lions.”

Lancaster is not the only member of England’s World Cup management team to be 
working on the other side of the Irish Sea. Andy Farrell is part of Ireland’s 
set-up and a year which started with the Pro12 failing to provide a Champions 
Cup quarter-finalist and Ireland’s defence of their Six Nations title crumbling 
in the opening three rounds when they failed to win a match, ended with
victories over New Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/05/ireland-new-zealand-rugby-union-report>
 and Australia to follow a first away triumph in South Africa and five wins out 
of seven in the opening two European rounds.

“The failure to make the knockout stage last year is not the main driver for 
Leinster <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leinster>, but having spoken to 
coaches from other teams there is a clear sense of disappointment that only 
teams from England and France went through,” said Lancaster. “The European Cup 
is a massive motivator for the Pro12 teams and I do not see it becoming an 
Anglo-French affair again. There is a slight difference in the overall quality 
of the Pro12 and the Premiership, but across the board at the top end of the 
Pro12, teams are well equipped for Europe.”

Lancaster’s role with Leinster involves hands-on coaching, in contrast to 
England where he was more of a director of rugby, overlooking everything, and 
under him the young centre Garry Ringrose is blooming.

“The one thing I wanted to clarify before committing myself was what the role 
was,” he said. “A lot of the bigger picture stuff such as selection, 
recruitment and the relationship with the Irish union is [head coach] Leo 
Cullen’s.

“For me it is about attack and defence which is a change from my England role. 
I am really enjoying it, able to just think about training sessions and seeing 
progress. Leinster have a group of talented players who were coached by Joe 
Schmidt and Matt O’Connor, so have a good framework in attack. I have tried to 
add my personality to it.”

Leinster are well placed in the Pro12, second behind Munster on points 
difference, and travel to Northampton at the top of a group in which every side 
has won and lost one match as they have secured two bonus points. Three years 
ago, they playedNorthampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> in successive weekends, 
winning handsomely away and losing at home.

“I am not reading anything into the previous games against them,” said 
Lancaster. “I know how good a team they are and it is important we come away 
from the game with something. They will be lifted by the return of their 
England players who will be brimming with confidence and we could see the lift 
last week when our Ireland internationals came back. Garry reminds me of some 
of the young English centres I was coaching back in 2012, such as Jonathan 
Joseph, blessed with unbelievable talent and having no fear.

“As a coach you always have to prove yourself and that’s what drives me more 
than anything else: it was a great move to join a top European club. I don’t 
miss certain parts of being head coach and we will see about the future. I am 
pretty open-minded and I have learned not to plan too far ahead.”

Meanwhile the announcement of Six nations referees shows four of England’s 
five matches will be refereed by Frenchmen. Jérôme Garcès, who was in charge 
last yearwhen Wales won at Twickenham in the World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/26/england-wales-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
, will have the whistle in Cardiff and in Dublin on the final weekend. Romain 
Poite and Mathieu Raynal will control the games against Italy and Scotland 
respectively while the opening encounter against France will be refereed by an 
Australian, Angus Gardner.
 