
We’ve seen plenty of alternative maps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/may/04/london-tube-maps-underground-reimagined-alternative-in-pictures>
 of the London Underground, from those plotting average rents by station, to 
those charting life expectancy at every stop. But what about sound? A group of 
musicians and sound artists have this week launched thefirst ever interactive 
“sound map” of the London Underground 
<http://citiesandmemory.com/thenextstation/>, capturing the shrieks, grinds and 
general patter of 55 tube stations across the capital.

It’s a noisy old world down there 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/england/london/3895769.stm> – from the “mind the 
gap” announcements to Londoners’ idiosyncratic curses anddrunken late night 
conversations over illicit tinnies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2008/may/07/london.drugsandalcohol>. This 
is precisely what The Next Station project, the work ofCities and Memory 
<http://citiesandmemory.com/> and The London Sound Survey 
<http://www.soundsurvey.org.uk/>, spent three months earlier this year 
gathering. And as well as capturing the real-life aural experience, sound 
artists from around the world were then invited to remix and reimagine the 
field recordings and create an alternative sound map to complement the real one 
– you canlisten to all of them in one interactive feature 
<http://citiesandmemory.com/thenextstation/>.

So why make a sound map of the places we would all rather spend as little time 
thinking about as possible? Stuart Fowkes, a sound artist and the project’s 
creator, says London’s underground noises are iconic: “not just nationally but 
on a global scale” – for residents, tourists, and watchers of London-based 
films alike. The tube, Fowkes says, definesLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> in a way that public transport networks 
in other cities don’t.

Clicking through the sound map, you’ll hear a surprising range of noises: a 
didgeridoo player at Stratford, someone offering free hugs at Brixton and a 
bagpipe busker at King’s Cross – as well as all the announcements and 
clattering train noises that you’d expect. “You might think that one 
underground station sounds much like another,” says Fowkes, “but they’re as 
characterful as pet dogs once you get to know them.” King’s Cross would be a 
yappy terrier, then. Brixton an affectionate labrador.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F26%2Ffirst-ever-london-underground-sound-map-tube%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd921a56be08ce880abafc0add8c067d16e2e415f%2F66_316_2028_1216%2F2028.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Subterranean%20sonic%20blues%3F%20A%20journey%20through%20the%20first%20ever%20sound%20map%20of%20the%20London%20Underground&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F26%2Ffirst-ever-london-underground-sound-map-tube%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Subterranean%20sonic%20blues%3F%20A%20journey%20through%20the%20first%20ever%20sound%20map%20of%20the%20London%20Underground&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F26%2Ffirst-ever-london-underground-sound-map-tube%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd921a56be08ce880abafc0add8c067d16e2e415f%2F66_316_2028_1216%2F2028.jpg>
 London’s tube stations: as ‘characterful as pet dogs’? Photograph: Transport 
for London 
And sound matters – what we hear every day on our commute is as much a part of 
our quotidian experience as our morning coffee. There’s the impact loud noises 
can have on our ears, for one. An expert working in 2004recorded sound levels 
louder than a pneumatic drill 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/england/london/3895769.stm> on parts of the tube – 
loud enough to damage the hearing.

Then there’s also the psychological impact of sound: though we might classify 
many of the noises on the tube as stressful, Fowkes insists they can be 
reassuring in their familiarity, keeping the whole system moving like 
clockwork: “the details like the intonation of the automated announcements 
communicate ‘everything is well’ to commuters subconsciously … the trundle of 
the escalators, the closing of the sliding doors are all as rhythmic as a 
heartbeat, and become part of Londoners’ natural functions when they’re 
underground.”

This idea of the importance of acoustic ecology is not new – R Murray Schafer 
<https://www.musiccentre.ca/node/37315/biography>, considered the father of the 
debate around it, began talking about the (damaging) effects of sound, 
especially on people dwelling in the “sonic sewers” he believed cities to be, 
back in the 1970s. “Noises are the sounds we have learned to ignore,”he wrote. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/mar/13/sounds-city-technology-urban-centres-peaceful>
 So perhaps this focus on the tube’s sounds will help Londoners occasionally 
listen, as well as simply hear, the underground aural landscape.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F26%2Ffirst-ever-london-underground-sound-map-tube%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb140e8d52d9fa1735c28e29ff23761e26d73b38b%2F0_253_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Subterranean%20sonic%20blues%3F%20A%20journey%20through%20the%20first%20ever%20sound%20map%20of%20the%20London%20Underground&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F26%2Ffirst-ever-london-underground-sound-map-tube%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Subterranean%20sonic%20blues%3F%20A%20journey%20through%20the%20first%20ever%20sound%20map%20of%20the%20London%20Underground&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F26%2Ffirst-ever-london-underground-sound-map-tube%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb140e8d52d9fa1735c28e29ff23761e26d73b38b%2F0_253_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 A man shouts while boarding a central line train at Oxford Circus station on 
the night of the launch of the 24-hour tube service. Photograph: Daniel 
Leal-Olivas/AFP/Getty Images 
“There’s no blue plaque system for preserving important sounds”, Fowkes says, 
even though “sounds change as much as visual cityscapes, and today’s sounds are 
tomorrow’s history.” Perhaps it makes sense that we should be working to 
archive the soon-to-be-lost sounds of our cities.

The remixed sounds on the London Underground sound map – added to “help people 
to appreciate how sound can form source material for some interesting art,” 
Fowkes says – are intriguing, if a little high concept. With the field 
recording made at Piccadilly Circus, Swedish sound artist Anya Trybala has 
crafted a composition meant to be a meditation on Brexit. Composer and artist
Martin A. Smith <http://www.martinasmith.co.uk/about/> has reimagined Moorgate 
by mixing recordings the Northern line with the sound of cigales and church 
bells recorded in forests in Provence.

And with the tube now rumbling through the night into the early hours 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/20/london-night-tube-meet-people-travelled-first-night-sadiq-khan>
, will we see this soundscape changing? “From a field recording perspective, 
the night tube is really exciting,” Fowkes says. He’s planning to head out, 
recorder in hand, and capture some of these nocturnal tube sounds. Who wouldn’t 
want to hear Londoners’ late night, post-party deep and meaningfuls mixed over 
the sound of Provençal cicadas?

What will our cities sound like in the future?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/mar/13/sounds-city-technology-urban-centres-peaceful>
Cities and Memory is continuing to capture sounds, not just below ground, but 
also above ground in London and in other cities in 55 countries across the 
globe. Fowkes’ ambition is to “help people appreciate the joy of the sounds 
that surround them every day.” So maybe then we can stop grimacing at the 
shriek of the Victoria line as it passes through Pimlico? Perhaps not. But 
maybe we can look more kindly on that King’s Cross bagpiper at quarter to nine 
on a Monday morning.

Listen to the London Underground sound map here 
<http://citiesandmemory.com/thenextstation/>. Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> to join the discussion
 