
About 100 minutes into Adam Curtis’s latest documentary, HyperNormalisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/09/adam-curtis-donald-trump-documentary-hypernormalisation>
, there’s a montage of movie scenes in which skyscrapers are blown up by bad 
guys, crumbling into themselves as people leap from flaming top-storey windows. 
All of these films, Curtis tells us, were made before 9/11. As the strangely 
prophetic scenes keep coming, Suicide’s Dream Baby Dream drones in the 
background.

In the context of a film convinced that we have “retreated into a dream world 
that allows dark and destructive forces to fester and grow outside”, Martin Rev 
andAlan Vega 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/18/suicide-alan-vega-punk-pioneer>
’s track seems to mock the state of blissful ignorance Curtis believes society 
has wrapped itself in. Dream Baby Dream is a song that hangs between hope and 
nihilism, and Curtis’ disaster reel embraces the latter.


Released in 1979, two years after an earlier incarnation, Keep Your Dreams, 
had been recorded, Dream Baby Dream is unquantifiable. There’s a weightlessness 
to it, a timelessness too, which perhaps explains why it’s circled back around. 
Anchored by an urgent electric drum beat that lurks like a ticking bomb beneath 
Vega’s murky vocals, its lyrics are stark, yet impenetrable. “Dream baby dream, 
forever and ever,” sings Vega in a voice that has been likened to Elvis – 
though it’s more of a hazy drawl, with Vega swallowing his consonants as if he 
lacks the enthusiasm to let his lips touch. “Yeah those dreams keep you free.”

Suicide's Alan Vega: a punk pioneer who shoved the streets back in people's 
faces
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/18/suicide-alan-vega-punk-pioneer> 
Where Curtis drew on the song’s darkness, Bruce Springsteen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/springsteen> found hope. His cover version, 
which he recorded in 2014 after performing it live for nearly a decade, shaves 
off some of the original’s eeriness – with its purposely flat, unresolved 
melodies – and sneaks in a little more sentimentality. Where Vega mumbles the 
line, “I see that smile on your face now baby, yeah you got the idea now”, 
Springsteen sings, “I just wanna see you smile / Now I just wanna see you 
smile”. He adds new lyrics too: “Come on and open up your hearts … come on 
darling and dry your eyes.” Suicide’s refrain is a vague suggestion, of which 
even they don’t seem entirely convinced. Springsteen’s is a command: “Dream, 
baby, dream.”


“A lot of bands have done my stuff, Suicide stuff, and they basically try and 
copy and do it the way that you do it,” Vega said of Springsteen’s cover back 
in 2005. “Thank God – finally somebody did their version of it. He did it his 
way, and such a great way, that I’m going to have to sing it that way, or not 
sing it at all any more.”

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DeaZRSQfFo8Y&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DeaZRSQfFo8Y>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DeaZRSQfFo8Y&media=>
 Bruce Springsteen: Dream Baby Dream video 
It’s this version that crops up in another film released this year, Andrea 
Arnold’sAmerican Honey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/13/american-honey-review-andrea-arnold>
. In one of the road movie’s best scenes, Sasha Lane’s Star clambers into the 
passenger seat of a lorry to try to sell a magazine subscription to its 
middle-aged driver. He’s in a rush, he says, so she decides to travel with him 
to his next pit stop. Something bad is going to happen. You can feel it in the 
dank, dusty highway air. Besides, the rules of cinema dictate that vulnerable 
young women don’t get into cars with strange men without something very bad 
happening. But it doesn’t. Instead, the driver puts on a tape of Dream Baby 
Dream, Star announces, delighted, “I know this one!” and for a blissful couple 
of minutes the two of them sing along tunelessly as he drives. It’s a moment of 
pure optimism.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fsuicide-dream-baby-dream-bruce-springsteen-adam-curtis-american-honey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28d85e44583e8f58dc08db5f309901b5964df07f%2F0_0_2000_1500%2Fmaster%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Suicide's%20Dream%20Baby%20Dream%20%E2%80%93%20the%20unlikely%20anthem%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fsuicide-dream-baby-dream-bruce-springsteen-adam-curtis-american-honey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Suicide%27s%20Dream%20Baby%20Dream%20%E2%80%93%20the%20unlikely%20anthem%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fsuicide-dream-baby-dream-bruce-springsteen-adam-curtis-american-honey%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28d85e44583e8f58dc08db5f309901b5964df07f%2F0_0_2000_1500%2Fmaster%2F2000.jpg>
 Optimism … Sasha Lane in American Honey. Photograph: Allstar/Film4 
The song’s ambiguity lends itself well to other artists’ interpretations; they 
find just enough space to pour themselves into it.Savages started playing it 
live <http://www.qthemusic.com/17087/savages-dream-baby-dream-live-q-awards-16/>
, then released their live version as a B-side in 2014. When Vega died earlier 
this year, Arcade Fire’s Win Butler recorded a version under his DJ Windows 98 
moniker - (Arcade Fire have performed it live 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9muJyVtXJo8> though it seems to have since 
disappeared from the internet).Neneh Cherry and the Thing 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4VWvQSEbl5Y> contorted it into a scattered 
jazz number in 2012.


It would be tempting to try and find a reason that the song has been 
reimagined so often in recent years. To suggest, maybe, that its enigmatic and 
contradictory tone are fitting in today’s unsettled climate. But, in truth, the 
song’s appeal is no more tangible now than it was almost 40 years ago. “Some 
folks find it sad,” says Cherry, “others endlessly happy and blessed. I think 
it’s one of those songs that will never go away.”

 