
Jamie Oliver and Phil Collins <https://www.theguardian.com/music/phil-collins> 
will do battle against Ladybird and the Danish concept ofhygge in the race to 
be Christmas No 1 in the UK book charts, which begins in earnest with the 
release of more than 200 festive contenders.

This “Super Thursday”, as The Bookseller magazine dubs it, sees 219 new books 
are published, many of which are expected to beChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> bestsellers.

Oliver, who last took the festive No 1 spot in 2012 with Jamie’s 15-Minute 
Meals, is in the running this year with his Christmas Cookbook. “I haven’t held 
back. This book is the greatest hits, all wrapped up in one Christmas parcel,” 
the TV chef promises.

Among the celebrity autobiographies is Collins’ Not Dead Yet, which is a 
“candid, witty, unvarnished story of the songs and shows, the hits and pans, 
his marriages and divorces, the ascents to the top of the charts and into the 
tabloid headlines”, according to its publisher.

Daredevil Guy Martin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/dec/07/guy-martin-bike-racer-isle-of-man-tt-speed-with-guy-martin-channel-4>
’s offering, Worms to Catch, is tipped to rise up the bestseller list; as is 
Nomad, the fictional memoir from Steve Coogan’s alter ego Alan Partridge, in 
whichthe Radio Norwich DJ “dons his boots, windcheater and scarf and embarks on 
an odyssey through a place he once knew – it’s called Britain – intent on 
completing a journey of immense personal significance”.

Alan Bennett <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/alanbennett>’s third 
collection of prose, Keeping On Keeping On, is also out on Thursday and 
contains his diaries from 2005 to 2015.

On the fiction front, queen of crime and perennial bestseller Martina Cole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/oct/28/martina-cole-queen-of-crime> 
publishes her 23rd novel, Betrayal, whileBaileys prize-winner Ali Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alismith> releases Autumn and Patricia 
Cornwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/01/patricia-cornwell-i-grew-up-with-fear>
 sends her medical examiner Kay Scarpetta on her 24th adventure in Chaos.

Although Super Thursday usually offers bookshops across the UK a guide of 
which titles will dominate the Christmas charts, this year they are expected to 
face stiff competition from earlier releases.

“This year Super Thursday stands out a little less than in the past, but in a 
positive way – this year it’s as though there has been a whole season of Super 
Thursdays,” said Nic Bottomley of the Bath independent bookshopMr B’s Emporium 
of Reading Delights <http://www.mrbsemporium.com/>.

“Ian McEwan’s Nutshell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/30/nutshell-ian-mcewan-review-hamlet-foetus>
 came out earlier in the season this year,Bruce Springsteen’s Born To Run came 
out on a Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/21/born-to-run-by-bruce-springsteen-review>
 [last month],” he said, adding: “Yes tomorrow is a big focus point, but it has 
been a bit more staggered.”

Debbie James, owner of The Bookshop Kibworth, agreed. “This year there have 
been several days of big book releases, so it feels like there have been lots 
of Super Thursdays, which is a great thing for bookshops,” she said. The UK and 
Ireland celebrated the first Bookshop Day on 8 October, with about 2,000 
bookshops taking part in the campaign organised by Books Are My Bag.

Super Thursday also sees the release of an armload of books exploring the 
Danish concept of hygge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/18/hygge-a-soothing-balm-for-the-traumas-of-2016>
, which roughly translates as cosiness. Whether it is Scandinavian Comfort 
Food: Embracing the Art of Hygge, Hygge: A Celebration of Simple Pleasures, How 
to Hygge: The Secrets of Nordic Living, or Hygge: The Danish Art of Happiness, 
our desire to behyggelig can be met in full from today.

Booksellers are also expecting big things from Ladybird, which is publishing a 
new tranche ofparody titles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/22/the-long-history-of-ladybird-parodies>
 featuring artwork from its archives, in homage to the its children’s books of 
the 1960s and 1970s. After the children’s publisher topped the Christmas charts 
last year with How It Works: The Husband – “he may look complicated, but he is 
in fact very simple. He runs on sausages and beer” – it has seven new titles 
appealing to the same market, including How it Works: The Cat, The Ladybird 
Book of the People Next Door, the Sickie, and the Zombie Apocalypse.

This year, however, the Ladybird books will face fierce competition from a 
raft of Famous Five titles catering to the same market, from Five Go On A 
Strategy Away Day to Five on Brexit Island – “it is the night of the referendum 
and the Five have retired to Kirrin Island to enjoy the fresh air and sunshine, 
fed up with the rancour of public debate. George is firmly a ‘remainer’, whilst 
Julian, who is in the ‘Brexit’ camp, is tolerated on the grounds that Anne 
cannot bear to go camping without him”. Those will be publish early next month.

“The new Ladybirds arrived yesterday and are a hit already. The Zombie 
Apocalypse is perfect timing for Halloween and great for occasions and for 
individuals as gifts. The one-page joke is an easy one for customers to get,” 
said Helen Stanton of Forum Books in Corbridge.


For that reason“the new Famous Five books may have the edge on Ladybird’s 
parody series this year”, said James. She predicted predicting that Five on 
Brexit Island could do particularly well on the sales front. “However, the 
competition is going to be fierce – it could be like Blur versus Oasis all over 
again,” she added.

Richard Humphreys, non-fiction buyer at Waterstones, said: “We are very 
excited about the new Famous Five parodies, the subjects seem appealing and it 
will be very interesting to see how they shape up against the publishing 
juggernaut of the Ladybird humour books,.”

Jasper Sutcliffe, head of buying at independent bookshop chain Foyles, said 
2016 festive period looked like it was going to be “a Christmas of national 
treasures, from Jamie Oliver toAlan Bennett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/alanbennett>, Martina Cole to Phil Collins”.

Sutcliffe also tipped Grayson Perry’s The Descent of Man, saying it was “a 
particular highlight for us”. Describing it as “amazing, insightful, accessible 
and personal”, he added: “There’s been a public conversation about femininity 
for some time now, so it’s only fair we do the same for men.”

Stanton picked Bennett’s Keeping On Keeping On as her tip for a possible No 1, 
calling it “good for us and good across the book trade.Jamie Oliver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/oliver> will also sell very well, but 
more so in supermarkets and high street chains than independents.”

She also pointed out Meetings With Remarkable Manuscripts, Christopher de 
Hamel’s exploration of medieval manuscripts, as a strong seller for her 
independent bookshop, and said she was looking forward to the release of Robert 
Seethaler’s novel The Tobacconist.

“Super Thursday always feels like Christmas come early for booksellers and 
anything which gets the wider world talking about books can only be positive. 
On the non-fiction and fiction sides respectively, only a fool would bet 
against Alan Bennett, Guy Martin, Jamie Oliver and Martina Cole, and clearly 
the new tranche of Ladybird books will provide rocket boosters to humour 
sales,” said Chris White, Waterstones fiction buyer.
 