
Supermarkets <https://www.theguardian.com/business/supermarkets> are preparing 
to fly in emergency salad from the US after heavy rains and flooding in Spain 
hit supplies.

About 80% of fresh produce – including leafy salads as well as celery and 
broccoli – sold in the UK at this time of year comes from the Murcia region in 
southernSpain <https://www.theguardian.com/world/spain>.

Suppliers spoken to by the Guardian said yields in the region had dropped to 
as low as 30% of those expected at this time of year on some crops, such as 
little gem lettuces, as farmers’ fields were inundated last weekend. Celery 
yields have dropped to 40% of normal levels while some citrus crops, including 
satsumas and clementines, have also been affected.

“There has been a deluge of flooding in that part of Spain and they have got 
blocked roads, flooded dispatch facilities and mobile rigs for picking as well 
as crops that have been washed away,” said Anthony Gardiner ofG’s 
<http://www.gs-fresh.com/>, a major supplier to the supermarkets with 
operations in the UK and Spain.

He said the past week had been “incredibly challenging” and that supply 
difficulties could last for weeks.

This week farmers have struggled to access fields and organise deliveries amid 
heavy flooding that had left roads and some workers’ homes deluged. But the 
loss of newly planted seedlings means there is likely to be further shortages 
into January and February, just as Brits seek out salad for their new year
health kick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/18/health-without-wealth-eat-well-for-less>
.

One wholesaler said some supermarkets were planning to fly in stock from the 
US and at least one supermarket confirmed it would do so.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fsupermarkets-fly-emergency-salad-from-us-spanish-floods%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18087831bd96b4eae879047161cc8d86bd9b08a3%2F0_199_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Supermarkets%20to%20fly%20in%20emergency%20salad%20from%20US%20after%20Spanish%20floods&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fsupermarkets-fly-emergency-salad-from-us-spanish-floods%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Supermarkets%20to%20fly%20in%20emergency%20salad%20from%20US%20after%20Spanish%20floods&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fsupermarkets-fly-emergency-salad-from-us-spanish-floods%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18087831bd96b4eae879047161cc8d86bd9b08a3%2F0_199_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 Flooded streets in the village of Los Alcázares in Murcia, Spain. Photograph: 
Marcial Guillen/EPA 
“These have been among the worst downpours we have seen since these farms were 
established in the 1980s,” a spokeswoman for theBritish Leafy Salads Association
 <http://www.britishleafysalads.co.uk/> told trade journal the Grocer. “The 
rainfall has been so intense that the ground is saturated and there is nowhere 
for the excess water to go.”

Andy Weir at Reynolds <https://www.reynolds-cs.com/>, which supplies national 
restaurant chains including Pizza Express and Carluccio’s, said: “We have 
managed to maintain availability as we buy from contracted growers and they 
have pulled out all the stops. There is a massive shortage in the market and if 
you don’t have a contract of supply you will struggle.”


He said difficulty in organising new planting to replace lost seedlings was 
likely to mean salad supply problems would emerge again in February and March 
when those crops should be harvested.

Some supermarkets including Sainsbury’s and Aldi had signs up warning shoppers 
they were experiencing salad shortages ahead of Christmas.

A spokesperson for Sainsbury’s said: “There has been limited supply of our 
iceberg and gem lettuce due to weather conditions in Spain but deliveries to 
stores are now taking place. We are doing all we can to ensure customers can 
buy the lettuce of their choice for Christmas and Boxing Day.”

Aldi said it was experiencing shortages in some areas, but Tesco and Morrisons 
said they had no serious shortages.
 