
Indonesian police have said a suspected Islamic militant arrested earlier this 
week was making explosives more powerful than those used in the 2002 Bali 
bombings that killed 202 people.

Rio Priatna Wibawa, 23, was linked to Bahrun Naim, an Indonesian militant 
fighting with the Islamic State group in Syria, national police spokesman 
Rikwanto said on Saturday. Naim was believed to have inspired attacks at home 
including a January attack in the capital Jakartathat killed eight people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/14/jakarta-bombings-multiple-casualties-after-indonesian-capital-hit-by-suicide-attacks>
.

A bunch of amateurs: Indonesia's homegrown jihadis ridicule Isis after Jakarta 
attack
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/11/indonesia-homegrown-jihadis-lethal-cocktail-terror-isis-jakarta>
Bomb-making explosives were recovered from a laboratory in Wibawa’s home in 
Majalengka town, West Java province, said Rikwanto, who goes by one name. With 
his ability, Wibawa was making bombs three times as powerful as theBali bombs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2002/oct/13/indonesia>, Rikwanto said.

A security crackdown since the 2002 Bali bombings has rounded up hundreds of 
radicals and reduced their capacity for large attacks. But a new threat has 
emerged from the hundreds of Indonesians who have travelled abroad to fight 
with Isis before returning home.

Rikwanto said Wibawa, a dropout from an agricultural university who was said 
to have been radicalised by the writings of firebrand cleric Aman Abdurrahman, 
allegedly received funds from radicalised Indonesians working in Saudi Arabia, 
Malaysia and Taiwan, and was operating under the direction of Naim.

The world's worst traffic: can Jakarta find an alternative to the car?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/nov/23/world-worst-traffic-jakarta-alternative>
Several other suspected militants were involved in the bomb-making and police 
are searching for them, Rikwanto said. Police, from their interrogation of 
Wibawa, believe he obtained bomb-making materials from contacts in Java, 
Sumatra and East Nusatenggara inIndonesia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/indonesia> as well as the Philippines.

Possible targets for attack were the parliament building, police headquarters, 
embassies, television stations, places of worship and cafes, according to 
Rikwanto.

Chemicals seized from Wibawa’s laboratory included RDX, which is a component 
in plastic explosives, TNT, high explosive peroxide HMTD and gunpowder.
 