
Japan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> has taken its reputation for 
hygiene up another notch with the introduction of “toilet paper” for 
smartphones inside toilets at Narita international airport.

In a new take on the meaning of public convenience, users are invited to pull 
off a piece of paper from a dispenser next to the regular toilet roll and give 
their phone screens a germ-busting polish.

The smartphone sheets, which bear the message “welcome to Japan”, were 
installed in 86 cubicles at Narita’s arrivals hall this month, according to the 
Mainichi Shimbun.

The telecoms company behind the service, NTT Docomo, said the option of an 
extra wipe would remain until next March.

The introduction of the cleaning paper came in response to studies showing 
that smartphone screens typically house more germs than toilet seats. Surveys 
show that foreign visitors are universally impressed with the cleanliness and 
versatility of Japan’s public toilets.

Japan may install toilets in elevators for earthquake emergencies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/03/japan-may-install-toilets-in-elevators-for-earthquake-emergencies>
Toilets are serious business in Japan, where many public buildings are fitted 
with hi-techwashlets <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Washlet> with heated seats 
and jets of warm water and air that the late restaurant criticAA Gill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/aa-gill> described as “strangely addictive”.


In some women’s public lavatories, users can call on assistance from the sound 
princess <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2004/oct/05/highereducation.science>
 – a gadget that produces loud flushing sounds on demand to cover up any 
embarrassing noises associated with answering the call of nature.

Japan’s newest toilet models have a deodorising function that, it is claimed, 
can quickly eliminate unpleasant smells, and “intelligent” seats and lids that 
rise automatically depending on whether a male user is about tourinate standing 
up <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/dec/13/japan.justinmccurry> or 
settle in for a longer stay.

Incoming passengers at Narita are encouraged to read their smartphone sheets 
before they flush them away for details of Wi-Fi spots and other travel 
information, according to the Mainichi.
 