
It was only a few months back that a friend told me he’d seen Syd Barrett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2006/jul/11/sydbarrett.pinkfloyd> drifting 
down Charing Cross Road, looking in guitar shops. His hair was long again, and 
he was back to wearing his old snakeskin boots.


Such a revelation may not mean much to a lot of you, but to hardcore Pink 
Floyd fanatics, even thepossibility of his return is cause enough for 
celebration. Barrett – the guitarist/songwriter who shaped the early image of
Pink Floyd <https://www.theguardian.com/music/pinkfloyd> through such vehicles 
as Arnold Layne, See Emily Play and Interstellar Overdrive – had been in his 
post-Floyd obscurity the object of a cult-level adoration; a genius who almost 
was.

 He flashed back briefly last year, forming a band called Stars with Twink, 
the mildly notorious ex-drummer of such luminaries as Tomorrow, the Pretty 
Things and Pink Fairies, and some bashful nonentity known as Syd Monk on bass. 
The ill-fated Stars lasted long enough for one gig: a one-off venue in 
Cambridge, backing up theMC5 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2003/mar/13/artsfeatures.popandrock>.

 Barrett seemed ever-distant on stage, reduced to playing vague fragments of 
theme, inane guitar doodles and glimpses of songs. It appeared to be just 
another exercise in Barrett’s own bizarre and confusing brand of pointless 
cacophony. After the gig Syd disappeared again, eventually to return to the 
basement of his mother’s house in Cambridge, where he’d passed the majority of 
his time since the break fromPink Floyd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/07/pink-floyd-knebworth-1975> in 
1968.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Fnick-kent-pink-floyd-syd-barrett-classic-profile-creem-1973%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09edf62e1ddf99e011686c40f0ba9e41ccf71e42%2F0_0_3494_3730%2F3494.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Syd%20Barrett%3A%20the%20genius%20who%20almost%20was%20%E2%80%93%20a%20classic%20profile%20by%20Nick%20Kent&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Fnick-kent-pink-floyd-syd-barrett-classic-profile-creem-1973%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Syd%20Barrett%3A%20the%20genius%20who%20almost%20was%20%E2%80%93%20a%20classic%20profile%20by%20Nick%20Kent&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Fnick-kent-pink-floyd-syd-barrett-classic-profile-creem-1973%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09edf62e1ddf99e011686c40f0ba9e41ccf71e42%2F0_0_3494_3730%2F3494.jpg>
 Pink Floyd in 1967. Left to right: Richard Wright, Syd Barrett, Roger Waters 
and Nick Mason. Photograph: Dezo Hoffmann/Rex Features 
 That’s but one further episode in the Barrett chronicles, and it exists amid 
numerous half-chewed anecdotes and tall tales of his various post-Floyd 
misadventures. Like the one about our hero, his head shaved in a reformatory 
crop, appearing nervously backstage after a performance by his old mates in 
their hometown, whispering an agitated plea: “Remember me? I’m Syd … I used to 
play in your group…”

 Or the tales of his acid-casualty excesses, his freakouts, disappearing acts 
and general weirdness. He’s a genuine eccentric, one of those people that 
people just love to wonder about. He joins in that category the likes of Brian 
Wilson, Bob Dylan (vintage 1966), Lou Reed and Iggy Pop (before their 
respective resurrections) and Brian Jones. Heavy company, to be sure, but Syd 
has earned his keep.

It was Barrett who more or less transformed the Abdabs, another wearisome 
student combo who specialised in playing Roadrunner and little else, into a 
decidedly more intriguing project. The Pink Floyd (name derived from old 
jazzers Pink Gingham and Floyd Cramer) quickly became the darlings of London’s 
dilettante “avant-garde” culture, then holed up in Arts Labs and clubs like the 
UFO. Their first publicity shots – four clean-faced youths disguised in Jim 
McGuinn specs, posed in front of a rather tepid light show – seem almost as 
lame now as, say, the Seeds’ first flower-power flack photos. The magic was the 
fact that they were the first English band to assimilate the waves of emerging 
psychedelia sent off by the raga-rock Byrds and the Tomorrow Never Knows 
experiments of the Beatles. Their light show, however ragged, was still the 
first in the British Isles.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Fnick-kent-pink-floyd-syd-barrett-classic-profile-creem-1973%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd358eb2b4c3a9724697d3b959c747ef6cdc31135%2F0_0_2629_3968%2F2629.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Syd%20Barrett%3A%20the%20genius%20who%20almost%20was%20%E2%80%93%20a%20classic%20profile%20by%20Nick%20Kent&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Fnick-kent-pink-floyd-syd-barrett-classic-profile-creem-1973%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Syd%20Barrett%3A%20the%20genius%20who%20almost%20was%20%E2%80%93%20a%20classic%20profile%20by%20Nick%20Kent&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Fnick-kent-pink-floyd-syd-barrett-classic-profile-creem-1973%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd358eb2b4c3a9724697d3b959c747ef6cdc31135%2F0_0_2629_3968%2F2629.jpg>
 Syd Barrett during a Pink Floyd concert in 1967. Photograph: Andrew 
Whittuck/Redferns 
 After the Floyd came a motley crew indeed, including (in decreasing 
importance) the Crazy World of Arthur Brown, Tomorrow, and Hapshash and his 
Coloured Coat. But Pink Floyd were unquestionably the heavyweights; Paul 
McCartney took some time off from the recording set of Sgt. Pepper to drop by 
and bestow his papal blessings, the English music press nodded in assent, and 
the band backed it all up splendidly with two hit singles, Arnold Layne and See 
Emily Play.

 The strange and sinister quality of the former gave way to the contemporary 
Edward Lear-styled psychedelic whimsy of See Emily Play. It was a unique 
marriage: the English nonsense tradition pioneered by Lewis Carroll and Kenneth 
Grahame (the title for the first Floyd album, Piper at the Gates of Dawn, came 
from a chapter heading in Wind in the Willows) and some (then) new-fashioned 
chemical nonsense as well. “Our main musical influences are the Byrds, Mothers 
of Invention and the Blues Magoos,” stated Syd to the press. What, no Coltrane, 
Stockhausen or Penderecki?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5R8EpAv4miA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5R8EpAv4miA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5R8EpAv4miA&media=>
 Pink Floyd’s See Emily Play. 
 In the meantime, Barrett was getting an overt reputation for … how you say it 
…instability. His mammoth chemical indulgences were legend, and his material 
slowly came to be the first definitive statement on acid-casualty music: songs 
that disintegrated for no apparent reason (witness Jug Band Blues on the second 
Floyd album, a distorted piece of absurdity and as good an explanation as any 
for Barrett’s absence on the rest of the record) or bouts of manic one-chord 
strumming which made the Velvet Underground’s Sister Ray sound like a rock 
opera. Unfortunately for Barrett aficionados, his really powerful twilight 
rantings like Vegetable Man and “Scream your last scream, old woman with a 
basket” were never committed to wax and are now lost forever.

Mick Rock’s best photograph: Syd Barrett on a Pontiac Parisienne
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/feb/12/mick-rock-best-photograph-syd-barrett>
 One day Syd showed up with a new song called Have You Got It Yet? that he 
would spontaneously change whenever the rest of the band attempted to follow 
him. He’d sing “Have you got it yet,” and they’d scream back “No!” It was a 
joke they didn’t get for hours.

 Stories about his final shot with Pink Floyd are vague and often 
contradictory, but the most credible (or at least the most oft-repeated) 
version follows. At a job at London’s Saturday Club, Barrett showed up and was 
unusually (even for him) uncommunicative. The band attempted to go into Set the 
Controls for the Heart of the Sun, but Syd could only repeat a single chord 
over and over, with no variation in tone or intensity. The band tried every 
trick at their disposal to break his pattern, but it was as if Syd was flying 
on automatic pilot.No comprende.

 There were other problems as well. While the band was attempting to introduce 
David Gilmour into the band as a second guitarist, Barrett had a couple of 
borderline buddies – one on banjo, the other saxophone – slated to join up as 
well. This didn’t set especially well with the other members, and they tried to 
convince him that his position in the group would be strengthened if he played 
it like Brian Wilson: a non-touring member that would write material and make a 
studio contribution. When this line was rejected, there was very little choice 
but for the partnership to be dissolved. Pink Floyd’s management at the time – 
Blackhill Enterprises – decided to go with Syd, a decision that has yet to see 
a return.

 A solo album was floundering when Roger Waters and David Gilmour stepped in, 
and their presence (as producers) may have been a decisive factor in EMI’s 
decision to even let him finish the record. The album, The Madcap Laughs, was 
superficially more low-key than the brash stamp of his Pink Floyd work, and yet 
somehow farther away. He recorded another solo album, Barrett, whose cult 
acceptance matched that of the previous record. But apparently that acceptance 
wasn’t deemed strong enough to warrant pursuing the matter further, and neither 
record was released in America. The word is passed by subterranean means, 
however, and you can usually find both albums at any good import shop.

 Pink Floyd, meanwhile, struggled on manfully. They marshalled their resources 
and released what certain old-liners would have you believe to be the only 
respectable post-Barrett album to date, Saucerful of Secrets. But the musty 
odour of Barrett’s influence hung over the creation, with the grandiose 
constructions somehow more vacuous than Barrett’s earnestly authentic brain 
jangles. Still, you have to give ‘em their due. Pink Floyd staunchly stood 
their ground while everyone else was desperately trying to learn the rudiments 
of pedal-steel guitar, and their commercial explosion withDark Side of the Moon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2011/aug/26/dark-side-moon-pink-floyd>
is the payoff for that perseverance.

And Syd Barrett <https://www.theguardian.com/music/sydbarrett>, the man Roger 
Waters still contends to be “one of the three best songwriters in the world”, 
is working as a part-time gardener in Cambridge.

 © Nick Kent, 1973

• This article was amended on 7 January 2016. An earlier version of the 
caption on the group photo said it dated from 1960 rather than 1967.

 