
Michael Gratton was cycling to work in Sydney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney> when he was stopped in a 
recent police “education and awareness” blitz and fined $531 (£310). His 
offence? Not wearing a helmet, not having a bell and not having a working brake.

“The bell fine of $106 is ridiculous,” says the robotics researcher, who is 
challenging the third fine, as braking on his fixed-wheel bike is done through 
the pedals – and his bike has a front brake anyway. “I don’t ride on the 
footpath and a bell is useless against cars. It has been my experience in the 
past that if you ring a bell behind a person they are as likely to jump into 
your way as out of it. Pedestrians also see ringing a bell as an aggressive 
act. The fines are massively disproportionate.”

Gratton was one of many caught out by a huge increase in fines for cycling 
offences in New South Wales 
<http://cyclingtips.com/2016/04/what-impact-have-the-new-cycling-laws-had-in-new-south-wales/>
. The fine for not wearing a helmet (which is compulsory across Australia) rose 
from $71 to $319; fines for cycling through a red light, riding negligently or 
not stopping at a pedestrian crossing were all raised from $71 to $425.

The value of cycling in Sydney has been undermined by hysterical claims
Clover Moore 
From March next year it will be compulsory for all cyclists in Sydney and 
elsewhere in the state to carry identification. This is going too far, says Ray 
Rice, chief executive ofBicycle NSW <https://bicyclensw.org.au/>. “There has 
been no evidence provided that there was any real issue in identifying riders. 
Police have existing powers to do this. It will mean that riders will need to 
carry a driver’s licence or photo card even when going to the local shops or 
down to the beach. This will be a disincentive to riding.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Fsydney-australia-war-cyclists-fines%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c9af8ea9fedca1961482bdd13d1d569b6dd28ee%2F0_81_3732_2239%2F3732.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sydney's%20'war%20on%20cyclists'%3A%20'I%20got%20fined%20%24106%20for%20not%20having%20a%20bell'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Fsydney-australia-war-cyclists-fines%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sydney%27s%20%27war%20on%20cyclists%27%3A%20%27I%20got%20fined%20%24106%20for%20not%20having%20a%20bell%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Fsydney-australia-war-cyclists-fines%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c9af8ea9fedca1961482bdd13d1d569b6dd28ee%2F0_81_3732_2239%2F3732.jpg>
 Cyclist injuries remain high in Sydney – but are fines the solution? 
Photograph: The Sydney Morning Herald/Fairfax Media via Getty Images 
Clover Moore – the mayor of Sydney since 2004 who is running for a fourth term 
– is a longtime supporter of cycling as a way of making cities more liveable, 
but her political rivals use that as a blunt instrument to attack her.


“The value of cycling in Sydney has been undermined by hysterical claims that 
bike riding will cripple the city’s economy, misleading stories that distort 
data to proclaim that less people are riding,and wilful ignorance of good 
practice overseas,” she told the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/aug/25/sydney-australia-bike-lane-skeptic-cycling-duncan-gay-cycleways>
.

An independent who leans to the left, Moore’s main rival for mayor is 
Christine Forster, a member of the conservative Liberal party, and sister of 
former Australian prime minister Tony Abbott. Forster wants a moratorium on 
cycle lanes while a light rail system is built, and then a reassessment of the 
existing network. Moore says the Liberal-National New South Wales government 
passed legislation giving two votes to businesses against one to residents to 
help Forster – and the recent increase in fines for cycling offences could be 
seen as backing Forster’s views over Moore’s.

But Duncan Gay, the NSW minister for roads, insists it is about safety and 
that cycling groups were consulted. “With cycling injuries remaining high in 
NSW, I had no choice but to look at tougher deterrents and increased 
enforcement to improve safety for cyclists and other road users like 
pedestrians,” he said via email. “I don’t want to see another dollar in fine 
revenue but I do hope to see a reduction in cyclist injuries.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Fsydney-australia-war-cyclists-fines%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8beb783711ee8f23eb24cf4830ac9bbdb83317a7%2F0_0_3500_2255%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sydney's%20'war%20on%20cyclists'%3A%20'I%20got%20fined%20%24106%20for%20not%20having%20a%20bell'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Fsydney-australia-war-cyclists-fines%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sydney%27s%20%27war%20on%20cyclists%27%3A%20%27I%20got%20fined%20%24106%20for%20not%20having%20a%20bell%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Fsydney-australia-war-cyclists-fines%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8beb783711ee8f23eb24cf4830ac9bbdb83317a7%2F0_0_3500_2255%2F3500.jpg>
 All cyclists must wear helmets in Australia. Photograph: Cameron Spencer/Getty 
Images 
That’s not how many cyclists see it – and Mark Ames, of consultancy Strategic 
Cities <mailto:@StrategicCities>, says Sydney is going against the flow of 
other world cities. “Making your city efficient should be above party politics, 
cycling is not really a right versus left thing, yet here in Sydney it is kind 
of seen as being a lefty, hippie, latte-sipping city thing, not something 
important,” he says.

“If you look at the leaders of other cities that are investing in cycling, 
they are conservative. In New York there was Michael Bloomberg, in Auckland it 
is the New Zealand prime minister John Key who led the charge on a $50m 
cycleway project. And in London, it was Boris Johnson, also a conservative. The 
tone of the debate here is very peculiar.”

Australia's biggest bike-lane sceptic 'wants to destroy cycling in Sydney'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/aug/25/sydney-australia-bike-lane-skeptic-cycling-duncan-gay-cycleways>
Australia’s second largest city, Melbourne, was once seen as friendlier to 
cyclists than Sydney – but that is no longer the case according to Chris 
Standen, an analyst at the University of Sydney’s Institute of Transport and 
Logistics Studies.

“In both cities you have some local councils that see value in giving more 
people the freedom to get around, or to access public transport, by bicycle, 
something that requires a connected bicycle network with either safe traffic 
speeds, or physical separation between traffic and bicycles.

“But in both cities you also have a state roads authority whose number one 
objective is to maximise the flow of motor vehicles through our neighbourhoods, 
and is therefore reluctant to approve any roadway changes that would affect 
vehicle flow … Progress on bicycle network development has been a lot slower in 
Sydney and Melbourne than in cities which have a single metropolitan transport 
authority responsible for all transport modes, such as New York, London and 
Berlin.”


In Australia, the “war on cyclists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/21/four-wheels-good-two-wheels-bad-nsws-war-on-cyclists-continues>
” continues.

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 