
The British government and parliament have failed the people of Syria, yet 
again. Like rabbits caught in headlights they have no plan of practical action 
tosave civilian lives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/13/red-cross-urgent-plea-to-save-civilians-aleppo-syria>
.

US and UK explore possibility of aid airdrops in Syria
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/04/us-uk-explore-possibility-aid-airdrops-syria-drones>
Yesterday’s debate in the House of Commons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/13/mps-to-debate-how-uk-can-help-civilians-trapped-in-aleppo-hellhole>
 was all tears and talk. There was no vote to do anything. Theresa May’s 
absence and the lack of a government action plan signalled that Downing Street 
is not taking the plight of civilians seriously.

Boris Johnson’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/dec/13/labour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live>
 futile rant against Bashar al-Assad and Putin looked like bluster to cover up 
his own lack of proposals. Yet again he offered more excuses; mistakenly 
claiming thataid drops are impossible 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/boris-johnson-rules-out-british-aid-drops-over-aleppo-a7472806.html>
 because they’d put RAF planes and aircrew at risk of being shot down. In fact, 
aid could be delivered by pilotless drones andGPS-guided parachutes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/08/push-for-east-aleppo-aid-drops-using-gps-guided-parachutes>
.

While all the focus is now on Aleppo, we need to remember that nearly five 
million Syrians 
<http://www.unocha.org/syrian-arab-republic/syria-country-profile/about-crisis> 
are living in other besieged and hard-to-access cities, towns and villages. Aid 
drops are urgently needed. Britain and other states with the capacity must act 
now.

Last Friday, by 122 votes to 13 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-mideast-crisis-syria-un-idUSKBN13Y27C?il=0>, 
the UN general assembly demanded a ceasefire in Syria; an end to all sieges and 
the delivery of humanitarian aid to the suffering populations. This gives the 
UK and other countries a UN mandate to carry out air drops of food, medicine, 
blankets and fuel. These are desperately needed by starving, freezing and 
wounded civilians.

The other urgent priority right now is to protect Syrians from massacre in 
territory seized by Assad. We remember the killings afterYarmouk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/10/yarmouk-is-being-annihilated-palestinians-in-syria-are-left-to-their-fate>
,Darayya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/26/syria-evacuation-of-rebels-and-families-from-darayya-under-way>
 andHoms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/feb/04/drone-footage-homs-syria-utter-devastation-video>
 were captured by his soldiers. This must not be allowed to happen again, as 
regime troops take over the rest of Aleppo.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fpeter-tatchell-syria-protest-disrupts-jeremy-corbyn-speech-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Peter%20Tatchell%20Syria%20protest%20disrupts%20Jeremy%20Corbyn%20speech%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fpeter-tatchell-syria-protest-disrupts-jeremy-corbyn-speech-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Peter%20Tatchell%20Syria%20protest%20disrupts%20Jeremy%20Corbyn%20speech%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fpeter-tatchell-syria-protest-disrupts-jeremy-corbyn-speech-video&media=>
Peter Tatchell Syria protest disrupts Jeremy Corbyn speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2016/dec/10/peter-tatchell-syria-protest-disrupts-jeremy-corbyn-speech-video>
To prevent or minimise the possibility of a slaughter ensuing, the UK should 
be pressing the UN to send in observers to monitor civilians, backed up by 
peacekeepers, as soon as possible. Their presence would deter disappearances, 
torture and extrajudicial murders – and these must be documented if, heaven 
forbid, they happen.

Our government and others should issue warrants for the arrest of parties to 
the conflict – primarily the Syrian government and military – who have been 
responsible formass torture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/08/un-report-syrian-government-actions-amount-to-extermination-crime-humanity>
. We have the legal authority to do this under theUN Convention Against Torture 
1984 
<http://www.unhcr.org/uk/protection/migration/49e479d10/convention-against-torture-other-cruel-inhuman-degrading-treatment-punishment.html>
 and section 134 of theCriminal Justice Act 1988 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1988/33/contents>. Although getting them 
to trial might be difficult – at least in the short term – this would be a 
powerful, symbolic gesture and would send a deterrent signal to would-be 
torturers.

Finally, the UK government ought to take the lead in securing a UN agreement 
to set up a Syria war crimes tribunal, similar to those established in the wake 
of theYugoslav 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/gallery/2011/jul/20/war-crimes-bosnia-and-herzegovina>
 andRwandan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/02/rwanda-genocide-fight-justice> 
conflicts. Its remit should be to prosecute all war criminals on all sides, 
including war crimes by the Assad and Putin regimes, Isis and other Islamist 
groups, the Free Syrian Army and even possible criminal acts by US-led 
coalition forces.

Britain should aim to bring on board other countries to back and implement 
these initiatives, creating an international drive for serious, concrete action 
to save civilian lives – and to bring to justice war criminals and perpetrators 
of crimes against humanity. The time for talk and hand-wringing is over. 
Syrians need action now.
 