
Reading on mobile? Click here to listen 
<https://w.soundcloud.com/player/?url=http%3A%2F%2Fapi.soundcloud.com%2Fplaylists%2F3981038%3Fsecret_token%3Ds-w21lC>

Hometown: Maplewood, New Jersey. 

The lineup: Solana Rowe (vocals). 

The background: We're not saying we're excited about SZA or anything, but we 
do think the music she is making does as much to advance the cause of the 
female R&B musician asDrake <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/drake>, the Weeknd 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/the-weeknd>, Miguel 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/artist/b05a34c1-1258-4bd3-8ec6-28cccbf11880> 
andFrank Ocean <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/frank-ocean> did for the male 
variety. Her EP, See.SZA.Run, which came out in the States last year and gets a 
release here next month, is the next logical step for indie or alt R&B – and we 
use those appellations because we haven't heard a sound this far out on an 
equivalent major label release since the glory days ofAaliyah and Timbaland 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nEF_-IcnQC4>. Imagine Aaliyah in the afterlife, 
or Solange in space – this music sounds as though it's coming at you from the 
other side, or the outer limits. The production on tracks such as Euphraxia, 
Advil, Crack Dreams, Once Upon a High, and Time Travel Undone (compare those 
titles with, say, the ones on the latest Rihanna album, with their rote 
language and love tropes) is INSANE, a mindblowing murk of billowing synths, 
bombing bass and crushed beats. Amid it all is a voice that's just another 
gorgeous, gaseous spectre in the mist/mix. It's like some outrageous 
culmination of all our favourite recent initiatives: witch house, chillwave, 
cloud rap, ethereal R&B: Cassie sings the Cocteau Twins with Syd tha Kid at the 
controls forthe TriAngle label 
<http://pitchfork.com/news/38155-new-label-alert-tri-angle/>, or something. 

Solana Rowe was born in St.Louis but has lived her whole life in New Jersey. 
She calls herself SZA (pronounced letter by letter), and not surprisingly loves 
RZA from theWu-Tang Clan <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/wutangclan>, as well 
asJohn Coltrane <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/john-coltrane>, Miles Davis 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/miles-davis>, Billie Holiday and Björk 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/bjork>. Lately, she's been listening to a lot 
ofAnimal Collective <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/animalcollective> and Ella 
Fitzgerald.

Her lyrics are inscrutable, adding to the atmosphere of pleasant 
torpor/stupor, but those titles (especially Advil, Crack Dreams and Once Upon a 
High, obviously) hint at a desire to retreat or escape from the worldly and 
everyday. The production – by, variously, Felix Snow and Patrick Lukens, 
BrandUn DeShay, ApSuperProducer and Top Notch, any one of whom could, for all 
we know, become the nextDarkchild <http://darkchild.com/> – goes beyond hippie 
trippiness to bring a sense of radiant splendour and rapt stupefaction.

On Ice.Moon, SZA sings: "Show me a way to a higher place". You can hear how, 
in lesser hands, the voice would have made that line an unsubtle rallying cry, 
belted or bellowed out. Here, though, it's one-part gospel to two-parts 
celestial warble. Country is breathtakingly pretty, blues and soul from Venus 
and Mars. Bed is likeCiara <https://twitter.com/ciara> if she met a producer up 
to the task of creating the right context for hersugar hiccup 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e_CHbmZIRXE>. Euphraxia finds SZA waxing 
esoteric about existentialism and the like, searching for answers over a 
clipped clatter – it's like some future hip-hop made by a band on 4AD in 1985. 
Crack Dreams obviates the necessity for the titular narcotic with its 
tranquilising bleepscape. Time Travel Undone is the one, though, the surest 
sign of the uncharted places SZA intends to go. It's like hearing a glimpse of 
the Björk-Beyoncé <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/beyonce> collaboration that 
will never be, a new kind of avant-jazz pop: unorthodox and untrammelled, yet 
accessible enough for repeat plays. Once Upon a High closes an EP of superb 
quality and distinction and introduces an artist with a vision singular enough 
to demand everyone's attention, not just those waiting for R&B to ascend to the 
next level. Which it might already have done here.

The buzz: "Super icy and chilled."  
<http://www.weallwantsomeone.org/2013/02/28/sza-ice-moon/> 

The truth: She's one possible future for female R&B. 

Most likely to: Work with RZA. 

Least likely to: With with ODB. 

What to buy: See.SZA.Run is released in April. 

File next to: Jhene Aiko, Cassie, Solange 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/solange-knowles>, the Internet. 

Links: https://soundcloud.com/justsza/ice-moon-prod-felix-snow 
<https://soundcloud.com/justsza/ice-moon-prod-felix-snow>. 

Monday's new band: Casual Sex.
 