
The Taiwanese <https://www.theguardian.com/world/taiwan> military is preparing 
for a Chinese invasion as fears grow about the impact that futureDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> policies towards Beijing may 
have on regional stability.


A two-day military drill that began on Tuesday simulated an attack by the 
People’s Liberation Army across the 112-mile (180km)Taiwan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/taiwan> strait that separates the mainland 
from the island nation of 23 million, amid deteriorating relations between 
Beijing and Taipei.

The island’s armed forces gathered in Taichung, central Taiwan, for annual 
drills that saw troops test their combat readiness with tanks, attack 
helicopters and artillery. Skydivers, known as Team Mighty Dragon, also 
demonstrated their precision landing skills.

The operation mimicked a scenario where Chinese war vessels had crossed over 
the middle line of the Taiwan strait.

“The military has active measures to deal with the situation in the Taiwan 
strait and theSouth China Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-china-sea>, so the public can rest 
assured,” defence spokesman Chen Chung-chi said. “We will enhance training 365 
days a year.”

The drills come one week after China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> 
set off alarm bells in Taiwan by sailing its only aircraft carrier, the 
Liaoning, through the strait, accompanied by a fleet of warships.

Related: China 'seriously concerned' after Trump questions Taiwan policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/12/donald-trump-questions-us-commitment-to-one-china-policy>

The Liaoning did not sail in Taiwanese waters, but entered an area covered by 
the island’s air defence zone. It was a show of strength that prompted Taiwan’s 
air force to scramble its fighter jets to “surveil and control” the passage of 
the fleet.

The Taiwanese government, led by the president, Tsai Ing-wen, has sought to 
reassure the public over growing Chinese military threats followingan 
unprecedented call with Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/03/trump-angers-beijing-with-provocative-phone-call-to-taiwan-president>
, the incoming US president, in December.

The call smashed decades of protocol that have prevented direct engagement 
between the two presidents since the US switched its diplomatic recognition of
China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> from Taipei to Beijing in 1979.

China considers Taiwan, a self-ruled democracy, as a breakaway province that 
will eventually be reunited with the mainland, by force if necessary. It views 
any attempts to recognise Taiwan identity as an attack on its sovereignty.

In recent weeks Trump has angered the Chinese government by intimating that 
its “One China” policy could become a bargaining chip in future trade talks.

On Monday, one government-run Chinese newspaper warned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/16/we-will-walk-on-international-stage-taiwanese-president-insists>
 that if provocation over Taiwan continued, China would be forced to “take off 
the gloves”.

In addition to the drills, the air force has confirmed an upgrade of Taiwan’s 
143 F-16 fighter aircraft.

The defence minister, Feng Shih-kuan, also recently called for increased 
vigilance over China, urging the island’s youth to join the military.

Related: China warns Trump that Taiwan policy is 'non-negotiable' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/15/china-warns-trump-that-taiwan-policy-is-non-negotiable>

Ross Darrell Feingold, from Taipei-based political risk consultancy DC 
International Advisory, played down the significance of the “routine” exercise.

“Obviously Taiwan faces an ongoing military threat from China, whether it’s 
from Chinese exercises intended to pressure Taiwan, or the long-term potential 
of a full and military invasion,” he said. “The perception of many observers is 
that military exercises in Taiwan are sometimes meant as much for public 
relations.”

However, experts warn that China, Taiwan and the US could be dragged into a 
messy military conflict if Trump continues to press Beijing over Taiwan once in 
power, forcing the Chinese president,Xi Jinping 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/xi-jinping>, to react rather than look weak 
at home.


 “Xi will see this as a very humiliating situation that Trump is putting him 
in, a humiliating position in the eyes of his own people,” warned Susan Shirk, 
the former US deputy assistant secretary of state. “And that is going to force 
him to push back very strongly in order to protect his position inside China.”

Shirk, who is now chair of the 21st Century China Centre at the University of 
California San Diego, added: “The risks are huge. The risks are right up to 
direct military confrontation.”

On Tuesday Xi sent an indirect message to Trump, using a meeting with the 
outgoing US vice-president, Joe Biden, 
<http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/2017-01/18/c_135991158.htm> to call for a 
“long-term, stable and cooperative” relationship between China and the US.

 