
Taiwan has asked Google to blur images of new military structures that have 
recently appeared on the hotly contested Spratly Islands in theSouth China Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-china-sea>.

Satellite pictures on Google Earth and Google Maps show four large 
three-pronged structures surrounding a circular building on the western 
coastline ofItu Aba, or Taiping Island 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/28/taiwan-president-ma-ying-jeou-visit-south-china-sea->
, which is controlled by Taiwan but also claimed by China, Vietnam and the 
Philippines.

The disclosure of the structures, revealed when images were updated in July, 
comes amid rising tensions over Beijing’s territorial claims in the SouthChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> Sea, and at a sensitive time for the 
Spratly Islands, a major archipelago located in strategic shipping lanes.

How China's artificial islands led to tension in the South China Sea
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/27/tensions-and-territorial-claims-in-the-south-china-sea-the-guardian-briefing>
In July, a United Nations court of arbitration upheld a challenge by the 
Philippines that China could not claim historic rights over the islands. It 
also characterised Taiping as a rock, meaning it could not be used to assert 
territorial claims over surrounding waters.

Both China and Taiwan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/taiwan> rejected the 
ruling.

The handling of Taiwan’s control of Taiping over China’s sovereignty claims 
has become one of the testing grounds of the new administration of President 
Tsai Ing-wen,who swept to power in January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/16/taiwan-elects-first-female-president>
.

On Tuesday, the coast guard director general, Lee Chung-wei, told the national 
parliament that Google had been notified about concealing the structures.

The defence ministry said the function of the facilities was classified.

“It is inconvenient for us to reveal any military facilities we are installing 
on Taiping island, and what their purposes are, as they are all considered 
secret,” the defence minister, Feng Shih-kuan, told reporters.

The purpose of the structures, which are believed to stand three to four 
storeys high, led to immediate speculation that they resembled anti-aircraft 
towers. But military experts said they were likely to be for detection and 
surveillance.

Google confirmed that it had received the request from the Taiwanese 
government and was reviewing it.
 