 Halfway through this autumn's Baltic Fleet manoeuvres off the Estonian coast, 
the deputy fleet commander held a press conference to explain each day's 
procedures. After it was over, a reporter asked to put an extra question direct 
to camera.
'Can you tell us,' the reporter asked, 'whether there is any truth in the 
rumours ... that you have sent all these warships here because of the rising 
nationalism inEstonia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/estonia>?' To his 
credit, the admiral was unfazed. 'Of course not. We could have had the 
manoeuvres off Leningrad or Latvia. It's pure coincidence that they are here.'

The Estonian reporter's question was extraordinary, a sign not only of the 
boldness of this republic's glasnost but also of local fears that comparisons 
between Estonia in 1988 and Czechoslovakia in 1968 are not fanciful.

A festering economic crisis, growing resentment over the high levels of 
Russian immigration, and anger at the way Moscow continues to monopolise all 
decision-making broke out this spring and summer into huge demonstrations.

Rank and file communists joined non-communists in calls for political reform 
in every sphere of Soviet life. They have called for Estonia to have its own 
citizenship, the restoration of the pre-war national flag, and full economic 
independence. One suggestion was that Estonia should become like one of China's 
special economic zones with special rights for foreigners to invest and a 
transferable currency.

Estonia's only senior diplomat, Mr Vaino Valyas, told the central committee 
last week that there was a 'crisis of confidence between the party and people' 
and that unless they gave in to most of the popular demands they would lose 
control of the situation. More than 200,000 people gathered yesterday for a 
mass rally. Mr Valyas also praised the newly-formed 'Green' movement in 
Estonia, although he did not expressly endorse its plans to run candidates in 
local elections. This too is a unique development.

No one knows whether the plan to give Estonia economic independence will lose 
it more than it gains.

Estonia is obliged to send much of its food to the rest of the Soviet Union at 
low prices fixed by Moscow, and imports consumer goods at high prices. With 
proper xozrashchet, or cost-accounting, the republic could charge market prices 
for its food, and trade freely with the rest of the world.

This part of Estonia's aspirations has won Mr Gorbachev's approval. Estonia 
hopes to move to it by January. Meanwhile, the Estonian spring is still on 
course, and the Baltic Fleet's unconnected warships have steamed away.
 