
It had been a long, long, Thursday evening at the European council summit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/21/theresa-may-awkward-eu-meeting-sees-little-progress-on-brexit>
 for Theresa May. First she had had to listen to loads of boring speeches about 
things she wasn’t very interested in and then she had got stuck next to a 
French bloke who’d insisted on talking to her in French. What was wrong with 
the EU these days? Back in David Cameron’s time, everyone used to speak in 
English.

Eventually her frustration had got the better of her and she had turned to the 
Frenchman to ask why her speech was only number 15 on the agenda.

“Parce qu’il n’y a pas 16 items sur the agenda,” the Frenchman had said, while 
swigging another tumbler of merlot.

The time passed slowly. Ten o’clock came and went. Eleven o’clock came and 
went. Midnight came and went. Just after 1am, a steward tapped her on the 
shoulder to let her know there was a spare five minutes if she had anything she 
wanted to get off her chest while the few remaining people still awake finished 
their coffee.

“I’d like to talk to you all about Brexit,” Theresa had begun.

“Parlez à la main,” shouted a lone Belgian, before falling off his chair.

Theresa continued, determined not to be distracted. “I’m here to tell you that 
Brexit means Brexit and that the UK remains committed to getting whatever deal 
with the EU we can manage to negotiate once we’ve got some sort of a clue what 
it is we really want.Merci, danke.”

Le Brexit: a linguistic guide for Theresa May
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/21/brexit-a-linguistic-guide-for-theresa-may>
Silence. Two people staggered off to bed without saying a word; the rest 
remained asleep in their chairs. Theépaule had never seemed so froide.

“I think that went quite well on the whole,” Theresa said later to one of her 
advisers.

“Er, yes ...” the adviser replied, guardedly. “I suppose you were at least 
invited to this summit. We only got to hear about the last one inBratislava 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/16/bratislava-summit-donald-tusk-urges-eu-leaders-not-to-waste-brexit-crisis>
 after it had finished.”

Things didn’t really pick up that much the following morning. On her way into 
the meeting, she had heard the European commission president,Jean-Claude Juncker
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/15/brexit-vote-years-of-lies-eu-jean-claude-juncker>
, whisper he wasn’t interested in doing Britain any favours and the frosty 
reception she had got in the room suggested that was a sentiment shared by 
other EU leaders.

“Can we talk about Brexit?” she begged.

“Non.”

“But I need to be able to tell people back home something. Can I just say 
we’ve agreed to start preliminary trade deals?”

“Nous will say rien until you invoke article 50 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/article-50>.”

“But I won’t know what I want unless we have some discussions before I trigger 
article 50.”

“Parlez en français,” sniggered Michel Barnier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/30/uk-heading-for-hard-brexit-say-european-diplomats>
, the EU’s chief Brexit negotiator.

“Mon français n’est pas très bon.”

“C’est meilleur que votre position de négociation!”

May: UK will remain at centre of EU decision-making until Brexit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/21/theresa-may-uk-centre-of-european-decision-making-until-brexit>
“He is right,” said Juncker. “Besides, nous want to talk about Russia, not vous
.”


The meeting ended with Theresa sulking and saying nothing as the Lithuanian 
president sent her email links to YouTube footage of Russian warships sailing 
up the English channel.

“It’s time for your press conference,” her adviser reminded her, shortly after 
1.30am. “Don’t forget to sound really upbeat and tell everyone this summit has 
been a huge personal success.”

“This summit has been a huge personal success, and Britain remains a 
confident, outward-looking and enthusiastic member ofEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>,” said a hollow-eyed, 
flatlining Theresa, sounding diffident and introverted. “We talked a bit about 
Russia and immigration and I am sure we can make a success of Brexit so long as 
people stop making it difficult for me. Now, does anyone have any questions?”

Theresa looked up, hoping that just this once no one did. No such luck. Did 
she really expect 27 countries to listen to us when we’re leaving? Wasn’t the 
EU out to embarrass us and make things difficult for us? How come she had made 
such a complete balls-up over the appointment ofDame Lowell Goddard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/14/dame-lowell-goddard-child-abuse-inquiry-racism-claims-totally-false>
 to the child sex abuse inquiry?

“Um ... er ... people really are listening to us,” she said. “They’ve just a 
funny way of showing it. Now is there anyone from the overseas media here?”

A hand shot up. Theresa fell on it gratefully, relieved to be able to show the 
whole world that at least one other country was listening to her. The hand 
turned out to belong to another UK journalist who was usually ignored and was 
trying to blag a question. There really was no one else out there listening to 
her after all. Theresa had never felt quite so alone.
 