
A historic effort to end the division of Cyprus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cyprus> has begun in earnest as Greek and 
Turkish community leaders resumed reunification talks before a high stakes 
multilateral conference, the first since the island’s partition 43 years ago.

Cyprus peace talks – all you need to know
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2017/jan/09/cyprus-peace-talks-all-you-need-to-know>
After 18 months of intensive negotiations to settle inter-ethnic divisions, 
Nicos Anastasiades and Mustafa Akıncı will attempt to finesse the details of a 
peace deal in Geneva this week by poring over maps and discussing territorial 
trade-offs before tackling the potentially explosive issue of security.

Asked if he was optimistic as he arrived at the UN’s European headquarters on 
Monday morning, Anastasiades, the Greek Cypriot leader, said: “Ask me when we 
are finished.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ftalks-to-secure-cyprus-reunification-enter-final-stages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec72509bcc8d290f68234b061fe4094a0fe92f85%2F209_0_760_831%2F760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Talks%20to%20secure%20Cyprus%20reunification%20enter%20'final%20stages'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ftalks-to-secure-cyprus-reunification-enter-final-stages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Talks%20to%20secure%20Cyprus%20reunification%20enter%20%27final%20stages%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ftalks-to-secure-cyprus-reunification-enter-final-stages%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec72509bcc8d290f68234b061fe4094a0fe92f85%2F209_0_760_831%2F760.jpg>
 The Turkish Cypriot leader, Mustafa Akıncı. Photograph: AFP/Getty Images 
For an island the finer skills of peacemakers has long eluded, the talks are 
seen as a defining moment in the arduous process of resolving what has long 
been regarded as the Rubik’s cube of diplomacy.


On Sunday, the new UN secretary general, António Guterres, described the talks 
as a historic opportunity. In Nicosiaofficials on both sides of the buffer zone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2014/apr/12/cyprus-buffer-zone-photographs-agencies>
 spoke of “the best and last chance” for a settlement. Other experts described 
the talks as the endgame.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ftalks-to-secure-cyprus-reunification-enter-final-stages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe98fbb0f8b087c8ff782fb94eef9ff29347f010%2F735_148_2639_2185%2F2639.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Talks%20to%20secure%20Cyprus%20reunification%20enter%20'final%20stages'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ftalks-to-secure-cyprus-reunification-enter-final-stages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Talks%20to%20secure%20Cyprus%20reunification%20enter%20%27final%20stages%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ftalks-to-secure-cyprus-reunification-enter-final-stages%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe98fbb0f8b087c8ff782fb94eef9ff29347f010%2F735_148_2639_2185%2F2639.jpg>
 The Cypriot president, Nicos Anastasiades. Photograph: Alkis 
Konstantinidis/Reuters 
“This is the final phase of the final phase,” said Hubert Faustmann, a 
professor of history and political science at the University of Nicosia. “It 
will be the first time since 1974 thatTurkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> and the Greek Cypriots will hold 
direct talks at the negotiating table.”

A week of fierce horse-trading lies ahead before Greece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece>, Turkey and former colonial power 
Britain – the island’s three guarantors under its post-independence 
constitution – convene on 12 January to address the issues of troop presence 
and security in an envisioned federation. Both are seen as crucial to ensuring 
1974 is never repeated.

“It is a classical final stage of negotiation,” said Faustmann. “Issues that 
neither side could agree on and have been kept pending will now be interlinked.”
Map of Cyprus 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2017/01/cyprus-zip/giv-3902KK51jqoPkoCt/>
The commitment to a settlement shown by Anastasiades and Akıncı has helped to 
raise hopes. The two men have shown a rare moderation, with some tracing their 
desire for a solution to their shared heritage as sons of the southern city of 
Limassol. Like Akıncı, Anastasiades – who heads Cyprus’s internationally 
recognised south – has memories of coexistence and believes time will only work 
against reunification.

Cyprus peace talks: Theresa May ready to attend if deal in sight
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/09/cyprus-peace-talks-theresa-may-ready-attend-deal-in-sight>
At a time of unprecedented uncertainty in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and growing global volatility, 
the need for a good news story has also added impetus. From Washington to 
Ankara there is recognition that a deal would bring stability to the wider 
region. The prospect of Greeks and Turks, Christians and Muslims cooperating in 
the continent’s eastern corner would, say officials, send a powerful message 
and be a beacon of hope.

Acknowledging a settlement will help set the tone for 2017, Turkey and Britain 
agreed at the weekend that a solution would be a game-changer. In statements 
made after the British prime minister, Theresa May, spoke by telephone to her 
Turkish counterpart,Recep Tayyip Erdoğan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/recep-tayyip-erdogan>, Downing Street said 
both leaders saw the talks as offering “a real opportunity to secure a better 
future for Cyprus and to guarantee stability in the wider region”.

The discovery of oil and natural gas deposits in the eastern Mediterranean and 
the spectre of Cyprus becoming an energy hub through which the reserves could 
be pumped to Europe has also helped drive the process.

Because peace talks have floundered so many times, however, there is consensus 
that if they do so again reunification efforts could collapse once and for all. 
Analysts have expressed fears that in event of failure Turkey could move to 
annex the north, where it continues to station more than 40,000 troops since 
invading in response to an Athens-inspired coup aimed at uniting the island 
with Greece. Guarantor powers have the right of military intervention, a right 
that Ankara is determined to maintain.

With both sides working on the premise that nothing is agreed until everything 
is agreed, officials are electing to voice cautious optimism.

“The last mile is always the most difficult,” a senior official in Ankara said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ftalks-to-secure-cyprus-reunification-enter-final-stages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F813d6033fc9adbf82d4ed86d325effb2da0718dc%2F291_0_3218_1932%2F3218.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Talks%20to%20secure%20Cyprus%20reunification%20enter%20'final%20stages'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ftalks-to-secure-cyprus-reunification-enter-final-stages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Talks%20to%20secure%20Cyprus%20reunification%20enter%20%27final%20stages%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ftalks-to-secure-cyprus-reunification-enter-final-stages%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F813d6033fc9adbf82d4ed86d325effb2da0718dc%2F291_0_3218_1932%2F3218.jpg>
 A Greek Cypriot soldier mans a checkpoint in Nicosia. Photograph: Kaveh 
Kazemi/Getty Images 
Any agreement will be put to twin referendums, which also raises the stakes. 
The last time a reunification deal was put to public vote in 2004, the minority 
Turks supported it but it was rejected by the Greek majority.

Persuading the Turks to surrender enough territory to allow at least 90,000 
Greek Cypriots displaced by the invasion to return to their homes is now 
pivotal to any deal.

Turkish Cypriots, citing the inter-ethnic violence that erupted after 
independence, in turn insist that mainland troops must remain to protect them 
in the event of renewed conflict.

Time for Cyprus's reunification has come – but Erdoğan holds the key
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/30/cyprus-reunification-erdogan-economic-gains-settlement-election-turkey>
The EU, which is likely to be represented by the European commission 
president, Jean-Claude Juncker, counters that Cyprus’s membership of the bloc 
is security enough. Greek Cypriots worry that without a withdrawal of troops 
their own security will never be guaranteed.

In talks so far, progress has been made on issues of governance, political 
power-sharing, the economy and the EU. Insiders liken the week ahead to a game 
of poker, in which concession and compromise will ultimately prevail, and there 
is thriller-like suspense over whether a comprehensive accord can finally be 
achieved. Heading to Geneva, Akıncı said it would be impossible to cover 
everything by the end of the week. The Greek foreign minister, Nikos Kotzias, 
echoed that sentiment, saying the talks were part of an open-ended process that 
should not be considered abortive if they were not conclusive.

Much will depend on Erdoğan, who has shown more flexibility on Cyprus than 
other Turkish leaders but is famously unpredictable.

The president, who has not clarified whether he will attend the talks, could 
exploit a Cyprus solution to improve ties with Europe that have become 
increasingly strained over migration. “It is he, and he alone, who will decide 
whether Turkey makes the concessions to solve the Cyprus problem,” Faustmann 
said. “But which way he will go, nobody knows.”
 