
Two senior Tata Steel executives are among 10 people suspended by the 
beleaguered company over forgery allegations that have prompted a criminal 
investigation by theSerious Fraud Office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/serious-fraud-office>.

The Guardian understands that Mark Broxholme, the managing director of the 
company’s speciality steels and bar business was suspended last November. 
Andrew Parker, the commercial director of the division, was also suspended and 
has since left the business.


The suspension of such senior figures within Tata Steel highlights the 
seriousness of the claims. The investigation is a further blow to the UK steel 
business, which is battling to survive after Tata announced it planned to pull 
out of the country, putting 15,000 jobs at risk. The speciality steels and bar 
business covers two ofTata’s <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tata> 
biggest sites in Rotherham and Stocksbridge, both in Yorkshire, and employs 
more than 2,000 people.

Tata's UK steel operation 'under investigation by SFO'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/08/tata-uk-steel-operation-underinvested-overmanned-ratan-tata>
The potential scandal was discovered when an internal audit by Tata 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/tata> found certificates that verify the 
quality and composition of its steel may have been falsified. The company then 
informed the SFO about its findings.

The SFO said in a statement on Friday: “The Serious Fraud Office confirms it 
opened a criminal investigation in December 2015 into activity at Speciality 
Steels, a business unit of Tata Steel (UK) Ltd. We can make no further comment 
at this time.”

The documents being investigated cover steel sold to about 500 customers, 
including BAE, Rolls-Royce, and oil and gas firms. Rolls has confirmed it has 
been contacted by Tata. The safety of the steel is not thought to have been 
compromised.

Tata is understood to have suspended nine people over the allegations last 
November and another employee in 2016. Broxholme did not respond to calls and 
emails seeking comment. Emails to his address are met with an automated 
response that simply says: “Away.”

The Tata executive has worked for the company and its predecessors – Corus and 
British Steel – since 1980. He is a leading business figure in the local 
community and sits on the board of the Barnsley & Rotherham Chamber of Commerce.

Broxholme has run the speciality steels and bars business since 2011. As well 
as the sites in Rotherham and Stocksbridge, the division has service centres in 
Bolton, India and Suzhou and Xi’an in China.

Parker was commercial director of the business between April 2013 and November 
2015 according to his LinkedIn profile. Since December he has been “actively 
seeking a new challenge”, according to the website. Parker could not be reached 
for comment.

Tata Steel said: “We won’t be commenting on the individuals concerned.” 

The allegations have emerged as the government tries to find a saviour for 
Tata Steel in the UK, which employs 15,000 people and includes the Port Talbot 
steelworks.

A number of potential buyers have emerged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/06/rescue-tata-uk-port-talbot-steel-operations>
, including Liberty House, which isrun by metals tycoon Sanjeev Gupta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/07/tata-steel-sanjeev-gupta-liberty-house-potential-bid-port-talbot>
, Greybull, the investment firm, and ThyssenKrupp, the German industrial 
conglomerate. A management buyout is another option, although this would need 
financial backing from a third party.

However, the scale of the challenge facing any buyer has been laid bare by 
Ratan Tata 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/08/tata-uk-steel-operation-underinvested-overmanned-ratan-tata>
, the former chairman of the Tata group and now head of the charitable funds 
that control the conglomerate. In his first intervention sincethe Indian firm 
announced it was selling its loss-making UK business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/30/tata-steels-british-plants-must-be-sold-within-weeks>
, Tata said job cuts would be necessary to make the Port Talbot steelworks 
profitable.

Speaking at a US Export-Import Bank conference in Washington DC, Tata said the 
“bottom just opened up” at the UK steel operation after Chinese steel exports 
poured into Europe.

“Right now the problem is that the English facilities are underinvested [and] 
overmanned,” Tata was quoted as saying by the Financial Times.

He said a potential buyer at Port Talbot would need to “cut back on the size 
and the scale of the operations and make them profitable”. This would be 
“extremely challenging” but not impossible.
 