
People should receive £250 a year in tax breaks if they cycle to work, 
according to a proposal to improve public health and business productivity 
backed by some of the UK’s biggest companies and the ParalympianDame Sarah 
Storey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/07/sarah-storey-other-athletes-want-to-beat-me-massive-compliment-cyclist-paralympics-rio>
.


According to a report published by British Cycling 
<https://www.britishcycling.org.uk/>, businesses should be able to claim back 
in tax up to £100,000 in construction works such as bike parking, showers or 
other cyclist facilities.

The study, written by tax barrister Jolyon Maugham QC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jolyon-maugham>, was produced for British 
Cycling’sChoose Cycling network of businesses 
<https://www.britishcycling.org.uk/campaigning/article/20150310-campaigning-The--ChooseCycling-Network-0>
, whose supporters include Tesco, GSK, Santander and Coca-Cola.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fdame-sarah-storey-how-to-perform-under-pressure&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sarah%20Storey%3A%20how%20to%20perform%20under%20pressure%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fdame-sarah-storey-how-to-perform-under-pressure>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sarah%20Storey%3A%20how%20to%20perform%20under%20pressure%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fdame-sarah-storey-how-to-perform-under-pressure&media=>
Sarah Storey: how to perform under pressure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/nov/07/dame-sarah-storey-how-to-perform-under-pressure>
The campaign has received support from Storey – her first involvement into 
agitating for everyday cycling afterreaching 14 gold medals at the Rio 
Paralympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/17/sarah-storey-gold-cycling-womens-road-race-rio-2016-paralympics>
 earlier this year, having won three golds on the road and one in the velodrome.

“Britain’s businesses have woken up to the benefits that cycling can bring to 
their employees and it’s about time that the government followed suit,” Storey 
said.

“It’s only right that if a company invests heavily in providing high quality 
changing and bike storage facilities – things that will help our nation become 
healthier and fitter – that they should get a tax incentive for it.”

The plan would see those who mostly cycle to work for a period of at least 10 
months a year, claim a £250 tax rebate. Their commute would be monitored by a 
downloadable phone app.

The report suggests limiting people’s claims to two years and estimates the 
plan would initially cost the Treasury about £120m a year, a sum that would 
gradually drop.

Companies which install bike parking or other facilities would be able to 
claim 100% of the costs of up to £100,000 in the first year they were built. 
This expenditure was calculated to about £50m a year.

British Cycling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling>, which is in 
charge of sports cycling but has branched out in recent years into campaigning 
for measures to boost everyday riding, noted that government support for 
bike-related regulation was set to fall to less than £1 per head or 0.3% of the 
total transport budget.

The UK's cycling revolution won't take off without funding | Chris Boardman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/bike-blog/2015/nov/24/the-uks-cycling-revolution-wont-take-off-without-proper-funding>
While levels of cycling have risen in some places, notably London, the amount 
of bike trips remains largely static across the UK at about 1% to 2% of all 
journeys.

Chris Boardman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/mar/31/chris-boardman-when-i-got-into-cycling-i-was-something-of-a-weirdo>
, the Olympic and Tour de France cyclist who is now British Cycling’s policy 
adviser, said measures to get more people on bikes would more than pay for 
themselves.

“If more people cycled to work regularly, the government would save millions 
on squeezed NHS budgets and our roads would be much less congested,” he said. 
“That in itself would more than pay for a £250 tax break and would provide a 
real incentive for people to live more active lives.”
 