
January: Album announcements and Twitter rows (part one)

After releasing a new track 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/01/fact-kanye-west-rings-in-2016-with-first-new-music-in-months>
, Facts, on New Year’s Eve, Kanyefollowed it up with another new track 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/jan/18/listen-to-kanye-west-no-more-parties-in-la-featuring-kendrick-lamar>
, No Parties in LA, on 18 January. At that point,his forthcoming album was due 
to be called Swish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/25/kanye-west-new-album-swish-kendrick-lamar-post-malone-ty-dollar-sign>
 (replacing the previous So Help Me God), and was – its maker said – “the best 
album of all time”. On 26 January, he announced he would bepremiering it at 
Madison Square Garden in New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/26/kanye-west-swish-debut-new-album-new-york-madison-square-garden>
. Never one to shun cross-promotional activity, the album launch was to be 
combined with a show for his Yeezy range for Adidas. Oh, and it would be shown 
in cinemas worldwide. Of course.

You would think, with all that to take care of, West might have better things 
to do than having rows on Twitter.You would be wrong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/27/kanye-west-wiz-khalifa-twitter-waves-swish-album>
. After West announced the new albumwould now be called Waves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/29/kanye-west-waves-what-we-know-tracks-collaborators-art>
 rather than Swish, Wiz Khalifa suggested he’d pinched the new name from the 
Harlem rapper Max B. Never one to see bait without taking it, West piled in. 
“Your first single was corny as fuck and most there after … No one I know has 
ever listened to one of your albums all the way through … I am your OG and I 
will be respected as such.” All of which provoked a most peculiar response from 
Khalifa’s girlfriend (and West’s ex), Amber Rose: “Are u mad I’m not around to 
play in ur asshole anymore? #FingersInTheBootyAssBitch.” It’s just like the 
Algonquin round table, I tell you.

The month in a Kanye title: Can’t Tell Me Nothing

February: Twitter rows (parts two and three) and the album launch

Well, having a pop at a fellow rapper can get to feel tame sometimes. So why 
not tweet your support for the man at the centre of a massive sexual-assault 
scandal instead? On 9 February, West chose to do just that, with the massively 
unambiguous: “BILL COSBY INNOCENT!!!!!!!!!!” Asthe Guardian’s Dave Schilling 
observed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/09/kanye-west-twitter-rant-bill-cosby-innocent>
: “I have a sneaking suspicion Kanye West has a box full of note cards, and on 
those note cards there are transgressive statements written on them. 
Proclaiming Bill Cosby is innocent of raping 37 women is probably just one of 
them.” Still, there’s no better way to distract attention from that by 
announcing that your new album has its third new title in less than a month.Now 
it was to be called The Life of Pablo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/11/kanye-west-reveals-fourth-title-for-new-album-the-life-of-pablo>
. Half the tracklist had changed from when it was called Swish. Surely that 
would be it for the saga of So Help Me God/Swish/Waves/The Life of Pablo?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fkanye-west-a-year-in-life-taylor-trump-and-twitter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F927cb4dfd2dd1fb9549c9629071cd22243369d19%2F0_34_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Taylor%2C%20Trump%20and%20Twitter%20%E2%80%93%20a%20year%20in%20the%20life%20of%20Kanye%20West&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fkanye-west-a-year-in-life-taylor-trump-and-twitter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Taylor%2C%20Trump%20and%20Twitter%20%E2%80%93%20a%20year%20in%20the%20life%20of%20Kanye%20West&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fkanye-west-a-year-in-life-taylor-trump-and-twitter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F927cb4dfd2dd1fb9549c9629071cd22243369d19%2F0_34_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 In the Garden … West at the Yeezy/Life of Pablo launch at Madison Square 
Garden. Photograph: Dimitrios Kambouris/Getty Images for Yeezy Season 3 
Then, on 11 February, West finally revealed the album at Madison Square Garden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/11/kanye-west-new-album-the-life-of-pablo-launch>
: he played it on his laptop from the stage, and appeared to get an email after 
one of the songs. Still, it was fun at the cinema,reckoned Ben Beaumont-Thomas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/feb/12/kanye-west-the-life-of-pablo-launch-cinema>
: “What may have seemed ramshackle in Madison Square Garden, or watching at 
home on the official stream that kept buffering due to demand, took on an 
unguarded beauty on the big screen.” All’s well that ends well, then. But hang 
on! What’s this? It’sTaylor Swift’s “people” saying she wasn’t at all happy at 
Kanye rapping about her 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/12/kanye-west-taylor-swift-controversy-i-made-that-bitch-famous-the-life-of-pablo>
: “I feel like me and Taylor might still have sex/ Why? I made that bitch 
famous.” West responded to the Swift condemnation by saying they’d had an 
hour-long conversation about the song, and she “gave her blessings”. As for the 
album itself, our review byAlexis Petridis detected a distinct “lack of focus” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/14/kanye-west-the-life-of-pablo-review-you-can-see-why-his-immodesty-rubs-people-up-the-wrong-way>
. Still, the rest of our writers liked it enough to make it ourfourth best 
album of the year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/dec/13/the-life-of-pablo-kanye-west-best-albums-of-2016-no-4>
.

You’d think that would have been enough activity for one month. But you would 
be wrong. Days after releasing The Life of Pablo – which by the time it reached 
the Tidal streaming service was already different to the version premiered in 
New York – he told the world (via Twitter) that he was $53m in debt and asked 
Facebook’s Mark Zuckerberg for a $1bn investment in his ideas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/15/kanye-west-53m-debt-mark-zuckerberg-larry-page-martin-shkreli>
: “Hey, Larry Page I’m down for your help, too.” He also announcedhe would be 
releasing another new album 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/24/kanye-west-next-album-summer-twitter-grammys>
 in the summer. But he didn’t. Nor did he turn out for Preston North End 
reserves, though in all honesty he never claimed he would do that.

The month in a Kanye title: Gold Digger

March: Twitter rows (part four) and album updates (part one)

At last, a breather in Westworld. It was a quiet month, with just the one war 
of tweets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/03/kanye-west-deadmau5-twitter-row-piracy>
 (with Deadmau5, who was affronted when a photo West tweeted appeared to show 
him using Pirate Bay. West responded by inviting the EDM star to perform at his 
daughter’s birthday party “with specifically a minnie mouse dead-mow-five head 
… not a mickey mouse dead-mow-five head”). He also said hemight never release a 
CD again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/08/kanye-west-no-more-cds-life-of-pablo-tidal-yeezus>
. Perhaps he was tied up at work, because despite The Life of Pablo having been 
released the month before,he was busy updating it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/mar/18/kanye-west-album-the-life-of-pablo-william-doyle-east-india-youth>
, so whenever you logged in to Tidal you faced the prospect of listening to a 
different album to the one you’d been listening to the day before.

The month in a Kanye title: Don’t Stop

April: Album updates (part two) and lawsuits (part one)

Once again, calm settled over Kanye West. He began the month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/01/kanye-west-life-of-pablo-stream-download-spotify-itunes-tidal>
 by announcing that a “newly updated, remixed and remastered version” of The 
Life of Pablo would be streaming on all major services from 1 April, though he 
added that he’d carry on tinkering with it for the foreseeable. The problem, 
though, was that in February he had told the world his album would only ever be 
on Tidal; fans who’d signed up to Tidal on that promise were rather disgruntled 
by that development. One Justin Baker-Rhett, in fact, was so disgruntled thathe 
launched a lawsuit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/18/kanye-west-fan-lawsuit-life-of-pablo-album-tidal-spotify>
, alleging the promise of exclusive access to West’s latest album led to an 
influx of new Tidal subscribers and allowed the service to collect users’ 
personal information. No matter the apparent chaos surrounding the album, 
though – this was the month The Life of Pablo became the first album to top the 
US chartsbased primarily on streaming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/12/kanye-west-first-number-one-album-via-stream>
.

The month in a Kanye title: Bad News

May: Lawsuits (part two) and Macca pledges support

The days were getting longer and warmer, and West was largely staying out of 
the headlines. Except when other people were putting him in them. People such 
as the Hungarian rock musician Gabor Presser, whofiled a suit in the US 
district court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/23/kanye-west-lawsuit-new-slaves-sample>
 in Manhattan alleging that New Slaves, from the album Yeezus, took without 
permission from his own 1969 song Gyöngyhajú Lány. He wanted $2.5m in damages – 
clearly, he hadn’t seen West’s tweets about being $53m in debt. Orpeople like 
Sir Paul McCartney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/24/kanye-wests-n-word-justified-paul-mccartney>
, who told the world – from his position as one of the great spokesmen for 
black people – that West’s use of the N-word in his lyrics was justified, 
citing its appearance in their collaboration All Day. “People like Oprah, who’s 
a little conservative about that stuff, said, ‘You shouldn’t do it, even black 
people shouldn’t use that word.’ I said, ‘Yeah, but it’s Kanye! And he’s 
talking about an urban generation that uses that word in a completely different 
way.’ It’s the context. So I was actually pleased with it.”

The month in a Kanye title: Facts

June: Cancelled shows (part one) and a ‘rape culture’ video

West started getting back into the swing of things as summer arrived. First, a 
popup concert at the 1,500-capacity Webster Hallended in the requisite chaos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2016/jun/06/kanye-west-pop-up-concert-causes-chaos-in-new-york-city-video>
 after many thousands tried to get into the hastily scheduled 2am gig, 
resulting in it being cancelled and the venue being locked down by authorities. 
Well, he was always going to bounce back from that, which he did by unveiling 
the trailer to his Only One video game. The trailer featured,as the Guardian 
put it at the time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/14/kanye-west-only-one-game-trailer-e3-sony-event-los-angeles>
, “an animation of the Chicago rapper’s late mother Donda West, who rides on 
the back of a winged white horse that is galloping through the clouds towards 
heaven.” Just like Call of Duty. Only One has been in development since 2015. 
It is not yet in shops.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fkanye-west-a-year-in-life-taylor-trump-and-twitter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Febb7f2559f95a0ae68702d39f9b3e21f3f277119%2F58_0_633_380%2F633.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Taylor%2C%20Trump%20and%20Twitter%20%E2%80%93%20a%20year%20in%20the%20life%20of%20Kanye%20West&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fkanye-west-a-year-in-life-taylor-trump-and-twitter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Taylor%2C%20Trump%20and%20Twitter%20%E2%80%93%20a%20year%20in%20the%20life%20of%20Kanye%20West&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fkanye-west-a-year-in-life-taylor-trump-and-twitter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Febb7f2559f95a0ae68702d39f9b3e21f3f277119%2F58_0_633_380%2F633.jpg>
 Fame monster … Kanye West and Kim Kardashian in the video for Famous. 
Photograph: Tidal 
Then the moment we’d all been waiting for, the moment where he caused wholly 
unnecessary offence –the release of the video for Famous 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/25/kanye-west-famous-video-donald-trump-taylor-swift>
 (the song in which he said he’d made “that bitch” Taylor Swift famous, if you 
recall). The video featured a rollcall of waxworks of celebrities connected in 
some way with West in bed with him and his wife, Kim Kardashian West. It was a 
comment on fame, West reckoned.Lena Dunham wasn’t impressed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jun/28/lena-dunham-condemns-kanye-wests-new-music-video-famous-as-sickening>
 – she called it “one of the more disturbing ‘artistic’ efforts in recent 
memory” and said it was emblematic of “rape culture”. And there’s more. “As 
assaults are Periscoped across the web and girls commit suicide after being 
exposed in ways they never imagined ... While Bill Cosby’s crimes are still 
being uncovered and understood as traumas for the women he assaulted but also 
massive bruises to our national consciousness ... Now I have to see the prone, 
unconscious, waxy bodies of famous women, twisted like they’ve been drugged and 
chucked aside at a rager? It gives me such a sickening sense of dis-ease.”

The month in a Kanye title: Guilt Trip

July: Twitter rows (part five – extended to Snapchat and Instagram)

Would there be no end to the West-Swift kerfuffle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/18/taylor-swift-condemns-kim-kardashians-release-of-kanye-west-phone-call>
? This time it was Kim Kardashian West restarting the row, by uploading to her 
Snapchat account film snippets of West and Swift on the phone discussing 
Famous, in which she appeared to approve the song – though there was no 
reference to the “that bitch” line. Swift responded, though she chose 
Instagram: “Where is the video of Kanye telling me he was going to call me 
‘that bitch’ in his song? It doesn’t exist because it never happened. You don’t 
get to control someone’s emotional response to being called ‘that bitch’ in 
front of the entire world.” Who should we call to resolve this one? That’s 
right – lawyers. And what did they have to say? That lawyers should be 
involved. Because if West had recorded the call in California, without Swift’s 
consent, he had broken the law and could face a year in county jail. The fact 
that West has remained unincarcerated suggests, very much, that Swift thought 
the lawyers could just keep out of it as far as she was concerned.

The month in a Kanye title: Blame Game


August: Dreaming of Ikea and opening popup shops

The dog days of August were free of fights with Swift, but there’s no time off 
when you’re Kanye West. At least he got into the silly-season swing, mind you, 
when hetold Radio 1 of his dream to design furniture for Ikea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/01/kanye-west-ikea-interior-design-aspirations-bbc>
. “YoIkea <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ikea>, allow Kanye to create, 
allow him to make this thing because you know what, I want a bed that he makes, 
I want a chair that he makes,” West said, as he explained why students would 
want a dorm room designed by him. And who are we to doubt that practicality of 
anything designed by the man who came up with leather jogging pants?Ikea 
Australia responded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/03/yeezy-to-assemble-ikea-designs-giant-bed-for-kanye-west>
 with a mockup of a Yeezy bed, big enough to recreate the Famous video. The 
Famous video? Let’s not go back there again, please. Meanwhile, he set about 
trying to clear that $53m of debt by opening 21 popup shops around the world, 
selling limited-edition merchandise for three days only. “The new shops follow 
on from West’s popup in New York’s Soho in March, which he said generated $2m 
(£1.5m) in sales of items including thrift store jackets customised by the 
rapper for $400,” the Guardian reported. So, 21 of those, and he’s only $11m 
short of paying off his debts. Job’s a good un. After that, beginning his Saint 
Pablo tour – on a stage that flew above the audience, naturally – seemed 
positively restrained.


The month in a Kanye title: Christian Dior Denim Flow

September: On the road and on the catwalk
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fkanye-west-a-year-in-life-taylor-trump-and-twitter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F222847ad1975512267c749681c01f7c1166e7d54%2F0_205_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Taylor%2C%20Trump%20and%20Twitter%20%E2%80%93%20a%20year%20in%20the%20life%20of%20Kanye%20West&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fkanye-west-a-year-in-life-taylor-trump-and-twitter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Taylor%2C%20Trump%20and%20Twitter%20%E2%80%93%20a%20year%20in%20the%20life%20of%20Kanye%20West&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fkanye-west-a-year-in-life-taylor-trump-and-twitter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F222847ad1975512267c749681c01f7c1166e7d54%2F0_205_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 I want to take you higher … Kanye and his flying stage for the Saint Pablo 
tour. Photograph: Kevin Winter/Getty Images 
Autumn, season of mists and mellow fruitfulness, and Kanye West concentrating 
on the work, failing to provoke any major rows, not insisting on his 
suitability to design space shuttles, not announcing he should be the leader of 
Ukip, or anything like that. If anything, he behaved suspiciously like a 
musician. The Guardian reported thatthe Saint Pablo show was worth five stars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/01/kanye-west-saint-pablo-tour-review>
 – “dynamic and compelling”, don’t you know? West announced thathe and Drake 
were making an album together 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/08/kanye-west-drake-making-album-together-tour-bus-burglary>
 (making it the third album he announced in a year that saw only one actually 
reach the public). And he put onhis Yeezy Season 4 fashion show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/08/kanye-wests-yeezy-show-fake-malia-obama-and-terra-firma-bodycon>
, which featured real tigers dressed in galoshes made from the highly treated 
skin of lions. (It didn’t; but you believed it, didn’t you?)

The month in a Kanye title: Highlights

October: Cancelled shows (part two) and Grammy politics (part one)

The Saint Pablo tour encountered its first hiccups 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/04/kanye-west-reschedules-tour-dates-after-kim-kardashian-robbery-paris>
, when West walked off stage halfway through a show after learning that Kim had 
been parted from her possessions at gunpoint by a gang in Paris. He then 
cancelled two shows, moving them to December (more on that later). As for the 
robbers, they fled on bicycles. Just thought you’d like to know that detail. He 
was feeling feisty by now, and when the Saint Pablo tour resumed, he told the 
crowd in Oaklandhow the 2017 Grammys needed to pan out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/24/kanye-west-boycott-grammy-awards-frank-ocean-nominated-blonde-endless>
: “The album I listen to the most this year is Frank Ocean’s album. I’ll tell 
you this right now, if his album is not nominated in no categories, I’m not 
showing up to the Grammys. As artists, we’ve got to come together to fight the 
bullshit.” This was entirely consistent with his policy on awards events, which 
has usually consisted of publicly explaining – sometimes to the recipient’s 
face, while they received their award – why he thought someone else should have 
got the gong.

The month in a Kanye title: No More Parties in LA

November: Cancelled shows (part three) and Trump time (part one)

There will be no armchair diagnosis here, but goodness knows November was not 
a great month in Westworld. Addressing the crowd at his San Jose show, he said 
he hadn’t voted in the presidential election, but if he had,he would have voted 
for Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/18/kanye-west-wouldve-voted-for-donald-trump-us-election>
. The crowd was unimpressed. Nor, apparently, were they won round by his 
explanation that a Trump presidency would force racists into the open.A few 
days later, in Sacramento 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/21/kanye-west-cancels-la-concert-after-rant-against-beyonce-and-hillary-clinton>
, he launched into a rant against Beyoncé, Hillary Clinton, radio stations and 
Mark Zuckerberg. He managed to play three songs before walking off stage. And 
that was that for the Saint Pablo tour, which was rapidly cancelled whenWest 
was admitted to hospital to be treated for exhaustion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/22/kanye-west-taken-to-hospital-after-cancelling-tour>
. Hestayed for a week before being discharged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/30/kanye-west-out-hospital-exhaustion-saint-pablo-tour>
.

The month in a Kanye title: Lost in the World

December: Grammy politics (part two) and Trump time (part two)

The Grammy nominations were announced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/06/grammy-awards-2017-beyonce-drake-rihanna-kanye-west-adele>
, and West had some good news and some bad news. The good news was that he got 
eight nominations. The bad news was that none of them were in the big 
categories – record of the year, album of the year, song of the year, or even 
best urban contemporary album, though he did get a best rap album nod. The 
worse news was that Frank Ocean didn’t get any nominations, though that was 
because he didn’t submit an entry before the 30 September cutoff date. We’ll 
see whether West sticks to his promise to boycott the awards on 12 February. If 
he was feeling ignored, he could at least take comfort in The Life of Pablo 
being voted the fourth best album of the year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/dec/13/the-life-of-pablo-kanye-west-best-albums-of-2016-no-4>
 by Guardian critics.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fkanye-west-a-year-in-life-taylor-trump-and-twitter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8fb93828ce628da2b01da5f367c76bd18de10ac%2F0_111_4068_2441%2F4068.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Taylor%2C%20Trump%20and%20Twitter%20%E2%80%93%20a%20year%20in%20the%20life%20of%20Kanye%20West&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fkanye-west-a-year-in-life-taylor-trump-and-twitter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Taylor%2C%20Trump%20and%20Twitter%20%E2%80%93%20a%20year%20in%20the%20life%20of%20Kanye%20West&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fkanye-west-a-year-in-life-taylor-trump-and-twitter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8fb93828ce628da2b01da5f367c76bd18de10ac%2F0_111_4068_2441%2F4068.jpg>
 When Donny met Kanye … Trump and West after their summit meeting. Photograph: 
Rex/Shutterstock 
But, hey, Grammys, screw you – West had bigger fish to fry. Not just any big 
fish, but the biggest fish of all. The whale shark of fried fish. A fish so big 
you’d need to open a chain of chippies to fry it. And that fish had a name: 
Donald Trump. It would be fair to say the general reaction whenWest went to 
meet the president-elect in Trump Tower 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/13/kanye-west-donald-trump-meeting-trump-tower>
 – the taste-free skyscraper in Manhattan that is Trump’s Bond-villain lair – 
was not, “I can’t wait to hear what these two famed purveyors of commonsense 
have to say,” so much as, “Good God, even he should know this is beyond the 
pale.” But no; he didn’t think it beyond the pale to replicate the movements of 
Nigel Farage. The reason for his visit, he said, was to discuss “multicultural 
issues”, including “bullying, supporting teachers, modernising curriculums and 
violence in Chicago”. We’re sure Trump has now put them top of his policy 
agenda. He then signed off with a hashag: #2024. Which surely means West is 
planning to run for the White House in 2024, after two terms of Trump. On the 
bright side, it means he seems to have gone back on his threat to run in 2020.

The month in a Kanye title: So Appalled
 