
Best individual US performance

When Katie Ledecky touched the wall to complete the first 200-400-800 treble 
in 48 years, an entire 11.38 seconds would pass – longer than it took Usain 
Bolt to win the 100m final – before Britain’s Jazz Carlin came in for the 
silver. The world’s most dominant swimmer is now a perfect 16 for 16 in 
individual events in international competitions andhas effectively supplanted 
Michael Phelps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/13/katie-ledecky-swimming-2016-dominant-athlete>
 as the face of the sport. BG


In an Olympics in which Michael Phelps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/michaelphelps> went out on top and Simone 
Biles brought everybody to their feet, it was another American who was the 
Games’ top performer. Katie Ledecky, just 19, won the 200m, 400m and 800m 
freestyle with ease. In the 400m and 800m she had already made her final turn 
when the rest of the swimmers were still swimming the other way. She won 
another gold in the 4x200m relay, and only a silver in the 4x100m kept her from 
a perfect five golds.LC

For the remarkable Katie Ledecky, the future appears limitless | Bryan Armen 
Graham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/13/katie-ledecky-swimming-2016-dominant-athlete>
There were so many, but it’s hard to look past what Michael Phelps did. Again. 
For most Olympic athletes, a single gold medal is the career dream. Phelps has 
achieved that dream 23 times over, to the point that it had to start feeling 
routine. After Phelps, the individual performance runner-up isRyan Lochte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ryan-lochte>. Just saying “whatever” when a 
gun was (fake) held to his head? What courage.DG

Simone Biles <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/simone-biles>. I get the 
Ledecky arguments, and clearly so, but to me, Biles wins it. Her Olympic legacy 
– aside from the five medals – suggests that we will never see another gymnast 
like her ever again. If you invent a floor trick (a double somersault in a 
layout position, ending with a half-twist in mid-air) that no one else can 
imitate, you win my vote.LME

The main image that I will take away from this Olympics are those shots of 
Katie Ledecky so far ahead of the rest of the field that it looked like she was 
completely alone in the pool. You head into the Olympics hoping to see 
something that will make your jaw drop and it doesn’t always happen – this time 
it did.HF
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fusain-bolt-triple-treble-to-simone-biles-best-olympics-moments-rio-2016-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Usain%20Bolt's%20'triple%20treble'%20to%20Simone%20Biles%3A%20the%20best%20moments%20of%20Rio%202016%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fusain-bolt-triple-treble-to-simone-biles-best-olympics-moments-rio-2016-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Usain%20Bolt%27s%20%27triple%20treble%27%20to%20Simone%20Biles%3A%20the%20best%20moments%20of%20Rio%202016%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fusain-bolt-triple-treble-to-simone-biles-best-olympics-moments-rio-2016-video&media=>
Usain Bolt’s ‘triple treble’ to Simone Biles: the best moments of Rio 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/aug/22/usain-bolt-triple-treble-to-simone-biles-best-olympics-moments-rio-2016-video>
Best US team performance

The sentimental choice is the Final Five, which might just be the retiring 
Martha Karolyi’s masterpiece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/17/simone-biles-us-gymnastics-olympics-rio-2016>
 after winning a team-record nine medals, the most by any country since the 
Soviet Union in 1972. But the correct pick is Geno Auriemma’s women’s 
basketball squad, whose dominance has been taken for granted back home. They 
romped to their sixth straight gold medal by an average margin of 37.3 points 
while playing gorgeous team basketball. They’ve now won 49 straight games in 
Olympic play with 48 of those wins coming by double digits. Serious question:
Has there ever been a national team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/aug/21/usa-olympic-women-basketball-team-gold-medal-domination-rio-2016>
 in any sport this dominant?BG

US Olympic women's basketball team may be most dominant champions ever
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/aug/21/usa-olympic-women-basketball-team-gold-medal-domination-rio-2016>
The answer here should be the women’s gymnastics team, who won almost every 
possible gold medal, but I think we need to talk about the dominance of the US 
women’s basketball team. They won their sixth straight Olympic gold this 
weekend and have now won 49 straight games. Almost none of them have been 
close. They don’t get enough attention for what they have done.LC

The women’s gymnastics team made it back-to-back team gold medals in Rio even 
though reigning Olympic all-around champion Gabby Douglas was off her game. 
That’s dominant. And the people who criticized Douglas for not putting her hand 
over her heart? That’s pathetic.DG

Women’s gymnastics team all-around. The Final Five didn’t just deliver, they 
destroyed the opposition. As my colleague Bryan Armen Graham pointed out: “Four 
years ago, USA won by 5.066 points, the biggest margin in 52 years. This time 
they won by 8.209.” The victory was remarkable, the way in which they won it – 
with poise and maturity – even more so.LME

This year’s US women’s basketball team might end up being remembered as one of 
the greatest collections of talent the sport has ever seen. They made the 
insanely stacked but occasionally rudderless men’s team look like amateurs in 
comparison. It’s especially impressive since they weren’t just competing 
against other teams, but the legacies of the previous gold medal winning US 
teams.HF


Biggest US disappointment
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fteam-usas-rio-2016-highlights-and-lowlights-our-writers-verdicts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f12e0bd0de72b36c3b6efd1efeb12f3d561ab0d%2F0_25_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Team%20USA's%20Rio%202016%20highlights%20and%20lowlights%3A%20our%20writers'%20verdicts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fteam-usas-rio-2016-highlights-and-lowlights-our-writers-verdicts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Team%20USA%27s%20Rio%202016%20highlights%20and%20lowlights%3A%20our%20writers%27%20verdicts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fteam-usas-rio-2016-highlights-and-lowlights-our-writers-verdicts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f12e0bd0de72b36c3b6efd1efeb12f3d561ab0d%2F0_25_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Hope Solo made few friends in Brazil. Photograph: Marques/AGIF/REX/Shutterstock
Two world No1s that were heavy favorites to defend their Olympic golds – the 
US women’s soccer team and freestyle wrestler Jordan Burroughs – crashed out in 
the quarter-finals of their respective draws and owned their failures (apart, 
maybe, from Hope Solo). A far bigger disappointment was Justin Gatlin, who blew 
the 200m semi-final by looking over early, failed to qualify and came out quick 
with the excuses.BG 

The US women’s soccer team were not only favored to win the gold medal they 
wereexpected to win. Just a summer ago, they won the World Cup and had won four 
of the last five Olympic golds. Hope Solo’s comments about Sweden’s players 
scarred one of America’s most-loved sports teams.LC

USA's women lost – blaming it on 'cowards' simply misses the point
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/13/usa-women-national-team-soccer-rio-2016-analysis>
In the pool, it was Missy Franklin. After winning five medals – including four 
gold – in London, Franklin slumped in Rio to a single gold in the 4x200m relay 
for swimming in the heats. Out of the pool, it was Ryan Lochte. Did he 
embarrass the American team? Hell Jeah.DG

Ryan Lochte? Kidding. To me, it’s Missy Franklin. Back in London she was the 
teenage darling of the US swim team winning five medals as a 17-year-old. In 
Rio, she failed to live up to her own expectations by failing to qualify for 
the 200m freestyle and the 200m back finals with her only gold being in the 
200m freestyle relay, only because she swam in prelims. Didn’t even get on the 
podium.LME


The biggest disappointment I had was not with any athletes but with that 
segment of “fans” who spent the Olympics hounding Gabby Douglas for entirely 
fabricated reasons. The Olympics are supposed to bring out the best in us, not 
the worst.HF

Star of the Olympics

Simone Biles had been preordained as individual all-around champion from the 
beginning of last year, casting one of the Olympics’ prestige competitions as 
essentially a race for the silver. That she would come home with a fistful of 
golds, barring injury or an unimaginable meltdown, was the working presumption. 
But then Biles had to, you know,go out and do it. Her performance under that 
pressure is hard to fathom. Clearly it made an impact on her team-mates, who 
voted the smallest member of the 554-person delegation to be the flag-bearer at 
Sunday night’s closing ceremony.BG

Usain Bolt has now overwhelmed his opponents in the 100m and 200m for three 
Olympics now. And while he will never win as big as he did in 2008 he still 
wins comfortably enough that he can still turn his head and laugh. No athlete, 
not anyone in the NBA or any of the swimmers or gymnasts, draws a crowd or 
creates a buzz like Bolt. When he is running it remains THE show of the Games.LC

Usain Bolt’s unrepeatable Threepeat proves his true greatness at razor’s edge 
| Barney Ronay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/aug/20/usain-bolt-triple-treble-greatness-rio-olympics>
Rio. There was no shortage of predictions that these Games would be a 
disaster. Zika, fecal bacteria in the water, body parts washing up on the 
beach, crime, political corruption, unfinished venues, mosquitoes covered in 
fecal matter and body parts washing up on corrupted beaches while engaging in 
criminal construction. But the Rio Games went as well as any other. Whoops.DG

I mean, come on. Isn’t it obvious? The Olympics are built for one man and one 
man only: Usain Bolt. Three gold medals in three consecutive Games is 
jaw-dropping. When he runs, the Jamaican sprinter knows that the only person 
who stands in his way is himself. Anyone else is merely a spectator, ready to 
marvel at poetry in fast motion.LME

Globally? Probably Usain Bolt. US-specific? Simone Biles. She certainly had 
the biggest breakout in popularity over the course of the last few weeks, 
transforming from a name casual sports fans were vaguely familiar with into an 
undisputed superstar.HF


Best villain

Ryan Lochte. By invoking the worst stereotypes of Rio criminality in a clumsy 
effort to conceal his knuckle-dragging antics, the 12-time Olympic medalist 
caused an international incident that overshadowed the achievements of 
countless athletes, many of whom only enjoy the spotlight once every four 
years. He is the living, breathingembodiment of privilege 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/19/ryan-lochte-olympic-tale-gold-medals-white-privilege-rio>
.BG

Ryan Lochte. Nobody loves an ugly American and Lochte became just that with 
his attack of the sign at the gas station and the insane story about the armed 
robbers who may or may have not been police. His story was so violent it left 
the city unsettled before it became outraged by his fiction.LC

Ryan Lochte: an Olympic tale of gold medals and white privilege | Marina Hyde
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/19/ryan-lochte-olympic-tale-gold-medals-white-privilege-rio>
Michael Phelps. Or, at least, he would be a US villain … if he weren’t 
American. Just imagine a Russian Phelps. A guy who does nothing but win. A guy 
with a checkered personal history. A guy who hangs around withunsavory 
characters 
<http://cdn.na16.netdna-cdn.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/01/Ray_Lewis_Michael_Phelps.jpg>
. A guy who makes mean faces while waiting to go to the blocks. If Phelps 
wasn’t from America, America would hate Phelps.DG

Hope Solo. It all began with a thoughtless tweet, ridiculing a nation with 
Zika jibes. Then, it got much, much worse as booing and crowd-jeering became 
the norm every time she took a goal-kick during the tournament. Her Rio 
experience ended in a tasteless way as the greatest goalie the US has ever 
produced called Sweden – who beat them in the quarter-finals – a bunch of 
cowards. Stay classy, Hope.LME

Thanks to his rapidly disintegrating “robbery story,” I’m going to go with 
Ryan Lochte for managing to use these Olympics as an opportunity to present 
himself as the Platonic Ideal of the 21st century Ugly American, trumping up 
half-baked lies based on lazy stereotypes to cover up his own jackassery.HF

Is Phelps a better athlete than Bolt?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fteam-usas-rio-2016-highlights-and-lowlights-our-writers-verdicts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5108912c6c74719629df230bb641509a0649175%2F0_0_2514_1801%2F2514.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Team%20USA's%20Rio%202016%20highlights%20and%20lowlights%3A%20our%20writers'%20verdicts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fteam-usas-rio-2016-highlights-and-lowlights-our-writers-verdicts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Team%20USA%27s%20Rio%202016%20highlights%20and%20lowlights%3A%20our%20writers%27%20verdicts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fteam-usas-rio-2016-highlights-and-lowlights-our-writers-verdicts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5108912c6c74719629df230bb641509a0649175%2F0_0_2514_1801%2F2514.jpg>
 Usain Bolt brought joy and talent to the Games once again. Photograph: Mike 
Egerton/PA 
Hard to say. Phelps’ otherworldly longevity – it’s stunning to think he won 
his first medal when Creed was the biggest band in America – tips the scales in 
his favor. But when you consider the wider competition pool of a sport with 
virtually no barriers to entry, Bolt’s ability to bring his very best when the 
lights are brightest stands alone. Consider that he’s started in 21 finals in 
the 100m, 200m and 4x100m relay over the last eight years and won 20 of them – 
a false start in Daegu representing the lone blemish. Heady stuff.BG

Wow, this is a tough one, they are specialists at such different things. I’m 
tempted to say Bolt because I bet he’s a great swimmer but Phelps might be a 
fast runner too. We should have a separate Olympics for just the two of them, 
like the old Superstars on ABC.LC

Michael Phelps is the greatest swimmer of all-time and it’s not even close. 
But running is a universal human activity. Every child in every country learns 
to stand and then walk and then they try to run. It’s natural.Swimming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/swimming> is learned, but every person on 
earth with a set of functioning legs has run. And Usain Bolt is the fastest 
runner in recorded human history. Bolt beats Phelps.DG

Longevity against supremacy. Phelps – akin to a shark hunting for prey – has 
23 gold medals. That’s almost twice as much as any other Olympian. Bolt on the 
other hand is untouchable, holding the best ever records for 100, 200 and 4x100 
meters. This is tough, but I’m going with Phelps simply because he not only 
wins, he can do it in more than one race in the space of an hour. Not sure if 
Bolt could replicate.LME

This is a tricky, perhaps even unfair question. It’s pretty much impossible to 
compare the two, who have both established themselves as the elite of the 
elite. Still, it feels like Bolt transcends his sport in a way that Phelps 
doesn’t. Bolt looks like he’s on a different plane of existence from those he 
competes against.HF

The US’s performance at the Olympics was ... 

As good as it gets. You know things are going OK when the Star-Spangled Banner 
supplants Mike Posner’s I Took A Pill In Ibiza as the most overplayed song of 
the summer. Team USA finished on 121 medals. That total includes 61 won by 
American women, who would have finished fourth on the medal table if they 
comprised their own country. Yes, it’s to be expected from such an affluent 
nation, but impressive all the same.BG 

Simply dominating. One afternoon I took a stroll near my apartment in 
Copacabana and heard the US national anthem coming from televisions in 
neighborhood bars three times as the US got golds in different events.LC

Dominant. The most gold, the most silver and the most bronze. The US finished 
with 50% more medals than runner-up China. When Donald Trump gets to work on 
making America great again, he can steer clear of the US Olympic program. 
They’re doing just fine.DG

The best there ever was. Team USA passed the 100-medal mark on 18 August. But 
what’s more impressive is the level of diversity across the squad. From humble, 
yet honorable boxer Nico Hernandez to the inspiring Ibtihaj Muhammad, this was 
a tournament where the colors of America truly shone.LME


About what was to be expected? It feels like we’re a bit spoiled here in 
America in the fact that no matter how many medals we come up with it there’s 
only two possible results “we did what we expected to do” or “we completely 
failed and should be embarrassed with ourselves.”HF

One event that shouldn’t be in the Olympics
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fteam-usas-rio-2016-highlights-and-lowlights-our-writers-verdicts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19ad13d5421c221590d4d71a0e7753f15c8f3fba%2F0_26_4724_2836%2F4724.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Team%20USA's%20Rio%202016%20highlights%20and%20lowlights%3A%20our%20writers'%20verdicts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fteam-usas-rio-2016-highlights-and-lowlights-our-writers-verdicts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Team%20USA%27s%20Rio%202016%20highlights%20and%20lowlights%3A%20our%20writers%27%20verdicts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fteam-usas-rio-2016-highlights-and-lowlights-our-writers-verdicts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19ad13d5421c221590d4d71a0e7753f15c8f3fba%2F0_26_4724_2836%2F4724.jpg>
 Sorry dressage, your time in the sun is over. Although it probably isn’t. 
Photograph: Xinhua / Barcroft Images 
Golf seemed a strange choice from the start. Olympic competitions should in 
theory represent the biggest international event in that sport, a standard 
doubly true for new additions to an already bloated programme. But that clearly 
wasn’t the case based on the small army of top-ranked golfers who played the 
Zika card for a guilt-free out.BG

Boxing. I’ve always loved Olympic boxing, think of all the great stars who 
first introduced themselves to the world from the Games. But the latest AIBA 
scandals have shown there is now way to properly manage the tournament. Adding 
pro fighters will not make it better.LC

Dressage. Ballroom dancing has struggled to even get consideration as an 
Olympic exhibition sport, yet we’re giving out medals for horse dancing? Sad! A 
common sense rule for approving Olympic sports is that humans should be allowed 
to compete in it before other animals are. We don’t have thoroughbred racing in 
the Olympics over the 100m do we? No. Dump dressage.DG

Golf. After a 112-year hiatus, the sport returned to Rio and it was 
overwhelmingly anti-climatic. It really felt like a side event rather than a 
triumphant spectacle that returned after a century of hibernation.LME

Dressage. Nothing involving horses should count as a sport, let alone an 
Olympic sport. In fact, in order for something to count as a sport, all 
participants must actually be aware that they are, in fact, participating in 
one.HF

One event that should be in the Olympics

Squash, the healthiest sport in the world, is played competitively on six 
continents. The men’s and women’s games are equally popular. Touring pros would 
be hugely supportive as the Olympics would represent the pinnacle of their 
career. It’s cheap to set up courts and possible to do it in spectacular 
settings: like thepyramids of Giza <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KHTjbVMBetk>
 orGrand Central Station <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=86-RWmD1AI4>. BG 

Tug of war. This was an event in early Olympics and from the photos I’ve seen 
it looks like tremendous fun. It would do great on television. Who doesn’t want 
to watch a great tug of war?LC

Backwards running. The backstroke is one of four strokes competed in swimming 
events. But when it comes to running events, straight-forward is the only way 
in the Olympics. Maybe it’s just that the IOC doesn’t want to give more medals 
to the US. No doubt American defensive backs would sweep the backwards running 
events.DG

Beach soccer or Futsal. Imagine how good it would have been to have beach 
futbol in Rio. The crowds would have gone insane and the atmosphere – as it was 
closer to the action – electric. There are also some truly talented futsal 
players (Falcao, Ricardinho, Amandinha) that deserve the Olympic spotlight.LME

I was all set to make a case for baseball and softball making a return to the 
Olympics and then I did a search and discovered that the IOC voted to bring 
back both of them for the Olympic games in 2020. It’s still depressing that 
there has been an entire generation of softball players who never even had the 
chance to dream about the Olympics. HF
 