
Anthony Modeste’s is a name fans of Premier League clubs could be forgiving 
for forgetting – if they had even taken note of it in the first place. He spent 
the second half of the 2011-12 season on loan at aBlackburn Rovers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blackburn> team that would go on to be 
relegated that season, and it’s fair to say he failed to have an impact.

In nine league appearances, the French forward was in the starting line-up 
just three times and failed to score a single goal. Those starts included a 2-0 
defeat to Newcastle, a 7-1 hammering at Arsenal and the 1-0 loss at home to 
Wigan that sealed Rovers’ fate on the penultimate weekend of the season. The 
one moment, if any, that you might remember him for was whenhe was shown a red 
card for kicking out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/apr/11/blackburn-rovers-anthony-modeste>
 at West Brom defender Billy Jones. His rating of 5.93 was the worst of any 
player to start more than one game that season.

Fast forward to the present day, however, and Modeste is the top marksman in 
Europe’s major leagues. His tally of 11 goals is beaten only by Azdren Llullaku 
(12) in Romania, though the Albanian has made 14 appearances to Modeste’s nine.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fanthony-modeste-koln-bundesliga-goals-blackburn-rovers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feed58a54f4515e9bef6c96dff9c176778798819a%2F0_0_660_371%2F660.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Teams%20of%20the%20week%20from%20around%20Europe%20%E2%80%93%20and%20the%20unlikely%20ascent%20of%20a%20goalscorer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fanthony-modeste-koln-bundesliga-goals-blackburn-rovers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Teams%20of%20the%20week%20from%20around%20Europe%20%E2%80%93%20and%20the%20unlikely%20ascent%20of%20a%20goalscorer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fanthony-modeste-koln-bundesliga-goals-blackburn-rovers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feed58a54f4515e9bef6c96dff9c176778798819a%2F0_0_660_371%2F660.jpg>
 Infographic:WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
It’s been quite the turnaround, though Modeste’s time in England was not in 
keeping with the potential he had shown up to that point. A superb season in 
France’s second tier with Angers in 2009-10 had earned him a move to Bordeaux, 
who sent him on loan to Lancashire when he was 23. He scored 20 goals in that 
season with Angers and missed out on the Player of the Season award to the one 
player who had scorer more, a certain Olivier Giroud (with 21). Modeste was a 
regular fixture in France’s under-21 set up at the time and Bordeaux forked out 
€3.5m for the striker the following summer.

His transfer failed to pay off. Despite scoring a respectable 10 league goals 
in his first season at the club, Modeste wasn’t given a single start in his 
favoured role up front the following season as Yoan Gouffran was preferred. The 
striker was sent to Blackburn and struggled further but a far more fruitful 
loan spell with newly promoted Bastia in the 2012–13 season helped reignite his 
career.

A tally of 15 goals was enough to fire the club to an impressive mid-table 
finish and draw admiring glances from elsewhere in Europe. He eventually opted 
for a move to Hoffenheim in theBundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball>, where he would again 
make an encouraging start to life. He scored 12 league goals from 20 starts and 
nine substitute appearances but, just like in Bordeaux, Modeste was 
marginalised the following season.

Having linked up well with Roberto Firmino and Kevin Volland in his first 
season at the club, he then fall foul of a rotation policy and was often 
replaced by Hungarian striker Adam Szalai. Restricted to just 16 starts from 26 
appearances, he only scored seven goals in his second season at Hoffenheim. The 
club were willing to listen to offers and, following an undisclosed bid fromKöln
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/cologne> last July, Modeste was on the 
move again.

Again he enjoyed a solid first season as he moved to a seventh club in the 
space of six years, scoring 15 league goals as Köln finished in the top half of 
the Bundesliga. But no one could have predicted quite how well Modeste would 
start the current campaign. Finally, aged 28, he has been established as the 
undisputed first-choice forward for a second season for the first time in his 
career and he is full of confidence as a result.

That confidence was perhaps best highlighted at the weekend, when Modeste 
bounced back from missing a penalty in the first half against Hamburg to score 
a hat-trick in the second half. His goals fired Köln to a 3-0 win and a place 
in the top four.

Anthony Modeste making the most of Cologne's Bundesliga ascent | Raphael 
Honigstein
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/17/anthony-modeste-making-the-most-of-colognes-bundesliga-ascent>
Modeste has been in scintillating in front of goal but his support cast – 
particularly the players in wide areas – deserve a lot of the credit for his 
superb form. The vast majority of the goals that Modeste has scored this season 
have been a result of set pieces or crosses and cut-backs into the box. 
Combining an impressive aerial threat with the pace to play on the shoulder of 
the last man, he is the ideal target man for wingers and full-backs who look to 
play the ball to Modeste as early as possible.

Marcel Risse has been particularly key to getting the best from the striker, 
with Modeste confirming: “Marcel always looks for me, we work on it in 
training.” It’s paying off, with all four of the winger’s assists this season 
teeing up the top scorer, making that combination the most fruitful in the 
Bundesliga.

While Modeste owes much to his team-mates then, and acknowledges as much, his 
finishing is still at an all-time high, with a conversion rate of 30.6% ranking 
among the best in Europe. Finally settled into his surroundings, he is 
flourishing in Germany, and with 45 Bundesliga goals he is already the second 
top scoring Frenchman in the league’s history. With a score of 7.75 thus far 
this season, for a player that was once the lowest rated in thePremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague>, Anthony Modeste has come 
a long way.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXe95Zj5YPL4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXe95Zj5YPL4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXe95Zj5YPL4&media=>
Premier League team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
La Liga team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Bundesliga team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Serie A team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Ligue 1 team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Liga NOS team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
• Follow WhoScored on Twitter <https://twitter.com/WhoScored> and Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/WhoScored>
• Follow Martin Laurence <https://twitter.com/martinlaurence7> on Twitter
 