
Leicester have got their roar back this season. They go into Sunday’s 
Champions Cup match against Munster at Welford Road on the back of last 
weekend’s handsomevictory at Thomond Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/13/european-challenge-cup-roundup-leicester-win-munster>
 and an unbeaten home run in the league and Europe that stretches back to 
September last year. But the Tigers are not purring.

Their captain, Ed Slater, has called on his players to reinforce the 31-19 
victory inMunster <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/munster> with key 
Premiership matches against Saracens and Northampton coming up at the start of 
the new year, describing Sunday’s encounter as a moment of reckoning.

“Things are going well for us at the moment and I hope in time to look back on 
last week as a victory to be proud of but all that matters now is backing up 
that performance.

“This is the more important match of the two because we have to finish the job 
at home. It was far from being one-way at Thomond Park and Munster are a very 
good side with some world-class players. We cannot go around thinking of how 
good we are because of that victory. It has not been a good European Cup for 
the Irish provinces so far but I put that down to a World Cup hangover and 
nothing more. They all have really strong squads and I think the big difference 
between now and a few seasons ago when they tended to get the better of English 
clubs is that there is more strength in depth across the Premiership. We were 
17 points down at Worcester this month andhad to dig deep to win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/05/worcester-leicester-premiership-match-report>
. We know Munster will come at us and we have to be ready.”

European Champions Cup round-up: Leicester win away to Munster
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/13/european-challenge-cup-roundup-leicester-win-munster>
Slater is in his second season as Leicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> captain but he has made 
only nine appearances in that time because of a knee injury sustained while 
captaining England in their uncapped match against the Crusaders on the 2014 
tour to New Zealand. He came back at the end of last season but suffered a 
relapse and missed the first four matches of this campaign.

“I am enjoying the captaincy,” said Slater, who joined Leicester in 2010 after 
spending four years in Australia. “It was not something I expected and you have 
to get to grips with the mental side of the job, looking to get the best not 
just out of yourself but those around you.

“Attitude defines a team and we are always asking questions of each other. 
While we have made a decent start to the season with just one defeat, we know 
there is more, much more, to come from us. The club had a rough spell last 
year, but [director of rugby] Richard Cockerill shouldered all the 
responsibility and kept the pressure off the players. He understands what the 
club is about and all it stands for but as players we have to look at ourselves 
first.

“It is easy to blame coaches when you lose but, if you want ownership as 
players, which the coaches here give us, you have to stick up your hands when 
things do not go well. Aaron Mauger [head coach] has a saying that players make 
the best coaches.

“The management give us the information and recognise we have to make the 
decisions when we are on the field. That means players talking to each other 
all the time and fixing things that are not working: there is nothing the 
coaches can do because they are in the stand. I may be the captain but there 
are leaders throughout the team: the likes of Tom Youngs and Dan Cole do not 
get anywhere enough credit for what they bring to the side but I know their 
value.”

Injury robbed Slater of the opportunity to win his first cap after he broke 
into the squad for the 2014 Six Nations and that summer’s tour. The England 
captaincy debatebroke out in earnest last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/17/dylan-hartley-england-captain-eddie-jones>
 and, while the 27-year-old second-row, who is again playing on the blind side 
against Munster, is not a contender as he re-establishes himself with 
Leicester, he has the drive, ambition, competitiveness and honesty that the new 
England head coach, Eddie Jones, will appreciate.

“I do not know Eddie Jones, although having spent time in Australia I 
appreciate where he will be coming from. Jean de Villiers [the Leicester and 
former South Africa centre] worked with Eddie inthe 2007 World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2007/oct/21/rugbyunion.rugbyworldcup200710> 
and said to me the other day that he would be good for England, which clearly 
means something.

“The captaincy is being talked about. I have no idea which way Eddie will go 
and he will work it out in his own way after having conversations with people, 
but I do not think he should dismiss Chris Robshaw too easily. He was the 
captain during my time with the squad and when I was first picked he welcomed 
me and showed me around, something that is really important when you are new to 
it all. He made me feel at ease and he should feel hard done by at some of the 
things that have been said after the World Cup. What happened was not his fault 
andthe past is all about learning from it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/01/chris-robshaw-england->.”

What matters for Slater is the present, not the past or the future. “I was out 
of action for a long time and I am feeling confident again. It is a long time 
[2002] since we won the European Cup and we have missed the last two 
Premiership finals. There is a long way to go and we have to make a statement 
against Munster.”
 