
A teenage prisoner killed himself after he was transferred to a new 
institution, where staff failed to recognise his history of self-harm as a risk 
factor, an inquest jury has ruled.

Josh Collinson, 18, was found hanged at Swinfen Hall young offender 
institution in Staffordshire on 3 September last year.


He had been transferred the previous day from Parc prison, in south Wales, 
where he had self-harmed on six occasions and been placed on a list of at-risk 
prisoners.

The inquest jury at South Staffordshire coroner’s court found that Collinson 
should have been on the register – known as an Assessment Care, Custody, 
Teamwork (ACCT) register – after he had self-harmed six times at his previous 
prison.

Deborah Coles, the director of the charity Inquest, said Collinson’s death was 
preventable and an example of the catastrophic consequences of failures in 
assessment of vulnerable prisoners and sharing of vital information.

“The failures to protect vulnerable teenagers with mental health and learning 
disabilities were well documented in Lord Harris’s review of the deaths of 
young people in custody,” she said.

“The failure of government to implement the Harris review recommendations is 
resulting in the ongoing number of people dying alone and in despair in 
prisons. It is shameful.”

The inquest heard that Collinson, who was serving four years in prison for 
having sexual relations with a girl under 16, had been monitored closely at 
Parc after self-harming six times.

The jury were told that reception staff at Swinfen Hall failed to put 
Collinson on an at-risk register, despite the incidents at Parc.


The inquest heard that the staff on duty on the day Collinson arrived at 
Swinfen Hall were not aware of its policy of treating all new transfers as 
potentially being at risk of self-harm.

In their narrative verdict, the jury said Collinson should have been placed on 
an ACCT register immediately on his arrival at Swinfen Hall.

Collinson had lived in Ynyswen Treochy, about 40 miles from the prison, and 
had received regular visits from his family. He was moved due to population 
pressure and the jury ruled this was also a factor in his death.

The South Staffordshire coroner, Andrew Haigh, said he would write a 
“prevention of future deaths report” to the National Offender Management 
Service to recommend the implementation of a clear policy on transfer which 
ensured that a prisoner’s particular vulnerabilities were considered.

The inquest heard that, although Collinson was placed on an ACCT register 
after he self-harmed at Parc, he was not referred to a psychiatrist and 
received no therapy.

The jury were also told that Collinson’s mother was seriously ill while he was 
in Parc and died the following May. A member of the Collinson family said his 
mother was mindful she might not see the outcome of her son’s inquest and 
thought it important that the process continue in order to seek accountability 
and prevent future deaths.

The barrister Sam Jacobs represented the family at the inquest. He said that 
having a swollen prison population had real consequences and Collinson’s death 
was an example of that.

There were signs Collinson had begun to cope at Parc, Jacobs said, but due to 
population pressure he was moved many miles from his family.

“Transfers between prisons are known to be a difficult and high-risk time and 
he died on his his first night in Swinfen Hall. It is good news that the 
coroner is asking for the issue of prison transfers to be looked at 
nationally,” he said.

The Collinson family member said he was a loving, protective and thoughtful 
brother, son and uncle.

She said the family hoped the conclusion of the jury and the recommendations 
of the coroner would help to cultivate a culture of care and compassion in the 
prison system, especially among vulnerable, young people suffering mental 
health issues and learning difficulties.

A Prison Service spokesperson said: “This is an appalling case and our 
thoughts are with Josh Collinson’s family and friends. The safety and welfare 
of people within our custody is our top priority but we recognise that there 
were significant failings in the care of Mr Collinson.

“We have already taken action and accepted all the recommendations following 
the [Prison & Probation Ombudsman] investigation. We will now carefully 
consider lessons from the inquest findings to help ensure such incidents are 
not repeated.”

 * This article was amended on 22 December 2016 because it incorrectly stated 
that staff at Swinfen Hall had not been told of Collinson’s history of 
self-harm.  