
Eddie Jones has offered Northampton’s Teimana Harrison a rapid route back into 
international rugby less than a month after axing the back-row forward from his 
squad. Harrison andhis recalled club-mate Tom Wood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/26/tom-wood-england-squad-autumn-internationals-eddie-jones-alex-lozowski-mike-haley>
, who has been in the Test wilderness for a year, will now contest the No7 
jersey against South Africa next month in the absence of several injured rivals.

The 24-year-old Harrison was omitted from the 45-strong elite player squad 
named less than four weeks ago and hauled off only 31 minutes intoEngland’s 
most recent Test against Australia in Sydney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/25/australia-england-third-test-match-report>
. Despite Saints’ recent struggles he is now in pole position to start against 
the Springboks. Jones, who has named six uncapped players in a 33-man squad, is 
determined to pick a combative pack and improve his team’s “abysmal record” of 
not beating South Africa since 2006.

Tom Wood works hard to impress England’s teak tough judge Eddie Jones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/26/england-tom-wood-eddie-jones-south-africa-autumn-internationals>
Wood, who along with Gloucester’s No8 Ben Morgan and Bath’s Dave Attwood, has 
not featured since the Stuart Lancaster era, will be invited to restate his 
credentials in the Algarve next week where Jones is promising another no holds 
barred training camp despite his team’s recent heavy injury toll. “We won’t be 
sipping beers in Portugal,” Jones said. “No one likes to see players get 
injured but we need to train with intensity to beat South Africa. They don’t 
mind you having the ball and they don’t mind hurting you. We have to make them 
feel uncomfortable.”

Jones said Harrison earned his reprieve with a forceful display in a losing 
cause against Castres 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/22/castres-northampton-european-champions-cup-match-report>
 last weekend. “He’s starting to stop people and he’s starting to put people 
back when he carries” he said.

Jones continues to view the former captain Chris Robshaw as England’s “best 
six” and argues that “the way the side is currently set up we don’t need a 
specialist openside”.

There is no room, either, for Danny Cipriani, Dan Robson, Kyle Eastmond, Paul 
Hill or Josh Beaumont as Jones looks to increase the depth of his squad against 
South Africa, Fiji, Argentina and his native Australia. The buildup to the 
match against Australia on 3 December could be particularly feisty, with Jones 
quick to seize on last week’s “clown” jibe at his opposite number Michael 
Cheika by a New Zealand newspaper: “We know the Aussies are talking even now 
about a [tour] grand slam so they’re obviously full of confidence. They won’t 
be sending in the clowns.”

It was revealed on Wednesday that Leicester’s recently arrived Australia 
centre Matt Toomua is facing a six-month layoff with knee ligament damage.
 