
Reading on mobile? Listen here 
<http://w.soundcloud.com/player/?url=http%3A%2F%2Fapi.soundcloud.com%2Ftracks%2F64359351&show_artwork=true>

Hometown: Kettering.

The lineup: James Bagshaw (vocals, guitar), Thomas Warmsley (bass, backing 
vocals), Sam Toms (drums), Adam Smith (keyboards).

The background: We're not saying psychedelia is back – it's always been there, 
especially since its colourful return circa the Paisley Underground of the 
early 80s – but it's certainly had a good year. Most conspicuously there has 
beenTame Impala's Lonerism 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/oct/04/tame-impala-lonerism-review>, 
although that album arguably evinced a more novel take on psych than the 
revivalism offered by today's new band.

To be fair, they call what they do "neo-psych". They could probably have got 
away with "quasi-psych" as well, if you want to be finicky. Either way, they're 
good, especially if you're in the mood for someincense and peppermints 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qhYLz63csS0>. Who says so? Johnny Marr does. 
"Good work, Temples," he tweeted recently as soon as he clocked their debut 
single, Shelter Song, released next week by Heavenly (who, withStealing Sheep 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/jul/13/new-band-stealing-sheep> and Toy, 
are on something of a roll right now). Suede – whose Dog Man Star 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2011/jun/09/suede-dog-man-star-reissue-review> 
was sort of psych at a pinch, if you stretched the definition almost to 
bursting point – have also been saying positive things about the four-piece 
from Kettering.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fvs4i41cOv0s%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fvs4i41cOv0s%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fvs4i41cOv0s%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on mobile? Watch here <http://www.youtube.com/embed/vs4i41cOv0s>

They apparently used vintage equipment in their local Pyramid Studios to 
achieve that kaleidoscopic effect you can hear on Shelter Song and its B-side 
Prism, but then such rampant retromania has been all the rage these last 10 
years, from the White Stripes'analogue worship 
<http://www.soundonsound.com/sos/oct03/articles/toeragstudios.htm> to Mark 
Ronson's 60s soul fetishism. To cite a more modern reference, at least one 
blogger has detected the influence, in Temples' big booming cavernous drum 
sound, of Dave Fridmann's productions for the Flaming Lips. And you could also 
draw comparisons with the likes of the Coral and other psychedelic Scousers 
(hallucinogenic pop being historicallyloved by Liverpudlians 
<http://liverpoolpsychfest.tumblr.com/>), but they were revivalists, too, so 
they don't count as contemporary.

But like we say, none of this matters really because Temples are so good at 
what they do, so accomplished in their (strawberry) field of endeavour. Just 
listen to the intro to Shelter Song as its Beatlesy guitar Rains (geddit? 
<http://www.metacafe.com/watch/yt-MPjDMZiuhbQ/the_beatles_rain_2009_stereo_remaster_original_promotional_video/>
) down, before morphing into a riff somewhere between the Monkees (circa Head 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2011/apr/28/monkees-head-jack-nicholson-interview>
) and Roger McGuinn's raga-infused 12-string things for the Byrds. The singer 
gets the vocals just right, sounding appropriately intoxicated, dazed and 
suffused with surreal daydreams, with his invocations to "take me away to the 
twilight zone".

As copies of the original go, this stuff's almost as faithful as Faithful 
<http://blogcritics.org/music/article/vinyl-tap-todd-rundgren-faithful/>, that 
1976 album by Todd Rundgren – a favourite, incidentally, of Tame Impala, andthe 
feeling's mutual <http://soundcloud.com/modularpeople/tame-impala-elephant-todd>
 – wherein the skinny 70s wunderkind reworked psych-era classics including the 
Fabs' Rain andStrawberry Fields Forever 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KCVyK1ktV4k>. Even 36 years ago, critics 
recoiled with bemusement at such a retro move. Listening to Temples' Prisms 
three and half decades on, to its shimmering Beach-Boys-in-66 sonics and 
baroque arrangement (warning: features prominent use of flutes), you might feel 
similarly baffled. But who cares when the music's so fine. Taxi! Penny Lane!

The buzz: "Shelter Song is a battering ram to the senses and soaked to within 
an inch of its life with retro references" –The Line of Best Fit 
<http://www.thelineofbestfit.com/videos/music-videos/temples-shelter-song-112265>
.

The truth: It might not be a patch(ouli) on the original psych, but it's a 
fabulous recreation.

Most likely to: Appeal to Julian Cope 
<http://www.headheritage.co.uk/psychedelic-revolution/>.

Least likely to: Encourage renewed interest in kaleidoscopes.

What to buy: Shelter Song/Prisms will be released by Heavenly on 12 November.

File next to: Beatles, Coral, Byrds, Tame Impala.

Links: facebook.com/templesofficial <http://www.facebook.com/templesofficial>.

Thursday's new band: Dan Croll.
 