
We are racing along the coast road, passing banana plantations, goat herders, 
little bars, and whitewashed houses. To our right the ocean crashes against the 
black, rocky shore. The waves – huge and rolling – are the pale ice blue of a 
glacier. Yesterday we trekked through a prehistoric forest; tomorrow we will 
climb a volcano.

This place feels exotic and strange. I had always thought of Tenerife as a 
beach destination: bland chain hotels squatting on black sand. Two for one 
cocktails. Pizza and chips.
Tenerife map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/12/tenerife_web/giv-390282ZGSmXzSYE6/>
I didn’t have a clue. The island, the largest of the Canaries, arches out of 
the sea, split by a spine of volcanic mountains. The symbol of Tenerife is the 
dragon tree, and the island itself is like a dragon – full of fire and dotted 
with volcanoes, the largest of which is El Teide, a massive 3,718 metres high. 
South of it are the resorts used by holidaying Brits. The landscape there is 
desert, all sandy rock and bleached-out cacti. But cross to the north of the 
island and a secret world is revealed. This is where the Spanish colonised 
Tenerife in the 15th century, building pretty towns, and taking advantage of 
the more temperate climate to grow food and make excellent wine. And it’s 
remarkably still under the tourist radar. Of the 1.5 million Brits who visited 
Tenerife between January and September 2016, only around 75,000 stayed in the 
north.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fnorthern-tenerife-canary-islands-volcano-winter-sun-wine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc523c24a582230eb0f78a7e7bd27d9b3c91a0d1a%2F0_173_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tenerife%20with%20a%20twist%3A%20winter%20sun%2C%20plus%20wildlife%20and%20wine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fnorthern-tenerife-canary-islands-volcano-winter-sun-wine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tenerife%20with%20a%20twist%3A%20winter%20sun%2C%20plus%20wildlife%20and%20wine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fnorthern-tenerife-canary-islands-volcano-winter-sun-wine%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc523c24a582230eb0f78a7e7bd27d9b3c91a0d1a%2F0_173_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 El Teide national park. Photograph: DaLiu/Getty Images/iStockphoto 
For winter sun, Tenerife does offer genuine warmth. It’s November when we 
visit and still hot enough for the beach most days. That doesn’t mean it never 
rains. A planned five-hour hike through Anaga country park, an ancient cloud 
forest of rare ferns and laurels, was curtailed by an unusually monsoon-like 
downpour.

We take refuge in a simple beachside restaurant, Estrella del Mar in the 
capital, Santa Cruz. It was the equivalent of a greasy spoon, except here the 
greasy spoons do freshly grilled seafood and good wine. A steaming bowl of 
Tenerife’s famous wrinkly potatoes, cooked in salt until they’re shrivelled and 
crispy, go down a treat dipped inmojo, the Canary Islands’ signature piquant 
salsa.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fnorthern-tenerife-canary-islands-volcano-winter-sun-wine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f605e16acb3e616957c64d465b524b12b4cb114%2F0_190_5615_3369%2F5615.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tenerife%20with%20a%20twist%3A%20winter%20sun%2C%20plus%20wildlife%20and%20wine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fnorthern-tenerife-canary-islands-volcano-winter-sun-wine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tenerife%20with%20a%20twist%3A%20winter%20sun%2C%20plus%20wildlife%20and%20wine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fnorthern-tenerife-canary-islands-volcano-winter-sun-wine%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f605e16acb3e616957c64d465b524b12b4cb114%2F0_190_5615_3369%2F5615.jpg>
 Afur village. Photograph: Alamy 
We head back to our hotel, the San Roque <http://hotelsanroque.com/EN/>, a 
traditional house with rooms around a central courtyard in Garachico, stopping 
off in Puerto de la Cruz to wander along the shore. As the sun begins to set, 
surfers are catching the last waves, while on the harbour old men are roasting 
chestnuts and drinking young red wine. At the hotel, guests are eating by the 
pool: it’s still warm enough to stay outside drinking and chatting well into 
the evening.

Garachico was the island’s main port until a volcanic eruption in 1706 
destroyed the harbour. We wander out to enjoy vermouths in the square by the 
old bandstand, followed by fresh fish and plenty of red wine atLa Perla 
<https://www.facebook.com/RestauranteLaPerlaGarachico/>. It’s the sort of 
restaurant I dream of finding on holiday – brightly lit, with vinyl floors, 
ridiculously fair prices and friendly hosts, Jesus and Ana.

The next day we take a blockbuster tour of the best things Tenerife has to 
offer beginning in the university city of San Cristóbal de la Laguna, with its 
colourful 16th-century buildings. The sun is warming the streets, and families 
throng outside cafes, catching up over churros and hot chocolate. The best 
churros are found at Miguel Angel on Plaza del Cristo – a down-to-earth cafe 
run by a man with swept-back, greasy white hair and a medallion. A bag of 10, 
dusted in sugar and hot from the frier, are crunchy on the outside and light as 
a cloud within.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fnorthern-tenerife-canary-islands-volcano-winter-sun-wine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6eb9082fd1cbf6e2acc90a2822bb1b987a9fc555%2F0_48_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tenerife%20with%20a%20twist%3A%20winter%20sun%2C%20plus%20wildlife%20and%20wine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fnorthern-tenerife-canary-islands-volcano-winter-sun-wine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tenerife%20with%20a%20twist%3A%20winter%20sun%2C%20plus%20wildlife%20and%20wine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fnorthern-tenerife-canary-islands-volcano-winter-sun-wine%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6eb9082fd1cbf6e2acc90a2822bb1b987a9fc555%2F0_48_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 Papas arrugadas, or wrinkly potatoes. Photograph: Alamy 
But we can’t linger: there’s more drinking to be done. We head to the wine 
museum <http://www.casadelvinotenerife.com/> for a tasting, noting how odd it 
is that we never get Tenerife wine back home. But of course – the island’s 
vineyards can only produce so much, and most of it is drunk by the Spanish. At
Bodegas Monje <http://www.bodegasmonje.com/> vineyard , we learn how to make 
those wrinkly potatoes and mojo, before eating them with slow-cooked black pig 
in red wine.

Our next stop is the volcano. The atmosphere alters rapidly as the road curves 
up through eucalyptus trees then pines shrouded in mist. Small bands of people 
loom out of the haze, foraging for mushrooms. We emerge on to a windswept 
summit and another strange sight: bulbous white towers, whipped by clouds that 
scud at ground level. This is theTeide Observatory 
<http://www.iac.es/eno.php?op1=3&lang=en>, where scientists study zodiacal 
light and solar activity with vast telescopes. Tenerife’s clear, dark skies 
make it one of the best places to study the solar system, and in June the 
island hostsStarmus <http://www.starmus.com/>, a stargazing festival with 
music, planets and Stephen Hawking. We tour the telescopes, and take turns to 
look through one at the sun itself, dark red through the filter, with sun spots 
and solar flares. It’s an oddly intimate moment.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fnorthern-tenerife-canary-islands-volcano-winter-sun-wine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2afb594760c2e1e9872da8ec2b5a794bef6d10d7%2F0_141_4243_2546%2F4243.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tenerife%20with%20a%20twist%3A%20winter%20sun%2C%20plus%20wildlife%20and%20wine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fnorthern-tenerife-canary-islands-volcano-winter-sun-wine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tenerife%20with%20a%20twist%3A%20winter%20sun%2C%20plus%20wildlife%20and%20wine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fnorthern-tenerife-canary-islands-volcano-winter-sun-wine%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2afb594760c2e1e9872da8ec2b5a794bef6d10d7%2F0_141_4243_2546%2F4243.jpg>
 Finger Of God rock at Teide. Photograph: TPopova/Getty Images/iStockphoto 
From the observatory, we look out across the great crater of Teide national 
park, a wild, barren, almost Martian landscape. Or is it Utah? Rock formations 
rising like totem poles in the distance are hardened lava from the funnels of 
dead volcanoes, long since eroded by the wind.

As the sun drops, we try to stay warm. Up here the temperature drops below 
freezing on winter nights. Snow will start to fall soon, transforming the 
Martian landscape into an Arctic one. That evening we meet with a star guide 
and crane our heads to look at the night sky, enjoying the sound of the words: 
Perseid, Pleiades, Andromeda, Vega.

The next day back down on the coast it’s hot and sunny enough for a bit of 
sunbathing before we head home – feeling like we’ve been to five countries in 
four days.

• Monarch <http://www.monarch.co.uk/> flies to Tenerife from Birmingham, 
Leeds-Bradford, Gatwick, Luton and Manchester from £70 return. Tenerife Tourism 
Corporation (webtenerife.co.uk <http://www.webtenerife.co.uk/>) assisted with 
the trip. Accommodation was provided by Hotel San Roque (doubles from £157 B&B, 
hotelsanroque.com <https://hotelsanroque.com/>). For tours of Anaga cloud 
forest, seeanagaatrapies.com <http://anagaatrapies.com/>
 