
A Tennessee <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/tennessee> woman arrested in 
late 2015 for using an unravelled coat hanger to attempt her own abortion was 
released from jail on Monday in exchange for a guilty plea to one felony count 
of procuring a miscarriage.

Anna Yocca, 32, initially faced a possible life sentence for her September 
2015 self-abortion attempt. Under her plea, she was given credit for the 13 
months she spent in jail and released immediately.

But reproductive rights advocates, who fear that Yocca’s story is a harbinger 
of what might happen as lawmakers increasingly restrict abortion rights, 
nevertheless condemned the prosecution that led Yocca to make a plea deal.

‘Please, I am out of options’: inside the murky world of DIY abortions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/21/home-abortions-emails-secret-world>
“This plea deal should not be understood as validation of arresting and 
punishing pregnant women who have or try to have abortions but rather a 
frightening example of how the criminal law system can be used to bully and 
punish pregnant women and mothers – with or without a conviction or valid law,” 
Lynn Paltrow, the executive director of the National Advocates for PregnantWomen
 <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women>, said in a statement.

Yocca, who is from Murfreesboro, attempted to cause an abortion in September 
2015 when she was 24 weeks pregnant. Little is known about the circumstances 
that led Yocca to try to induce an abortion by herself.


According to local news reports, she pierced herself with the coat hanger in 
the bathtub and called her boyfriend when the amount of blood she was losing 
began to scare her. He rushed her to the hospital, where doctors delivered a 
live infant. The boy survived, but because he was born prematurely and incurred 
injuries from the abortion attempt, he reportedly requires long-term medical 
care. Another family has since adopted her child.

Authorities arrested Yocca in December 2015 and held her on a $200,000 bond. A 
Rutherford County grand jury later indicted her on attempted murder in the 
first degree. Under that charge, Yocca faced a potential sentence of life in 
prison.

Yocca’s defense attorney succeeded in having the felony murder charge dropped 
in February 2016. In response, prosecutors indicted Yocca under a 2014 “fetal 
assault” law that permits authorities to arrest pregnant women who use opioids 
and give birth to infants who are chemically dependent on the drugs. Yocca was 
never accused of using opioids.

In December 2016, prosecutors dropped the fetal assault charge and indicted 
Yocca on three new felony counts: aggravated assault with a weapon, attempted 
criminal abortion and attempted procurement of a miscarriage. In an email, 
Paltrow stated that Tennessee adopted its criminal abortion and miscarriage 
statutes in the late 1800s.

“The charges against her call attention to antiquated, unconstitutional laws 
that pose a threat to anyone who might seek an abortion or lose a pregnancy,” 
said Farah Diaz-Tello, SIA legal team senior counsel.

Tennessee places numerous restrictions 
<https://www.guttmacher.org/fact-sheet/state-facts-about-abortion-tennessee> on 
abortion rights. In addition to banning abortions after 24 weeks unless the 
mother’s life or health is in danger, the state requires women seeking an 
abortion to wait 48 hours between their initial counseling and the procedure 
itself. The requirement forces women to make two separate, in-person trips to 
the abortion clinic, placing barriers on women who struggle to access 
transportation or take time off from work. Tennessee also bans public insurance 
or plans sold on the state Obamacare exchange from offering abortion coverage.

Researchers are unsure of how many women attempt to end their own abortions in 
the US every year and whether that number is increasing. Several estimates, 
which are not definitive, have placed the percentage of pregnant women who 
attempt to self-induce in the low single digits.

Abortion rights are already under siege – and it's only going to get worse | 
Jessica Valenti
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/commentisfree/2016/nov/22/abortion-rights-under-siege-roe-v-wade-womens-rights>
Reporting by the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/21/home-abortions-emails-secret-world>
 has revealed that self-induced abortions are a significant, if hidden 
phenomenon in America. Volunteers who run groups helping low-income women pay 
for abortions report hearing from many women who have attempted to use herbs or 
abortion drugs obtained outside of a medical setting to cause their own 
abortion. And the Guardianfollowed one Texas woman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/21/home-abortions-emails-secret-world>
 as she traveled to Mexico and back to procure an abortion drug because she 
could not afford to have an abortion in a US clinic.

Prosecutions of women who attempt or appear to attempt their own abortions 
have occurred sporadicallyfor decades 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/22/abortion-pregnancy-law-prosecute-trump>
.

“We’re glad Ms Yocca is free after more than a year of unjust incarceration,” 
said Jill E Adams, the chief strategist for the Self-InducedAbortion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abortion> Legal Team, a group of 
organizations including Berkeley Law that track prosecutions related to 
self-induced abortion. “Criminal prosecution is the wrong response to 
healthcare access issues. No one should fear arrest or jail for ending their 
own pregnancy or for seeking medical help when they need it.”
 