
As Theresa May stood to address regional leaders of the Gulf states in Bahrain 
last week, one conspicuous fact struck observers. In the vast hall of the Gulf 
Cooperation Council, packed with scores of men in Arab dress making up the six 
regional delegations, there werejust two women other than the prime minister 
<https://twitter.com/chrisshipitv/status/806416960800063488>: one female 
representative from the UAE and, sitting immediately behind the PM, her closest 
adviser and most ferocious defender, Fiona Hill.

In a busy schedule, May used her first prime ministerial trip to the region to 
lobby onBritish trade and on Iran’s nuclear deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/06/theresa-may-iran-nuclear-deal-vitally-important-speech-bahrain-donald-trump>
. But she also found time tosecure a deal 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/2351925/border-force-agents-to-team-up-with-arab-airlines-to-help-fight-theresa-mays-battle-against-human-trafficking/>
 on an issue on which Hill has personally worked in her time outside 
government: modern slavery.

It is difficult, according to those who work closely with Downing Street, to 
overestimate Hill’s closeness to and influence over the prime minister – 
a degree of access matched only byNick Timothy, with whom she shares the role 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/15/may-appoints-former-advisers-as-joint-chiefs-of-staff>
 of chief of staff at Number 10.

Hill worked as a special adviser to May at the Home Office from 2010 before 
joining her at Downing Street when May won the leadership this summer, and her 
loyalty to the prime minister is absolute. But loyalty can have its flip side. 
The adjectives most commonly applied to Hill by those who work with her are 
“pugilistic”, “ferocious”, even “terrifying”, anda remarkable text exchange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/11/theresa-may-trousers-row-angry-text-exchange-nicky-morgan>
 leaked over the weekend revealed why.

Nicky Morgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/12/trousergate-dressing-up-brexit-row-tories>
, the former education secretary, said Theresa May’s choice of £995 leather 
Burberry trousersworn in a photoshoot 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/the-interview-theresa-may-hmpg0m2lg?CMP=Spklr-_-Editorial-_-TWITTER-_-TheSTMagazine-_-20161127-_-Magazine-_-681814454&linkId=31569536>
 didn’t show a great deal of solidarity with struggling families – comments 
that were met with a quite remarkable rebuke. In messages leaked to the Mail on 
Sunday, it emerged that Hill had texted a fellow backbencher, Alistair Burt, 
urging him not to bring “that woman” to Downing Street as a result of her 
comments. Morgan heard about the messages, then protested to Hill that “no man 
brings me to any meeting”. “Well, he just did,” Hill replied. “So there!”

In no way is it edifying to see three women engaged in a spat over trousers. 
But as one close observer remarked on Mondayyesterday: “Of course, it’s not 
about the bloody trousers. This is about loyalty,” a virtue that Hill is said 
to prize almost above all others. Stories are legion of those who have been 
deemed to have crossed May and met with a ferocious response from Hill – Morgan 
is far from the only minister, journalist or official who has received 
scorching texts from Hill.

The former Liberal Democrat MP Norman Baker memorably described 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4023522/Theresa-s-rottweiler-style-guru-frightens-ministers-terrifying-aide-Fiona-Hill-shields-prime-minister-harm.html>
 moving from the transport department to the Home Office, where he became a 
minister of state in the coalition government, as “like going from somewhere 
nice and warm to hell”, thanks to his clashes with Hill and other members of 
May’s team.

Relations with Craig Oliver, David Cameron’s then communications chief, were 
reportedly terrible.

Another ongoing spat between the Home Office and Michael Gove’s team in the 
department of education was so toxic it led to Hill’s resignation in 2014; 
Downing Street said she had been briefing against Gove’s department. Despite 
her resignation, observers suspect she remained in close contact with May, 
before eventually rejoining her leadership team in the summer.

Even those who are most critical of Hill, however, acknowledge that she and 
Timothy make up a ruthlessly effective team. Now 43, she grew up in Greenock, 
in the west of Scotland, before becoming a football writer on the Scottish 
Daily Record. She moved to the Scotsman and later to Sky, then to work for the
Conservatives <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> before 
the 2010 election, when she joined May at the Home Office. She previously 
worked under her married name of Fiona Cunningham (she is now divorced), and 
reverted to her birth name after rejoining the government in July.

“She has no airs or graces,” her friend George Pascoe-Watson, the former 
political editor of the Sun, has said. “That she’s a woman is neither here nor 
there. She’s just a professional.”

The Home Office minister Ben Wallace, who has known Hill since before she 
worked in government, says some of the reporting about Hill is unfair. “Chiefs 
of staff are supposed to be loyal and defensive of the people they work for. 
They wouldn’t be any good at it if they weren’t. She’s come up through the 
ranks, she’s worked hard at it and … she is determined. There are people 
venting their criticism of No 10 through the staff that work there, and I think 
that’s not a very grownup way of doing business.”

He is not the only one to have challenged Hill’s portrayal in the press, 
detecting sexism in the way she is presented as an angry woman who deals with 
frivolous matters (reporting of the trousers dispute has inevitably descended, 
in some quarters, to a discussion of all three women’s clothing), while the 
wonkish Timothy does the brainy policy stuff. Not true, say observers: Hill’s 
influence on policy is clear, and she is far from frivolous.

“She’s capable of having very robust conversations, but I certainly respected 
her professionally,” notes someone – not a political ally – who worked closely 
with Hill while she was at the Home Office. “[She and Timothy] had a clear idea 
of what they wanted and a clear strategy, and they were very ruthless in their 
deployment of it.”

With May as loyal to her aide as Hill is to the PM, few think the release of 
her texts puts her position in any jeopardy. And yet, in a business where the 
number one rule for aides is to stay out of the news, Hill’s texts have shone 
unwelcome light on the messy business of day-to-day governing. With an enormous 
fight looming over Brexit, they also reveal an operation that is rather nervier 
than the PM and Hill would like it to appear.
 