
After the terrorist attacks on Paris in November 2015, tricolour flags were 
waved around the world and international solidarity with France was 
vociferously expressed. It seems the world was being hypocritical. Many people 
began altering holiday plans, even before mass murder came to Nice, with the 
Bastille Day truck attack. Tourism inFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> is so badly hit that even the Louvre 
has recorded a fall in visitor numbers.

The country’s grandest museum has announced 
<http://theartnewspaper.com/news/museums/louvre-attendance-falls-as-tourists-stay-away-from-paris/>
 that it had 7.3 million visitors in 2016, considerably down from a colossal 
9.3 million two years previously. It even breaks down the international 
shortfall: declines in visitors of 31% from China, 61% from Japan and 18% from 
the US.

Before you fall for news stories in some quarters 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/09/13/paris-is-a-post-apocalyptic-hellhole-of-public-urination-and-lit/>
 that make Paris sound like a dying city where wild dogs fight for the last 
scrap of foie gras, let’s get this in proportion. The Louvre, however, remains 
the most popular museum in the world. Its nearest rival, the British Museum in 
London, counted 6.8 million heads in 2015 – and was delighted with that.

Having spent time in Paris and other parts of France in 2016, I find the idea 
that it has been culturally shattered by recent events both ridiculous and 
offensive. No one who has recently queued for a lift up the Eiffel Tower would 
say Paris is short of tourists. Nor would anyone who has spent an evening in 
the Marais call it a joyless or depressed city. What struck me inParis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris> last year was what had impressed me 
when I visited New York after the attack on the World Trade Center: the moving 
and beautiful sense of a great city overcoming its wounds with sheer vitality 
and elan.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Flouvre-worlds-greatest-gallery-visitor-numbers-paris-nice-terror-attacks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd07bec24d3f5227d3189ded65ce9f6d83d66858f%2F0_0_4915_3686%2F4915.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Terror%20be%20damned%20%E2%80%93%20the%20Louvre%20is%20still%20the%20world's%20greatest%20gallery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Flouvre-worlds-greatest-gallery-visitor-numbers-paris-nice-terror-attacks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Terror%20be%20damned%20%E2%80%93%20the%20Louvre%20is%20still%20the%20world%27s%20greatest%20gallery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Flouvre-worlds-greatest-gallery-visitor-numbers-paris-nice-terror-attacks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd07bec24d3f5227d3189ded65ce9f6d83d66858f%2F0_0_4915_3686%2F4915.jpg>
 Tourists photographing the Mona Lisa at the Louvre. Photograph: 
Imagebroker/Alamy 
It’s really pathetic if, after all the Francophile flag waving in 2015, some 
people are scared to go the city that invented the modern world. This is 
especially true of anyone who misses out on the Louvre. To be honest, some 
parts of this palatial museum could benefit from far fewer visitors. Fewer 
heads to look over to see theMona Lisa 
<http://www.louvre.fr/en/oeuvre-notices/mona-lisa-portrait-lisa-gherardini-wife-francesco-del-giocondo>
 can only be a good thing. But the Louvre is so big and complex, so rich in 
masterpieces from everywhere from ancient Mesopotamia to 19th-century 
Romanticism, that you can always find near-empty galleries to roam in. This is 
not a museum you can assimilate in one visit. I went there twice last year and 
managed to do only the department of French paintings properly, concentrating on
Poussin 
<https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nicolas_Poussin#/media/File%3ANicolas_Poussin_078.jpg>
 the first time,Watteau 
<http://www.louvre.fr/en/oeuvre-notices/pilgrimage-cythera> and Chardin 
<http://www.louvre.fr/en/oeuvre-notices/ray> the second.

No museum rivals the Louvre’s encyclopedic fullness. The Prado has a more 
idiosyncratically characterful collection and the National Gallery a more 
manageable one, but the Louvre lets you sample or study the entire history of 
art under one roof. It is so laden with glories that crowds making a beeline 
for theLeonardos 
<http://www.louvre.fr/en/oeuvre-notices/virgin-and-child-saint-anne> (not just 
the Mona Lisa but also a couple of Virgins) often walk straight past 
Michelangelo’sThe Rebellious Slave 
<http://www.louvre.fr/en/oeuvre-notices/rebellious-slave> and Dying Slave 
without noticing. And when I contemplate these sublime sculptures I tend to 
miss Canova’sCupid and Psyche 
<http://musee.louvre.fr/oal/psyche/psyche_acc_en.html> in the same room.

Don’t forget Caravaggio’s Death of the Virgin 
<http://www.louvre.fr/en/oeuvre-notices/death-virgin>, or Van Eyck’s Madonna of 
Chancellor Rolin 
<http://www.louvre.fr/en/oeuvre-notices/virgin-chancellor-rolin>, and above all 
don’t miss the great hall of French history paintings that the characters in 
Jean-Luc Godard’s film Bande à Partrun through 
<http://3.bp.blogspot.com/_q7CMz5wchIo/TNrkkTjDxWI/AAAAAAAAAPs/GQYR0x1WyPk/s640/Project5.png>
 in a great moment of punk art history.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-z74tb51YI8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-z74tb51YI8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-z74tb51YI8&media=>
Some of the strangest works of art in the Louvre – if you can find them in the 
depths of its French department – are the paintings of Hubert Robert, who in 
the 18th century painted grandiose vistas of classical ruins that ache with 
melancholic meditation on the decline of empire. He alsopainted the museum 
itself 
<https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hubert_Robert#/media/File%3AHubert_Robert_-_Projet_d’aménagement_de_la_Grande_Galerie_du_Louvre_(1796).JPG>
 as a visionary Romantic temple of art, for after being imprisoned during the 
Reign of Terror he served on the committee that created this revolutionary 
museum. The basis of the Louvre is the former French royal collection – it has 
so many works by Leonardo, for instance, because he was the court painter to 
Francis I – that was seized in the French revolution. Its grandeur was turned 
up a notch by Napoleon, and throughout modern times it has inspired artists 
such as Renoir (who came to gawp atits immense Veronese 
<http://www.louvre.fr/en/oeuvre-notices/wedding-feast-cana>), and Picasso (who 
copiedThe Women of Algiers 
<http://www.louvre.fr/en/oeuvre-notices/women-algiers-their-apartment> by 
Delacroix).

The Louvre's closure proves art cannot survive climate change
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2016/jun/06/louvre-closure-flooding-paris-climate-change>
The cultural power the Louvre emanates is an awe-inspiring expression of the 
French republic. I find this reassuring. France is not going to fall apart any 
time soon, you have to recognise after visiting this museum that proclaims 
Paris as the custodian of world civilisation.Museums 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/museums> are optimistic beacons of 
enlightenment in our dangerous world – and the Louvre is the most luminous of 
all. Make it your pilgrimage for 2017, and help it beat the terrorists with a 
record year.
 