
Tesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> could face a £500m fine for 
the accounting scandal at the retailer, analysts have warned.

The Serious Fraud Office <https://www.theguardian.com/law/serious-fraud-office>
 may announce the findings of its investigation into the £326m black hole in 
the company’s accounts as early as this week, according to Mike Dennis, an 
analyst at Cantor Fitzgerald.

Tesco suspended four executives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/sep/22/tesco-investigators-overstating-profit-250m>
 after the chief executive, Dave Lewis, revealed in September 2014 that a 
shortfall had been found in the retailer’s accounts relating to payments from 
suppliers. Tesco was accused of bringing forward payments to flatter its 
financial results as sales fell.

The SFO subsequently launched an investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/27/philip-clarke-to-be-interviewed-by-office-over-tesco-accounting-scandal>
 into the company. The Groceries Code Adjudicator, the supermarket regulator, 
is also investigating Tesco’streatment of suppliers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jun/22/tesco-suppliers-say-retailer-worst-at-following-grocery-code-of-practice>
.

Tesco beats forecasts with Christmas sales rise
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/14/tesco-beats-forecasts-with-christmas-sales-rise>
Dennis said the SFO could fine Tesco more than £350m and force it to repay 
hundreds of millions of pounds to suppliers that it claimed in what has been 
called “arbitrary unjustified cash payments”.

He said the scope of the alleged fraud at Tesco might be far greater than has 
been revealed so far. Dennis estimated that the amount Tesco collected from 
supplier payments rose by £1.7bn over five years to £2.4bn in February 2014 and 
accounts for 30% of cash profits.

“To secure a case against Tesco, the SFO needs to link the commercial income 
fraud to a controlling board director and senior management by ‘mens rea’, 
where ‘the acts and state of mind’ of those who represent the ‘directing mind 
and will’ of the company can be attributed to the employees’ behaviour and 
fraud, in our view,” Dennis said.

“We believe [that] Tesco could be fined 1% or more of its UK grocery sales or 
£350m on £35bn of sales. In addition, there might be individual prosecutions 
after applying the identification principle to controlling officers of the 
company. The SFO could also add punitive fines to deter other grocery retailers 
and force repayments which together could cost Tesco £500m.”

Tesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> declined to comment. Shares 
in the company fell more than 1% in Monday morning trading.
 