
“The Last Poets are the microcosm of black America,” said Umar Bin Hassan 
<http://www.umarbinhassan.com/>, one of the founding members of the group, when 
I first met him in Harlem, New York, a decade ago. And he’s right: the 
turbulent and sometimes violent history of this legendary group of African 
American men who became famous worldwide in the late 1960s and early 70s with 
self-critical, militant poems (“Niggers are scared of revolution. Niggers love 
anything but themselves”) not only influenced generations of hip-hop and soul 
artists – such asPublic Enemy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/15/chuck-d-public-enemy-interview-black-lives-matter>
,Ice Cube 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/13/straight-outta-compton-film-ice-cube>
,Ice-T <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/nov/07/q-and-a-ice-t>, 
2Pac 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/08/mothers-day-hip-hop-afeni-shakur-tupac-legacy>
,Common <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2007/jul/28/popandrock.urban>, Mos 
Def 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2013/jul/08/mos-def-force-fed-guantanamo-bay-video>
 andErykah Badu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/jun/19/erykah-badu-singer> – but also 
the likes ofDavid Bowie <https://www.theguardian.com/music/davidbowie> and Mick 
Jagger <https://www.theguardian.com/music/mick-jagger>. Their fluent and funky 
conga-rhythms transformed poetry into rap (a novelty at the time, though 
perhaps not today).

Umar Bin Hassan, now 68, is in a position to reflect on their remarkable 
collective strength, resilience and hope. The Poets always bounced back, no 
matter how much they struggled – and boy, did they struggle. Umar, in 
particular, lived on the streets as a crack addict for years and found success 
very hard to handle. Growing up in a ghetto, where he was told “You ain’t shit” 
from a very young age, Umar worked as a shoeshine boy in a red-light district 
to escape his father’s abuse. Racism, poverty and social exclusion left their 
destructive marks on him; as Bin Hassan put it in one of his autobiographical 
poems: “Self-hatred wrapped up in a twisted, demented but well-controlled 
smile.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fthe-last-poets-america-in-poetry-from-black-power-to-black-lives-matter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81adc0819b49170bb87b87fa7de2afea4876784e%2F0_0_842_562%2F842.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Last%20Poets%3A%20America%20in%20poetry%20from%20black%20power%20to%20Black%20Lives%20Matter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fthe-last-poets-america-in-poetry-from-black-power-to-black-lives-matter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Last%20Poets%3A%20America%20in%20poetry%20from%20black%20power%20to%20Black%20Lives%20Matter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fthe-last-poets-america-in-poetry-from-black-power-to-black-lives-matter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81adc0819b49170bb87b87fa7de2afea4876784e%2F0_0_842_562%2F842.jpg>
 Umar Bin Hassan Photograph: Hollis King 
From the first moment I discovered the Last Poets – through my 11-year-old, 
hip-hop-obsessed son – and from the first time I met them, I was completely 
absorbed by their life stories and poetry, which continues to reflect today’s 
black America.

The Last Poets started out during the black power movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/sep/02/black-panthers-last-poets-pop-politics>
, in the years, months and days after Martin Luther King, Robert F Kennedy and 
Malcolm X had been murdered. They were young men living in the black ghettos of 
Akron, Ohio, Detroit, Michigan, Jamaica Queens and The Bronx – all desperately 
seeking a different life to that of their parents, who in their eyes were too 
subdued, too damaged by racial oppression.


Inspired by the music of John Coltrane, the glamour of the Temptations and the 
politics of black pride, they started performing on street corners in Harlem 
where they immediately gained a following. But it wasn’t until 1970, when Alan 
Douglas – the white record producer who made Jimi Hendrix a star – convinced 
them to record their first album (Douglas drove into the heart of Harlem in his 
silver Jaguar and appealed to them himself), that they experienced fame. It 
became an instant classic. “White death will froth the walls of museums and 
churches breaking the lies that enslaved our mothers when the revolution 
comes,” is recited onWhen the Revolution Comes 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8M5W_3T2Ye4>. “The Statue of Liberty is a 
prostitute,” is shouted out, onNew York, New York 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=De_N7Yaz2pE>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8M5W_3T2Ye4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8M5W_3T2Ye4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8M5W_3T2Ye4&media=>
Listen to the Last Poets’ When the Revolution Comes – audio 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8M5W_3T2Ye4> 
Their poetry seemed stronger then themselves, visionary even. But despite 
their self-awareness, their scope for self-criticism didn’t prevent them from 
getting into trouble; Umar and Félipe Luciano (former leader of the Puertorican 
Black Panthers, now a politician) got mixed up in drugs;Jalal Mansur Nuriddin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jan/30/hustlers-convention-rap-lost-great-album-hip-hop>
 became a hustler; and Abiodun Oyewole was in prison by the time the first Last 
Poets album came out, and heard other inmates sing words he wrote from other 
cells.

When they were all together, they almost killed each other fighting over 
rights and money. It was all too much for some: the original founder of the 
Last Poets, David Nelson, retreated to his sisters’ house; fellow original 
member Gylan Kain moved to Europe. By the late 1970s, their popularity had 
declined. Their disintegration coincided with the downfall of the black 
consciousness movement in America; the FBI’s Cointelpro programme had 
infiltrated all the major black political organisations, the Black Panther 
party was in disarray and drugs were flooding into black neighbourhoods.

But the Last Poets were saved by their art. When young hip-hop bands such as A 
Tribe Called Quest started sampling the Last Poets’ words in their own raps in 
the early 1990s, Umar started writing poetry again. After hearing his own voice 
on the radio, Umar went to Abiodun’s house in Harlem and told him: “We still 
got something to say to the kids.” He started reciting new work: “Arrogance is 
the demon that will kill us, before the white men, before the drive-bys...”

It was the start of a new beginning. Umar and Abiodun began working together 
again, recording new albums, and collaborating with artists such as Common, 
Erykah Badu, and bands like Dead Prez. And they found peace. Since then, 
despite all their internal fights, they have performed together on stage at 
various points; wiser, a bit sadder perhaps, but no less inspiring or militant.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fthe-last-poets-america-in-poetry-from-black-power-to-black-lives-matter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F04a2b4bd9e156fcdc943de5060f030b3317f59cb%2F19_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Last%20Poets%3A%20America%20in%20poetry%20from%20black%20power%20to%20Black%20Lives%20Matter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fthe-last-poets-america-in-poetry-from-black-power-to-black-lives-matter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Last%20Poets%3A%20America%20in%20poetry%20from%20black%20power%20to%20Black%20Lives%20Matter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fthe-last-poets-america-in-poetry-from-black-power-to-black-lives-matter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F04a2b4bd9e156fcdc943de5060f030b3317f59cb%2F19_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 Christine Otten, with Umar Bin Hassan, percussionist Baba Donn Babatunde and 
Abiodun Oyewole. Photograph: PR 
Writing a book about the Last Poets changed my life, not only as a person but 
as an author. After spending months in America with these audacious artists who 
were so far ahead of their time, I felt I could do anything as a writer, even 
making music with words, just like the Last Poets themselves. Artistically, 
they taught me to be completely free. And more broadly, they remain so 
relevant: race remains one of the most urgent matters of our time. Not only in 
America, where a new generation is fighting racism and police violence, but 
also in Europe, where xenophobia and racism have become more open, more common. 
Ultimately, the story of the Last Poets is about human resilience and beauty’s 
sustaining power. I remember Umar telling me: “You have to turn yourself inside 
out, until something raw and honest comes to the surface. Something unique, not 
like anything else.” I definitely had to turn myself inside out. And I am glad 
I did.

The Last Poets by Christine Otten, translated from the Dutch by Jonathan 
Reeder, is published by World Editions (£12.99).

 * The Last Poets will be visiting the UK 25-27 November and performing at 
Ronnie Scott’s <https://ronniescotts.co.uk/artists/the-last-poets>, The South 
Bank Centre Being a Man festival 
<http://www.southbankcentre.co.uk/whatson/the-last-poets-and-ashley-walt-99123>
, andFoyles <http://www.foyles.co.uk/Public/Events/Detail.aspx?eventId=3025> 
bookshop. The Last Poets are presented byApples and Snakes, 
<https://twitter.com/applesandsnakes?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 the UK’s leading performance poetry organisation.
 