
It speaks volumes about government priorities that the Treasury briefed 
journalists <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-38041466> ahead of 
Wednesday’s autumn statement that an extra £1.3bn would be spent on roads. Yet 
we have been kept in the dark over any rescue package for the tottering social 
care system, on which the chances of the NHS getting through the winter so 
critically depend.

As it happens, £1.3bn is also the price of a basic rescue for social care. It 
is thecalculation by the Local Government Association 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/nov/02/social-care-threat-level-reaches-new-high>
 (LGA) of the gap between what care providers in England say they need now to 
sustain threadbare state-funded services for older and disabled people and what 
councils say they can afford. To meet rising demand, inflation and the costs of 
the “national living wage” next year would require the same sum again.

Pretty much everyone outside the government understands the perilous position 
of the social care system, highlighted again this week by withdrawal from the 
market of another leading homecare provider, Mitie, andby a survey of councils 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/21/older-people-care-uk-local-authorites-family-childcare-trust-survey>
 suggesting that four in five local authorities do not have enough provision in 
their areas – especially for care at home, “extra care” housing with support 
and specialist nursing homes for dementia.

Social care cuts take English service to tipping point, regulator warns
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/13/social-care-cuts-take-english-service-to-tipping-point-regulator-warns>
Relations between social care and the NHS have frequently been awkward and 
testy. Yet health leaders have been queueing up to say that if there is any 
spare cash going, give it to the poor folks next door (provided they spend it 
on keeping people away from hospitals already bursting at the seams two months 
before winter pressures traditionally bite). Even the health and social care 
regulator, the Care Quality Commission, has bravely stood up andwarned of a 
system almost at tipping point 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/13/social-care-cuts-take-english-service-to-tipping-point-regulator-warns>
.

Expectations are modest. While sector leaders say there must be a far bigger 
long-term settlement, for now they are looking realistically for renewal of the 
power English councils were given this year to add up to 2% to council tax 
bills for adult social care, ideally increasing that amount. They also want the 
extra funding, under the so-called Better Care Fund, already earmarked for the 
end of the decade brought forward to next year.

That there has been no word on this from the Treasury, even obliquely from the 
usual sources, is worrying. In a reply last week to Sarah Wollaston, chair of 
the Commons health select committee – who had warned thatNHS reforms would be 
undeliverable 
<https://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/health-committee/news-parliament-20151/letter-to-chancellor-nhs-finances-16-17/>
 without urgent action to improve social care – the chancellor, Philip Hammond, 
said he recognised that conditions were challenging and would “continue to 
closely monitor the position”.

Most observers still think he will find something for social care. But their 
faith in that extends little beyond rationalising that “he must, mustn’t he?”. 
Treasury officials are notoriously deaf to special pleading and, let us be 
frank, social care has done rather a lot of that over the years, not always 
very well.

One problem is the sector’s apparent inability to make a unified case. Even 
now, various figures are put on the scale of the funding gap it faces, from the 
LGA’s £1.3bn (or is it £2.6bn?) to£1.6bn advanced by social services directors 
<https://www.adass.org.uk/autumn-statement-2016-representation-by-adass> and 
£1.9bnput forward by three leading health thinktanks 
<http://www.nuffieldtrust.org.uk/publications/autumn-statement-joint-statement>.

While the size of a water bottle may be immaterial to a man dying of thirst, 
The Treasury expects precision and rigour in the cases it considers. Another 
problem is that the evidence of crisis isn’t entirely consistent. Even as 
care-homechains are privately warning ministers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/01/one-in-four-care-home-beds-at-risk-without-funding-increase-providers-say>
 that up to a quarter of beds are at risk of closure, aleading property 
consultancy 
<https://kfcontent.blob.core.windows.net/research/548/documents/en/2016-4176.pdf>
 is reporting that profitability of homes is rising. Our Treasury friends will 
not have missed that. A key reason, paradoxically, is that closure of some 
homes – and overall capacity is falling – is increasing occupancy rates in the 
others.

But if there should be nothing for social care in Hammond’s statement, or if 
there is too little to make much difference, the consequences can only be bad: 
bad for councils, which are braced for an onslaught of legal challenges as it 
becomes clear that they cannot fulfil their duties under the Care Act; bad for 
theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>, as hospital beds fill this 
winter with older people who could and should be receiving care and support at 
home; and, above all, bad for anyone who cannot afford to pay for their own 
care and support.

The distressing scenes of ill-treatment seen in BBC Panorama’s secret filming  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/20/neglect-uncovered-care-homes-cornwall-bbc-panorama>
inside two Cornish care homes this week will only be repeated again and again 
as long as the care system remains underfunded, underskilled and undervalued by 
the rest of society.

Even the Care Quality Commission has stood up and bravely warned of a system 
almost at tipping point
 