January star chart 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2017/01/jan_night_sky-zip/giv-3902rpgtykZJLpep/>
The crescent Moon stands between the brilliant evening star Venus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/venus> and the much fainter Mars on the 
2nd. Look for them in the constellation Aquarius some 20° high in the SSW as 
night falls. At the same time, Orion is rising in the E, below Taurus and the 
Pleiades, while the “W” of Cassiopeia lies overhead in the Milky Way.

The year begins with a flurry of Quadrantids meteors. Active from the 1st to 
the 6th, the shower peaks at about 15:00 on the 3rd. Its medium-speed meteors 
stream from a radiant in northern Bootes which skims low across our N evening 
sky and lies below the Plough’s handle as the latter climbs through our NE 
later in the night. With negligible interference from moonlight, the best times 
to watch may be before dawnon the 3rd, and after nightfall as meteors trace 
long paths from N to S across the sky.

Both Mars and Venus climb higher in our evening sky as they track eastwards 
and northwards from Aquarius into Pisces. Mars leads the way as their 
separation falls from 12° to 5° by the 31st when they again lie near the Moon. 
Our chart depicts their motions from the 12th, the day that Venus stands at its 
furthest E of the Sun. The latter improves from mag –4.3 to –4.6, its dazzling 
disc swelling from 22 to 31 arcsec as its sunlit portion falls from. 56% to 40%.
Mars <https://www.theguardian.com/science/mars>, less than one hundredth as 
bright, dims from mag 0.9 to 1.1 and appears only 5 arcsec wide.

The Moon stands below the Pleiades in the S at our map times on the 8th, 
alongside Aldebaran in Taurus and above Orion on the 9th and close to Regulus 
in Leo on the 14th/15th.

Jupiter <https://www.theguardian.com/science/jupiter>, conspicuous at mag –2.0 
rises in the E by 01:30 at present and before midnight at the month’s end, 
climbing to pass almost 30° high in the S before dawn. Creeping eastwards, it 
lies 4° above Spica in Virgo where it is near the Moon on the 19th, its 
cloud-banded disc appearing 37 arcsec in diameter.

Saturn, mag 0.5 in Ophiuchus, hovers low in the SE before dawn and is 3° below 
the waning earthlit Moon on the 24th. Mercury rivals or surpasses Saturn in 
brightness as it stands lower to Saturn’s left from the 5th onwards.

January diary

2nd 09h Moon 1.9° N of Venus

3rd 07h Moon 0.2° N of Mars; 15h Peak of Quadrantids meteor shower

4th 14h Earth closest to Sun (147,100,998km)

5th 20h First quarter

12th 12h Full moon; 13h Venus furthest E of Sun (47°)

15th 04h Moon 0.8° S of Regulus

19th 05h Moon 2.7° N of Jupiter; 10h Mercury furthest W of Sun (24°); 22h Last 
quarter

20th 21h Jupiter 4° N of Spica

24th 10h Moon 4° N of Saturn

28th 00h New moon

31st  15h Moon 4° S of Venus

 * This article was amended at 1:45pm on 2 January to add missing labels to 
the graphic
 