Brazil 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/10/archive-zip/giv-1406IERPU8nI30Et>
Prosecutors in Brazil have uncovered what is believed to be the biggest 
corruption scandal in the country’s history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/20/brazil-petrobras-scandal-layoffs-dilma-rousseff>
. Many companies have been accused of paying bribes to officials at a 
state-owned oil giant known as Petrobras. One of them is Rolls-Royce, which is 
alleged to have paid a $200,000 (£165,000) bribe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/27/rolls-royce-second-investigation-brazil-petrobas>
 to win a contract to install equipment on oil rigs. Rolls-Royce has said 
previously that it is cooperating with the Brazilian investigation. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/30/rolls-royce-cooperate-brazil-investigation-petrobras-bribery>
India 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/10/indiamap/giv-1406kjVOGMy3leJN>
Rolls-Royce admitted in 2013 that it had failed to declare that it had 
employed middlemen on civil energy contracts awarded by state-run bodies. Firms 
are required to declare the payment of commission to agents in civil contracts. 
Separately, Indian police have been examining arms deals involving Rolls-Royce 
between 2007 and 2011.
China 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/10/china-map/giv-1406syS0aqdFkquA>
An anonymous blogger using the name Soaring Dragon alleged that Rolls-Royce 
paid large bribes to two Chinese officials in 2005 and 2010 to win contracts 
from two of the country’s airlines. One official was jailed for life, although 
Rolls-Royce was not named as the payer of the bribe in the court case.
Indonesia 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/10/indonesia-map/giv-1406HJgHL8JbBprZ>
A former employee has claimed in interviews with newspapers that Rolls-Royce 
had given £20m to the then Indonesian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/dec/11/rolls-royce-whistleblower-speaks-out>
 president’s son Tommy Suharto to persuade the country’s main airline to buy 
its engines in the 1990s.Suharto has denied that he received the money, or a 
blue car from Rolls-Royce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/nov/25/suharto-denies-bribery-rolls-royce-engines-garuda>
, or that he recommended the engines to the Indonesian airline.
South Africa 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/10/south-africa-map/giv-1406Fb8gFwoIgWfe>
Fana Hlongwane, a former aide to a South African defence minister, was 
implicated in an arms deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/jan/06/bae.armstrade> scandal and in 
2008 was accused of channelling large payments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/dec/06/bae-arms-trade> to secure 
contracts for British arms firm BAE. He was not prosecuted. A leaked document 
seen by the Guardian and theamaBhungane Centre for Investigative Journalism 
<http://amabhungane.co.za/> in South Africa shows that in 2005, Rolls-Royce 
hired Hlongwane as a commercial consultant to “support and promote” its 
business in the country. He was to be paid £140,000 for his work, according to 
the document. Hlongwane, who has denied being involved in corruption in the 
past, did not respond to a request for comment.
Angola 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/10/angola-map/giv-1406M4QsDFc3fBmn>
Rolls-Royce hired agents in oil-rich Angola to try to secure lucrative 
contracts with Sonangol, the powerful state-owned oil company, according to 
leaked documents obtained by Fairfax Media. Between 2008 and 2013, the company 
hired a partnership between theMonaco-based agent Unaoil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/19/serious-office-opens-criminal-investigation-into-unaoil>
 and another firm of agents to try to secure contracts worth more than $110m.
Iraq 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/10/iraq-map/giv-1406dIPae7z7enFW>
In the aftermath of the Iraq war, Rolls-Royce hired Unaoil to help it secure 
contracts with the state-owned Southern Oil Company. Between 2007 and 2011, the 
company was particularly keen to try to secure a contract to sell three 
industrial turbines.
Iran 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/10/iran-map/giv-14064cKHQUeBHE5Z>
In 2008, a subsidiary of Unaoil was hired to represent Rolls-Royce in Iran, 
though the contract would be cancelled just one year later over fears of 
reputational damage. Prior to this, Rolls-Royce sold industrial components to 
the country through a separate firm of agents.
Kazakhstan 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/10/kazakhstan-map/giv-1406W7UsIxvJqjmm>
Unaoil represented Rolls-Royce in Kazakhstan from 2008, attempting to secure a 
contract to contribute to the China-Kazakhstan pipeline. According to Unaoil’s 
lawyers, the partnership was still active as of July 2014, despite corruption 
allegations having been made against Unaoil the previous year.
Azerbaijan 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/10/azerbaijan-map/giv-14064FnQGy3IdS8s>
Rolls-Royce was using Unaoil’s help to secure contracts in Azerbaijan as early 
as 2001. The relationship between the two companies was sufficiently close that 
in 2006, as work dried up, plans were made for Unaoil’s Baku operation to be 
subsumed into Rolls-Royce’s international division rather than being shut down.
Nigeria 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/10/nigeria-map/giv-14061HgWLR11rCwH>
The Serious Fraud Office is examining whether Rolls-Royce and its agents were 
involved in bribing government officials to win energy contracts as recently as 
2013, according to a report in the Financial Times. Rolls-Royce reportedly no 
longer employs the agents, who told the paper that they were not aware of the 
SFO’s investigation. The paper said the agents did not respond to emailed 
questions.
Saudi Arabia 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/10/saudi-arabia-map/giv-14062kx9JjBd7Tef>
Britain’s huge al-Yamamah arms deal with the Saudis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/feb/05/bae-systems-arms-deal-corruption>
 was mired in corruption claims for years. A court case in the late 1990s 
revealed that Rolls-Royce, which made engines for warplanes, had paid £23m to 
Saudi royals as part of the deal. The Guardian has previously reported details 
of the court case, including the claim that the money was paid into an 
anonymous company in Panama. The payments became public when the Saudi royals 
sued, claiming that Rolls-Royce had promised them nearly double that sum. The 
matter was settled out of court. It is unclear if these payments are being 
examined by the SFO in its current inquiry.

 * Unaoil has said it was not “involved in corrupt practices relating to its 
business relationship with Rolls-Royce”. It said that some of the information 
that formed the basis of the allegations against it “has been gathered as a 
result of criminal activity including extortion”. 
 * If you would like to pass on any confidential information, you can send a 
message via the Guardian’s SecureDrop service (see howhere 
<https://securedrop.theguardian.com/> and here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jun/05/guardian-launches-securedrop-whistleblowers-documents>
). 
 * Panorama: Rolls-Royce will be broadcast on BBC1 at 8.30pm on Monday 31 
October.  