
Facts alone do not make history. We choose and debate what to erase and what 
to record; and these decisions about the past have profound implications for 
our future. Tuesday marks the 79th anniversary of the start ofthe Nanjing 
massacre <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2002/oct/04/artsandhumanities.japan>
. Japanese troops slaughtereda vast number of civilians and prisoners of war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2006/aug/23/china.japan>, and raped tens of 
thousands of girls and women in the Chinese city. The atrocity has become 
perhaps morecontentious and politicised 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-japan-china-nanjing-idUSKBN12E0IS> as time 
has passed. The Japanese government hasexpressed its deep remorse and heartfelt 
apology for wartime actions <http://www.mofa.go.jp/policy/q_a/faq16.html#q8> – 
though the current prime ministerhas not quite repeated that apology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/14/shinzo-abe-japan-no-new-apology-second-world-war-anniversary-speech>
 – and acknowledged that many non-combatants were killed. But it questions the 
death toll, and Japanese rightwingersdeny war crimes happened at all 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2002/oct/04/artsandhumanities.japan>. 
History is no comfort to the dead, of course. History may not even prevent 
itself from being repeated. In Aleppo, never again has happened again: chemical 
weapons, barrel bombs, and now reports – via the UN human rights office – of 
pro-government forces killing civilians, including children, on the spot. Yet 
history matters, and not only for the faint prospect thatthe guilty may one day 
face justice 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2016/04/18/bashar-al-assads-war-crimes-exposed>
 for their actions. The truth is never enough, but the truth must be 
acknowledged.
 