
In 1904, George Bernard Shaw <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/bernardshaw> 
wrote a play about Ireland. He called itJohn Bull’s Other Island 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Bull's_Other_Island>. With a memorable 
title like that, Shaw – if he were alive today – could have got himself signed 
up for a whole BBC series. Even in 2016, John Bull still has plenty of other 
islands and enclaves scattered about the world. And, as a presenter, Shaw 
prancing about the world in his tweed plus-fours would leave evenDan Snow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/dan-snow> or Lucy Worsley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/lucy-worsley> standing.

The attacks in France show that its colonial past endures | Natalie Nougayrède
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/22/attacks-france-colonial-past-war-terror>
These other islands and coastal enclaves rarely impinge on the collective 
consciousness. But when they do, they can pack a punch. Few British people knew 
or cared about theFalklands <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/falklands> before 
the war of 1982. But they do now. To this day, Britain is still spending£20,000 
per head 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/diary/diary-so-what-is-the-real-cost-of-defending-the-falkland-islands-6896566.html>
 on the defence of every Falklander every year.

In other cases, these distant possessions nag away like an untreated sore 
tooth. Britain’s exile of theChagos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/chagos-islands> islanders to enable the US 
air force to build its Diego Garcia base in the 1970srumbles on unresolved 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/26/chagos-islands-british-government-nearing-decision-exiled-chagossians>
 on a series of Indian Ocean atolls claimed by Mauritius. The shambolic saga of 
the£285m St Helena airport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/03/st-helena-airport-will-require-open-chequebook>
 in the south Atlantic – practically unusable because it is built in a place 
where strong winds make landing unsafe – is one of the most absurd UK 
government blunders of the modern era.

But it’s not just Britain that clings on – sometimes in rueful bemusement, but 
at other times defiantly – to a scattering of islands and other bits of 
territory it acquired long ago around the globe. Almost every global power of 
the recent past continues to have its own collection of wanted and unwanted 
outcrops, territories and coastal stations, the flotsam and jetsam of 
imperialism.

France is the most unabashed of these hoarders. It has Guadeloupe and 
Martinique in theCaribbean <https://www.theguardian.com/weather/caribbean>, 
Réunion in the Indian Ocean, and even St Pierre et Miquelon off Newfoundland, 
and a clutch of others in the Pacific. Some are even fully part of the European 
Union – their inclusion doggedly recorded at France’s insistence on every euro 
banknote – and they send deputies to sit in the national assembly in Paris.

Spain takes the same view of the Canaries, as well as of its north African 
possessions Ceuta and Melilla. TheNetherlands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/netherlands> clings on to Curaçao and Aruba 
off the coast of Venezuela.

This post-imperial untidiness is not of purely European origin. The US retains 
Guam, American Samoa and other islands in the western Pacific, along withPuerto 
Rico <https://www.theguardian.com/world/puerto-rico> and the Virgin islands in 
the Caribbean – not forgetting its Guantánamo Bay base on Cuba. But the most 
assiduous hanger-on to its ill-gotten imperial gains remains Russia, with 
annexed possessions ranging from the Baltic Kaliningrad enclave on the Baltic 
in the west to the Kuril islands off the north of Japan.

Vladimir Putin <https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin> is 
definitely not rueful or bemused about these possessions. For him, they are 
emblems of power and strength. A month ago, he announced that he was moving
cruise missiles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/21/russian-military-deploys-missiles-baltic-poland-lithuania-nato>
 to Kaliningrad. Last week,Putin’s visit to Tokyo 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/16/world/asia/japan-russia-abe-putin.html?_r=0> 
turned frosty after Japan failed to secure expected concessions from him over 
the southern Kurils, islands that are no more Russian than the Hebrides.

It’s easy to become beguiled by the quirky stories of these often disputed 
oddments of land. There are still hundreds of them in every corner of the 
globe. They may seem a bit like spots or scars on the human body, things we’ve 
all got and, unlike Putin, that we don’t think about much or often. Yet, just 
as spots and scratches can sometimes turn serious for the health, so the 
islands and enclaves can erupt in global politics, not least because a fair 
number of them are military and naval bases or offshore tax havens.

Uncovering the brutal truth about the British empire | Marc Parry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/aug/18/uncovering-truth-british-empire-caroline-elkins-mau-mau>
A resonant new book by the Birkbeck historian Jan Rüger 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Heligoland-Britain-Germany-Struggle-North/dp/0199672466/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1482414773&sr=1-1>
 tells the story of one of the quirkiest and least known, certainly to the 
British, of these possessions. Unless you remember the shipping forecast sea 
area before they renamed it German Bight in the 1950s, or you’re a student of 
the less frequently performed music ofAnton Bruckner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/anton-bruckner>, who wrote a choral work 
about <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZvT1tG2zKgw> it in 1893, you may not 
have heard of Heligoland.

Yet this cluster of rocky islands 50 miles off the German coast was a British 
possession for most of the 19th century. Seized from Denmark in 1807 to prevent 
Napoleon from capturing it, then ceded to Germany in 1890 in return for 
unchallenged access to Uganda and Zanzibar, Heligoland is an extreme example of 
the European possessions that the British tend to forget they once controlled. 
It’s a list that includes not just the well-known examples of Gibraltar, Cyprus 
and Malta, but also Corfu and Minorca, and evenCalais 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/europe/france/7072533/Pas-de-Calais-was-English-for-hundreds-of-years.html>
.

As Rüger makes clear, Heligoland’s history is also a prism through which to 
view the entire span of Anglo-German rivalry, conflict and, eventually, 
reconciliation. It would be a warming and seasonal thought to suppose that the 
kind of reconciliation that Heligoland now embodies – “No more Heligolands,” as 
the heroine puts it in Shena Mackay’s 2003 novel named after the islands – 
could be generalised to help resolve all the other historical and political 
territorial anomalies that still dot the map of the world.

Sadly, with the United Nations so paralysed, it isn’t likely to happen. Yet 
why not try? Why doesn’t Britain launch such an initiative? We have an 
Antarctic treaty and an outer-space treaty. Why not an islands and enclaves 
treaty? Even Putin, facing sanctions overCrimea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/crimea>, has something to gain from a global 
grand bargain which, at least in the imagination, might see these imperial 
relics transformed into a network of internationally administered or joint 
sovereignty agreements forming part of a collective global assault on the 
super-rich’s hateful tax havens.
 