
The one with the long blond hair and the tinted glasses, the one who looks 
like a bleached Nana Mouskouri, is called Tom. He’s not far short of seven feet 
tall and he has this curious habit of dum-de-dumming strange little tunes under 
his breath every few minutes. He’s the quiet one. Mind you, alongside the other 
one, the pudgy one, the one called Ed, Caesar the Geezer would probably be 
considered as quiet.


Until a few months ago, Tom Rowlands and Ed Simons were known as the Dust 
Brothers. Now, after a threat of court proceedings from the New York production 
team of the same name, they’re theChemical Brothers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/chemical-brothers>. Not that this 
fundamental change in their masterplan has dampened their spirits. Not in the 
least.

 “Nobody from the dance world has come up with an album to reflect these 
times,” says Ed, embarking on his first rant of the day. “Why is that? Why is 
it left to a group like Oasis to express the way that young people want to go 
out and get battered every weekend? That’s what the Chemical Brothers are 
about. Tom and I are out all the time, off to clubs and gigs, living fast, 
living it up. That’s what I hope we’re putting across on our records.

 “The trouble is that too many people involved in dance music want to keep the 
scene down to their little clique,” he continues. “They don’t want to try to 
create characters, they don’t want artists with something to say. They’re just 
interested in faceless boffins sitting in their bedrooms, putting out their 
tunes on white labels. That’s part of the reason dance music hasn’t progressed 
over the last three or four years.

 “Look at the way that some people ignore Orbital 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/orbital>, just because they’re on a major 
label. Never mind that they’re still making great records. And why don’t people 
recognise the huge salesLeftfield <https://www.theguardian.com/music/leftfield> 
clocked up with their album? Why aren’t they held in higher esteem? That’s why 
I likeRichie Hawtin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2001/sep/29/artsfeatures2>. I’m not into 
his music, but I admire him for not being afraid to court fame.Aphex Twin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2001/oct/05/artsfeatures3> is brilliant 
for that, too. But who else is there?

 “I’m amazed at the low expectations which have always been centred on dance 
music. I’m amazed at the lack of ambition. What dance music needs at the moment 
is a big album. An album the scene truly deserves. An album which so many 
artists out there who have promised so much haven’t quite managed to deliver.”

 An album like the Chemical Brothers’ Exit Planet Dust?

 Hmm …
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dt_g4DHxMvu8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dt_g4DHxMvu8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dt_g4DHxMvu8&media=>
 Tom and Ed were introduced to each other in 1989 by Geoffrey Chaucer, the 
medieval writer. They were studying history at Manchester University at the 
time. Within just a few weeks of their first meeting they were DJ’ing together 
under the name of the Dust Brothers, playing any and every hop they could in 
Manchester. They specialised in tunes with big beats and bigger noises, but 
soon became frustrated at what they saw as a shortage of tracks like that. So 
they decided to make one themselves.

 The result was Song to the Siren, which appeared as a white label during the 
summer of 1992. The record was pressed up with the help of a £300 loan from a 
friend, Ed promising away 10% of all of his future earnings if he hadn’t paid 
back the money within six months. Unfortunately for the friend, Ed managed to 
find the dosh in time. Song to the Siren was subsequently picked up byJunior 
Boy’s Own <http://www.discogs.com/label/283-Junior-Boys-Own>, who reissued it 
in early 1993.

 Tom and Ed have since released two EPs: 14th Century Sky, the title a nod of 
respect to Chaucer, and My Mercury Mouth, which unleashed the storming Chemical 
Beats. They’ve also undertaken countless remixes, their credits including the 
Prodigy, Bomb the Bass and Primal Scream, and held the residency at the popular
Heavenly Sunday Social club 
<http://www.kentishtowner.co.uk/2014/02/28/three-clubs-rocked-90s/> in London 
throughout the second half of 1994. So popular, in fact, that they sometimes 
had to turn away 500 people a night.

 The problem over the duo’s original choice of name has been a bummer and they 
still occasionally slip back into the habit of referring to themselves as the 
Dust Brothers. But aside from this, their star keeps on rising.

 Exit Planet Dust, the Chemical Brothers’ debut album, will be in the racks in 
another month or so. It’s their last release with Junior Boy’s Own because 
they’ve just signed to Virgin. And the number of artists wishing to benefit 
from the group’s knob-twiddling skills continues to grow by the day. David 
Bowie is the latest to join the queue.

Exit Planet Dust kicks off with the caustic groove of Leave Home, which is 
about to be released as a single, complete with some ace Sabres of Paradise and
Underworld <https://www.theguardian.com/music/underworld> remixes. The press 
release describes the original version as “The Prodigy meets Motorhead”, and it 
would take a bold man to attempt to think up anything more accurate. The guitar 
samples will cause great distress to the purists, but the Chemical Brothers 
simply smile at this suggestion.

 As anyone who ever made it to a Heavenly Sunday Social night will already 
know, Tom and Ed don’t particularly like the idea of confining themselves to 
one narrow band of music and Exit Planet Dust is sure to stand as the most 
eclectic dance album you will uncover this year. From hip-hop to acid to funk 
to techno, goodness knows where their heads were at when they were in the 
studio. Especially since the album was recorded in a mere three weeks.

 “We were really hammering it out,” says Ed. “We’ve written loads of new 
material since then and we were toying with the idea of replacing a couple of 
tracks with fresh stuff, but then we thought, ‘Fuck it. It all sounds great, 
even if it is now nine months old’.”

 “We were very conscious of making the album work together as a whole,” adds 
his partner. “The first half an hour consists of solid beats, but it also has 
other stuff on there because people will hear it at home, not in a club.”

 With this in mind, two of the tracks, the ghostly Alive Alone and the prickly 
Life Is Sweet, feature vocals.Beth Orton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/sep/23/beth-orton-interview-sugaring-season>
, who has previously worked with William Orbit and Red Snapper, andTim Burgess 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/oct/21/tim-burgess-charlatans-interview>
 of the Charlatans take the respective credits.

 “We had a good session with Tim,” says Ed. “He basically sank four cans of 
lager, scribbled a few lyrics, and went for it. We first met him when we did a 
Charlatans remix, after which he regularly came down the Sunday Social and 
danced around with his Adidas top zipped right up to his nose. We had a wild 
time messing about with his vocals. But then music should be an adventure, 
shouldn’t it? Not just going over the same idea again and again.”

 “You need different sounds to fit different moods,” says Tom. “We’re both 
into lots of types of music and I don’t see why we should have to deny that. I 
can’t believe that even the most dedicated techno buff would want to stick on a 
Basic Channel tune when they woke up on a summery Sunday morning. I bet they 
all have a secret stash of Simon and Garfunkel under their beds.”

 Imagine Maurizio and the Basic Channel crew flicking through the Sunday Sport 
with Bridge Over Troubled Water playing in the background. What a genius 
thought.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgknXdDLJDMc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgknXdDLJDMc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgknXdDLJDMc&media=>
 Chemical Brothers (then Dust Brothers): Chemical Beats 
 Although there are lots of different levels to Exit Planet Dust, it’s the fat 
beats which hit the listener first. And hardest.

 Ed: “I think the album suggests two people with a lot of energy about them, a 
lot of vitality. It’s a very youthful record. If I was 16 and I went out and 
bought it, I’d be chuffed to bits.” Tom: “We’re not into avant-garde 
excursions, the sort of abstract ideas that you’ll hear on a Mo’ Wax record. 
We’re more like party steamrollers.”

 The dynamic quality of the Chemical Brothers’ music is not in doubt. But it 
could be said that there’s not a lot of elbow room for any soul.

 Ed: “I don’t think that’s true at all. What do you want us to do? Get Luther 
Vandross to sing with us? A lot of our music is pretty brutal, but I’d say that 
it has far more soul, more fire and passion than most so-called soul records. 
It’s like theTricky <https://www.theguardian.com/music/tricky> album. That’s a 
heavy bit of gear, but it’s also really soulful. Not everyone wants to be like
Portishead <https://www.theguardian.com/music/portishead>, making music for 
people to put on when they have little dinner parties.” Tom: “Which is not to 
say that we don’t put a lot of time and effort into our tracks. We re-worked 
Chemical Beats around 50 times until we were finally happy with it. It’s often 
a very painstaking process.”

 A substantial part of which, of course, revolves around the fine art of 
sampling.

 Tom: “I love the concept of manipulating lots of different artists and having 
them play together on your record. It’s a shame the days of blatant sampling 
are gone. Unless you pay shitloads of money. I was told recently about someone 
who wanted to sample a conga loop and the record company were asking for 20 
grand. For a conga loop! It’s fucking ridiculous.”

 Ed: “We’re not at liberty to say exactly what samples are on the album, but 
there are some crazy combinations. Not that even the people concerned would be 
able to recognise themselves.”

 Except Kenny “Dope” Gonzalez 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kenny_%22Dope%22_Gonzalez>, who recently 
complained that the Chemical Brothers had half-inched all of his beats.

 Tom: “I don’t know why he’s creating such a fuss. Apart from the fact that 
we’ve only ever used one of his beats, he makes music in precisely the same way 
as us. He loops bits of other people’s tracks! That’s why we didn’t mind when 
we were sampled by theBoo Radleys <http://www.booradleys.co.uk/>. We thought it 
was great.” Ed: “But we didn’t think much of that other band sampling us, did 
we?” Tom: “Someone in Germany sent us this dreadful soul record which started 
with a snatch of Chemical Beats. We refused to let them use it.”

 Ed: “We did it more for them than for us, though. We didn’t want them to 
embarrass themselves. They’ll thank us in the long run.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fchemical-brothers-classic-interview-1995-muzik-rocks-backpages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434471083392%2F28ec0465-009c-4926-9e66-34fd75535e86-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Chemical%20Brothers%2C%20in%201995%3A%20'There%E2%80%99s%20far%20too%20much%20good-blokery%20in%20dance%20music'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fchemical-brothers-classic-interview-1995-muzik-rocks-backpages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Chemical%20Brothers%2C%20in%201995%3A%20%27There%E2%80%99s%20far%20too%20much%20good-blokery%20in%20dance%20music%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fchemical-brothers-classic-interview-1995-muzik-rocks-backpages%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434471083392%2F28ec0465-009c-4926-9e66-34fd75535e86-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Living it up … Tom Rowlands, of Chemical Brothers, performing live onstage. 
Photograph: Simon Ritter/Redferns 
 Kenny “Dope” Gonzalez is by no means the only one who has taken a pop at the 
Chemical Brothers during recent months. EvenKris Needs 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kris_Needs>, one of the mildest-mannered guys in 
clubland, has had a go. And around the time that Tom and Ed were forced to 
change their name from the Dust Brothers, there was the fanzine which said that 
they should follow Prince’s example and just use a symbol. They suggested a 
pile of steaming shit.

 So what is about this pair that seems to wind people up?

 “It’s probably me,” says Ed, a massive grin creasing his face. “I’ve been 
known to get a bit leary sometimes. But it’s not like I’m waltzing into clubs 
with two beautiful women and I’ve never gone out of my way to deliberately wind 
someone up. Not as far as I can remember.”

 “I sort of understand why some people don’t really like us,” says Tom. 
“There’s a buzz about us at the moment and it might seem as though we’ve come 
out of nowhere... ”

 “But I honestly don’t think we wind people up” interrupts Ed, his grin now 
replaced with an almost pained expression. The question seems to have touched a 
raw nerve. Another rant is on the cards.

 “Perhaps it’s because we don’t really have much to do with anyone else on the 
scene,” he mulls. “There are probably one or two people we’re supposed to shake 
hands with and ask what they’re having to drink, but we’re not into playing 
that game. There’s far too much good-blokery in dance music. Some people have 
built an entire career out of being good blokes. That’s a load of bollocks. 
We’re not into DJ get-togethers, you know, everyone going down to Strutt on a 
Sunday night. We’d rather run around with our friends.

 “There’s also the fact that I don’t have the obligatory respect for the past. 
We could never be like all of those groups who are now desperately trying to 
make their records sound like old Detroit tracks. It’s not us. We’re not 
constantly droning on about the techno originators and shit like that. We don’t 
toe some imaginary line. The likes of us andAndrew Weatherall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2000/sep/06/artsfeatures2> are just out 
there doing our things. I mean, look at the way Weatherall winds a lot of 
people up. It’s simply because we’ve dared to tread our own path.

 “In some ways I don’t particularly care if people want to take a pop at us. 
At least it shows we’re having a bit of an impact, doesn’t it? And in the final 
analysis, our music speaks for itself. It’s been bloody good right the way down 
the line. People can criticise what we do as much as they want, but they’re not 
going to stop us totally believing in the noises coming out of the speakers.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fchemical-brothers-classic-interview-1995-muzik-rocks-backpages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434471211597%2F7e96e13a-7ee4-46a1-aed1-84c81ceb49db-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Chemical%20Brothers%2C%20in%201995%3A%20'There%E2%80%99s%20far%20too%20much%20good-blokery%20in%20dance%20music'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fchemical-brothers-classic-interview-1995-muzik-rocks-backpages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Chemical%20Brothers%2C%20in%201995%3A%20%27There%E2%80%99s%20far%20too%20much%20good-blokery%20in%20dance%20music%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fchemical-brothers-classic-interview-1995-muzik-rocks-backpages%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434471211597%2F7e96e13a-7ee4-46a1-aed1-84c81ceb49db-2060x1236.jpeg>
 In the mix … Ed Simons, of Chemical Brothers. Photograph: Simon Ritter/Redferns
 The Chemical Brothers are one of the few dance groups to really cut it on the 
live circuit. A couple of reviewers have suggested that their set is all on 
DAT. In fact, the duo actually use two huge samplers to build lengthy chains of 
beats and noise. Listen closely and you’ll hear them balls it up from time to 
time.

 “Playing live is an essential part of what we’re about,” beams Ed. “One gig 
which sticks in my mind was at this glitzy club in Los Angeles. There was a 
weird political meeting going on during the soundcheck, Young Republican of the 
Month or something, and we were wondering what the hell we were doing there. 
But when the audience came in, the place went mad. We even had people 
stage-diving.”

 The Chemicals’ live set-up has been specially designed to enable the duo to 
stand shoulder-to-shoulder onstage. Hunched over the samplers, their heads are 
simply blurs of movement, but they still seem to be communicating with each 
other every couple of minutes.

 Ed: “But I’m usually talking in Sanskrit.”

 Tom: “And I’m usually shouting, ‘More strobe! More strobe!’”

 However focussed the group’s live show might be, their DJ sets are all over 
the shop. With sounds as varied as U-Ziq, Sly Stone, Patrick Pulsinger, Slam, 
Public Enemy, Desmond Dekker, Emmanuelle Top, Flowered Up, Schoolly-D and even 
the Beatles on offer, it’s hardly surprising that they’ve come in for some 
stick about their mixing. Or, to be more accurate, the lack of it.

 Tom: “Our DJing has always been about us just getting up and having a go. 
Neither of us has any decks at home, so we have to practise in public. We’ve 
definitely been getting a lot better lately, though.”

 Ed: “It’s important to connect with the audience. You can hear a thousand 
records being mixed technically brilliantly, but if the DJ doesn’t actually 
mean anything to you ... The people who come to hear us DJ probably own some of 
our records and want to know what else we can give them. Whatever our mixing is 
like, we’ll always give you a fucking rocking party.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Df0_pU7F5E3U&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Df0_pU7F5E3U>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Df0_pU7F5E3U&media=>
 Chemical Brothers: Leave Home, off album Exit Planet Dust 
 It’s easy to understand why the Chemical Brothers have come in for a lot of 
flak in recent months, and why they’ll continue to do so. They can’t DJ, not in 
today’s accepted sense, but they hosted one of the hippest London clubs of the 
last few years. They’ve taken their have-a-go attitude into the studio and 
walked out with a string of successful records. They’ve been lucky. They’re the 
first to admit it, and their refreshing honesty, both in print and on vinyl, is 
something else one or two people can’t seem to handle.

 But whatever you think about the Chemical Brothers, there is absolutely no 
question that they do make for a fucking rocking party. There’s the big crate 
of amyl they keep hidden under decks, just for starters. Then there’s the 
raucous energy of the likes of Leave Home and Chemical Beats. That’s mainly 
down to Ed. Listen close to the tracks, however, and you will discover some 
mighty skilful musical twists in the arrangements, the timings and the tones. 
That’s Tom.

 Despite the Chemicals’ laudable ambitions, Exit Planet Dust is not the best 
dance album ever made. But it is highly recommended. The larger-than-life, 
almost cartoon-like quality of the material is a neat reflection of the two 
spirited guys responsible, rather than simply a rerun of some tired old 
formula. Don’t knock them for it. At least not until you’ve found out exactly 
what it is they’re carrying in those test tubes.

© Push, 1995
 