
Until 2013, Badia East – a small, densely populated pocket in central Lagos 
flanked by overhead expressways – was home to 30,000 people living in an 
informal housing settlement. In February of that year, 9,000 were forcibly 
evicted. This month the same thing happened to another 1,000 more. It is one of 
the largest forced evictions in the state’s history.

Their homes were demolished under the authority of the Oba Ojora, a local 
tribal king who has long claimed hereditary ownership of the land, previously 
owned by the Nigerian government. As bulldozers crashed through the 
neighbourhood, the residents scrambled for their belongings, most of which were 
crushed into rubble.

The demolition was comprehensive. The bulldozers destroyed the district’s 
homes, a church, a school, its only well and its only medical centre, founded 
two years ago by Medicins San Frontieres before being handed over to the 
government. The only evidence it existed are dozens of sachets of malaria 
treatment, syringes and needles, scattered among the broken concrete.

The demolition also removed Badia East’s only public toilet. Many of the 
remaining residents have taken to using what is now an open dump site, 
effectively excreting on what used to be – and in a way, still is – their home.

Chief Ilawole is an elderly community leader who has lived in Badia East since 
1973. His home was destroyed, and he has been forced to live in a shelter 
overlooking the site, where he shares a mattress on the floor with another 
displaced resident.


The bulldozers destroyed the district’s homes, a church, a school, its only 
well and its only medical centre
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fforced-evictions-badia-east-lagos-this-is-not-right%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59ab4808d985a37a69f4afaaf9f3a25f8c659102%2F0_0_2048_1536%2Fmaster%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20forced%20evictions%20of%20Badia%20East%2C%20Lagos%3A%20'This%20is%20not%20right'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fforced-evictions-badia-east-lagos-this-is-not-right%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20forced%20evictions%20of%20Badia%20East%2C%20Lagos%3A%20%27This%20is%20not%20right%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fforced-evictions-badia-east-lagos-this-is-not-right%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59ab4808d985a37a69f4afaaf9f3a25f8c659102%2F0_0_2048_1536%2Fmaster%2F2048.jpg>
 Residents of Badia East, their houses destroyed, have been forced to live in 
shelters. Photograph: Justice & Empowerment Initiatives 
“You can see where I live,” he says. “This was not how it was before.” The 
neighbourhood had small businesses, he said, and residents were making 
improvements to their homes. “We are just sad, because the Ojora does not 
understand or want to understand. He has a home and a palace, so why should he 
take our own homes from us?”

The Lagos state government claims to be neutral in the dispute, but its 
officials – along with scores of police – were seen by the residents overseeing 
the demolition. (The government denies this.) Amnesty International have 
condemned the evictions as unlawful and a violation of human rights.


The residents were, after all, moved to the settlement in the first place by 
the federal government, after the building of the National theatre in 1973. The 
government at the time offered a choice to the people living on the site of the 
new theatre: compensation or resettlement. They chose the latter. But that 
agreement has not deterred the Ojora.

Megan Chapman, a human rights lawyer, is helping the residents take the tribal 
leader to court; she and colleague Andrew Maki have co-founded JEI, a human 
rights organisation dedicated to giving paralegal training and representation 
to slum residents. “The Ojora says that the land was given to him in 1979, but 
that was after the federal government relocated them there,” Chapman explains. 
“He has given no documents to prove it. He also didn’t attempt to remove the 
residents until 2002, after which the residents had lived there for 23 years. 
No one had ever had any idea of his apparent ‘ownership’.”

In 2013, the Ojora secured a Lagos high court order claiming rights over the 
land. “He sued five individuals apparently representing Badia East – but whom 
none of the residents recognised, nor consented to represent them,” Chapman 
said. “And now that we have representation, he is avoiding dealing with us 
directly.”

We are just sad, because the Ojora does not understand or want to understand
Chief Ilawole  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fforced-evictions-badia-east-lagos-this-is-not-right%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8212a6cb39991ede02c8065a77838f73fb00982d%2F0_185_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20forced%20evictions%20of%20Badia%20East%2C%20Lagos%3A%20'This%20is%20not%20right'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fforced-evictions-badia-east-lagos-this-is-not-right%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20forced%20evictions%20of%20Badia%20East%2C%20Lagos%3A%20%27This%20is%20not%20right%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fforced-evictions-badia-east-lagos-this-is-not-right%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8212a6cb39991ede02c8065a77838f73fb00982d%2F0_185_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Those belongings that weren’t crushed are now stacked in piles. Photograph: 
Justice & Empowerment Initiatives 
When asked whether the evicted tenants would receive support, a spokesperson 
for the Ministry of Local Government and Community Affairs would not comment. 
Multiple requests to the Ojora for comment have gone unanswered.


Officials from the Lagos state government, meanwhile, say that although they 
are sympathetic to the claim that the residents were moved to Badia East by the 
federal government, they have never seen any documentation to prove it. After a 
temporary stop order was rejected in Lagos high court, the bulldozers have 
returned.

Lagos is full of such informal settlements. Though there is no official 
figure, in 2000 there were an estimated 42; seven years later, in 2007, it was 
more than a hundred, housing two-thirds of Lagos’ population. The homes 
typically have tin roofs and are made from wood or clay, or sometimes the more 
secure and stable cement. They are essentially developed camps, squalid but 
characterful and vibrant. People sell groceries and water; there are small 
shops, churches and community groups. In Badia East, these features developed 
over decades into a collective history. But the human rights of the residents 
have never been enough to avert slum clearance in Lagos.

'Slum' is a loaded term. They are homegrown neighbourhoods
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/nov/28/slum-loaded-term-homegrown-neighbourhoods-mumbai-dharavi>
The number of slums is a direct result of a lack of affordable housing in 
Lagos. Social housing is virtually non-existent, and private landlords 
typically demand between a year’s rent up front, sometimes two. Many low-income 
families find refuge in the informal settlements, where land can be purchased 
cheaply and housing built according to each person’s means. The inherent 
vulnerability of these places is a trade-off for the chance to live in a home, 
which for many in Lagos is increasingly unaffordable.

The land demolished in Badia East in 2013 has now been given to property 
developers; developers are often linked to or owned by the state government. 
Next door is a building site for a new block of more 1,000 flats, each to be 
rented at 1.4m Naira (about £4,500) a year – beyond the wildest dreams of 
anyone in Badia.

Most of the people in Badia East have left. They have moved on to other slums 
or are staying with relatives. But some have no where else to go. Stella 
Omogbemi lies on a foam mattress next to plastic bags that bulge with pots, 
clothes and other belongings. Her home once stood just meters away. Her four 
children sit on stools beside her; her right leg is inflamed to twice its size. 
“When the caterpillars [Lagos slang for bulldozers] came, the police just 
rushed us out,” she says. “I could not take most of my belongings, our money 
and clothes. But what can I do? I cannot be bitter. Life is life. I just want 
you to help us beg the Ojora, because this is not right.”

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> to join the discussion
 