
One yard. One yard is all that stood between the Seattle Seahawks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/seattle-seahawks> becoming the first NFL 
team to win back-to-back Super Bowl since the 2003-2004 New England Patriots. 
One yard is all the Seahawks needed to launch a mini-dynasty.

Two years later, after some combination of Russell Wilson, Pete Carroll and 
Darrell Bevellconspired to throw Super Bowl XLIX away and into the hands of 
Malcolm Butler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/feb/01/tom-brady-leads-new-england-patriots-on-a-thrilling-ride-to-super-bowl-xlix-win>
, the Seahawks are a lot further than one-yard from greatness. Last season’s 
attempt to get back to the Super Bowl for a third year in a row ended two 
rounds short in Carolina with a 31-24 defeat that featured a furious comeback 
from a 31-0 deficit. This year’s effort also ended in the divisional round,but 
in a 16-point defeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/14/atlanta-falcons-nfc-championship-game-seahawks-nfl>
 that saw the Seahawks get thoroughly outplayed by the Falcons – a team coached 
by Dan Quinn, Seattle’s defensive coordinator during their two Super Bowl 
seasons.

Michael Bennett goes on expletive-laced rant after Seahawks lose to Falcons
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/14/atlanta-falcons-nfc-championship-game-seahawks-nfl>
By any measure, there has been some serious regression in Seattle from the 
2013 championship season. The Seahawks did not live up to Carroll’s catchphrase 
and “Win Forever.” They win sometimes. Usually. But they’ve not become the 
dynasty many predicted after Super Bowl XLVIII. Starting with that ill-fated 
pass attempt to Ricardo Lockette two years ago, Seattle’s slide has been 
self-inflicted. Or astheir truther head coach 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/sports/nfl/seahawks/2015/01/29/pete-carroll-911-sept-11-truth-movement-truthers/22556683/>
 might say: it’s been an inside job.

While conventional wisdom is that the 2014 Seahawks should have handed the 
ball to Marshawn Lynch to win the Super Bowl and save the world from another 
Patriots Super Bowl title, it’s true that the 2016 Seahawks might not gain a 
single yard running the ball on one, two or 20 cracks at it. Lynchliterally 
hung up his cleats after last season 
<https://twitter.com/MoneyLynch/status/696525541826924546?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>, 
but even in his beastiest mode would have struggled for yards behind Seattle’s 
current line. The unit was was ranked worst in the NFL by Pro Football Focus 
and Seattle’s running attack was 25th in the NFL this season. Wilson is one of 
the league’s more mobile quarterbacks, but ideally his mobility would be 
utilized to extend and make plays, not to save his life every time he drops 
back to pass.

That Seattle’s offensive line disaster is not a huge surprise considering 
they’ve drafted a total of one offensive lineman earlier than the third-round 
since stumbling upon their franchise QB in the 2012 draft. Carroll’s philosophy 
is to build a line out of good athletes with big frames. Right tackle Garry 
Gilliam was a tight end at Penn State who went undrafted after playing his 
final collegiate season on the offensive line. Seattle’s left tackle, the man 
tasked with protecting Wilson’s blindsidewhen God is busy doing other stuff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/jan/21/race-loss-and-the-comeback-when-russell-wilson-melted>
, is George Fant: another undrafted project who played four years of basketball 
at Western Kentucky and one year of tight end. Carroll says the Seahawks have 
no intention to spend big on blockers this offseason and, considering his 
experiment of a line has an average age of 24, maybe they’ll show significant 
progress in 2017 and beyond. But that thought probably was of little comfort to 
Wilson when he was getting drilled in the chest.

How the Seattle Seahawks became the NFL's most outspoken team
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/15/how-the-seattle-seahawks-became-the-nfls-most-outspoken-team>
While the Seahawks are hoping their line will develop with time, time is not 
on the side of the defense. Seattle gave up 231 points in their Super Bowl 
season, 254 a year later, 277 last year and 292 in 2016. That was still good 
for third-best in the league, but anyone who saw Matt Ryan pick apart the 
vaunted Seattle secondary on Sunday knows the unit is not what it once was. 
Safety Earl Thomas missed the last month of the season with a broken tibiaand 
has hinted at retirement 
<http://www.nfl.com/news/story/0ap3000000760471/article/earl-thomas-caught-in-between-return-retirement>
. That’s unlikely, but his return won’t slow Richard Sherman’s decline or make 
Kam Chancellor less prone to injury from his bruising style. Thomas’ return 
also won’t help Seattle sign Chancellor or any of their other veterans in line 
for salary bumps.

Losing linebacker Bruce Irvin to free agency last offseason was a blow to the 
defense, but keeping Irvin wasn’t much of a possibility with Chancellor wanting 
a new deal, Seattle choosing to invest in third cornerback Jeremy Lane, 
defensive end Michael Bennett in line for a new contract and tight end Jimmy 
Graham commanding big money.

As great as Lynch and Wilson and the defense were during Seattle’s Super Bowl 
title run, the true MVP of that teamwas Wilson’s contract 
<http://www.spotrac.com/nfl/seattle-seahawks/russell-wilson-9885/cash-earnings/>
. Seattle could load up across their roster thanks to paying their star 
quarterback like a practice squad punter. But now that Wilson gets market rate 
for his position and accomplishments, the Seahawks are forced to make the same 
tough choices as every other team – and their choices haven’t always panned 
out. Lane struggled this year and while Grahamfinally put up the numbers 
Seattle expected from him <http://www.nfl.com/player/jimmygraham/497236/profile>
, the Seahawks could decide to cut their big tight end by March and save $10m 
against the salary cap.

It’s not that Seattle’s championship window is closed. And if we’re doing the 
window analogy, look at Seattle as having two windows that have to be open a 
crack at the same time for them to get another Lombardi Trophy into the house: 
the young line needs to get up to speed before the long-time core of Bennett, 
Sherman, Thomas, Chancellor, Cliff Avril, Doug Baldwin, Jermaine Kearse and 
friends get too old. Maybe they have next year or the the next three years to 
go after a Super Bowl before they’ll need a full-scale rebuild. Or maybe the 
three-year decline will continue next year with a wildcard round exit or no 
playoffs at all if the defense gets worse and the offensive line gets no better.
Earl Thomas (@Earl_Thomas) 
Tom Brady has the easiest route... put his ass in our division and see what he 
does!!!#salty <https://twitter.com/hashtag/salty?src=hash>!!
 <https://twitter.com/Earl_Thomas/status/820481349626818560> January 15, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/Earl_Thomas/status/820481349626818560> 
The former is more likely thanks to having a top-flight quarterback and a 
defense that is still one of the better units in the league. But Seattle’s best 
shot at getting back to the playoffs is their easy division.Don’t tell Thomas 
this, of course <https://twitter.com/Earl_Thomas/status/820481349626818560>. 
He’s better at tackling than self-awareness. But the Seahawks shouldn’t have 
much trouble next year against a 2-14 49ers team with no head coach, a 4-12 
Rams teamwith a toddler head coach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/12/sean-mcvay-los-angeles-rams-youngest-nfl-head-coach>
 and a 7-8-1 Cardinals team with no better options than Carson Palmer at 
quarterback. Even a struggling Seattle team should take that group with ease. 
Carroll began his rise in Seattle by winning the division at 7-9. The question 
is whether he completes his fall there by doing the same.
 