
“So I’ve decided to take my work back underground … to stop it falling into 
the wrong hands.” So begins Music for the Jilted Generation, theProdigy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/aug/01/electronicmusic.alexispetridis>
’s fab second LP. See, seven consecutive hits and a gold debut album aren’t 
enough for 23-year-old whiz-kidLiam Howlett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2004/aug/20/popandrock.prodigy>. He’s sick 
and tired of his public image: peerless purveyor of hyper-hyper bubblegum 
nuttercore for E’d up popkids. Liam wants to be taken seriously; more to the 
point, he wants to be taken seriously by you, the alternative rock fan. So 
that’s why he’s used rock guitar in a couple of tracks on the album, and that’s 
why Jilted is a sort of semi-concept album, with a “heavy” political statement.

“The Jilted Generation, it’s all the kids who’ve grown up on this supposedly 
corrupt dance music,” says Liam, in between hacking his lungs out (he’s run 
down by endless remixing and a recent tour of Australia). “The government are 
trying to make out the whole scene is bad, and they want to stop everyone going 
out and having a good time.”

On the album’s inner sleeve, a painting depicts an allegory of this 
confrontation, as a police force and a ragged army of ravers glare at each 
other across a ravine, with the rave-tribe’s chieftain about to slash the ropes 
of the bridge. The chorus ofTheir Law 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hlEs9udOquE> – a surprisingly effective 
metal-riff propelled collaboration with Pop Will Shite Itself – articulates 
this defiance: “Fuck ’em and their law.” What’s riled Liam isn’t just the
Criminal Justice bill 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Criminal_Justice_and_Public_Order_Act_1994>, but 
the unofficial clampdown on legal raves.

“The police can control the sound levels at raves. Basically, there aren’t 
going to be big outdoors raves any more. They’re not giving them licences in 
the first place now ’cos of the alleged disturbance and noise pollution, and 
all the drugs. And ’cos of that, the punters have lost faith a bit. A year ago, 
you’d get 20,000 at a big event, no worries. Now you’d be lucky to get 10,000. 
Events happen up until the last minute and then they get cancelled, and so 
people stop bothering. The Obsession rave, a big three-dayer on the beach, was 
cancelled, and that was going to be the only major event this year.The Prodigy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/prodigy> haven’t suffered from it at all, 
we’re still packing out shows and selling records. But it does annoy me, the 
government telling young kids what they can do.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxGq7TaiikWc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxGq7TaiikWc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxGq7TaiikWc&media=>
 Watch the video for the Prodigy’s Their Law 
Because of the clampdown, rave culture’s gone into the clubs and it’s 
fragmented into factions: scenes like techno, jungle, progressive house, 
garage, et al. Liam admits to being nostalgic for the golden days of rave’s 
bygone unity.

“I think a lot of people are. That’s why the housey progressive scene is so 
popular, ’cos even though it’s not as mental and sweaty, it’s still got the 
love vibe. On the hardcore scene, the DJs won’t mix up different styles of 
music, they just wanna play the brand new dubplates that no one can get hold 
of, cos they only printed 10 copies.”

The Prodigy emerged from the early hardcore scene (what’s now evolved into 
jungle). Along withAltern-8 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/24/cult-heroes-altern-8-rave-music-old-skool>
, they were the principal ambassadors for ’ardkore in the top 10. The Prodigy’s 
top three hitsCharly <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cSTBFZ-To2E> and 
Everybody in the Place <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WY87o9IZXWg> were 
classic breakbeat tracks, and the debut LP Experience was ruff jungle bizness, 
albeit with a commerical sheen and Liam’s poptastic choonfulness well to the 
fore. But ever since a dance mag accused the Prodigy’s Charly of instigating 
“the death of rave” (because it inspired a rash of lame bubblecore tracks with 
kids’ TV samples, likeSesame’s Treet 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=odQgfUUegQI>), an embarrassed Liam has 
struggled to distance himself from hardcore.


“It’s the 180bpm breakbeats I’ve moved away from. The new album is as hardcore 
as anything I’ve written, but hard in a different way, a German techno way. But 
I still use breakbeats, ’cos I’ve always been into hip-hop and that side of me 
will always be there.”

It’s all a bit ironic, given jungle’s creative renaissance in 93 and its long 
overdue return to hipness in 94. (The dance mag in question just leapt on the 
bandwagon along with every other rag in town.)

Admits Liam, “There’s loads of quality jungle tracks around. The problem was 
that a lot of people thought it was so easy to make hardcore that they just 
knocked out white labels and flooded the market with crap. But this year 
there’s been a lot of intelligent jungle.Moving Shadow 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moving_Shadow> are the leading label.”

But Liam still doesn’t like the attitude and moody atmosphere that so often 
surrounds jungle ’94, and which is so different from the nutty, luv’d up vibe 
of ’ardkore ’92.

“The reason I got into rave was that hip-hop had gotten too much into 
attitude. To me, the jungle scene now is really confused. One minute they’ll 
play something really uplifting and the next it’s dark and gloomy. Also, that 
music’s lost a bit of energy. Because it’s so fast, people don’t dance to the 
160bpm drums, they lock into the reggae baseline, which is half speed. So you 
dance really slow. With techno, you dance to the full-on beat. The stuff I 
really rate is European, likeCJ Bolland 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Nkbqxr4Ht7k> and a lot of the German artists.”

When I suggest that the Prodigy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/05/the-prodigy-review-newcastle-academy>
 are the last representatives in the charts for the old rave spirit, Liam 
frowns. What he really wants is to get back his underground credibility – 
something as difficult and arguably futile as attempting to recover your 
virginity.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-Fz85FE0KtQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-Fz85FE0KtQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-Fz85FE0KtQ&media=>
 Watch the video for the Prodigy’s Voodoo People 
“We actually do everything we can to stay off the telly and out of Smash Hits 
and the pop media,” he stresses. “We only do interviews that I feel are 
credible. It is a battle, a constant battle to get the correct press.”

Hence his flirtation with alternative music and deployment of rock guitar on 
Jilted. He’s been listening to Led Zep and Pearl Jam, and he might be producing
Skinny Puppy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/feb/07/skinny-puppy-payment-guantanamo>
’s debut forRick Rubin <https://www.theguardian.com/music/rick-rubin>’s 
American label. He tells me how much he likesSenser <http://www.senser.co.uk/>
’s “energy” (they were actually first choice before Pop Will Eat Itself, but 
were too busy). As well as Their Law, grunge guitar features on the killer next 
single,Voodoo People <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-Fz85FE0KtQ>.

But Howlett doesn’t need to latch misguidedly onto that dodo “alternative 
rock” for cred; his own roots – in electro and early hip-hop – are solid 
enough. I always thought his thang was like a hyperkinetic version ofMantronix 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mantronix>’s breakbeats-and-samples collage 
aesthetic, and sho’nuff, it turns out he was a big fan. His old-school hip-hop 
background comes through in the funky, fusiony3 Kilos 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1oJ5XhCHQ2k>, which is part of the LP’s 
Narcotic Suite – songs meant to evoke different drug atmospheres.

Back to the present, to Generation J, the kids who live for dance and drugs … 
Are they going to fight back against repression, or are they just going to 
languish at home, get despondent, get wasted?

“At the end of the day, I don’t think there’s anything anyone can do. But as 
long as people can still go to clubs, it’ll survive. They’ll never kill the 
whole thing off completely. Why are the government so threatened? I don’t know. 
We live in Essex and there’s a massive farmers’ festival every year at the 
showground. They block up the whole fucking road and it’s totally disruptive. 
But they won’t have a rave there. It’s the same with football matches – there’s 
loads of drugs at football now, people taking Es. So it’s one rule for us, one 
rule for them.”
 