
As the summer’s sporting calendar again comes into view, another familiar 
ritual of the season is an anguished backward look at the Battle of the Somme, 
which the British army launched against the Kaiser’sGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> on 1 July 1916. But should it share 
some of the anniversary attention?

At the Somme, Britain suffered 20,000 dead on the first day alone, beginning a 
grinding attrition that staggered to an inconclusive end on 18 November 1916. 
Little wonder that it always overshadows a briefer passage of arms to break the 
first world war’s military deadlock just a month earlier. Over in a few hours 
with 10,000 dead on both sides, it proved far more significant to the eventual 
allied victory.

 The naval Battle of Jutland, fought in the shallow waters of the North Sea 80 
miles off Denmark on 31 May 1916, seems to be gathering a little more attention 
this year than usual. The BBC is showing Dan Snow’s Battle of Jutland: The 
Navy’s Bloodiest Day on Sunday. Scores are still being settled between 
supporters of the main British admirals, cautious Sir John Jellicoe, commander 
of Britain’s Grand Fleet, and his swashbuckling cruiser chief, Sir David Beatty.

Shrouded in mist and confusion during the battle, Jutland was instantly 
controversial and remains so. Who were the real winners and who the heroes or 
villains? Was it “the battle that won the war”, as Jellicoe partisan and 
ex-defence minister, Admiral Lord West, reasserted on Radio 4. or a missed 
opportunity to repeat Nelson’s comprehensive destruction of the French and 
Spanish fleets at Trafalgar in 1805 and end the war more quickly?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Fthe-battle-of-jutland-the-chilcot-shambles-of-its-day%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4c52125ac029de786070f6c719d38ecdca946c3%2F0_186_5568_3341%2F5568.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Battle%20of%20Jutland%3A%20the%20Chilcot%20shambles%20of%20its%20day%20%7C%20Michael%20White&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Fthe-battle-of-jutland-the-chilcot-shambles-of-its-day%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Battle%20of%20Jutland%3A%20the%20Chilcot%20shambles%20of%20its%20day%20%7C%20Michael%20White&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Fthe-battle-of-jutland-the-chilcot-shambles-of-its-day%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4c52125ac029de786070f6c719d38ecdca946c3%2F0_186_5568_3341%2F5568.jpg>
 A sea cadet attends a service at a war graves cemetery to mark the Battle of 
Jutland on 28 May in South Queensferry, Scotland. Photograph: Jeff J 
Mitchell/Getty Images 
As a much diminished Britain prepares to debate the painful findings of Sir 
John Chilcot’s report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/09/chilcot-report-iraq-war-inquiry-published-6-july>
 on the 2003 Iraq war, the “Jutland Controversy” – as it quickly became known – 
serves to remind us of the fearsome cost of military miscalculation and how a 
victorious commander can be as readily pilloried for caution as a reckless one 
by a glory-hungry press.

The basic facts are that in 1898 the new German empire of Kaiser Wilhelm II 
decided to challenge Britain’s centuries-old, worldwide naval dominance by 
building its first fleet. A naval arms race followed, focused on super 
battleships known as dreadnoughts. Britain won numerically, but new 
technologies, notably mines and submarines, complicated the equation. When war 
broke out in 1914, theRoyal Navy <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/royal-navy> 
set about blockading Germany while German U-boats sank allied shipping on a 
prodigious scale.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Ftony-blair-comments-long-awaited-chilcot-inquiry-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tony%20Blair%20comments%20on%20long-awaited%20Chilcot%20inquiry%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Ftony-blair-comments-long-awaited-chilcot-inquiry-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tony%20Blair%20comments%20on%20long-awaited%20Chilcot%20inquiry%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Ftony-blair-comments-long-awaited-chilcot-inquiry-video&media=>
Tony Blair comments on long-awaited Chilcot inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/may/29/tony-blair-comments-long-awaited-chilcot-inquiry-video>
Both aimed to starve the other into submission while the rival fleets – one at 
Scapa Flow in the Orkneys, the other at Wilhelmshaven on the Jade bay of the 
North Sea – waited in stalemate as profound as in muddy Flanders. Heavily 
outnumbered, the imperial High Seas Fleet, commanded by Reinhard Scheer sought 
to even things up with raids on east coast towns such as Scarborough, hoping to 
lure Beatty’s rapid response cruisers into a bitesized trap.

Under pressure to help the German army, bleeding from another futile 
“breakthrough” initiative around the French fort of Verdun, Scheer took his 
fleet to sea on 31 May 1916. But, not for the first or last time, British 
codebreakers were ahead of him. Jellicoe had already put to sea 28 dreadnoughts 
(against Scheer’s 16) and other warships, bent on a counter-trap.

In preliminary skirmishes between the lighter battlecruiser squadrons of 
admirals Franz Hipper and Beatty, Germany’s relative novices sank more British 
ships, 14 to 11 lost, and claimed a great victory as soon as they got safely 
back to port. But as soon as he unexpectedly caught sight of Jellicoe’s 
awe-inspiring Grand Fleet – opening fire and brilliantly positioned at high 
speed to destroy him in the rays of a setting sun – Scheer fled. He immediately 
turned his highly trained fleet 180 degrees and escaped his pursuers via a 
second bold change of course under cover of darkness.

In London, Arthur Balfour (of Balfour Declaration fame), First Lord of the 
Admiralty after the Dardenelles-disgraced Winston Churchill, later remarked: 
“It is not customary for victors to run away.”

But, as its reaction to the Dublin Easter Rising had just shown the world, 
Whitehall’s stuffed shirts were hopeless at PR. For several days the Germans 
were allowed to proclaim a triumph in what they called the Battle of Skagerrak, 
while London said nothing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Fthe-battle-of-jutland-the-chilcot-shambles-of-its-day%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0afcdc76585e80049296617cd98a86ce01515676%2F277_127_4521_2712%2F4521.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Battle%20of%20Jutland%3A%20the%20Chilcot%20shambles%20of%20its%20day%20%7C%20Michael%20White&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Fthe-battle-of-jutland-the-chilcot-shambles-of-its-day%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Battle%20of%20Jutland%3A%20the%20Chilcot%20shambles%20of%20its%20day%20%7C%20Michael%20White&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Fthe-battle-of-jutland-the-chilcot-shambles-of-its-day%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0afcdc76585e80049296617cd98a86ce01515676%2F277_127_4521_2712%2F4521.jpg>
 British ships in the Battle of Jutland. Photograph: Express/Getty Images 
After all, Beatty’s cruisers had been beaten by a smaller force, the 113,000 
tonnage lost was, like the death rate, double Germany’s loss, even when the 
Germans were forced to tell the whole truth about their own losses and damage. 
Short of information and outraged at its failure, the press turned on the navy. 
Battered ships returning to port were booed. The Admiralty had to call for 
Churchill’s deft pen to restore some perspective.

 But Germany’s tactical victory masked a strategic defeat of great 
consequence. As a New York newspaper explained to its readers, most of them 
keen to stay out of a European bloodbath, “the German fleet has assaulted its 
jailer, but it is still in jail”. The blockade’s slow strangulation continued.

In consequence, Scheer swung his prestige behind those generals loudly 
demanding a resumption of unrestricted submarine warfare. It had already been 
twice attempted, then curtailed for fear of provoking war with the nascent 
power of the US. Now the desperate calculation became that, if Britain could be 
crippled, the war might be won on the western front – as it was soon to be 
against Russia – before the Americans could organise an army and intervene 
decisively.

As with Hitler in 1940-41, Britain was waiting for an American intervention 
and German mistakes. Berlin duly took a conscious gamble and it failed. In 
April 1917, its mediation efforts spurned and its ships being sunk, an angry 
America entered the war and made the predicted difference. Four days after the 
11 November 1918 armistice, when German admirals came to negotiate the 
surrender of their fleet to Beatty in the Firth of Forth, their sailors were in 
open mutiny, having refused a last-minute plan to attack the Grand Fleet.

Instead they endured humiliation. One starving senior officer in the surrender 
party was caught stealing a piece of cheese from HMS Queen Elizabeth’s table. 
Six months later, a week before the new German republic signed the humiliating 
Treaty of Versailles, their crews scuttled and sank most of the 74 rotting 
ships of the High Seas Fleet interned in Scapa Flow. Only then could Scheer 
talk of honour restored.

But what of Jellicoe’s honour? Churchill would later write that he had been 
“the only man on either side who could lose the war in an afternoon” by way of 
a major defeat in the North Sea. A modest man, much-loved by his officers and 
men, Jellicoe was also a cautious perfectionist of centralising instinct. So 
Sir John turned his great battle fleet to the east – to port, not starboard – 
at the crucial moment at Jutland when Scheer did his U-turn. Going west would 
have offered greater opportunities to destroy the enemy, but also greater risk 
from submarines (torpedoes were Scheer’s speciality) and from mines. Jellicoe 
was not a man to take a risk he didn’t need to take. A draw that upheld 
Britain’s dominant status quo was good enough.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Fthe-battle-of-jutland-the-chilcot-shambles-of-its-day%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc10178abf6af8a18f222ed04b1426bca8d60d8d4%2F0_0_2862_4803%2F2862.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Battle%20of%20Jutland%3A%20the%20Chilcot%20shambles%20of%20its%20day%20%7C%20Michael%20White&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Fthe-battle-of-jutland-the-chilcot-shambles-of-its-day%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Battle%20of%20Jutland%3A%20the%20Chilcot%20shambles%20of%20its%20day%20%7C%20Michael%20White&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Fthe-battle-of-jutland-the-chilcot-shambles-of-its-day%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc10178abf6af8a18f222ed04b1426bca8d60d8d4%2F0_0_2862_4803%2F2862.jpg>
 The bust of Admiral Sir John Jellicoe in Trafalgar Square seen during a 
wreath-laying ceremony to commemorate the Battle of Jutland. Photograph: 
Anthony Devlin/PA 
He was right. But Beatty, a hunting-and-shooting socialite with a rich and 
glamorous American wife, let it be known almost immediately that he disagreed. 
He had done his job, delivering Scheer’s fleet into Jellicoe’s hands, in the 
“crossed T” formation of which every admiral dreamed. Jellicoe had flunked it.

The truth, as usual, was messier. Modern British battleship design had 
sacrificed armour plating for speed and those great 15-inch guns that now greet 
visitors to the Imperial War Museum had failings. Its shells were poorly 
designed and did less damage than they should. Communication between the 
Admiralty and the fleet, as well as between ships, was not that much advanced 
on Nelson’s own, primitive by 1939 standards, let alone today’s.

Systemic failures were matched by tactical ones. Whitehall blundering failed 
to alert Jellicoe to Scheer’s exact movements. More extraordinary still, Beatty 
failed to tell his chief where exactly the enemy was heading and at what speed 
– vital to interception in poor visibility – a silence that lasted from 4.45pm 
to 6.06pm. Later he would fiddle the record and suppress the official history 
of the battle to exculpate himself, as Nick Jellicoe, the admiral’s grandson,
explained on Channel 4 this month 
<http://www.channel4.com/info/press/programme-information/jutland-ww1s-greatest-sea-battle>
.

Beatty won the immediate PR war and got control of the levers of power. First 
succeeding Jellicoe as commander of the Grand Fleet (Jellicoe went ashore to be 
first sea lord), he then became first sea lord after the armistice while 
Jellicoe was dispatched to distant New Zealand as governor general. Never mind 
that Beatty’s cruisers had been beaten by Hipper’s inferior force. “Something 
wrong with our bloody ships today,” he remarked as another one blew up with 
1,000 lost lives. Poor gunnery practice and carelessness with safety 
regulations (to increase the rate of fire) was part of the story. Beatty’s 
style was “more inspirational than preparation”, Admiral West said on Radio 4.

But Beatty was as glamorous and self-promoting as Jellicoe was not. He was 
made an earl and granted £100,000 by parliament, Jellicoe initially only a 
viscount (and £50,000). Papers such as the Daily Mail and a string of early 
books promoted Beatty’s version of events and denigrated Jellicoe. It was years 
before they were challenged, less by Jellicoe than by his outraged captains.

In his own history of the war, The World Crisis, Churchill equivocated, torn 
between his awareness of Jellicoe’s cautious wisdom and his own preference for 
the gloryseekers. In our own times, scholarly works such as Andrew Gordon’s The 
Rules of the Game (1996) have put the arguments fairly in the wider context of 
their times.

 But the story is a familiar one, which will be as evident in the pages of the 
Chilcot report as the postmortem on Jutland. Political imperatives compromise 
military strategy, which veers between reckless and cautious. Poorly designed 
or outdated equipment is found wanting in the heat of battle. The armchair 
press and war-weary public longs for stirring victories and seek scapegoats 
when they do not happen. Politicians, officials and commanders shamelessly pass 
the buck and cover up their mistakes.

 Beatty made it up with Jellicoe to the extent of acting as a pallbearer at 
his funeral, despite evident poor health. It prompted a bystander to pass him a 
glass of brandy as the procession passed along Fleet Street, where he had won 
so many battles. Beatty died four months later. In 1948, busts of them both 
were unveiled in Trafalgar Square on the anniversary of Nelson’s greatest 
victory. In death, as in all ambitious British admirals’ lives, Nelson still 
overshadows them.
 