
By any measure, it has been a bad week for hard Brexiters and Theresa May’s 
government. Problem is, the two have become all but synonymous. Thursday’s shock
byelection result in Richmond Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/02/lib-dems-unseat-zac-goldsmith-in-richmond-park-byelection>
 showed that the pro-Europe convictions of nearly half the country’s voters 
cannot wisely be ignored. Conservative supporters were alienated by May’s 
“pandering” to hardline party zealots andUkip 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/03/can-ukip-survive-brexit-eu-party-funding-donors-referendum-nigel-farage>
 fellow travellers, the victorious Liberal Democrats claimed. “One of the 
things that concerns a great deal of people in this constituency is… the 
Conservative government seems to be shifting very rapidly towards the right,” 
said Sarah Olney, the unashamedly Europhile winning candidate.

There is a widely shared perception that May, far from reuniting the country 
in the wake of the EU referendum, as she promised, is cementing and entrenching 
divisions. It would be wrong to see in the byelection outcome definitive proof 
that the national mood has radically shifted in the past six months. Most 
Richmond voters favoured Remain in June. But the scale of Tory defections 
suggests deep unhappiness with May’s subsequent, lopsided approach. It is as 
though she and her ministers have wholly dismissed the views of the48% who 
rejected Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/07/marching-mad-brexit-someone-speak-48-per-cent>
, just as they arrogantly rejected last month’s impartial, legally soundhigh 
court judgment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/parliament-must-trigger-brexit-high-court-rules>
 that parliament must be consulted prior to the triggering of article 50.

We’re marching towards a mad Brexit. Someone must speak for the 48% | Jonathan 
Freedland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/07/marching-mad-brexit-someone-speak-48-per-cent>
May’s political positioning seems designed, first and foremost, to keep the 
parliamentary Tory party together, not the country. Even so, her slim majority 
is now further reduced. A second consideration, which also has nothing to do 
with the national interest, is to woo traditionally Labour voters who favoured 
Leave. This is not leadership. It is partisan opportunism. Yet worse still, 
from May’s point of view, it is not working. Every day brings more evidence 
that a hard Brexit is not supported by most voters – Leave and Remain – and 
that it would be unworkable and massively damaging.

Ministers may belatedly be coming to understand this latter point. The 
confusion within government ranks is palpable. David Davis, Brexit tsar, has 
moved from initially implying that Britain will willingly quit the single 
market to admitting, last week,that it may pay to stay in it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/01/brexit-secretary-suggests-uk-would-consider-paying-for-single-market-access>
 – a stunning reversal. Having refused to offer up-front guarantees on the 
rights of EU citizens living in Britain, May is now reportedly affronted that 
her proposal to do exactly that, in exchange for similar guarantees for Britons 
living in the EU, wasprivately rejected as premature 
<http://www.politico.eu/article/uk-theresa-may-pre-brexit-expats-plan-nixed-by-german-chancellor-angela-merkel-negotiations-european-union-residence/>
 by Angela Merkel, Germany’s chancellor.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fdavid-davis-suggests-uk-would-consider-paying-for-single-market-access-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Davis%20suggests%20UK%20would%20consider%20paying%20for%20single%20market%20access%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fdavid-davis-suggests-uk-would-consider-paying-for-single-market-access-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Davis%20suggests%20UK%20would%20consider%20paying%20for%20single%20market%20access%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fdavid-davis-suggests-uk-would-consider-paying-for-single-market-access-video&media=>
David Davis suggests UK would consider paying for single market access 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/dec/01/david-davis-suggests-uk-would-consider-paying-for-single-market-access-video>
Ministers are likewise all over the place on freedom of movement, which, with 
single market access, is the key Brexit negotiating issue. Using sophistry, 
Boris Johnson, the foreign secretary, who cynically misled voters by dangling 
the spectre of millions of Turks descending on Britain, now says he “personally”
believes all immigrants should be welcome 
<http://news.sky.com/story/boris-johnson-supports-freedom-of-movement-in-brexit-10678355>
 – and champions Turkey’s EU membership. This volte-face was described by one 
European diplomat as typical of the government’s “shambolic” diplomacy. Johnson 
is a very unfunny disgrace. He plainly has no idea what he is doing or what he 
believes from one day to the next.

Brexit: rising frustration across EU at Britain's unclear exit strategy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/30/brexit-rising-frustration-across-eu-at-britains-unclear-exit-strategy>
All this flailing and flip-flopping is the direct result of an unyielding 
European stance. The past few days have seen a significant hardening of opinion 
in reaction to the hard Tory Brexiters’ chaotic and high-handed behaviour. 
There is alsoincredulity, mixed with dismay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/30/brexit-rising-frustration-across-eu-at-britains-unclear-exit-strategy>
, that May and her allies seem incapable of grasping that when the EU leaders, 
singly and collectively, say there can and will be no compromise on the union’s 
four founding principles – freedom of movement of goods, services, people and 
capital – they really mean it. EvenDonald Tusk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/29/donald-tusk-turns-on-tories-in-row-over-rights-of-eu-citizens-in-uk>
, the normally unflappable, anglophile president of the European council, lost 
his cool last week when Tory MPs accused Brussels of obstruction.

Michael Gove, Iain Duncan Smith and other backbench Little Englanders really 
should get out more. There is no option to have one’s cake and eat it, as a 
Brexit departmental aide’s notes optimistically suggested. When Jeroen 
Dijsselbloem, the Dutch finance minister, says the UK’s Brexit demands are 
“intellectually impossible and politically unavailable”, he speak for all of 
Europe. WhenWolfgang Schäuble, Germany’s finance minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/17/german-minister-takes-hard-line-over-britains-eu-commitments-post-brexit>
, Manfred Weber, chair of the largest centre-right group in the European 
parliament, andMichel Barnier, the EU’s chief Brexit negotiator 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/29/eus-brexit-negotiator-wants-to-stop-uk-getting-soft-transitional-deal-michel-barnier-access-single-market>
, all say there will be no fudging matters of principle andno face-saving 
transitional arrangement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/29/eus-brexit-negotiator-wants-to-stop-uk-getting-soft-transitional-deal-michel-barnier-access-single-marke>
, either, they must be taken very seriously indeed.

From Europe’s perspective, these are the immoveable rocks on which the 
credibility of the hard Brexiters’ case is foundering. Yet, if May keeps 
blindly steering in her current direction, a super-hard Brexit pile-up – 
meaning a total, sudden, economically unstructured, financially calamitous and 
politically acrimonious divorce from the EU in 2018 – may become unavoidable. 
From a domestic perspective, May’s populist policy, unless swiftly rethought, 
will mean deepening national divisions, more revolts such as Richmond, more and 
worsening damage to investment, jobs and living standards, more of the vicious 
bullying and public name-calling of which theDaily Mail has become chief 
exemplar and more constitutional chaos.

This is a fraught moment for Britain and Europe as a whole. Tomorrow, the 
supreme court will start to hear the government’s appeal against the high 
court’s article 50 ruling. A repeat of last month’s crude attempts to 
intimidate the judges is already under way. Already, the legitimacy of their 
eventual ruling is being placed in doubt. Already, the mob is baying, 
denouncing the “enemies of the people”. In Italy and Austria, meanwhile, the 
forces of an ugly nativism are again on the march. Last week was a bad week for 
Brexiters. This week may be rocky for us all.
 