
1) Darts! Darts! Darts! It’s that time of year again … the PDC world 
championship begins on Thursday which is the perfect excuse to dig into the 
archive for a few gems.Here’s a look at all of the champions from 1994 to 2016 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_Tm8vhZUp1Q>, or how about the biggest shock 
in darts history <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o1oyVvp-Tf8> … almost? And to 
really get you in the mood, here’s the 2015 final,in full 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=APbcbWLESlc> – or, if you’re pushed for time, 
two minutes of darting perfection <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pGNZ3GqYrVY> 
from Michael van Gerwen.

2) There’s nothing quite like a good old non-league football dust-up. Take it 
awayNewton Aycliffe and Morpeth Town 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ut32UePgHHs>. 

3) Walter Swinburn – a tribute <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qh_S8U5S9k0>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dqh_S8U5S9k0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dqh_S8U5S9k0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dqh_S8U5S9k0&media=>
4) Call off the search. The undisputed worst pass in the history of American 
football has been found,and it’s right here 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zGSE60aDVSk>.

5) There was some sad news last week when London Welsh announced they would be 
going into liquidation. It is one of the country’s oldest and most storied 
clubs so to bring some cheer to supporters, here are some clips from headier 
days. Grainy footage ofthe Lions’ successful trip to New Zealand in 1971 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hF2mQKVGiX4>, when London Welsh provided seven 
players – more than any other side. And here’s the 1985 John Player Cup final 
against Bath at Twickenham, inparts 1 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kmhGv8-Tn4c> and 2 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HufJk9SeDnM>.

6) A documentary on concrete football (Ballon sur bitume) in the French 
suburbs – where players such as Riyad Mahrez learned their game – has gained 
traction on the back of passion and nostalgia.If you have a spare hour, it’s 
well worth a watch <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FhW2CwKXsfE&t=994s>.

Highlights from last week’s blog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/08/boxing-brawls-junior-joe-cole-plus-bob-paisley-this-is-your-life>

1) Dorian Finney-Smith and the ‘wedgie-block’. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BtBOFxmdCp4&feature=youtu.be>

2) Ten managers who haven’t lost it 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Nd9Q4tHYJ7I>. Featuring a stonking volley from 
Mark Hughes.

3) Cheeky from South Dakota in the big one against North Dakota 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9HqO-ZWkVoU&feature=youtu.be>.

4) Anyone for angleball? <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=asS5nEsgasY> Me 
neither.

5) The ultimate Larry Bird mixtape 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hcXv0JtzNQA>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhcXv0JtzNQA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhcXv0JtzNQA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhcXv0JtzNQA&media=>
Spotters’ badges: TheCedarRoom, BlackCaeser, GrahamClayton.

Guardian YouTube football channel

Do subscribe, if you fancy <https://www.youtube.com/user/GuardianFootball>

Guardian YouTube sport channel

Do subscribe, if you fancy 
<https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCwD9E_QNwFwrQC7OnPnrg2Q>
 