
Standing before a crowd in my home state of Ohio in late June, Trump casually 
asked his supporters what they thought of waterboarding. “I like it a lot,” he 
said, as though he were commenting on an appetizer. “I don’t think it’s tough 
enough.”

As much as I am horrified by Trump’s words, I am not surprised. Recent surveys 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-election-torture-exclusive-idUSKCN0WW0Y3>
 have shown that torture has the support of roughly two-thirds of the US 
population: 82% of Republicans and 53% of Democrats believe it is justifiedat 
leastsome of the time. Trump, ever the opportunist, is simply tapping into a 
sentiment that few want to believe exists.

And exist it does. I experienced this sentiment firsthand last semester, while 
teaching two writing courses at the University of Illinois at Chicago – courses 
designed around the topic “terrorism and everyday life”.

I chose it because terrorism, as the title of the class was meant to suggest, 
is a fundamental part of daily life in the 21st century. No longer is it 
something that encroaches upon us from “outside”, as the planes did on 9/11. 
Daily life is now structured around the possibility of attacks, with news 
headlines about bombings and shootings flashing across our electronic devices 
on a routine schedule.

For many of my students, though, I assumed terrorism wouldn’t just be confined 
to the headlines. University of Illinois at Chicago is located in the heart of 
city’s downtown, and has one of the most diverse student populations in the 
country. While creating the syllabus for the class, I assumed we would have 
discussions of what it meant to live in a major city that remains on constant 
alert. I thought we would tackle the steady rise of Islamophobia and have 
debates about the relationships between religion, poverty and violence. I 
wanted my students to become good writers, but to do this I wanted them to 
confront the ways terrorism has touched them personally: the anxieties they 
might have, the discrimination they may have experienced.

And we did have some of those conversations. We talked about the role of 
media, its glorification of tragedy and its lopsided coverage of attacks that 
affect westerners. We talked about the normalizing of violence in many parts of 
the world, and what it might mean to live under occupation.

Then, inevitably, we talked about torture.

 Although torture wasn’t a major topic on the syllabus, it seemed to be 
waiting in the background. Some of our primary texts included essays written by 
Sam Harris, himself aproponent of torture 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/sam-harris/in-defense-of-torture_b_8993.html> in 
some instances, as well as Noam Chomsky, who refuses to accept any 
justification for torture (and frequently criticizes its use throughout US 
military history). Likewise, many of my students seemed to want to write about 
two broad topics: “terrorism and the media” and “preventing terrorism”, a vague 
category that included things such as foreign policy and military tactics.

I was hesitant, at first, to open the box on torture and the ethical dilemmas 
that surround it, but eventually decided to broach the topic by showing them 
the first episode of 24’s seventh season. This particular episode seemed 
relevant, as it deals with the ethical problem of torture as a preventative 
measure and, as a television show on a major network, is one of the most 
prominent examples of how the media portrays terrorism in a post-9/11 world.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Ftorture-terrorism-college-class%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42b0179fda59c555def73ad00e41ba7ecfdbfbf7%2F0_147_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20appeal%20of%20torture%3A%20what%20I%20learned%20from%20teaching%20a%20class%20on%20terrorism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Ftorture-terrorism-college-class%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20appeal%20of%20torture%3A%20what%20I%20learned%20from%20teaching%20a%20class%20on%20terrorism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Ftorture-terrorism-college-class%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42b0179fda59c555def73ad00e41ba7ecfdbfbf7%2F0_147_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
 Jack Bauer in 24: torture porn? Photograph: Sky/Imagenet 
The writing is laughably bad: as the opening credits flash across the show’s 
iconic multi-camera collage, iconic CTU agent Jack Bauer sits before a Senate 
committee hearing on the use of torture. With his blasé rogue chic, Bauer 
insists that his use of torture was justified because it saved lives. He did 
“what was necessary”. When pressed by the senator if he was above the law, 
Bauer’s response is crucial and cuts to the core of American ideology: 
terrorists don’t play by our rules, so he wasn’t going to be limited by them 
either.

I showed my students this episode right around the time Trump repeated Bauer’s 
remarks, almostword for word 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/donald-trump-vows-to-strengthen-laws-to-allow-torture-waterboarding-election-2016/>
, at a campaign event. I even made the joke that Trump’s foreign policy adviser 
was Jack Bauer himself, hoping my students – many of whom hadprotested Trump’s 
recent 
<http://chicago.suntimes.com/news/trump-uic-rally-accompanied-with-protests/> 
event on our campus – would see the absurdity of the position.

To my surprise, or rather disbelief, almost every one of my 46 students wasn’t 
bothered by the use of torture. The general consensus was both simple and 
eerily confident: “It may not be ideal, but sometimes it’s just necessary.”

I was at a loss for words. These weren’t the stereotypical, angry 
conservatives who I had always naively imagined supported torture. They were a 
diverse group of liberal college students coming of age in a post-Abu Ghraib 
world. They understood how racism and Islamophobia functioned in the broader 
national security discourse, and found the “it’s religion, stupid” views of 
thinkers such as Sam Harris and Bill Maher rightfully problematic. When I first 
introduced them to Chomsky, they were thrilled to finally read someone willing 
to call out America on its imperial legacy of exceptionalism.

The general consensus was both simple and eerily confident: 'It may not be 
ideal, but sometimes it’s just necessary'

How, I wondered, could they be so accepting of torture?

The predicament almost exclusively used in discussions of torture is the 
so-called “ticking bomb” scenario: an evil terrorist is withholding critical 
information about an imminent attack, and in order to save thousands of lives, 
he must be tortured to elicit the details.

On its face, this scenario seems difficult to refute. It is almost common 
sense to agree that such an attack should be prevented at all costs, and the 
rights of one immoral person are worth considerably less than the lives of 
thousands of innocents.

Such utilitarian logic is troubling. Leaving aside the remarkable 
implausibility of such a scenario ever taking place, it reduces human life to a 
vague notion of “worth” without sufficiently offering up a picture of how such 
value is established. It is an abstract way of thinking about life that often 
favors quantity over quality and ignores the particular experiences of 
different lives. By this logic, one American life, even an innocent one, should 
be worth less than hundreds of thousands of innocent Iraqis. As we have seen 
countless times in the past few decades, this is simply not the case.

When I presented this argument to my students, many seemed to agree. 
Nevertheless, they couldn’t really see why torture should never be used. Why 
did it need to be forbidden so absolutely, especially considering those 
clearcut examples when critical information is needed to save lives? Shouldn’t 
we do everything we can to save lives?

At the time, I didn’t know how to respond this question. Quite honestly, I had 
made the error of assuming what my students would think ahead of time, and as a 
result wasn’t prepared. I couldn’t give them a simple answer, and it bothered 
me that I couldn’t give them a simple answer. I just wrung my hands and shook 
my head and sort of laughed in disbelief.

Looking back, it seems to me that this inability to answer, my not knowing how 
to respond, is precisely the point. The logic of every justification of torture 
is that it offers a foolproof solution to an impossible problem: lack of 
knowledge.

What I should have said to my students was that scenarios justifying torture 
never question whether the person being tortured actuallyhas information, nor 
how the torturerknows this person has information. The scenarios simply accept 
it as fact that the person has “something” important. If you reframe the 
scenario and say “we don’t know if this person has information, but we’re going 
to torture him on the off chance he does”, things begin to look a little 
different.

When listening to someone such as Trump casually endorse torture, it becomes 
clear why people are so receptive to it. It promises a solution to the 
terrifying reality that we simply can’t predict, with 100% certainty, when the 
next attack will be.

My point is not that we need an argument against torture. We shouldn’t have to 
argue against torture. My point is that torture, even in the most implausible 
of scenarios, isn’t actually the solution to the problem, but rather something 
that obscures the problem by presenting itself as a solution. What’s really 
bothering us isn’t that another attack is possible, but rather that we often 
can’t “have all the facts” and prevent this attack.

As a teacher, students expect you to have answers to their questions. Students 
look to you for guidance and authority. My own students were bright and 
insightful, but they also didn’t feel as if they had enough authority to speak 
about big issues with any degree of certainty. Their default position, in these 
instances, was to shut down and not engage. One of the things I always stressed 
is that it’s OK to not know. It allows you to ask questions you might not 
otherwise ask, and perhaps arrive at a more thoughtful conclusion.

The problem is that in the Information Age, and the conquering of the world by 
Google, such a position of uncertainty is less accepted. We’ve been trained to 
demand, and expect, immediate answers. This is fine if you need to convert feet 
to meters, or translate a Latin phrase to any language of your choosing. But 
what about those things that don’t have easy answers, the things we fear, the 
things that affect and shape our lives?

Things like terrorism.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Ftorture-terrorism-college-class%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7d3551a473f4c677a1e444f03f55ff7298b7267%2F0_0_1600_1065%2F1600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20appeal%20of%20torture%3A%20what%20I%20learned%20from%20teaching%20a%20class%20on%20terrorism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Ftorture-terrorism-college-class%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20appeal%20of%20torture%3A%20what%20I%20learned%20from%20teaching%20a%20class%20on%20terrorism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Ftorture-terrorism-college-class%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7d3551a473f4c677a1e444f03f55ff7298b7267%2F0_0_1600_1065%2F1600.jpg>
 Jake Gyllenhaal in Source Code: the ticking gets louder and louder. 
Photograph: Sportsphoto Ltd/Allstar 
In addition to showing my students that episode of 24, I also had them watch 
the film Source Code, a science fiction film about a terrorist attack that 
takes place, appropriately enough, in Chicago.

The premise of the film involves a great deal of quantum physics, but the 
basic plot involves Jake Gyllenhaal, a US army captain, inhabiting the last 
eight minutes of consciousness of a school teacher aboard a commuter train that 
explodes. By returning to these last eight minutes just before the explosion, 
Gyllenhaal is able to find the bomber and prevent an attack that is to take 
place later in the day in downtown Chicago.

While watching this film with my students, it occurred to me that the film was 
a cleverly disguised ticking bomb scenario, one that seems to implicitly 
promote torture: Gyllenhaal’s character is repeatedly thrust through time and 
space, forced to return again and again to find information that will prevent 
an attack. When he objects and begins to realize what is happening, those in 
charge adopt the sinister, clinical language of torturers. “Who’s the bomber?” 
they ask, ignoring his questions. “Find the bomber, and this will all be over.”

Of course, Gyllenhaal’s character is a US army captain, a hero, and in the end 
comes to sacrifice his own concerns and patriotically accepts his mission. 
Nevertheless, the film plays into the fantastic logic presented by people such 
as Harris and Trump. It plays into our fears and satisfies our demands for a 
solution: with the right amount of technology, or heroic sacrifice, we can 
prevent an attack.

America loves heroism. We love someone like Jack Bauer, a man willing to do 
anything to prevent the loss of innocent life. We love the fantasy of being 
saved at the last minute from a ticking bomb.

In real life, though, there are no ticking bomb scenarios. There is just the 
ticking, the fear and anticipation. Trump understands this well. Despite his 
talk of heroism and greatness, he isn’t actually interested in the rescue 
mission.

He just wants to make sure the ticking is a little louder, so we can all hear 
it.
 