
After four months as president of the Philippines, Rodrigo Duterte has become 
notorious for erratic and attention-grabbing statements. But his remarks on his 
country’s longstanding alliance with the United States make his other 
pronouncements appear a model of understatement and consistency. He announced 
that he wasseparating from the US <http:> “in military [and] economics also” 
and talked of a possible new troika “against the world: China, Philippines and 
Russia”. On Monday, hereversed course 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-china-philippines-idUSKCN12K0AS>. Existing 
alliances were alive and there should be no concern about them changing; all he 
sought was trade and commerce with China, he said. By Tuesday, he was lashing 
out at Washington again. The US has said itis seeking clarity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/24/us-philippines-president-rodrigo-duterte-separation-comments>
 on his intentions; so, it seems, are his colleagues, and perhaps even Mr 
Duterte himself.

If his manner is sui generis, the strategic question he faces is not. Beneath 
the bluster appears to be an attempt to extract advantage from the rival 
ambitions of the US and China. Beijing’s growing economic and military power 
and increased confidence have produced a discernable shift in the region 
(helping to explain why Mr Duterte is downplaying his nation’s victory over 
Chinain a tribunal ruling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/12/philippines-wins-south-china-sea-case-against-china>
 on their South China Sea dispute). The situation has been complicated both by 
what the US has done, and what it hasn’t. In 2011, Barack Obama announced a 
“pivot to Asia” and stressed that the US was a Pacific power, a message 
bolstered by plans to station marines in Australia. Beijing saw that as an
attempt to contain it 
<http://aus.thechinastory.org/archive/australia-and-the-american-pivot-to-asia/>
, and efforts to gloss the message failed to undo the damage. But it alarmed 
China without achieving much: in reality, the Obama administration had little 
time to devote to the region. It has been too busy elsewhere. That seems 
unlikely to change significantly, even if a President Clinton proves more 
active and keener to make alliances count – especially given that she has 
renounced the pivot’s economic plank, the TPP trade deal 
<https://www.ft.com/content/91b726e2-540d-11e6-befd-2fc0c26b3c60> including 
multiple Pacific nations but not China.

There are broader echoes, too, in Mr Duterte taking exception to criticism of 
his high-death-count war on drugs. Thailand’s tilt towards China has gained 
pace under the military junta; Beijing does not question the 2014 coup and 
associated human rights abuses. Malaysia has also moved towards China while the 
US Department of Justice has pursued thecorruption scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/international> concerning its 1MDB development 
fund.

Beijing may enjoy Washington’s discomfiture, but it knows how much is still to 
play for. Though regional players seek cash and support – without awkward 
questions about domestic affairs – they are worried by China’s growing clout 
and assertiveness. The multi-sidedSouth China Sea row 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/12/philippines-wins-south-china-sea-case-against-china>
 is as much symbol as cause of tensions. Last month sawa rare public spat 
<https://www.ft.com/content/07345320-852f-11e6-8897-2359a58ac7a5> between 
Singapore and China, as the city-state’s ambassador clashed with a populist 
state-owned tabloid over its approach to the dispute. There arerising tensions 
with Vietnam, too 
<https://www.ft.com/content/3aa404f2-5ee8-11e6-bb77-a121aa8abd95>. Meanwhile, 
India has been takingan increasing interest 
<http://www.newmandala.org/india-in-asean/> in the region, with US 
encouragement. Even Mr Duterte appears to be looking beyond China; hence this 
week’s trip to Japan.

Smaller nations may see opportunities in the ongoing competition between these 
great powers. But there are alsoreal risks 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-05-29/u-s-china-competition-in-asia-brings-risk-singapore-s-lee-says>
 that, in the longer run, this rivalry and more localised conflicts could 
destabilise the region. That is in no one’s interests.
 