
Eddie Levert, singer

We started the O’Jays <http://www.mightyojays.com> at school in Canton, Ohio, 
in 1958, but struggled to find our identity and took years to make a 
breakthrough. At one point,we were doing beach music 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2AqnyQ0zwV0>, playing shows supporting the 
Dave Clark Five and Sonny and Cher. I’d always thought we’d make a record and 
be millionaires, so it was a rude awakening.

Then Bill Isles fell in love, said he was going to California for four weeks 
and never came back, and Bobby Massey quit to become a songwriter and producer. 
The remaining trio weren’t anything like the O’Jays as people know us now.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSvsAqkOhI48&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSvsAqkOhI48>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSvsAqkOhI48&media=>
Everything changed in 1972, when we met [songwriters and producers] Gamble and 
Huff <http://www.gamble-huffmusic.com/home/> and signed to Philadelphia 
International. They recognised our gospel roots and ability to switch between 
lead vocals. Kenny Gamble was a prolific songwriter, and Leon Huff could make a 
piano sound like a whole band. We just clicked. They had dozens of songs and we 
were able to pick the ones we liked. When we started recording, Love Train 
didn’t even have lyrics, so Kenny came up with them in five minutes, on the 
spot.

At that stage, I don’t think any of us had any idea how big that song would 
become, but by the time we started laying down the vocals, we knew we had a 
hit. Love Train felt like destiny. It had suchperfect, timeless lyrics 
<http://www.azlyrics.com/lyrics/ojays/lovetrain.html> that it was almost as if 
they’d come from God, and we had to deliver them to the people.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fthe-ojays-how-we-made-love-train-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F599d045012caaa94a2ac9e8105b40454e45f776e%2F0_172_4646_2788%2F4646.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20O'Jays%3A%20how%20we%20made%20Love%20Train&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fthe-ojays-how-we-made-love-train-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20O%27Jays%3A%20how%20we%20made%20Love%20Train&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fthe-ojays-how-we-made-love-train-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F599d045012caaa94a2ac9e8105b40454e45f776e%2F0_172_4646_2788%2F4646.jpg>
 The O’Jays in 1973. From left: William Powell, Walter Williams and Eddie 
Levert. Photograph: Michael Ochs Archives/Getty Images 
I was very young, conflicted between my spiritual upbringing and becoming a 
superstar, but when we made apromotional film 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SvsAqkOhI48&list=FLuyhAVEeM8zDEpGpbmtsThg&feature=plcp>
 on a train that went through a zoo in Griffin Park, California, I felt humbled 
by the children, who were – and are – our future.

To this day, people hear it and want to start a train. At one gig, we played 
it for 30 minutes, while the audience formed a dancing train that went all the 
way outside the building.

Walter Williams, singer

Gamble and Huff saw us when we supported the Intruders at the Apollo in New 
York, and were somewhere down the bill. We learned so much from them. You could 
rehearse a song, think it was finished and in the studio they’d suddenly try a 
different groove. I watched them dissect each song until it really worked.

I was offended when Trump started using the song, supposedly with our 
involvement

Eddie and I brought the gospel feeling that we learned at St Mark Baptist 
church, where my dad was the choir director, my stepmother was the pianist and 
her sister was the organist. Love Train was the first of our big message songs: 
“People all over the world (everybody), join hands, start a love train.”

 1972 was explosive – Vietnam was rumbling on, the rich were getting richer - 
so it was the perfect time to sing about social issues. The song mentioned 
places that were having human rights problems, but in a positive, hopeful way: 
“The first stop we make will be England … tell all the folks in Russia and 
China too.” We’ve performed in it England many times, but I’d still love to 
sing it in Russia or China.

How we made Motown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/22/how-we-made-motown-records-berry-gordy-smokey-robinson-stevie-wonder-interview>
I was offended when Donald Trump started using the song, supposedly with our 
involvement, as “Join a Trump train 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hgM2xN5TPgw>.” Oh no we won’t! Our attorneys 
sent him a cease and desist letter. We’re about unity, not division. Trump says 
he’s gonna make America great again. I would ask him: “When was it not great 
for you?” My dad didn’t give me a million dollars. What a joke. I’ve 
experienced what it’s like being a black man in America and being successful 
through hard work.


 For most people, the biggest problem is how to cope. You have to learn not to 
jump off a bridge or put a gun to your head. The timeless message of Love Train 
is that if we pull together, we can make things better for everyone.

It went to number one and is still the biggest song we’ve ever done. I never 
get bored of it.


 * The O’Jays are on tour in the US <http://www.mightyojays.com/>.
 