
In disbelief, Charlie Hope reread the email. “It said I had 24 hours to pack 
my stuff and get out,” he says. He felt confident that evicting anyone at such 
short notice must be illegal, although his evictors were threatening to call 
the police for assistance if he didn’t leave.

Hope’s neighbour had already tearfully packed down her bedroom and left after 
receiving a similar email the day before. She would be trespassing if she 
stayed on the premises, she was warned, and so, frightened and distressed, she 
took a taxi to her parents’ house.

Hope was living in a disused council building in Tower Hamlets, east London, 
and, by maintaining a physical presence on site, providing services for a 
property guardian company called Newbould Guardians. But, rather than being 
paid for his services, Hope had to pay the company a monthly licence fee.

Average monthly rent hits record high of £816, highlighting housing shortage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/oct/16/average-monthly-rent-hits-record-high-of-816-highlighting-housing-shortage>
Hope, a softly spoken artist and MA student, says that he endured some “pretty 
unreasonable stuff” with Newbould Guardians. Even so, he found the last-minute 
eviction attempt exceptional. “There was no due process,” he says. “They tried 
to make me homeless with one day’s notice.”

Newbould Guardians take a very different view of the situation. Hope, they 
say, is a “bad egg”; they “strenuously deny” several of his claims, but are not 
at liberty to discuss them because of pending legal action. But if it is to be 
believed, Hope’s account is not unique. Stories such as his suggest that, 
although they’ve been used in Britain for more than a decade, property 
guardianship schemes are not all they are cracked up to be.Property 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/property> guardianship is billed as 
win-win-win: landowners can cheaply secure their buildings, guardians benefit 
from cheaper living costs, and empty urban spaces are put to use.

But an investigation shows that property guardians are part of a growing 
underclass of renters with severely curtailed rights who live in miserable and 
legally dubious conditions. Meanwhile, the companies that operate the schemes 
are thriving in austerity London’s housing crisis, where they make profits by 
turning former public sector buildings into substandard accommodation. The 
industry is set to boom because, after changes to government tax guidance, it 
is easier for landowners using the schemes to lessen their liability.

It wasn’t supposed to be like this. When guardian schemes launched in the 
early 00s, they provided genuinely cheap and unorthodox housing alternatives. 
Artists and creative professionals lived in old schools, office blocks and 
council houses awaiting refurbishment or demolition. There were only a handful 
of companies in the market.

“In the beginning you might pay £250 a month for a huge space. There was a 
feeling it was the best-kept secret in London”, says Gloria Dawson, an academic 
at Durham University who is researching guardian schemes. In exchange, 
guardians forewent the comfort and security of a traditional tenancy and agreed 
to the terms of guardian licences.

Common license rules include no overnight visitors and no more than two 
friends on site, and speaking to the media is forbidden. Crucially, guardians 
do not have the right to solely occupy any part of the building, and must be 
ready to leave a building at short notice. The low costs and unusual, sometimes 
exciting, living spaces seemed to provide a mutually beneficial arrangement, 
but this “golden era” has passed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fdec%2F24%2Fthe-high-price-of-cheap-living-how-the-property-guardianship-dream-soured%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9680718274d718f7d56af4735e37ece4159613c0%2F0_497_6996_4207%2F6996.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20high%20price%20of%20cheap%20living%3A%20how%20the%20property%20guardianship%20dream%20soured&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fdec%2F24%2Fthe-high-price-of-cheap-living-how-the-property-guardianship-dream-soured%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20high%20price%20of%20cheap%20living%3A%20how%20the%20property%20guardianship%20dream%20soured&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fdec%2F24%2Fthe-high-price-of-cheap-living-how-the-property-guardianship-dream-soured%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9680718274d718f7d56af4735e37ece4159613c0%2F0_497_6996_4207%2F6996.jpg>
 Laundry facilities at the property Hope occupied as a guardian in east London. 
Photograph: Linda Nylind for the Guardian 
The industry is maturing, with a conservative estimate of more than 4,000 
guardians living in properties, and more than 30 companies seeking to maximise 
profits and gain competitive advantages wherever possible. The losers are the 
guardians who suffer from high prices and increasingly unsuitable living 
conditions.

One guardian described viewing “rooms that were like chicken coops” in 
Kennington, south London, which were being offered by a guardian company for 
£500 a month. It was a single space “with rows of plyboard walls and no natural 
light, no ventilation”.

Squeezing guardians into properties like this is increasingly common. Dawson 
says: “A certain property might once have been divided into three and now it 
could be 15. There are still large spaces, but they have limited resources, 
like one kitchen, or one bathroom.” She adds: “The long-term guardians all 
comment negatively on the situation today. It was a good game when it started, 
but is now more expensive, less secure and conditions are worsening.”

Hope felt some of these changes in the industry personally. He lived in the 
gloomy, if expansive, third floor of a disused council building for £700 a 
month. He couldn’t afford a place to live and a studio to practise art in 
London, but this deal gave him the space to do both. He was expecting to 
compromise on basic comforts, but he didn’t realise how bleak life could get.

The carpets were worn and stained by the thousands of shoes that had crossed 
the floor of the council’s now-defunct One-Stop Shop. Knackered office 
furniture was piled high next to windows caked with soot, letting in the gloom 
from Commercial Road. He couldn’t get the toilet light working. To wash, Hope 
had to descend two flights of stairs to a dirty, windowless room where Newbould 
Guardians had installed a temporary shower. Five other guardians living on the 
property also used it.

Property guardians: a solution to the UK’s housing crisis?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/mar/24/property-guardians-housing-solution-opportunism>
Mara Ferreri, a colleague of Dawson’s at Durham, says: “It’s incredibly 
difficult to get the guardian companies interested in repairs. Their attitude 
is: ‘We’re giving you a cheap property – what are you complaining about?’” 
Guardians need to be self-reliant about cleaning, maintenance and repairs, but 
they must also contend with routine violations of their privacy. Inspectors, 
who use their own keys, regularly visit properties to ensure the guardians 
comply with their stringent licenses.

One Saturday in November, Hope remembers, he was experimenting with a new art 
installation, which contained a smoke machine. The smoke machine triggered an 
alarm and the fire brigade arrived after receiving an automatic callout. A 
fireman inspected Hope’s installation and told him he was OK to carry on.

Two days later, Hope received an email terminating his license and giving him 
until 5pm the next day to leave the property. He knew it was related to the 
fire alarm, but was confused because it had been triggered several times 
beforeand no one had been evicted. Hope had also breached his license by having 
more than two friends in his space.

But he was defiant. He believed that Newbould Guardians lacked the power to 
evict him. His neighbour had complied with her 24-hour termination notice and 
already left. But Hope had nowhere to go. He refused to hand back his keys and, 
when Newbould Guardians threatened to call the police, he called some friends 
over and prepared for the worst.

He says he tried to contact senior staff at Newbould without success. So he 
phoned Tower Hamlets Council, the building’s owner, and persuaded an employee 
to call Newbould and enquire about his eviction. This proved a shrewd move: 
shortly afterwards, the company director of Newbould Guardians, Joseph Askins, 
called Hope. Feeling wary, he recorded the phone call.

After Hope rebuffed his friendly overtures, Askins tried a different tack. He 
said: “I got you in because I thought you you’d be a nice guy and you won’t 
screw me over. Now if that’s not the case, I will kick you out, no problem.”

The other generation rent: meet the people flatsharing in their 40s
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/sep/25/flatsharing-40s-housing-crisis-lack-homes-renting-london>
When asked for comment, Askins disputed Hope’s characterisation of the 
exchange. In an email, he dismissed Hope’s story as an act of “revenge” and 
said that guardians like him “let themselves down, along with their fellow 
guardians and also the client”. He added that Hope’s complaints were evidence 
of a misunderstanding of the difference between “tenancy” and “licence to 
occupy”.

But according to one expert on property guardianship, Hope’s hunch that 
Newbould lacked the legal power to evict him was correct. He didn’t have to 
comply with the termination notice, says Giles Peaker, a partner at Anthony 
Gold, a legal firm specialising in housing matters. “The notice was of no 
effect because it was completely inadequate under the Protection from Eviction 
Act. Anything less than four weeks written notice is inadequate and would be 
void under the Act,” Peaker says.

As Askins’s view of their obligations suggests, guardian companies routinely 
operate as if the four-week notice rule doesn’t apply to them because guardians 
are not tenants but licensees. Therefore they do not seek to protect guardians’ 
tenancy rights. But that is not how the law works, Peaker says. The Protection 
from Eviction Act applies to anyone who is a “residential occupier” of a 
building, and that includes property guardians.

Some companies openly advertise two-week notice periods, while other 
companies’ contracts state only that they will “endeavour” to provide 28 days’ 
notice. Most guardians don’t understand how the law works. Peaker says: “In a 
sense they’ve got away with it because it would be for guardians themselves to 
take action, and the state of knowledge of their rights is not high.”Housing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/housing> laws on safety, fire exits and 
access to basic facilities may also be frequently violated by guardian 
companies because they do not aim to meet residential tenancy standards.

In the end, Askins offered to let Hope remain in his space for an additional 
20 days. Peaker says Hope’s neighbour had a right to remain, but because she 
left of her own accord, no crime was committed by Newbould Guardians.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fdec%2F24%2Fthe-high-price-of-cheap-living-how-the-property-guardianship-dream-soured%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F83df999c1c2b54eb1df6822df19ac1e19b2b13a1%2F2546_969_4505_2706%2F4505.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20high%20price%20of%20cheap%20living%3A%20how%20the%20property%20guardianship%20dream%20soured&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fdec%2F24%2Fthe-high-price-of-cheap-living-how-the-property-guardianship-dream-soured%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20high%20price%20of%20cheap%20living%3A%20how%20the%20property%20guardianship%20dream%20soured&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fdec%2F24%2Fthe-high-price-of-cheap-living-how-the-property-guardianship-dream-soured%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F83df999c1c2b54eb1df6822df19ac1e19b2b13a1%2F2546_969_4505_2706%2F4505.jpg>
 ‘There was no due process. They tried to make me homeless with one day’s 
notice’ … Charlie Hope in his former Tower Hamlets residence. Photograph: Linda 
Nylind for the Guardian 
The practices of guardian companies are not set to change. Civil claims 
brought by guardians are uncommon and usually end in settlements, which include 
compensation and gagging clauses. Unlawful eviction is a criminal offence, but 
a criminal case requires a local authority to prosecute, and they have shown no 
appetite for prosecuting guardian companies. Councils in London have a 
complicated relationship with guardian companies because, as well as regulating 
them, they are among their top clients, as buildings that once provided vital 
services to the community are repurposed as sources of income.

Number 55 Albion Grove, a large 1950s cottage in Stoke Newington, was once 
used by Hackney Council to provide respite care for children with disabilities. 
Since 2010, it has provided cheap accommodation for a group of young 
professionals willing to suffer periods with no rubbish collection, faulty 
electrics and, guardians claim, no hot water. For them, the cheap rent made it 
just worthwhile. The property was managed by market leader Camelot – which has 
a turnover of £5m-£6m a year, and has seen a 25% increase in the number of 
guardians between 2014 and 2015.

But earlier this year Camelot lost its contract with Hackney Council. 
Guardians were told that the council had found out that Camelot had misled them 
about the fees paid by guardians, and that Camelot was using the property to 
house its own unpaid interns, who were exchanging work at the company for a 
roof over their heads. Camelot insists that the decision to put the contract 
out to tender was not caused by those complaints, and says it doesn’t recognise 
the allegations. Hackney Council declined to comment on specifics, but added 
that it “reviews contracts regularly to ensure that appropriate safeguards are 
in place”.

When the council put the contract out to tender, the winners were Global 
Guardians, a north London-based agency whose successful bid offered Hackney a 
cut of the profit as part of the deal. Global’s price hike was massive: the 
cost of one room was due to double from £310 to £700 a month.

Property guardian schemes are a cheap way to rent a home with character. But 
you won't stay long
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2010/jan/10/property-guardian-schemes> 
Global Guardians defend themselves by arguing that they will be investing 
significantly in the property. And they have confirmed that under the new 
contract, Hackney will receive a share of the licence fee revenue. Peaker 
believes this is a growing trend, which is an effect of the competition between 
guardian companies to win new buildings.

But property guardian schemes also pose a greater threat to local authorities’ 
revenue. Private landowners are able to use property guardians to minimise 
their tax bills and, although it is hard to estimate, the potential financial 
loss to councils is substantial.

Vacant commercial property is usually a dead loss to landowners. Unless they 
redevelop it, they continue to pay high business rates while receiving no rent. 
By installing property guardians – and basic facilities such as temporary 
showers and kitchens – owners can reclassify buildings as domestic, slashing 
their business rates.

Live-In Guardians advertises its ability to reduce business rates for 
landowners. Its website states: “In most cases we will be able to substantially 
reduce your empty rates liability.” The company reduced a landowner’s business 
rates on an office block in Lambeth from £694,000 to £33,000 per year, lowered 
liabilities on a gym in Covent Garden from £150,000 to £2,650 per year, and 
reduced the rates on nine light-industrial units in Shoreditch from £110,000 to 
£15,000 per year.

The number of properties receiving rates reductions under these schemes is 
unclear, but it is clearly costing local authorities millions of pounds. Global 
Guardians alone claims to have saved its clients £1.2m in reduced business 
rates. There are at least 37 guardian companies operating in the UK.

Whatever the losses to councils are, they are set to grow. Central government 
now explicitly permits landowners to save on business rates by reclassifying 
commercial property as residential. The Valuations Office Agency (VOA), a 
little-known arm of HMRC, rules on how much of a building should be taxed at 
business rates. In 2014 the VOA issued guidance that states: “in times of 
economic downturn … there is no reason why [a guardian] scheme should not 
succeed in reducing tax liability by getting a property banded as a dwelling or 
dwellings”.

Live in a stately home – just don't get too settled in
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/jul/22/live-stately-home-dont-get-settled>
Local authorities – who stand to lose the tax revenue – do not get a say in 
the reclassification of buildings. The coalition government changed policy so 
that converting a property from commercial to residential did not require local 
planning permission.

This irony is compounded by the fact that austerity budgets, imposed by 
central government, led to the closure of public services, which are now 
helping guardian companies to prosper. And as the guardian companies grow and 
engage new private clients, they will deprive councils of further revenue.

Later in November, Newbould Guardians handed back Tower Hamlets Council the 
building where Hope was living. All the guardians were required to leave, none 
was given a four-week notice period, and all continue to wait for the return of 
their deposits. Hope did not seek another guardian placement, and has been 
sleeping on friends’ sofas for almost a month. He says: “I’ve just been staying 
at friends’ places, trying to find somewhere not too expensive. London’s pretty 
difficult right now.”
 