
The experience of death, which had bound them together a quarter of a century 
ago, unexpectedly reunited them on an unseasonably warm January afternoon in 
2013. They made their way down East 32nd Street in Manhattan just after two 
o’clock, wending sedately towards the stark black doorway of the Cutting Room, 
a performance space hosting the memorial service for Spencer Cox, one of the 
country’s most recognisable Aids activists. Long before the glass doors swung 
open, a line stretched down the block. Taxis deposited luminaries from the 
worlds of science and medicine, of theatre, advertising, media, of activism, 
art, and academia, people from all over the United States, from Europe and 
Africa. Many of them were hollow-cheeked and balanced on canes or on one 
another, slowed by age or disease or a reluctance to re-enter the community of 
the grieving. Even the nimble among them wore haunted expressions. If you knew 
what to look for, you saw in their faces the burden of a shared past, the years 
and years of similar services. This was what survivors of the plague looked 
like.

The crowd swelled to 500. Some among them were adorned in mementos: faded 
protest buttons or T-shirts with militant slogans. This was the generation that 
fought Aids from the dawn of the global pandemic. Most had been members or 
supporters of the Aids Coalition to Unleash Power, or Act Up – the radical 
protest organisation that started inNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> City but went on to count 148 
chapters in 19 countries, with perhaps 10,000 members at its peak. The movement 
collapsed in the mid-1990s, when the advent of effective medicine finally 
staunched much of the dying. In the decades since then, it had seemed that the 
menace had receded, at least in America. But death convoked them one more time.

Few people personified the epidemic’s long history in America more than Cox. A 
college dropout, he was just 20 years old when he received his grim diagnosis. 
Given only a few months to live, he threw himself into Act Up, becoming a 
central player in the movement’s treatment and data committee, where patients 
and their advocates puzzled through the science of virology, chemistry, and 
immunology. Their insights won them audiences with researchers in the deepest 
corridors of science – audiences, then respect, then working partnerships; it 
was the first time patients had joined in the search for their own salvation.

Cox, a consummate networker, illustrated the developing science by submitting 
his own health complications to the scrutiny of reporters. In his drive to give 
the disease a face, he kept no aspect of his life with HIV offstage – not his 
rapid viral mutations, his enlarging lymph nodes, the humiliating and painful 
diarrhoea that regularly sidelined him, or the cruel complication that turned 
his left eye cloudy and useless.

Cox looked like a teenager, not able to grow a beard. But he displayed a 
researcher’s grasp of his own cellular tapestry

That was how I first met him. In the winter of 1988, I was reporting for the 
Village Voice. He brought me his latest laboratory results to help describe how 
certain experimental drugs were thought to work, and how, in fact, they 
uniformly failed. We met in a dark coffee shop late in the morning. Short and 
smooth faced with dark eyes and floppy black hair, he arrived Brando-style in 
industrial work boots, jeans tight as a sunburn, and a black leather bomber 
jacket over a white T-shirt – the uniform of Act Up. His youth disarmed me. He 
looked like a teenager, not yet able to grow a beard. But he displayed a 
researcher’s grasp of his own cellular tapestry and a facility for rendering 
complex immunological principles into everyday language. He was anything but 
self-pitying. Reaching into a canvas army surplus bag, he spun a sheaf of his 
own lab results across the table towards me, accompanied by a line from Bette 
Davis that was lost on me. Until shortly before then, Cox had learned much of 
what he knew from the movies, especially those of the 1940s and 50s, or the 
theatre, which had been the subject of his aborted education.

Over the ensuing years, he became a principal source for much of my Aids 
reporting for New York magazine, the New York Times, GQ, Newsweek, among 
others, and among the most effective treatment advocates in the field. But his 
seminal achievement came in the area of biostatistics. It was Cox who conceived 
the drug trial innovations that in record time helped to bring to market the 
therapies that stopped HIV from being an automatic death sentence. He claimed 
no credit for this, and until shortly before his death only a few insiders were 
aware that a self-taught person with Aids had made this history-changing 
contribution.

As movements go, the one Act Up spearheaded against HIV was unique. The virus 
made its traumatic appearance at different times across the globe – perhaps as 
early as 1920 in what is now known as the Democratic Republic of Congo. After 
sporadic cases through the 1970s, the viral epidemic was first reported in New 
York City and California. On 3 July 1981, Centers for Disease controlreleased a 
report <https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/1265> stating that symptoms now known 
to be typical Aids-related illnesses had been exhibited by 26 gay men. That 
same day, the New York Times reported 41 cases of Kaposi’s sarcoma – “a rare 
and often rapidly fatal form of cancer” – affecting 41 gay men in New York and 
California. Health authorities in the United Kingdom acknowledged the first 
cases there later that year, and outbreaks reached a handful of European and 
African nations in 1982. Today, no country has been spared, and 35 million are 
infected.

But throughout the plague years – when no effective treatment existed, and 
death was quite nearly guaranteed – New York City remained the epicentre of the 
disease, and America the main obstacle to research and treatment. It took two 
years for the city’s mayor, Ed Koch, to acknowledge its existence publicly. 
President Ronald Reagan waited six. But their words were hollow. Both continued 
to practise obfuscation, budgetary strangulation, and aggressive apathy even as 
the number of dead Americans passed 20,000, and 1.5 million more were believed 
to be infected. By the end of 1986, the city’s gay ghetto was a tinderbox. 
Along Christopher Street you could see the dazed look of the doomed, skeletons 
and their caregivers alike. There was not even a false-hope pill for doctors to 
prescribe. The estimates we heard were that half the gay men in New York were 
already infected, and for the rest of us it was simply a matter of time.

Then one morning in December, bus shelters and bank windows in a large part of 
Manhattan were covered with large, ominous posters, featuring a pink triangle 
floating against a black background. This was a potent reminder, not at all an 
obscure one, of how gays were marked by the Nazis in the camps. The global LGBT 
movement had long ago reclaimed the pink triangle to signify liberty. It was 
the symbol used for gay pride marches, on the covers of gay magazines, on 
T-shirts from gay cruises. But on the mysterious poster, the triangle had been 
inverted – no longer pointing downward like a yield sign, it was depicted there 
as a pyramid, invoking cosmic power and strength.

New York's 'queer health warrior': city official funds grassroots fight 
against HIV
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/07/new-york-city-hiv-aids-demetre-daskalakis-health-department>
Beneath this image was an arresting message in blocky white letters: 
SILENCE=DEATH.

Three thousand of these posters went up, from the East River to the Hudson and 
stretching north from the Village through Chelsea to Hell’s Kitchen and the 
Upper West Side, and as far south as SoHo – not just in the gay ghetto but in 
the outposts of the arts communities where allies might find meaning in the 
message. For a long time, those posters, produced by an anonymous collective, 
were all anybody talked about. Who was behind them? What did they mean? It was 
obvious that the posters were addressing those of us living inside the plague. 
Part of the message was easily discerned: on the current course, we were surely 
doomed. Less clear was what these posters were asking us to do. The slogan 
suggested a corollary. We knew what the opposite of death was. But what kind of 
non-silence was being called for?

The fuse was lit, and in early 1987 Act Up was formed following a fiery town 
meeting at Bailey House, a residence at the far end of the West Village where 
Christopher Street met the Hudson River. Conceived as a place for homeless 
people with Aids to live out their last days, it became the city’s LGBT 
community centre.

Calling itself “a diverse group of individuals united in anger and committed 
to direct action to end the Aids crisis,” Act Up adopted a deceptively simple 
demand: drugs into bodies. The New York group grew to several hundred members, 
drawn by word of mouth, and chapters quickly proliferated, including in London. 
Though most were people who were new to political action, the leaders of Act Up 
were shrewd and relentless, attacking the government and the pharmaceutical 
industry in mass demonstrations. It took them little time to realise the 
scientific problem would require leadership: which drugs into bodies? Even six 
years into the plague, nobody had a theory for beating Aids.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fact-up-aids-new-york-spencer-cox%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8cb7bcbbc4d4c05611658f9ac3e3115ceb499d4%2F0_0_2995_2794%2F2995.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20reinvention%20of%20radical%20protest%3A%20life%20on%20the%20frontline%20of%20the%20Aids%20epidemic%20%7C%20David%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fact-up-aids-new-york-spencer-cox%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20reinvention%20of%20radical%20protest%3A%20life%20on%20the%20frontline%20of%20the%20Aids%20epidemic%20%7C%20David%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fact-up-aids-new-york-spencer-cox%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8cb7bcbbc4d4c05611658f9ac3e3115ceb499d4%2F0_0_2995_2794%2F2995.jpg>
 The Aids campaigner Spencer Cox. Photograph: Walter Kurtz 
Spencer Cox joined a small committee to take on the science, hoping that by 
arming themselves with its language, they could engage scientists in meaningful 
dialogue. They passed among themselves used textbooks on immunology and 
virology, cellular biology and medical statistics (they also read Derrida, 
Foucault, and Genet). And with the gathering armies of Act Up activists 
standing outside the doors, they marched into the halls of science as unwanted 
– then begrudgingly accepted, then admired – collaborators. They called this 
their “inside/outside” strategy.

Act Up redrew the blueprint for activism in a media-saturated world, providing 
inspiration for groups such as Black Lives Matter, pro-democracy activists in 
Moscow, and even a new generation of Americans mounting daily protests against 
Donald Trump.

It revolutionised everything from the way drugs are researched to the way 
doctors interact with patients. Ultimately it played a key role in catalysing 
the development of the frontline drugs that, following a major breakthrough in 
1996, are now keeping 16 million people alive worldwide, returning to them the 
promise of a near-normal lifespan. Some had been just breaths away from their 
own deaths. But after a few weeks on treatment they rose from their hospital 
beds and, against all reasonable expectations, went home to resume an ordinary 
life. So dramatic was their resurrection that stupefied doctors began calling 
it the Lazarus effect.

And yet the pharmaceutical marvels Cox fought so hard to bring into existence 
failed him in the end. His infection proved to be resistant to many drug 
combinations. The country’s best doctors tinkered with “salvage” regimens 
specifically for him, accomplishing numerous barely-in-time rescues. For more 
than half his life Cox careened from one medical trauma to another, maintaining 
his trademark cheery facade, though over time he had grown weary. The last time 
I saw him he spoke of feeling run down. When he checked into the hospital a few 
weeks later, his immune system was severely compromised, putting him at risk of 
a host of fatal infections. Doctors diagnosed hypoglycemia and severe 
pneumonia. By the following Tuesday, at 44 years old but wracked and worn as an 
ageing guerrilla soldier, he died from complications of Aids.

So went the global Aids pandemic in its fourth decade. A precise number of 
deaths cannot be fixed, as the majority have occured in areas of sub-Saharan 
Africa seldom visited by doctors or census takers. At the time of Cox’s death, 
the body count was as high as 40 million – nearly twice the devastation of the 
bubonic plague that threatened humankind in the 14th century. In the US, the 
official count was 658,507 dead by the end of 2012 – an approximate figure, 
despite its ring of precision. In the early years especially, many people were 
declared dead from other causes, in order to spare the relatives from stigma, 
or because doctors mistook the symptoms. Some deceased went down as suicide 
statistics, having chosen pills or bullets or the high-rise window.

Though so much has changed, so much is still the same. Around the globe, two 
million people still die from Aids every year because the cost of the effective 
medicines – under a dollar a day – is prohibitive. In America, where the price 
is 50 times higher, a federal law has provided the treatment to indigent 
patients since 1987. This policy was adopted after intense lobbying by leaders 
of the gay community, but access to the drugs was still spotty, because a 
prescription was required and many patients could not afford the initial 
payment necessary to visit a doctor. The year Cox died, 13,711 other Americans 
died of Aids. As in 1981 – the epidemic’s very first year – most belonged to 
communities that were stigmatised, marginalised, feared, or hated. Cox had 
begun his journey through the plague as a gay man at a time when most Americans 
supported laws criminalising homosexuality. He finished his life entirely 
dependent upon social services for his day-to-day living, on probation for a 
criminal conviction after a descent into drug addiction.

Few of his old colleagues knew about Cox’s last days. The members of Act Up 
had drifted far apart. Even Cox’s old HIV-positive support group, the members 
of which had relied upon one another at the height of the crisis and vowed to 
be at one another’s side when the time came, scattered once Aids became a 
condition that could for the most part be managed. “When we realised we weren’t 
going to die,” said David Barr, who convened the support group, “we all got 
sick of each other.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fact-up-aids-new-york-spencer-cox%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c78355791f7139830bae46623e3ba0cf1efe994%2F0_0_5043_3989%2F5043.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20reinvention%20of%20radical%20protest%3A%20life%20on%20the%20frontline%20of%20the%20Aids%20epidemic%20%7C%20David%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fact-up-aids-new-york-spencer-cox%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20reinvention%20of%20radical%20protest%3A%20life%20on%20the%20frontline%20of%20the%20Aids%20epidemic%20%7C%20David%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fact-up-aids-new-york-spencer-cox%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c78355791f7139830bae46623e3ba0cf1efe994%2F0_0_5043_3989%2F5043.jpg>
 Act-Up protesters at the Gay and Lesbian Pride march in New York City, in 
1988. Photograph: The New York Historical Society/Getty Images 
That could not have been foreseen at the support group’s height. In the epic 
struggle for survival that consumed the plague years, these men – Barr, an 
attorney by training; Peter Staley, a former bond trader; Gregg Bordowitz, an 
experimental filmmaker; Derek Link, a former bookstore clerk; Mark Harrington, 
a film archivist – were among the recognised generals, the architects and 
administrators of the movement’s public health strategy. Successive 
presidential administrations sought their insights, and Nobel prize-winners 
adopted their critiques. Global pharmaceutical companies succumbed to their 
demands, at first out of fear of guerrilla protests, later out of respect for 
their minds. Embracing their reputations for arrogance and insolence, and their 
high profile, they had jokingly called themselves “the HIVIPs”. That anyone 
with HIV had a chance for an ordinary life was thanks to the work these men did.

Yet their extraordinary journeys had rendered them mostly unprepared for an 
ordinary life. In countless ways, survival proved as hard to adjust to as the 
plague itself. Many in the at-risk communities shared this paradox, whether or 
not they had been infected themselves. Nobody left those years untouched by 
what they had witnessed, not only the mass deaths – 100,000 lost in New York 
City alone – but also the foul truths that a microscopic virus had revealed 
about American culture: politicians who welcomed the plague as proof of God’s 
will, doctors who refused the victims medical care, ministers and often even 
parents who withheld all but the barest shudder of grief. Such betrayals would 
be impossible to forget.

The burden of memory was something Cox spoke about with deep insight. Sensing 
its toll on the mental health of survivors, he formed a new organisation to 
bring attention to these unanticipated problems. In our “hour of victory”, 
depression and isolation were growing. So was a syndrome labelled “survivor’s 
guilt”, an idea that bound the survivors more to the dead than to the living. 
Add to this the unrecognised health consequences common among those diagnosed 
in the 1980s – including rapid ageing issues, and an onslaught of end-of-life 
cancers and conditions. Cox saw all of this coming. He issued white papers and 
penned op-eds, but despite those efforts, he was unable to spark the interest 
of researchers or funders, much less of the generation of gay people who never 
experienced the plague. His new organisation withered, and he sank deep into 
his own depression and isolation.

Cox felt erased, his suffering – which had enlightened the public and 
challenged science – suddenly insignificant

I remained closer to him than most of his friends over his final year. In our 
last conversation, he bitterly complained that the community that inherited the 
advances he helped make, who lived integrated lives as gay Americans, who went 
on to fight for marriage equality and against discrimination in the military, 
whether or not they had been infected, had abandoned his generation and 
forgotten the events that had shaped them. He felt erased, his suffering – 
which in the past had enlightened the public and challenged science – suddenly 
insignificant. His new policy was to talk as little about his personal health 
as possible.

It wasn’t until after he died that I learned that Cox, a regular poster on the 
website Gawker, used the nom de plume “Shanghai Lil” to describe his agony in 
those final months. “Some days, I’m fine, and get around with no problem,” he 
wrote. “Other days, I’m curled in [the] foetal position in bed the whole day 
(and more often, several days), racked with pain the whole time. Some days I’m 
on the subway getting the stink-eye from some old or pregnant lady who clearly 
wants my seat, and can’t tell just by looking at me that I’m sitting because 
I’m on my way home from a doctor’s appointment, and if I stand for one more 
minute, I’m going to fall on the ground.”

When grieving friends were packing away Cox’s possessions after his death, 
they found a shelf of unopened medicine bottles and a drawer full of unfilled 
prescriptions. Apparently Cox had stopped taking his hard-won medicine, which 
accounted for his rapid demise. Angry speculation about this consumed his 
friends, but most agreed that it signalled a post-trauma syndrome unique to 
survivors. Many of the 500 people waiting outside the Cutting Room for Cox’s 
memorial service recognised that they shared the symptoms. In the tradition of 
the movement, people in line accorded it an irreverent name – Aids survivor 
syndrome, or Ass – and took it very seriously.

The doors of the Cutting Room swung open at precisely 2.30. The mood inside 
was mostly sombre and reflective, despite the efforts of the pair of drag 
queens – done up as Joan Crawford and Cox’s totem, Bette Davis – greeting 
mourners. A video played campy scenes from the old films that always ran 
through Cox’s mind and frequently spilled from his lips. The camp sensibility 
was lost on almost nobody except perhaps for Cox’s mother, Beverly, who had 
travelled up from Atlanta. She steadied herself on the arm of Nick Cox, 
Spencer’s only sibling, who is also gay. They took seats in the first row, 
alongside friends of the family. A mother’s grief was a thick wall around them.

When Larry Kramer arrived, one of the organisers took him by the arm. “Follow 
me, I have a seat for you,” he said, leading him through the crowd to the 
second row. Among the activists, Kramer alone was accorded this special 
treatment. No individual was more responsible for galvanising the Aids movement 
than Kramer. His plays, books, and op-ed pieces over the years pushed the gay 
community to demand that the world take notice. Now 77, he stayed as busy as 
ever, though Aids had slowed him noticeably and he too felt a touch of the 
survivor’s syndrome. That morning he had seriously considered not coming. What 
finally motivated him to take a cab uptown was a need to stand with his fellow 
survivors, for whom his emotions were boundless. “Love was always love, anytime 
and anyplace,” Gabriel García Márquez wrote, “but it was more solid the closer 
it came to death.”

Chip Duckett, a professional party planner who had organised the affair, 
walked to the stage to begin the service. “If there was ever any question that 
Spencer Cox would stop at absolutely nothing to be at the centre of attention” 
– he broke for over-eager laughter – “this is it.”

He passed the microphone to a succession of speakers, eventually introducing 
Mike Isbell, Cox’s partner for more than eight years. After their breakup, they 
had remained friends for many years, but as he had with so many people, Cox 
pushed Isbell away as his troubles grew. They had not spoken in some time. 
“Spencer often didn’t make it easy for people who loved him,” Isbell began. 
“The Aids epidemic traumatised Spencer, and I imagine this trauma stayed with 
him until the end. I recall being at dinner parties – some of you were probably 
there – or out to meals with friends, where someone would talk about ‘living 
with Aids’ and Spencer would immediately reply, ‘I’m not living with Aids, I’m 
dying of Aids!’ He’d say this in a tone of defiance, but I knew he was scared 
to death.”

Isbell spoke of how ironic it was that Spencer lost his way after the 
treatments came and the lifesaving mission came to an end. “He desperately 
wanted another life outside of Aids,” he said, looking around the overflowing 
room. “It seemed that in the ‘treatment era’, he was always in search of 
something but not finding it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fact-up-aids-new-york-spencer-cox%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F085b0f9e284e01edbc98b28bf7f1e68f8a5a4291%2F0_0_4371_2940%2F4371.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20reinvention%20of%20radical%20protest%3A%20life%20on%20the%20frontline%20of%20the%20Aids%20epidemic%20%7C%20David%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fact-up-aids-new-york-spencer-cox%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20reinvention%20of%20radical%20protest%3A%20life%20on%20the%20frontline%20of%20the%20Aids%20epidemic%20%7C%20David%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fact-up-aids-new-york-spencer-cox%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F085b0f9e284e01edbc98b28bf7f1e68f8a5a4291%2F0_0_4371_2940%2F4371.jpg>
 The author, Aids campaigner and gay rights activist Larry Kramer, founder of 
Act Up. Photograph: New York Times Co./Getty Images 
Peter Staley was the last to speak. He had been unable to sleep the previous 
few nights, struggling to find the words to make sense of Cox’s death and life. 
Staley was among a small group of people who had raced to Cox’s side when they 
had learned about the final hospitalisation. By the time he arrived, Cox was 
already in steep decline: he had gone into cardiac arrest three times, and his 
kidneys had failed. Staley stood outside the hospital door as medical personnel 
rushed in and out. Staley could hear the defibrillator lifting Cox’s chest off 
the table again and again. When Cox was stabilised, Staley and Tim Horn, 
another activist, were allowed inside briefly. Minutes later came another heart 
attack and another brutal resuscitation.

From his telephone, Staley posted a note to a private Facebook message group 
where he had been coordinating support for Cox. It landed in my phone with a 
vibration and a jingle, as I stood in the cold morning sun on Sixth Avenue, a 
mile and a half away: Spencer had died. I slumped, lightheaded and bereft, 
against a plate glass window.

The four weeks between then and the memorial service had done little to dim 
Staley’s pain. He placed the pages of his planned eulogy on the small lectern, 
squinting into the harsh stage lighting to study the faces before him.

He said: “I first met Spencer when he started showing up at Act Up meetings in 
the fall of 88. We were all so young. I was younger than most. But he was seven 
years my junior.”

It isn't lack of drugs preventing us eradicating Aids, but inequality | 
Lilianne Ploumen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/09/hiv-rates-eradicating-aids-inequality-social-stigma>
He caught his breath, remembering.

“It was a wonder watching him wow the FDA, and in meetings with the biggest 
names in Aids research, like Anthony Fauci. He earned the respect and the love 
of his fellow science geeks and those of us lower down the learning curve … 
Eight million on standardised regimens. Eight million lives saved. It’s a 
stunning legacy, and so bittersweet. How could that young gay man, confronted 
with his own demise, respond with a level of genius that affected millions of 
lives but failed to save his own?”

Staley spoke of Cox’s last failed burst of activism, and called on the 
weathered activists to snatch meaning from his death. “He spoke out forcefully 
about the depression and PTSD that the surviving generation of gay men from the 
plague years often suffered from, regardless of HIV status. While many of us, 
through luck or circumstance, have landed on our feet, all of us, in some way, 
have unprocessed grief, or guilt, or an overwhelming sense of abandonment from 
a community that turned its back on us and increasingly stigmatised us, all in 
an attempt to pretend that Aids wasn’t a problem any more.”

He scanned the vacuum-quiet room. “That is Spencer’s call to action,” he said, 
“and we should take it on.”

This is an edited extract from How to Survive a Plague, published by Picador 
on 1 December. There will be aspecial screening 
<http://www.cinemamuseum.org.uk/2016/international-aids-day-screening-of-how-to-survive-a-plague-2012/>
 on Thursday 1 December of David France’s film How to Survive a Plague at the 
Cinema Museum, London SE11, at 7pm; it will be introduced by Peter Staley.

• Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread 
<https://twitter.com/@gdnlongread>, or sign up to the long read weekly email 
here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/jul/20/sign-up-to-the-long-read-email>.
 