
In the beginning, they were known as die Dönermorde – the kebab murders. The 
victims had little in common, apart from immigrant backgrounds and the modest 
businesses they ran. The first to die was Enver Şimşek, a 38-year-old 
Turkish-German man who ran a flower-import company in the southern German town 
of Nuremberg. On 9 September 2000, he was shot inside his van by two gunmen, 
and died in hospital two days later.

The following June, in the same city, 49-year-old Abdurrahim Özüdoğru was 
killed by two bullets while helping out after hours in a tailor’s shop. Two 
weeks later, in Hamburg, 500km north, Süleyman Taşköprü, 31, was shot three 
times and died in his greengrocer’s shop. Two months later, in August 2001, 
greengrocer Habil Kılıç, 38, was shot twice in his shop in the Munich suburbs.

The crime scenes indicated that the killers favoured a particular killing 
method. Typically, several shots were fired at close range to the face. Most of 
the bullets were traced back to a single weapon, a silenced Česká CZ 83 pistol. 
Police assumed that the professional method of killing, as well as the intimate 
nature of the murders – when they died, the victims were presumably looking 
directly into the eyes of their killers – meant that the murders must have been 
carried out by Turkish gangsters fighting out turf battles. No hard evidence 
ever substantiated this theory. Nevertheless, the taskforce assigned by the 
German authorities to the case was given the name “Bosphorus”.

The Bosphorus team tried to persuade the widow of Enver Şimşek, the first 
victim, to say that her husband was connected to the Turkish mafia. They 
invented a false story of marital infidelity – that Şimşek was having an affair 
and had a secret family elsewhere – in the hope that her fury would lead her to 
reveal his non-existent underworld ties. She said nothing, but the police 
continued to waste time and resources attempting to prove the killings were the 
work of Turkish gangs.

Three years later, in 2004, Mehmet Turgut, 25, was murdered in a kebab shop in 
the city of Rostock on the Baltic coast. The next attack came later that year 
in the form of a bomb detonated in the Keupstrasse area of Cologne – a part of 
town popular among Turkish immigrants. Twenty-two people were wounded. In June 
2005, İsmail Yaşar, 50, was shot in his kebab shop in Nuremberg – the third 
murder in that city.

The following year, a 41-year-old Greek-German locksmith named Theodoros 
Boulgarides was killed in his newly opened shop in Munich. He was the first 
victim without a Turkish background. In 2006, a kiosk vendor named Mehmet 
Kubaşık, 39, was shot in the western city of Dortmund. Only two days after 
that, Halit Yozgat, 21, was killed while sitting behind his desk in the 
internet cafe he ran in the central German city of Kassel, 160km away.

The killings occurred in seven different cities across Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>, and were often separated by months 
or years. This made it difficult to connect them, though no one expected it to 
take until 2006 for the authorities to grasp how they were related.

From the very start, the investigation was riddled with basic errors and 
faulty assumptions. First, at least two of the murders took place at locations 
close to police stations, which should have made them unattractive sites for 
mafia murders. Then there was the problem of the two “Eastern-European-looking 
men” on bicycles whom eyewitnesses described leaving several of the crime 
scenes. More baffling still was a fact that surfaced during the investigation 
of Halit Yozgat’s killing: a German intelligence agent had been inside the cafe 
when the murder took place – something he later neglected to report.

In 2006, Alexander Horn, a young police profiler who prepared a report on the 
case for the Bosphorus team, began to cast doubts on the idea that the murders 
were connected to the Turkish mafia. In several cases, the victims were killed 
on days when they had broken with their daily routine, and were in places that 
no one could have predicted. It seemed more plausible that the victims had been 
chosen randomly by the killers, rather than singled out for vengeance by 
professional hitmen.

By using the same weapon, the killers also appeared to be drawing attention to 
their crimes and underlining the connection between them. Horn identified this 
as a typical tactic of far-right groups. Some officers were assigned to pursue 
this lead, but the focus of the investigation remained on the police’s initial 
theory. The media continued to refer to the killings asdie Dönermorde.

In November 2011, more than a decade after the first murder, DVDs containing a 
curious recording were dropped off at the offices of several German newspapers. 
They featured a doctored episode of the 1960s cartoon series, the Pink Panther, 
which appeared to be a message from the killers. For the first few minutes, the 
Pink Panther strolls around a city, where he sees a poster calling on citizens 
to “Stand with your country” and “Stand with your people”. Accompanied by the 
jaunty chords of Henry Mancini’s theme song, the character bombs a grocery 
store – then the video cuts to news footage of a shop that had been similarly 
attacked in Cologne in 2001.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fneo-nazi-murders-revealing-germanys-darkest-secrets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd12af824d68aa1b773b35f65f664e66276f81446%2F33_74_695_409%2F695.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20neo-Nazi%20murder%20trial%20revealing%20Germany's%20darkest%20secrets%20%7C%20Thomas%20Meaney%20and%20Saskia%20Sch%C3%A4fer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fneo-nazi-murders-revealing-germanys-darkest-secrets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20neo-Nazi%20murder%20trial%20revealing%20Germany%27s%20darkest%20secrets%20%7C%20Thomas%20Meaney%20and%20Saskia%20Sch%C3%A4fer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fneo-nazi-murders-revealing-germanys-darkest-secrets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd12af824d68aa1b773b35f65f664e66276f81446%2F33_74_695_409%2F695.jpg>
 A still from the doctored Pink Panther film that the far-right NSU sent to 
various German organisations, revealing their crimes. Photograph: Getty Images 
The Pink Panther lounges on his couch and watches television news clips about 
the so-calledDönermorde. The clips flickering on his cartoon television are of 
real news reports from the murder scenes, with gruesome photographs of the 
victims. The Pink Panther’s eyes glaze over with boredom at how long it takes 
the German public to realise who is behind them. With a huff of impatience, the 
narrator indicates a sign on the screen: the murders, the video suggests, are 
the work of a group calling itself the National Socialist Underground (NSU).

By the time the German press was puzzling over the Pink Panther video, the 
investigators’ focus had finally narrowed to a cluster of extreme rightwing 
groups operating in the country. The authorities had still not figured out how 
to find the killers, but their confusion was brought to an abrupt end on 4 
November 2011, when two men used bicycles in a bank robbery in Eisenach, a town 
in the central German state of Thuringia. After the robbery, they loaded the 
bikes into a rented camper van.

After a tip-off, police found the vehicle nearby. The two men had a vast 
stockpile of guns and ammunition inside the vehicle, but they did not try to 
fight their way out. Instead, according to investigators, they chose to kill 
themselves and set fire to the van. (An official report later concluded that 
one of the men had set the van alight, killed the other and then himself.)

The bodies were identified as those of Uwe Mundlos and Uwe Böhnhardt, two 
longstanding but hitherto unremarkable members of Germany’s enduring far-right 
scene, who had escaped the police with their friend Beate Zschäpe 13 years 
earlier. Even before identifying the corpses, investigators had found in their 
van the gun of a murdered police officer, Michèle Kiesewetter, whose killing 
five years earlier had never been solved.

Four days after the death of Mundlos and Böhnhardt, Zschäpe called the police 
in the Thuringian city of Jena. “Beate Zschäpe here,” she said. “I’m the one 
you’re here for.” The local authorities did not immediately grasp the 
significance of the call, even though more than a decade earlier the police had 
searched for all three in connection with a series of smaller crimes. German 
intelligence services had also been keeping tabs on the rightwing radical scene 
that Zschäpe was a part of, but had lost track of her, along with Mundlos and 
Böhnhardt when they went underground.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fneo-nazi-murders-revealing-germanys-darkest-secrets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdfd78af72ec67a4d7f759b56b70613ece0e9faf8%2F0_158_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20neo-Nazi%20murder%20trial%20revealing%20Germany's%20darkest%20secrets%20%7C%20Thomas%20Meaney%20and%20Saskia%20Sch%C3%A4fer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fneo-nazi-murders-revealing-germanys-darkest-secrets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20neo-Nazi%20murder%20trial%20revealing%20Germany%27s%20darkest%20secrets%20%7C%20Thomas%20Meaney%20and%20Saskia%20Sch%C3%A4fer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fneo-nazi-murders-revealing-germanys-darkest-secrets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdfd78af72ec67a4d7f759b56b70613ece0e9faf8%2F0_158_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 The burnt-out apartment that was once the home of Uwe Mundlos, Uwe Böhnhardt 
and Beate Zschäpe in Zwickau, Germany. Photograph: Marco Prosch/Getty Images 
The three had been living together in the town of Zwickau in an apartment that 
Zschäpe burned down after she learned of the deaths of Mundlos and Böhnhardt. 
When police later searched the scorched apartment, they found newspaper 
clippings about the murders of the Turkish-German businessmen, copies of the 
Pink Panther DVD, and the Česká pistol. This was early evidence that linked 
Mundlos, Böhnhardt, and Zschäpe to the murders that had first been investigated 
by the Bosphorus group.

On 6 May 2013, after two years of sensationalist speculation about the NSU in 
the German press,Zschäpe appeared 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/09/german-woman-on-trial-for-neo-nazi-murders-breaks-silence-over-attacks>
 for the first time in a Munich courtroom, charged with nine murders, an attack 
on police that included a murder, and two attempted murders by bombing. Four 
other men also stand accused of providing support to the NSU.

For the media, it was Bonnie and Clyde and Clyde – offering the salacious 
possibility of a murderous menage a trois

Rather than investigating how far-right killers could have operated undetected 
for so long, most of the German media opted for lurid coverage of the NSU, 
insisting that it consisted of only three people. Der Spiegel took the lead 
with a cover story dedicated to “ice-cold precision” of what it called the 
“Brown Army Faction”, with photographs that portrayed Zschäpe, Mundlos and 
Böhnhardt as natural-born killers, ready for their Hollywood close-ups. For the 
media, it was Bonnie and Clyde and Clyde – offering the salacious possibility 
of a murderous menage a trois. The German tabloid Bild ran the headline “The 
Devil has dressed up,” after Zschäpe appeared at the opening of the trial in a 
trouser-suit, jewellery and freshly dyed hair.

Zschäpe, now 41, has been sitting in court every weekday morning in Munich for 
the past three years, but she has revealed almost nothing – despite the urgent 
pleas of the families of the victims. While she claims that she now understands 
that Mundlos and Böhnhardt had conducted bank robberies and killings, she 
claims not to have known anything about their plans or activities while she 
lived with them. “They had become my family,” she said. Her plea is not guilty.

But the significance of the trial is far larger than what Zschäpe did or did 
not know about the killing spree. Germany’s sense of itself is also on trial. 
The findings of the prosecution suggest that Germany, a nation that prides 
itself on having confronted the dark recesses of its past with unique 
diligence, has left a thriving underground culture of rightwing extremism 
untouched.

Alternative für Deutschland – the first far-right populist party in Germany to 
enjoy sustained electoral success since the second world war – is only the 
latest in a series of symptoms of a widespread animosity toward the postwar 
liberal consensus. Darker currents of discontent are openly displayed on the 
internet – and on newsstands and television, where rightwing arguments have 
increasingly found favour.

The German government has been content to write off the NSU as a stand-alone 
terror cell of sociopaths – an unfortunate, but exceptional recrudescence of a 
political syndrome that the country has long since inoculated itself against. 
However, the NSU murder investigation and Zschäpe’s trial suggest that the 
organisation may have been carefully supported and protected by elements of the 
state itself.

The first thing to understand about the National Socialist Underground is that 
it was never really underground. Beate Zschäpe first met Uwe Mundlos when they 
were teenagers, at an after-school youth club in Jena, a renowned university 
town, perched on the slate mountains of the former East German state of 
Thuringia. It was 1991 and many East Germans were still feeling the shock of 
the fall of the Berlin Wall and acutely aware of how much they lacked in 
comparison to their western neighbours.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fneo-nazi-murders-revealing-germanys-darkest-secrets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe78b7622ae1c8127288951071156f9ac82ed209e%2F0_39_658_823%2F658.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20neo-Nazi%20murder%20trial%20revealing%20Germany's%20darkest%20secrets%20%7C%20Thomas%20Meaney%20and%20Saskia%20Sch%C3%A4fer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fneo-nazi-murders-revealing-germanys-darkest-secrets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20neo-Nazi%20murder%20trial%20revealing%20Germany%27s%20darkest%20secrets%20%7C%20Thomas%20Meaney%20and%20Saskia%20Sch%C3%A4fer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fneo-nazi-murders-revealing-germanys-darkest-secrets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe78b7622ae1c8127288951071156f9ac82ed209e%2F0_39_658_823%2F658.jpg>
 Uwe Mundlos. Photograph: Uncredited/AP 
The youth club is still there today, set in a strip of single-storey buildings 
on a quiet street with dramatic views of the surrounding valleys. When we 
visited the neighbourhood earlier this year, it seemed normal enough: 
well-maintained apartment blocks, playgrounds full of children, direct trams to 
the city centre. A new school was being built across the street from the youth 
club, with placards advertising places for the children of asylum seekers.

There were a few ominous signs, though, such as the German flags that were 
hanging from a few high-rise balconies. Anywhere else, they would be an 
innocuous show of patriotism, but in this part of Germany the flag can send a 
different signal. Thuringia has long been one of the heartlands of Germany’s 
radical right. In the 1990s, the youth club was a focal point in the emerging 
far-right scene. Former supervisors at the club remember turning a blind eye – 
for fear of losing the trust of the cool kids – when teenagers gave each other 
birthday party invitations with small swastikas on them. At her trial, Zschäpe 
described meeting and falling in love with Mundlos during her adolescence in 
the late 1980s. Then on her 19th birthday, she met and fell in love with 
Mundlos’s friend, Uwe Böhnhardt, who was even more committed to the rightwing 
extremist cause.

Before the fall of the Berlin Wall, to become a neo-Nazi in East Germany was a 
form of youthful rebellion

Before the fall of the Berlin Wall, to become a neo-Nazi in East Germany was a 
form of youthful rebellion against the state. What better way to antagonise 
communist elites than to parade around as their old enemy? After 1989 and the 
fall of the wall, neo-Nazism became a conduit for rage against the pieties – 
and the perceived humiliations and betrayals – of the newly unified Federal 
Republic of Germany. West Germany’s identity had long been bound up with its 
productivity and wealth in comparison to East Germany. Meanwhile, its 
politicians and intellectuals embraced what the country’s leading philosopher, 
Jürgen Habermas, called “Constitutional patriotism”. It would be an identity 
based on a shared commitment to ideas rather than one founded on blood. 

This new West German identity was something Zschäpe, Mundlos and Böhnhardt 
fiercely rejected. But there was nothing in their backgrounds that made them 
particularly susceptible to rightwing extremism. Zschäpe’s childhood does not 
appear to have been especially tumultuous, though she had a troubled 
relationship with her mother. (Zschäpe never met her biological father, who was 
Romanian.) The backgrounds of the two men are even further from the stereotype 
of the backward, resentful easterner. Böhnhardt’s father worked as an engineer 
and his mother as a teacher; Mundlos’s father was an IT professor at the Jena 
University of Applied Sciences. The parents treated their children’s developing 
interest in Nazi history and knick-knacks as a passing phase. (Although 
Zschäpe’s mother later reported that she was concerned when she heard that 
Mundlos’s grandfather collected Nazi curios.)
 Uwe Böhnhardt. Photograph: Uncredited/AP 
“Their experience was far from unique,” said Martin Debes, a journalist for 
the Thüringer Allgemeine newspaper, who grew up in Jena at the same time as 
Zschäpe and the two Uwes. “But in the youth scene at the time you often had to 
choose: become a neo-Nazi or a punk.”

Zschäpe started out as a punk, joining a nominally leftwing group known as 
“the Ticks” that got into fights with local neo-Nazis. But at the Jena youth 
club Mundlos and Böhnhardt encouraged her to switch sides, and in a few years 
the three of them had joined the flourishing neo-Nazi scene in the newly 
reunified Germany. They devoted weekends to battling leftwing punks in the 
streets and attending concerts of far-right bands such as Türkenjäger (“Turk 
hunter”) and Endsieg (“Final Victory”). Some of their early stunts included 
touring the former grounds of Buchenwald while dressed up in self-tailored SS 
uniforms, and inventing a board game called “Pogromly”, which rewarded players 
for sending as many Jews as possible to concentration camps.

The fall of the Berlin Wall offered East German neo-Nazis a new focus for 
their rage. As Turkish-Germans and Germans of other backgrounds began moving 
into the east, there were flare-ups and violence. Kebab stalls that sprung up 
in the tiniest towns of Thuringia became regular targets for young neo-Nazis. 
In September 1991, rightwing extremists attacked housing facilities for asylum 
seekers in Hoyerswerda, a town 200km east of Jena in the state of Saxony. The 
attacks were the start of a new brand of violence throughout Germany. During a 
three-day riot in the city of Rostock on the Baltic coast in August 1992, 
several thousand people surrounded a high-rise asylum shelter and watched while 
neo-Nazis threw Molotov cocktails through the windows. The building’s 
Vietnamese and Roma inhabitants barely survived by fleeing to the roof, and 
passing their babies up the stairs along a human chain.

The attacks were not confined to the former East Germany. On the night of 22 
November 1992, neo-Nazis set fire to two houses of Turkish families in Mölln, a 
small town in the north-western state of Schleswig-Holstein. Two girls and a 
51-year-old woman died in the flames. Nine others were seriously injured. In 
1993, skinheads in Solingen, a town outside Cologne, set fire to the home of a 
Turkish family, killing five people, including three children.

This violence seemed senseless and random, but it was effective. All the major 
political parties of the time bowed to pressure applied by rightwing 
extremists. Helmut Kohl’s conservative coalition government called for new 
limits on immigration. In 1992 and 1993, his expanded coalition, with support 
from the Social Democratic party, changed the German constitution to limit the 
country’s obligation to admit asylum seekers. The far-right rejoiced at finding 
its arguments winning the day on mainstream TV.

For Zschäpe, Mundlos and Böhnhardt this was apparently not enough. After their 
early years of small-time crime, investigators claim that they began trying to 
build homemade bombs. In January 1998 the police, tipped off by an anonymous 
source, searched Böhnhardt’s garage in Jena and discovered 1.4kg of TNT – 
enough to destroy a car. By the time an arrest warrant was issued later that 
day, Böhnhardt had fled Jena. Together with Zschäpe and Mundlos, he later hid 
in the city of Zwickau, 80km to the east.

They allegedly conducted the longest, and most intricate, political killing 
spree in postwar German history

During their decade on the run, Zschäpe, Böhnhardt and Mundlos seem to have 
worked odd jobs and in shops that sold Nazi paraphernalia under the counter. At 
the trial, Zschäpe has been accused of helping the two men supplement their 
income with a series of bank robberies, which the three friends carried out 
together in a number of towns in Thuringia and Mecklenburg-West-Pomerania 
between 1999 and 2011. Sometimes they entered wearing gorilla masks, sometimes 
masks from the movie Scream. Their trusted escape method was allegedly to ride 
bicycles to a nearby rented van, in which they waited until the search for them 
had ended. The German police managed to link the robberies to each other, but 
not to Zschäpe, Böhnhardt and Mundlos.

The three fugitives showed few signs of concern about their possible capture. 
They used fake IDs and rented their apartment under aliases, but took few 
precautions beyond that. Neighbours fed their cats when they were away, and it 
appears that friends visited each week when they were home, sometimes bringing 
their children. With patience and an almost languid sense of impunity, Zschäpe 
and the two Uwes allegedly conducted the longest, and most intricate, political 
killing spree in postwar German history.

When we visited the Munich courtroom earlier this year, all eyes were trained 
on Zschäpe, who stared at her laptop and seemed more worried about running out 
of the crate of coconut water she had brought to the trial than anything that 
might happen there. With her neat long hair and signature trouser-suit, she 
appeared deeply at ease, smiling like a professional model for a brief press 
photo session, before she settled back among the lawyers, from whom she is 
almost indistinguishable.

In the press and visitors’ spectator booth, set behind glass above the 
courtroom, conspiracy-theorists, bloggers, newspaper reporters, and law 
students studying the trial all sit together – alongside a loyal Zschäpe 
groupie. (The most notorious of Zschäpe’s fans, Anders Breivik, the 
extreme-rightwing Norwegian terrorist, sent her a letter of solidarity from 
prison in 2012.)

Zschäpe originally seems to have chosen her defence lawyers on the basis of 
their martial-sounding surnames: Sturm (“Storm”), Stahl (“Steel”), and Heer 
(“Army”), but she soon turned against them. Four years into the trial, she has 
finally found a young lawyer she likes. The two whisper and smile during the 
court proceedings. The main judge at the trial, Manfred Götzl, has ordered the 
state lawyers she fired to remain in the courtroom because their departure 
could be grounds for an appeal: he wants to fend off any claim by Zschäpe that 
her current lawyer does not have full knowledge of the trial. Sturm, Stahl, and 
Heer sit a few chairs down from Zschäpe in what appears a state of permanent 
listlessness. Behind Zschäpe sits Ralf Wohlleben, a neo-Nazi accused of 
providing Böhnhardt and Mundlos with the Česká pistol used in the murders. His 
lawyer, Nicole Schneiders, first appeared in police reports on the extreme 
right when she was just 16 years old. The members of the extreme-right have 
taken up different, coordinated positions in the Munich courtroom. The lawyers 
and the accused sit side by side, and greet each other with kisses on the cheek.

The prosecution has decided to treat Zschäpe’s case strictly as a murder 
trial. She is essentially charged with being the last surviving member of the 
group of three who are assumed to be responsible for the killings. The task of 
the trial, in this view, is simply to clarify whether – and to what degree – 
she was involved with the killings. There has been little effort on the part of 
the investigators and prosecutors to determine whether other rightwing 
extremists were involved.

When one considers the level of local knowledge required to carry out these 
murders in several different German states – the detailed knowledge of getaway 
routes at the various crime scenes, the massive stockpile of weapons, the 
professionally forged fake IDs, not to mention the cost of these operations – 
the question of how the NSU could have operated without the support of a much 
larger network of sympathisers is unavoidable. Yet the prosecution appears at 
pains not to address this question.

Still, despite its slow-moving procedures and its limited scope, the 
proceedings have provided a succession of strange revelations about the 
workings of the German state intelligence agency, known as the BfV, and its 
state-level branches, known as the LfV, which have led to allegations that 
elements within the agency either turned a blind eye to the NSU murders or 
supported the group’s aims.

In summer 2013, Andreas Temme, the Hessian LfV agent who was inside Halit 
Yozgat’s internet cafe in Kassel when Yozgat was murdered, testified that he 
did not hear the silenced shots, nor did he notice the sprinkles of blood on 
the counter where he placed his payment in coins when he left. Spectators of 
the Munich trial agree that one of the most searing moments of the trial came 
when Yozgat’s father described how he found his dying son. It was impossible, 
he said, that Temme could have left the cafe without seeing the dead body 
behind the counter. “Why did you kill my son? What did he do to you?” he 
shouted at Zschäpe and Wohlleben in the courtroom.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fneo-nazi-murders-revealing-germanys-darkest-secrets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13ca13af0072e2facbb7c744797f1f48304d0442%2F0_169_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20neo-Nazi%20murder%20trial%20revealing%20Germany's%20darkest%20secrets%20%7C%20Thomas%20Meaney%20and%20Saskia%20Sch%C3%A4fer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fneo-nazi-murders-revealing-germanys-darkest-secrets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20neo-Nazi%20murder%20trial%20revealing%20Germany%27s%20darkest%20secrets%20%7C%20Thomas%20Meaney%20and%20Saskia%20Sch%C3%A4fer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fneo-nazi-murders-revealing-germanys-darkest-secrets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13ca13af0072e2facbb7c744797f1f48304d0442%2F0_169_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 The Česká pistol allegedly used by the Neo-Nazi gang to commit multiple 
murders. Photograph: Alex Grimm/Getty Images 
Temme, who denies any involvement, said that it was simply a coincidence he 
was in the cafe at the time of the murder and that he had been surfing dating 
websites. (“I was in the wrong place at the wrong time,” he said in an 
interview on German public television in July 2012.) When the police rounded up 
all those who were present at the scene of the murder, Temme did not come 
forward. After he was tracked down, Temme claimed that he did not volunteer any 
information because he was worried that his wife would discover his online 
proclivities. Yozgat’s father won approving nods from many in the audience at 
the trial when he declared: “We all know this man is lying.”

One of the prosecution’s witnesses, a policeman from the village where Temme 
grew up, testified that in his youth, Temme was known as “Little Adolf”. When 
the local police tried to dig deeper into allegations that Temme had a personal 
library of Nazi literature and weapons manuals, the interior minister of the 
state of Hesse, Volker Bouffier, shielded him from further investigations and 
from the press. Bouffier, who is now the prime minister of Hesse, argued at the 
time that it was necessary to protect Temme in order to “guarantee the 
protection of undercover agents”. The brazenness of Temme’s testimony ignited 
anger in the German press about the prerogatives of its intelligence agencies, 
but it has since mostly subsided. Temme has meanwhile retired from the LfV, but 
continues to draw his pension.

Germany’s domestic intelligence service is charged with protecting the 
national constitution – from both foreign threats and domestic extremism on the 
left and right. But its record with regard to the latter has not always been 
stellar. In recent decades, it has tended to use paid informants who are 
already deeply entrenched in extremist milieus.

In the case of the country’s far-right scene – whose membership the BfV 
estimates to number 23,850 as of last year – these informants are not simply 
turncoats who make some money on the side by giving tips to police. Instead, 
they are lavishly groomed sources who are developed over long periods, promised 
legal protection, and plied with funds that elevate their status in the 
movement.

By distributing cash to their informants, the BfV has hoped to create a paper 
trail that maps out connections between the far right across Germany. But in 
practice, this dispersal of money has also nurtured rightwing groups, providing 
them with a level of funding they would not have been able to obtain from their 
genuine followers. “There’s no question [that the] BfV overdid the financing of 
informants during the early 1990s,” said Hajo Funke, a professor of politics at 
the Free University of Berlin, who is the author of a book on the NSU.

Before he was imprisoned in 2014, Tino Brandt, the man who first welcomed 
Zschäpe, Böhnhardt and Mundlos into the rightwing extremist scene in Jena, 
openly boasted to German public television that the state had given him 200,000 
Deutsche Marks (roughly €100,000) in the early 1990s to print flyers and 
organise concerts and demonstrations. For his fellow neo-Nazis in Thuringia, 
Brandt’s work as a paid informant was an open secret. He never gave the state 
useful information, but his funds made organisational growth and the 
recruitment of young neo-Nazis possible. (Brandt himself was never tried for 
his connections to the NSU and far-right violence, but was sentenced to 
five-and-a-half-years in prison on 66 counts of child sexual abuse and child 
prostitution.)

In March, Judge Götzl took an hour to explain to the courtroom that the task 
of the NSU trial is simply to judge the accused, not to investigate what German 
intelligence agents knew or did. The following month, Götzl rejected a petition 
from lawyers representing the victims’ families to introduce a witness who was 
a BfV informant in Zwickau at the time of the first killings, when he almost 
certainly knew the members of the NSU.

Ralf Marschner, an avowed neo-Nazi and a former singer in a skinhead band 
called West-Saxon Riff-Raff, was a paid informant for the BfV between 2000 and 
2002. During these years, he lived around the corner from Zschäpe, Mundlos and 
Böhnhardt. “Marschner was the main Neo-Nazi in Zwickau, which is a relatively 
small town,” says Dirk Laabs, an expert on the NSU.

But when a government commission that was reviewing the NSU investigation 
tried to obtain Marschner’s file, it was told by a public prosecutor in Saxony 
that “a flood has destroyed the file”. According to Funke, Marschner is one of 
the most important witnesses, because he “proves that the BfV almost certainly 
would have known about the two Uwes and Beate, either directly through 
Marschner, or by monitoring his activities”. (Marschner, who is currently 
living in Switzerland, has refused to comment on the case to the press.)

Earlier this year, the Munich courtroom learned that when Marschner was 
working as a paid informant for the BfV, he probably employed Mundlos in his 
construction company. It also seems likely that Zschäpe worked in his clothing 
shop, Heaven and Hell, which sold Nazi T-shirts and paraphernalia under the 
counter. The exact nature of Zschäpe’s work for Marschner remains remarkably 
unclear. These connections make Marschner a critical witness for the 
prosecution. And yet Judge Götzl has dismissed the effort to explore his role, 
describing his alleged employment of two NSU members as “irrelevant”.

According to Bilgin Ayata, a professor of political sociology at the 
University of Basel, who has researched the case and the trial, these omissions 
are typical of the state’s unwillingness to examine the more disturbing 
implications of the NSU murders. “Instead of acknowledging the institutional 
racism that the case reveals,” Ayata said, “the state has presented its 
investigations as a series of unfortunate mishaps”.

Zschäpe’s trial is the most significant courtroom showdown in Germany since 
the trial of theBaader-Meinhof gang 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/6314559.stm> – a radical-left 
terrorist group also known as the Red Army Faction, who targeted US military 
installations, conservative media outlets and German corporations in the 1970s. 
Both cases go to the heart of Germany’s identity in postwar Europe. In the 
Baader-Meinhof case, the question was whether German youth were willing to be 
integrated into western capitalism, and whether the German state would lapse 
back into a form of authoritarianism. In the Zschäpe trial, it is a question of 
how far Germany really is from becoming a nation of immigrants and how far the 
values of tolerance have penetrated society.

“The Red Army Faction wanted to bring down the German state,” said Hajo Funke. 
“The difference this time is that the National Socialist Underground got some 
help from part of the state.”

The head of the BfV, Heinz Fromm, resigned in 2012 while facing public 
pressure over the mishandling of the NSU investigation, but he never mentioned 
the reason for stepping down, nor has the BfV admitted any improprieties.

Instead, BfV officials have strenuously guarded their sources and intelligence 
from both the normal police and from a special federal commission that was 
established in 2012 to probe lapses in the NSU investigation. But critics of 
the federal commission allege that it has also failed to dig deeper into the 
inconsistencies in the case. “The Federal Examination Commission has chosen not 
to question the claim that the NSU was confined to three people,” said Bilgin 
Ayata.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fneo-nazi-murders-revealing-germanys-darkest-secrets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0b7206fd8a16b1048002e13c0faf059a8508d3b%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20neo-Nazi%20murder%20trial%20revealing%20Germany's%20darkest%20secrets%20%7C%20Thomas%20Meaney%20and%20Saskia%20Sch%C3%A4fer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fneo-nazi-murders-revealing-germanys-darkest-secrets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20neo-Nazi%20murder%20trial%20revealing%20Germany%27s%20darkest%20secrets%20%7C%20Thomas%20Meaney%20and%20Saskia%20Sch%C3%A4fer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fneo-nazi-murders-revealing-germanys-darkest-secrets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0b7206fd8a16b1048002e13c0faf059a8508d3b%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 A rally in Berlin, in 2012, to commemorate the murder victims of the neo-Nazi 
group. Photograph: Carsten Koall/Getty Images 
The BfV has long been regarded as right-leaning: it was founded after the 
second world war by the Americans, who welcomed Nazis and former Gestapo 
members into its ranks. Its mission was to spy on and root out the KPD, as the 
German communist party was known, as well as members of the Social Democratic 
party. The first head of the organisation, Otto John, defected to East Germany 
in 1954, citing the overwhelming number of Nazis in the organisation. His 
successor was Hubert Schrübbers, a former member of the SS. Under Schrübbers’ 
supervision, the German communist party was finally banned in 1956, based on 
allegedly incriminating materials turned up by the BfV. Major German political 
parties – such as the Left party and the Greens – have long called for the 
abolition of the BfV.

For now, neither police nor trial investigators have the right to subpoena BfV 
documents that may contain vital evidence about the NSU killings.

There are still many mysteries about the true extent of the seven-year killing 
spree – most notably the circumstances of the final murder, of the police 
officer Michèle Kiesewetter, which did not fit the pattern of the others. The 
prosecution has accused Mundlos and Böhnhardt of attacking two police officers 
on duty in the town of Heilbronn in April 2007: Kiesewetter, age 22, was killed 
instantly; her duty-partner survived but has no memory of the attack.

A nightly news report about the murder scene appears at the end of the Pink 
Panther video, and traces of Kiesewetter’s DNA were found among the charred 
remains of the Zwickau apartment that Zschäpe set on fire. But a different type 
of gun was used for Kiesewetter’s murder, and witnesses at the scene describe 
more than two people running away from the scene with blood on their clothes. 
Local police have declared these witnesses unreliable, and stated that only 
Mundlos and Böhnhardt were involved in the murder. But their reason for killing 
a police officer remains unknown, and the possible presence of others at the 
crime scene has further stoked fears that the NSU was not an organisation of 
only three people.

“For the commissions and for the trial, the [size of the] NSU is a fait 
accompli,” Ayata said. “They ignore the questions that nag at the migrant 
communities in Germany: Are they still here? Are they still killing?”

At a public commemoration of the victims of the NSU murders at the Konzerthaus 
Berlin in 2012, Angela Merkel asked for forgiveness on behalf of the 
investigators who had insisted that the victims were entangled in the Turkish 
mafia. “As chancellor, I will do everything I can to clear up the murders and 
uncover the accomplices and supporters, and bring all of the perpetrators to 
justice,” she said. But her government is hesitant to probe more deeply into 
the more troubling elements of the case, and of the rightwing extremist scene 
that continues to flourish in Germany.

More than three years into the trial the judges seem bored; they appear to 
have lost interest in key witnesses

There is a telling contrast between the laxness of Zschäpe’s trial and the 
professionalism of the concurrent prosecution of the so-called “last” Nazi, 
Reinhold Hanning, a 94-year-old former Auschwitz guard. Hanning’s trial was 
swiftly wrapped up in four months, and he was sentenced to five years in prison 
for “facilitating slaughter” at the extermination camp. It seems that Germany 
may be more comfortable trying former Nazis than current ones. More than three 
years into Zschäpe’s trial, the panel of judges now seems bored; they take 
frequent recesses and appear to have lost interest in key witnesses.

Where German officials have feared to tread, dramatists have rushed in. The 
NSU murders have already been the subject of several films and plays, including 
a miniseries that aired on German public television, and a play by the Austrian 
Nobel laureate Elfriede Jelinek.

But theatrical versions of the trial cannot capture the complexity of the 
case, which seems impossible for anyone to fully grasp – especially when so 
much information still remains secret. Even the numerous fact-finding 
commissions established to review the botched investigation have had trouble 
assembling an accurate version of events. Most of the commissions have no 
authority to visit and search the BfV files. Instead they request files of 
interest, which the BfV delivers abridged and redacted. “We haven’t been 
granted the power to seize their files,” said Petra Pau, a parliamentarian for 
the Left party and a member of the federal commission looking into the case. 
“Not to mention the files they may have already shredded.”

One core problem is that too many expectations have been heaped on a trial 
that cannot bear them all. The victims’ families want justice and redemption, 
the judge wants no loose ends that could be grounds for a retrial, migrant 
communities want to know if they are safe from future attacks and terrorism, 
and political activists want to know whether the BfV was involved in a cover-up.

New pressure from Merkel’s government would be necessary to force BfV 
operatives to cooperate as witnesses. But there have been no steps in this 
direction. Meanwhile, the refugee crisis has fuelled Alternative für 
Deutschland’s rise to double digits in the polls, while hostility towards 
foreigners has become openly acceptable.

The German ministry of the interior counted around 14,000 far-right-related 
crimes in 2015, about 30% more than in the previous year. By April 2016, police 
counted three attacks per day against housing facilities for asylum seekers. 
Last year, a small group – one woman and two men – threw a molotov cocktail 
into a Zimbabwean child’s bedroom at an asylum centre in Lower Saxony. The 
savage anti-immigrant climate of the 1990s is making a return.

“The National Socialist Underground still has members out there,” said Petra 
Pau. “The question is only how many.”

• Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread 
<https://twitter.com/@gdnlongread>, or sign up to the long read weekly email 
here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/jul/20/sign-up-to-the-long-read-email>.

• This article was amended on 16 December 2016 to correct the distance from 
Jena to Zwickau. An earlier version of this piece also stated that Andreas 
Temme was a BfV agent. He was, in fact, an LfV agent. The article has also been 
amended to correct the spelling of Ralf Marschner’s name, to state that Zschäpe 
called the police four (rather than two) days after the deaths of Mundlos and 
Böhnhardt, and to make clear that Zschäpe first appeared in court on 6 May 
2013, not on 11 April 2013 when the trial itself began.
 