
Dominic Ongwen’s trial, which begins in earnest on Monday, is one of the 
grimmest and most morally complex that the international criminal court has 
tackled. The body exists to try the worst offences: genocide, crimes against 
humanity and war crimes. It is not the horrifying list of charges, including 
rape and murder, that makes Mr Ongwen’s case unusual, but that he is believed 
to be the first former child abductee to be tried. Seized as a 10-year-old, and 
forced into violence, the former commander of the notorious Lord’s Resistance 
Armyhas denied all offences 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/06/dominic-ongwen-the-hague-trial-war-crimes-lra-uganda>
 and insists that he is the victim.

His lawyers have indicated that duress may form part of his defence; others 
say he must not avoid justice for acts committed as an adult, but acknowledge 
that his experiencemay be relevant 
<https://www.child-soldiers.org/news/a-former-child-soldier-at-the-icc> in 
mitigation of a sentence. The judges must not only ascertain the evidence 
against the 40-year-old, but also consider what he first endured and the mind 
control techniques and sheer brutality that the LRA has used on the30,000 to 
60,000 children 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2016/12/05/questions-and-answers-lra-commander-dominic-ongwen-and-icc#Q1>
 it has abducted over its history. The more pressing issue highlighted by the 
trial is what to do about the tens and perhaps hundreds of thousands of 
children still associated with armed forces and armed groups worldwide, used as 
combatants and in other roles, including as porters and spies.

Occasional pieces of good news, such as the release of 145 child soldiers 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-37775852> by rebel groups in South 
Sudan last autumn, are dwarfed by the scale of the problem: according to 
Unicef, government and opposition forces there have taken on16,000 children  
<https://www.unicef.org/media/media_92960.html>over the last three years. In 
the worst cases, children not only face horrific abuse and risk death – at the 
hands of rival forces or their captors – but, if they escape, are traumatised 
and poorly equipped to re-enter society even if peace prevails.

Campaigners say a first step would be action at home, agreeing to what the NGO 
Child Soldiers International calls the “straight-18 
<https://www.child-soldiers.org/child-recruitment>” standard, a minimum 
enlistment age of 18 for state forces. Two-thirds of states worldwide have done 
so (even if they don’t always abide by their own rules) yet the US permits 
recruitment from 17 and the UK from 16, in both cases dependent on parental 
consent and with the caveat that under-18s cannot be sent to war. This is 
unquestionably different from beating and drugging an 11-year-old until they 
will fight for you. But it is still wrong. A state that stops 16-year-olds from 
seeing the most violent films should not begin training them to kill. A 
“straight-18” rule would send a clear message that child soldiers are 
unacceptable.

Secondly, governments can exert pressure on others; the US, Belgium and 
Switzerland have tied military aid to ending child recruitment. A “national 
interest” clause means the American law is honoured more in the waiver than the 
observance. But Human Rights Watch believes its use prompted the government of 
theDemocratic Republic of the Congo 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2016/09/29/president-obama-fails-child-soldiers> to 
largely end the recruitment of child soldiers, demonstrating why the US should 
make better use of it and others should consider similar legislation.

Persuading armed groups is a harder task, and in some cases no doubt 
impossible. Islamic Stateforces young children into violence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/19/isis-sending-children-die-unprecedented-rate-report-child-soldiers>
 for propaganda as well as for military purposes and to brutalise a generation. 
But some groups have proved willing to change because they seek international 
recognition, or fear they could one day face legal repercussions – with 
commanders even asking NGO staff if they could “end up in the Hague like 
[Thomas] Lubanga”,convicted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2012/jul/10/icc-sentences-thomas-lubanga-14-years>
 of recruiting children in 2012.

Thirdly, existing victims must not be written off. Rehabilitation and 
reintegration programmes are often scarce, seriously under-resourced, 
short-term and uncoordinated. They do not come cheap: in the DRC, economic and 
professional reintegration of each child soldier costs an estimated $1,000 a 
year. Yet abandoning traumatised and stigmatised children, often without 
education and family ties, is vastly more costly. They may hurt themselves and 
others in civilian life. They may return to armed groups or forces because they 
lack an alternative. They may drag others in; the charges against Mr Ongwen 
include recruiting and using children in combat.

The problem cannot be seen in isolation. Peace is the best protection for 
children. But helping to reintegrate those who have already been exploited is 
crucial to the long-term prospects for peace and security in their societies.
 