
The classrooms and hallways of Farmingdale High in Long Island were deserted 
on the morning of Saturday 19 August 2001, when a van pulled into the school’s 
parking lot. Turning off the engine, the driver – a tall man in his late 30s – 
stepped out into the warm summer sun. He cast a sweeping gaze upon the 
institution he had graduated from two decades earlier.

Whatever nostalgia he might have felt for his old school was tinged with 
bitterness. It was here that he had suffered some of life’s early humiliations: 
taunted by classmates for his apparent dimwittedness; held in low esteem by his 
teachers. If they remembered him at all, they would remember him as the boy who 
had difficulty reading. The boy who was so bad with spellings. His bearish 
frame may have protected him from physical bullying, but combined with his 
severe dyslexia and his social awkwardness, it had also cemented his image as a 
dolt.

That image had stuck with him, despite a successful career in US intelligence, 
where he had been given access to some of the country’s most valued secrets. 
Being underestimated – by family, classmates and colleagues – had been the 
theme of his life, a curse he had borne silently since childhood. But for the 
mission he had now embarked upon, it was a blessing. None of his co-workers or 
managers in the intelligence community could have imagined that he of all 
people was capable of masterminding a complex espionage plot.

From the parking lot, he walked to the edge of the school grounds. Squeezing 
through a hole in the barbed wire fence next to the handball courts, he stepped 
into a wooded area that separated the nearby highway from the school perimeter. 
Walking a few yards, he stopped by a tree and dug a hole in the ground. He took 
a laminated list of phone numbers out of his pocket and buried it there before 
walking back to his van, confident that nobody had seen him.

He had already pulled off what was then the biggest heist of classified 
information in the history of American espionage. In just a few days, he hoped 
to execute the final step of a meticulous plan to exchange those secrets for 
millions of dollars. If he succeeded, he would have enough money to pay off the 
mortgages of his brothers and sisters, settle his personal debts and secure the 
financial future of his children.

With fortune, he imagined, respect would follow. Those who had known him would 
no longer doubt his intelligence. Once and for all, he would shake off the 
image that had dogged him since childhood.

One Monday morning in December 2000, FBI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> Special Agent Steven Carr hurried out 
of his cubicle at the bureau’s Washington DC field office and bounded down two 
flights of stairs to pick up a package that had just arrived by FedEx from the 
FBI’s office in New York. Carr was 38, thoughtful and intense, meticulous in 
his work.

Since he joined the FBI in 1995, he had played a supporting role in a series 
of high-profile espionage cases, but like most agents starting out in their 
careers, Carr was keen to lead a high-stakes investigation himself. A devout 
Catholic, Carr would sometimes bow his head in church and say a silent prayer 
requesting divine assistance in landing a good case. That’s why he had 
responded so quickly when his squad supervisor had asked him to pick up the 
package that morning. “Whatever it is, it’s yours,” she had said.

Carr raced back to his desk and laid out the contents of the package in front 
of him: a sheaf of papers running into a few dozen pages. They were from three 
envelopes that had been handed to the FBI by a confidential informant at the 
Libyan consulate in New York. The envelopes had been individually mailed to the 
consulate by an unknown sender.

Breathlessly, Carr thumbed through the sheets. Based on directions sent from 
New York, he was able to sort the papers into three sets, corresponding to the 
three envelopes. All three had an identical cover sheet, at the top of which 
was a warning in all caps. “THIS LETTER CONTAINS SENSITIVE INFORMATION.” Below, 
it read, in part:

This letter is confidential and directed to your President or Intelligence 
Chief. Please pass this letter via diplomatic pouch and do not discuss the 
existence of this letter in your offices or homes or via any electronic means. 
If you do not follow these instructions the existence of this letter and its 
contents may be detected and collected by US intelligence agencies.

In the first envelope was a four-page letter with 149 lines of typed text 
consisting of alphabets and numbers. The second envelope included instructions 
on how to decode the letter. The third envelope included two sets of code 
sheets. One set contained a list of ciphers. The other, running to six pages, 
listed dozens of words along with their encoded abbreviations: a system 
commonly known as brevity codes. Together, the two sets were meant to serve as 
the key for the decryption.

Carr flipped through the letter, skimming the alphanumeric sequence. It looked 
like gibberish. There was no way to make sense of it without the code sheets 
and the decoding instructions. By mailing the three separately, the sender had 
sought to secure the communication against the possibility that one envelope 
might get intercepted by a US intelligence agency. Carr saw that the sender had 
included a message in typed, plain text in each envelope, informing the 
consulate of the other two envelopes in the mail and instructing the receiver 
of the message to place a car ad in the Washington Post if any of the other 
envelopes failed to arrive. The sender had not anticipated that all three 
envelopes could fall into theFBI <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi>’s 
hands.

FBI New York had already decoded a few lines of the letter. Carr’s pulse 
quickened further as he read the deciphered text.

“I am a Middle East North African analyst for the Central Intelligence Agency. 
I am willing to commit espionage against the US by providing your country with 
highly classified information. I have a top secret clearance and have access to 
documents of all of the US intelligence agencies, National Security Agency 
(NSA), Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA), Central Command (Centcom) as well as 
smaller agencies.”

To prove that this wasn’t a bluff, the sender had included in all three 
envelopes an identical set of government documents, 23 pages in all, some 
marked “CLASSIFIED SECRET”, some “CLASSIFIED TOP SECRET”. Most of them were 
aerial images taken by US spy satellites, showing military sites in the Middle 
East and other parts of the world. Some of the documents were intelligence 
reports about regimes and militaries in the Middle East. It was evident from 
the markings on these images and reports that they had been printed after being 
downloaded from Intelink, a classified network of servers that constituted the 
intelligence community’s internet.

There were some additional documents, including a monthly newsletter of the CIA
 <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/cia>, circulated internally among agency 
employees, and aerial photographs of Colonel Gaddafi’s yacht in the 
Mediterranean. They had been taken from a low-flying aircraft deployed not by 
the United States but by a foreign intelligence service. How the sender of the 
package could have acquired them was unclear.

Carr had never seen anything like it before. The sender of the envelopes was 
no doubt a bona fide member of the US intelligence community, with access to 
“top secret” documents, intent on establishing a clandestine relationship with 
a foreign intelligence service. The person had, in fact, already committed 
espionage by giving classified information to an enemy country. Carr might as 
well have been looking at a warning sign for a national security threat 
flashing in neon red.

Carr filed the sheets neatly into a binder before stepping into the office of 
his supervisor, Lydia Jechorek. “Lydia,” he said, sliding the binder across her 
desk. “You have to look at this.” Jechorek, a counter-intelligence veteran in 
her early 50s, leafed through the pages. Carr explained to her why FBI New York 
had couriered the pages to Washington. In the portion of the coded letter that 
agents in New York had deciphered, they had found an email address the sender 
wanted to use for further communication. With special permission from the US 
attorney general, the nation’s top law enforcement official, the agents asked 
the email service provider to let them pry into the account: 
jacobscall@mail.com.

They discovered that the account had been created four months earlier, on 3 
August, using internet access from a public library in Prince George’s County, 
Maryland. In the account registration, the user had identified himself as 
“Steven Jacobs,” having a residential address in Alexandria, Virginia. The 
account had been accessed half a dozen times from public libraries around 
Washington DC. There were no emails in the account except for test messages the 
person had sent to himself, and a reply from the Fraud Bureau in response to an 
inquiry he had made about an online company that sold fake IDs.

“What are we going to do?” Jechorek asked. It was imperative that the FBI find 
this person as quickly as possible. Perhaps it was already too late.

Carr showed Jechorek a series of clues about the sender’s identity that he had 
gleaned from the intercepted pages. The system of brevity codes the sender had 
used – along with the concern for operational security – pointed to somebody 
with a military background. He had a “top secret” security clearance, which 
reduced the potential suspect pool from a few hundred thousand workers in the 
US intelligence community who have a “secret” security clearance to a more 
limited population, of tens of thousands, with the higher level of clearance. 
He also had access to Intelink. And he was probably married, with children, as 
evidenced by a line in the letter, stating: “If I commit espionage, I will be 
putting myself and family at great risk.”

There was one other thing: the man was a terrible speller. Scanning the six 
pages of brevity codes, Carr spotted one misspelled word after another.

AP: Anonmus

NH: Alligations

GR: Reveil

16: Precausion

CN: Negotianalable

DZ: Airbourn

KJ: Assocation

MY: Netralize

YF: Confrimed

The list went on and on. Here was a person who had gone to great lengths to 
accomplish “op sec”, but failed to run a basic spellcheck.

For the moment, though, Carr was focused on another set of clues: the 
locations of the public libraries the sender had accessed the jacobscall email 
account from. He had marked them with pins on a large map of the Washington DC 
metropolitan area. The pins were clustered in and around the towns of Bowie and 
Crofton in Maryland. The intelligence agency in closest proximity was theNSA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/nsa>.

Located in Fort Meade, Maryland, the NSA has thousands of military employees, 
many with a background in cryptology, many with homes in the towns of Bowie and 
Crofton. Carr’s hunch was that the mole was probably from within the NSA’s 
ranks, even though he had introduced himself as a CIA analyst. That line – and 
the CIA newsletter in the materials he had sent – was possibly a red herring.

“We need to call Mac,” Carr said.

Jechorek picked up the phone and dialed Robert McCaslin, the head of 
counterintelligence at the NSA.

The idea of committing espionage began taking shape in Brian Regan’s mind 
through the early months of 1999, after he had spent four years working at the 
National Reconnaissance Office (NRO), the agency responsible for managing the 
United States’ spy satellites. Regan worked in an office that helped military 
units in the field to access and use intelligence collected through 
reconnaissance from space.

He was feeling humiliated at work, his financial situation was getting worse, 
and his marriage was deteriorating. From the average evaluations he had been 
getting, he knew he wasn’t going to be promoted any time soon. The air force 
wanted to transfer him to Europe, but Regan wasn’t willing to move because of 
the disruption it would cause to his family. When the air force turned down his 
request to defer overseas deployment, he had to choose between accepting the 
transfer and retiring a year later at the age of 37, on August 31, 2000, when 
he would complete 20 years of service. Grudgingly, he opted for the latter.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fspy-couldnt-spell-how-biggest-heists-us-espionage-history-foiled%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a279b03929206b23d4da2511454b5920b9c87f1%2F0_0_981_1227%2F981.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20spy%20who%20couldn%E2%80%99t%20spell%3A%20how%20the%20biggest%20heist%20in%20the%20history%20of%20US%20espionage%20was%20foiled%20%7C%20Yudhijit%20Bhattacharjee&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fspy-couldnt-spell-how-biggest-heists-us-espionage-history-foiled%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20spy%20who%20couldn%E2%80%99t%20spell%3A%20how%20the%20biggest%20heist%20in%20the%20history%20of%20US%20espionage%20was%20foiled%20%7C%20Yudhijit%20Bhattacharjee&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fspy-couldnt-spell-how-biggest-heists-us-espionage-history-foiled%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a279b03929206b23d4da2511454b5920b9c87f1%2F0_0_981_1227%2F981.jpg>
 A courtroom drawing of Brian Regan from 2002. Photograph: William P. Hennessy 
Jr/AP 
With the clock ticking towards retirement, Regan’s anxieties about the future 
transformed into a rising sense of panic. Because of the narrow scope of the 
work he had been doing at the NRO, he wasn’t sure he would be able to find a 
well-paying job in industry, certainly not with the ease that his colleagues 
expected to. Clutching at straws, Regan finally saw a way out of this 
insecurity. He would cash in on the nation’s secrets.

Growing up, he had learned that getting what he wanted sometimes meant having 
to break the rules. He had not experienced any negative consequences for having 
stolen the ceramic art tools from his neighbour’s house, or for cheating on his 
military entrance test. All that mattered, he felt, was not getting caught. As 
long as he could get away with it, espionage was a legitimate answer to his 
troubles.

It was also one that seemed to lie within easy grasp. One of Regan’s secondary 
responsibilities at his job was to help maintain his division’s web page on 
Intelink. He knew that on the network’s thousands of pages and databases there 
was an array of secrets the US had spent billions to acquire. The way Regan 
came to see it, Intelink was the doorway to a basement stuffed with treasures 
waiting to be sold to the country’s enemies.

Regan began exploring Intelink, browsing content that went far beyond his 
assigned responsibilities. Through the autumn and winter months, he accessed a 
diverse selection of images and intelligence reports – a profile of a Libyan 
general, the US’s capabilities for destroying military sites hidden deep 
underground, an adversary’s handbook for conducting biological warfare. As he 
continued, these sessions became longer, and more frequent.

Regan devoted part of his surfing to educating himself about espionage. He 
searched Intelink for reports by analysts on how spies through US history had 
gone about stealing secrets and transferring them to other governments, how 
they were discovered and investigated. He even took time out of his job at the 
NRO to attend a counter-intelligence course, where he heard former FBI and CIA 
agents present counter-intelligence case studies.

Regan wanted to avoid the mistakes that traitors before him had made. With 
sufficient foresight and planning, he told himself, he would pull off the 
perfect conspiracy. Unbeknownst to all those co-workers and classmates who had 
ever doubted his intelligence, he would transform himself into the ultimate spy.

By autumn 1999, Regan was using the office printer to compile hundreds of 
pages of classified information from Intelink. As he began accumulating these 
documents, Regan thought carefully about the next steps in his plan. Most US 
spies who had betrayed the country were tasked by a foreign government to steal 
and pass information, but Regan had initiated his espionage scheme on his own. 
He had no relationship with intelligence agents of another country. He was 
going to have to devise his own way of contacting a foreign service and 
marketing the information he was gathering.

What countries could he target? He turned his sights to the Middle East and 
North Africa, a part of the world he had concentrated on during much of his 
career. In the decade since the end of the cold war, the region had become a 
focus of increasing attention for US military planners. Following the collapse 
of the Soviet Union, the US no longer had a single, rival superpower to worry 
about. Instead, it had to contend with a growing military challenge from China, 
and a host of smaller adversaries, many of them oil-rich countries with a 
majority-Muslim population: Iraq, Libya, Iran, Sudan. Each of these nations, 
Regan thought, would be willing to pay for secrets that might help them 
militarily against the United States.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fspy-couldnt-spell-how-biggest-heists-us-espionage-history-foiled%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea58a9a7dcee2af069c98b76a82fe4cebe34c634%2F0_206_1915_1149%2F1915.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20spy%20who%20couldn%E2%80%99t%20spell%3A%20how%20the%20biggest%20heist%20in%20the%20history%20of%20US%20espionage%20was%20foiled%20%7C%20Yudhijit%20Bhattacharjee&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fspy-couldnt-spell-how-biggest-heists-us-espionage-history-foiled%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20spy%20who%20couldn%E2%80%99t%20spell%3A%20how%20the%20biggest%20heist%20in%20the%20history%20of%20US%20espionage%20was%20foiled%20%7C%20Yudhijit%20Bhattacharjee&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fspy-couldnt-spell-how-biggest-heists-us-espionage-history-foiled%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea58a9a7dcee2af069c98b76a82fe4cebe34c634%2F0_206_1915_1149%2F1915.jpg>
 CCTV footage of Brian Regan at his desk Photograph: daily motion 
Regan tailored his explorations on Intelink accordingly. He collected images 
and reports on China. He entered “Top Secret Iran” into the intranet’s search 
engine and sifted through the results. He cast another wide net by searching 
for “Top Secret Libya,” misspelling “Libya” on more than one occasion. He 
looked for material that would be valuable to the Iraqi regime. Regan did not 
just gather information that would help the countries he had in mind – Libya, 
Iraq and Iran among them – in hostilities against the US. He also downloaded 
whatever intelligence he could find on the military capabilities of regional 
neighbours, such as Israel, which he expected his target countries would be 
equally interested in.

Regan could not simply stack this growing volume of printouts on his desk. He 
stored them in a free-standing cupboard that sat between his cubicle and his 
neighbour’s. Every now and then, he would open it, add a new bundle of 
documents, and lock it up again. Nobody asked him any questions.

The storage proved to be more secure than he could have imagined. Once, when 
Regan was travelling on assignment, members of NRO’s building management staff 
came by his office looking to pick up unused furniture. Nobody spoke up for the 
cupboard, and so they took it away. Later, when they discovered that it was 
locked, they used a drill to unlock it. Inside they found hundreds of documents.

When Regan returned, one of them called him to ask if the papers belonged to 
him. He replied in the affirmative, trying to stay calm despite feeling a wave 
of panic about being found out. The staff wrapped up the documents and sent 
them all back to him. Relieved, he stuffed the printouts in an overhead 
cabinet, which felt like a safer storage space, even if only because it was 
affixed to the wall.

One day in March 2000, Regan pulled out a sheaf of documents from his stash 
and placed it at the bottom of his gym bag, underneath his sweaty workout 
clothes. At around 5pm, he logged out of his computer, picked up the bag and 
walked out of his cubicle towards the building exit.

Regan’s heart was racing, but he walked unhurriedly as he approached the 
turnstiles. He looked at the security guards who milled around at the front 
desk, chit-chatting among themselves as people streamed out of the building on 
their way home. Regan knew that the guards had the authority to stop anyone for 
a search. There was a chance, however slim, that one of them would want to look 
into his gym bag, rifle through the clothes and discover the classified 
documents concealed underneath.

Who killed the 20th century’s greatest spy? | Simon Parkin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/15/who-killed-20th-centurys-greatest-spy-ashraf-marwan>
But the guards had seen him come in and go out of the building with that same 
gym bag hundreds of times in the past; they had no reason to suspect him, and 
he slipped through the turnstiles, unimpeded. As he walked to his car, the 
tension draining from his body, Regan thought about how easy it had been to 
smuggle the documents out. He had got away by being just another face in the 
crowd, a signal drowned by a sea of noise.

In the weeks that followed, Regan removed hundreds of pages of documents from 
the office in his gym bag, transferring his holdings, bit by bit, into the 
basement of his townhouse in Bowie. None of the things he had collected over 
the years – comic books, baseball cards, action figures – had made him rich; 
now, finally he was hoarding materials with real value.

His stash was not limited to documents any more. He was copying information 
from the NRO’s computers on to CDs and taking home training videos on VHS. Late 
at night, while his wife Anette and the kids slept, he would go down to the 
basement and copy the tapes.

It was around the same time, in April 2000, that Regan started working on a 
plan to market what he had stolen. From the spy cases he had researched, he 
knew he would have to contact the intelligence services of the countries he was 
targeting.

Regan began writing a letter addressed to the head of the Libyan intelligence 
service, whose name he had dug up on Intelink. Introducing himself as a CIA 
analyst, he highlighted some of the secrets he was willing to offer in exchange 
for $13m. By the time he had finished typing up his detailed instructions for 
how the transaction was to occur – the Libyans would have to set up a 1-800 
number for him to call, and communicate that this had been done via a used-car 
ad in The Washington Post – the letter had run to 13 pages. Drafting it was 
only the first step, however. To be secure, Regan decided he had to communicate 
the letter in code.

For this letter, Regan used a complex encryption scheme. He first assigned 
brevity codes to the different words in his text – for example, using the code 
“JK” to represent the word “signals”. He then converted, through further 
encryption, this encoded version of the letter into another string of letters 
and numbers. In a separate document, Regan typed up the steps for decrypting 
the letter. After weeks of painstaking effort, he had what he thought was a 
foolproof way of reaching out to the Libyans without risking his anonymity.

In July, when Anette and the kids were away in Sweden, Regan went through the 
trove of classified material in his basement. By now, he had more than 20,000 
pages, plus the CDs and videotapes. Sitting at home, he sorted the information 
by target country, bundling the printouts, CDs and tapes into packages intended 
for Libya and Iraq – the two nations that he felt most optimistic about selling 
to. He separated about 5,000 pages of documents into another pile. They 
contained what Regan believed to be the most sensitive of all the secrets he 
had pilfered.

He packed these documents in Tupperware containers, along with CDs and 
videotapes containing information of similarly high sensitivity. He put the 
containers – and whatever he couldn’t fit into them – into garbage bags, and 
wrapped them up into packages.

One rainy day in July, Regan drove out to Patapsco Valley State Park near 
Baltimore, about 30 miles from his house. The woods in the park were lush 
green, the hiking trails damp from the rain. Regan got out of the car with a 
backpack and walked into the forest.

After he had trekked deep into the forest, Regan stopped and looked around. 
There was no one in sight. He took out a shovel from his backpack and began 
digging a hole in an open patch between the trees. The air was hot and humid, 
and by the time he had dug a-foot-and-a-half into the ground, Regan’s brow was 
beaded with sweat. He dropped one of the packages into the hole, and covered it 
up with dirt.

Then he walked over to a tree several feet away, and hammered some roofing 
nails into it. Next, reaching into his backpack, he pulled out a GPS logger 
that he had brought home from work. He had used the device hundreds of times to 
record the positions of air defence systems deployed in training exercises. He 
peered at the logger’s screen to read out the coordinates of where he stood, 
next to the tree he had just marked with the nails, and wrote them down on a 
piece of paper.

Over two more visits to the park, Regan finished burying all of the seven 
packages that he had determined to be highly sensitive, logging their 
coordinates each time.

He was not going to trade these secrets for money. Their value was much 
greater. They were part of his insurance plan.

On 23 May 2001, in the middle of the day, Regan pressed his foot hard on the 
accelerator as he pulled out of the parking lot at his new workplace. He had 
retired from the air force in August 2000, and joined the defence contracting 
company TRW a few months later, working in their offices in Chantilly, 
Virginia. TRW planned to assign him back to the National Reconnaissance Office 
as a contract employee to do the same kind of work he had been doing before. 
But for now, while he waited to regain his security clearance, the only thing 
keeping him busy was his paranoia.

Since November, when he had mailed his secret offer to the Libyans, his mind 
had been gripped by a constant fear of being found out. He found himself 
worrying constantly about being watched. He had recently taken to getting on 
the subway and then hopping off at the last minute, right before the doors 
closed, to see if anybody stepped out of the train to shadow him.

On this morning, just a short while after he had come into work, he drove out 
from TRW and sped through the streets of Chantilly, darting glances at the rear 
view mirror. As he approached an exit for Interstate 66, he swerved from the 
left lane all the way over to the right, just in time to get on the ramp for 
I-66 West. If a car was following him, he assumed, it would have to switch 
lanes as suddenly as he had, revealing itself to him. He raced on at breakneck 
speed for 10 miles, and got off at an exit for Manassas National Battlefield 
Park.

Entering the park, he drove up a one-way dirt road. When he got halfway to the 
end, he stopped the van and turned off the engine. He scanned his surroundings. 
There were no cars driving up from behind, which he took to be a reassuring 
sign. He sat there for 20 minutes, watching for any activity that might 
indicate surveillance. He saw none.

An old pick-up truck drove past; it looked nothing out of the ordinary. Regan 
stepped out of the van. Walking a few yards into the forested area by the road, 
he placed a couple of Mad magazines on the ground. Then he hopped back into the 
van and returned to work, stopping for lunch along the way.

Later that day, he drove back to the park to retrieve the magazines. They were 
exactly where he had left them. He felt certain that he was not being watched.

He was wrong.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fspy-couldnt-spell-how-biggest-heists-us-espionage-history-foiled%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a5fe3045b165fe00afdc21f1c11f01a55195de8%2F0_72_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20spy%20who%20couldn%E2%80%99t%20spell%3A%20how%20the%20biggest%20heist%20in%20the%20history%20of%20US%20espionage%20was%20foiled%20%7C%20Yudhijit%20Bhattacharjee&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fspy-couldnt-spell-how-biggest-heists-us-espionage-history-foiled%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20spy%20who%20couldn%E2%80%99t%20spell%3A%20how%20the%20biggest%20heist%20in%20the%20history%20of%20US%20espionage%20was%20foiled%20%7C%20Yudhijit%20Bhattacharjee&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fspy-couldnt-spell-how-biggest-heists-us-espionage-history-foiled%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a5fe3045b165fe00afdc21f1c11f01a55195de8%2F0_72_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
 Brian Regan felt certain he was not being followed. He was wrong Photograph: 
Vasiliki Kostopoulou / EyeEm/Getty Images/EyeEm 
The FBI began surveilling Brian Regan in late April 2001, following a 
six-month spy hunt that culminated in Carr and his fellow investigators 
connecting the Intelink documents in the intercepted package to Regan’s 
computer at the NRO. When agents discovered that Regan was a bad speller, they 
grew more confident that he was their man. Teams of surveillance specialists 
followed Regan on his commute to and from TRW’s offices in Chantilly.

If there were any doubts in Carr’s mind about Regan being the spy, they were 
laid to rest on 23 May 2001 when surveillance teams observed Regan driving like 
a lunatic from TRW to Manassas Battlefield National Park. Just because Regan 
had failed to notice any cars following him didn’t mean there weren’t any. When 
Regan was parked on the dirt road, Carr was on the phone with a surveillance 
specialist nicknamed Smitty who was watching Regan’s van from a distance.

“We’ve got a live one,” Smitty told Carr.

“What do you mean?” Carr asked.

Smitty described how Regan had been driving, and how he had come to a stop in 
the middle of nowhere.

“What are you doing?” Carr wanted to know.

Smitty said surveillance couldn’t possibly drive up the dirt road in the car 
they were using, as it would look suspicious.

“Do you have any pickup trucks or anything?”

“Yes, we do.” Smitty answered. The team had a pickup truck drive by Regan’s 
van. Smitty called Carr back.

“He’s just sitting in the van.”

None of these observations would have any value in court. Regan hadn’t broken 
any laws by leaving a couple of magazines in the park and collecting them 
later. But his unusual behaviour showed that he was watching to see if he was 
being watched. In Carr’s eyes, it was undeniable proof of guilt.

On 23 August 2001, a few weeks after Regan had returned to the NRO to work as 
a contractor, he drove into work as usual and promptly logged onto Intelink for 
a 20-minute session, during which he jotted down notes while browsing 
information such as the coordinates of Chinese missile sites. Logging off, he 
scribbled more notes in a small pad, unaware that FBI agents were watching him 
through surveillance cameras.

It was Regan’s last day at work before a week’s vacation. He had told his 
supervisor that he was driving to Orlando with his wife and kids. Instead, at 
about 4pm, Regan drove out to Washington Dulles airport to catch a flight to 
Zurich, where he planned to meet with Iraqi and Libyan embassy officials with 
an offer to spy on the United States. After going through security, he boarded 
a crowded airport shuttle to get to his departure gate.

How a Czech 'super-spy' infiltrated the CIA
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/30/how-a-czech-super-spy-infiltrated-cia-karel-koecher>
As the shuttle doors were closing, Carr and a colleague entered the carriage 
and started making their way through the crowd to the front. “Excuse me. Pardon 
me. Coming through,” Carr said as they inched forward. Finally, the two agents 
stood face-to-face with Regan. “Mr Regan,” Carr said, holding up his badge. 
“I’m with the FBI. We have a couple of questions for you. Do you mind coming 
with us?”

Regan stared at Carr with a dazed expression. Carr thought he looked like a 
teddy bear. “Sure,” Regan replied, picking up his duffel bag. The agents led 
him out of the coach and on to the concourse. Holding him by the elbow, they 
marched him into a room for questioning before putting him in handcuffs.

On searching Regan, officials found a piece of paper tucked between the inner 
and outer soles of his right shoe, on which were written addresses of Iraqi and 
Chinese embassies in Europe. The other materials they found on him and in his 
belongings were more mystifying. In a trouser pocket, Regan was carrying a 
spiral pad containing a page with 13 words that didn’t add up to anything: like 
tricycle, rocket and glove. He had another 26 random words scribbled on an 
index card. Among the contents of Regan’s wallet was a piece of paper with a 
string of letters and numbers that read “5-6-N-V-O-A-I …” And in a folder he 
was carrying in his duffel bag were four sheets with handwritten lines of 
three-digit numbers.

Regan, who would admit to nothing, was not about to tell the investigators 
what these various writings meant. But Carr knew, beyond a shadow of doubt, 
that they were clues to understanding the full extent of Regan’s conspiracy. 
Although the investigators could legitimately pat themselves on the back for 
having identified and nabbed the spy, they knew that their job, as of yet, was 
only half done. What they could not have foreseen was that Regan’s 
cat-and-mouse game with them would continue well after his arrest, and that it 
would take them another two years to unravel his plot and bring him to justice.

This is an edited extract from The Spy Who Couldn’t Spell: 
<http://www.penguinrandomhouse.com/books/316456/the-spy-who-couldnt-spell-by-yudhijit-bhattacharjee/9781592409006/>
 A Dyslexic Traitor, an Unbreakable Code, and the FBI’s Hunt for America’s 
Stolen Secrets, which will be published by New American Library on 1 November.

• Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread 
<https://twitter.com/@gdnlongread>, or sign up to the long read weekly email 
here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/jul/20/sign-up-to-the-long-read-email>.
 