
The timing and location of the night’s entertainment – Grandmaster Flash 
<https://twitter.com/DJFlash4eva?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 atHouse of Yes <http://houseofyes.org/> – was entirely coincidental. On the 
eve of a week that would see New York City host a handful of events to 
celebrate and spotlight the release ofTim Lawrence 
<http://www.timlawrence.info/>’s new book, Life and Death on the New York Dance 
Floor, 1980-1983 <http://www.timlawrence.info/life-and-death/> – a study of 
what the author convincingly identifies as the city’s “cultural renaissance”, 
when hip-hop, new wave and dance music collided in clubs like Mudd and the 
Paradise Garage – one of the book’s characters was making a rare Brooklyn 
appearance at a space in Bushwick.

Though there’s rarely a lack of nighttime activity in the city that supposedly 
never sleeps, on paper it seemed like an especially great match. Unlike many 
New York clubs in the post-Rudy Giuliani era, House of Yes tries hard with its 
musical bookings, setting and entertainment acumen. Billing itself as part 
disco, part “circus theatre”, it features DIY décor, psychedelic projections, 
dressed-for-cabaret employees and an audience always ready to let loose.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpHCdS7O248g&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpHCdS7O248g>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpHCdS7O248g&media=>
Flash, meanwhile, is riding his third wind. In the mid-1970s, he helped 
perfect record-scratching as one of the cornerstones of the Bronx culture that 
came to be known as hip-hop. Now he is one of the executive producers ofThe Get 
Down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2016/aug/07/baz-luhrmann-the-get-down-rappers-delight>
, Baz Luhrmann’s colorful Netflix show that recasts the creation myth of rap 
and modern DJing as a fairytale musical. (And is a wonderful fact-meets-fiction 
preamble to Lawrence’s historical account.) So, while Flash’s stock as a local 
legend never fell off, it’s been a minute since it paid such high market 
dividends.

Understandably, the packed House of Yes crowd – an impressive congregation of 
young and old, black and white, straight and gay – went wild. Flash’s skills at 
cutting up records, and his interpretation of the cross-genre flow at the heart 
of the city’s original sound (disco, rap, funk, dance-punk, Latin, mutant 
electronic, all in the mix) were rapturous and timeless.

The scene played out like a simulacrum of the very bygone moment that 
Lawrence’s book documents. Reading Life and Death on the New York Dance Floor 
as a clubber in the city is to reflect not only on what’s been lost over the 
past three decades, but on how the sounds, events and characters at the center 
of Lawrence’s story still influence NYC’s nightlife. At House of Yes, one of 
this tale’s endless postscripts played out as real-time legend. In fact, 
through sheer circumstance, over the course of a single week in October 2016 
you could watch and listen to urban folklore cement as history. Better yet, you 
could dance to that transformation.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPobrSpMwKk4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPobrSpMwKk4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPobrSpMwKk4&media=>
“There was always a sense of New York in my imagination,” said Lawrence in one 
of our numerous conversations during his visit. The wiry 49-year-old may have 
grown up in the London exurb of Winnersh and teaches cultural studies at the 
University of East London, but there’s little question that New York’s late 
20th-century nightlife has served as his muse. Life and Death is the third of 
Lawrence’s books about the city’s rhythms, joining the disco scene-redefining
Love Saves the Day: A History of American Dance Music, 1970-79 
<https://www.dukeupress.edu/love-saves-the-day>, and the quasi-biography, Hold 
On to Your Dreams: Arthur Russell and the Downtown Music Scene, 1973-92 
<https://www.dukeupress.edu/Hold-On-to-Your-Dreams/>. He also credits the 
city’s house music scene for his initial focus on the meaning of the dancefloor.

Lawrence first escaped to New York in the early 90s at a sensitive time in his 
life, following the sudden death of both parents and an early crisis of 
professional faith at BBC Newsnight. He studied a doctorate in English 
literature at Columbia University by day, and clubs by night. Love Saves the 
Day began as a dissertation on house music and postmodernity, mutated into a 
quickie book about dance music culture, before his research brought him face to 
face with the then little-known story of a “musical host” named David Mancuso 
<http://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2016/06/david-mancuso-interview>, his 
private weekly gatherings at a Soho loft, and all the DJs deeply influenced by 
it (including the legendaryLarry Levan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/28/larry-levan-disco-dance-nicky-siano-dj-harvey>
, and father of house music,Frankie Knuckles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/frankie-knuckles>). That party, nicknamed 
the Loft <http://pitchfork.com/thepitch/248-the-loft/>, basically launched 
global DJ and club culture; and in presenting its details, Lawrence suddenly 
had a career documenting the founding corner of contemporary dance music.

Life and Death on the New York Dance Floor began as another attempt to write 
that history of house, but ended up as a 500-page dive into a three-year period 
that exemplified “the melting pot idea that had been synonymous with New York, 
yet hadn’t been written about”. Popular history claimed the city’s dance scene 
died under the strain of the forces that killed the disco craze. Yet as 
Lawrence writes, the influence of Levan and his club, the Paradise Garage, was 
already being felt at “art-punk discotheques” like theMudd Club 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/26/fashion/the-mudd-club-comes-back-to-life-for-one-night.html?_r=0>
 andDanceteria 
<https://www.insomniac.com/media/new-york-nightlife-gone-danceteria-82-86>, 
where DJs such asJohnny Dynell  <http://www.johnnydynell.com/>and Mark Kamins 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/madonna-producer-mark-kamins-dies-421974>
 were creating a new mix for a new, mixed audience.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fnew-york-city-clubs-golden-age%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fffc440fc4476cdc0be8647a7f1190adb4101a30e%2F0_0_5601_3712%2F5601.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20golden%20age%20of%20New%20York%20clubbing%3A%20'We%20wanted%20to%20be%20part%20of%20something'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fnew-york-city-clubs-golden-age%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20golden%20age%20of%20New%20York%20clubbing%3A%20%27We%20wanted%20to%20be%20part%20of%20something%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fnew-york-city-clubs-golden-age%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fffc440fc4476cdc0be8647a7f1190adb4101a30e%2F0_0_5601_3712%2F5601.jpg>
 Larry Levan photographed in the DJ booth at Paradise Garage in 1978. 
Photograph: Bill Bernstein/serenamorton.com‎. 
The Garage, meanwhile, was home to not just the gay, black dancers 
historically placed there, but also young art-punks and nascent hip-hop kids, 
whose music found life on Levan’s turntables. The records that came out of 
these borderless scenes soon became the soundtrack of the entire city and 
beyond, with Blondie’s Rapture, Afrika Bambaataa’s Planet Rock, the Peech Boys’ 
Don’t Make Me Wait and Madonna’s Holiday effortlessly crossing genres, cliques 
and, soon, oceans. New York club music had gravitas, with everyone from Bowie 
and the Clash to New Order and Herbie Hancock pulled into its orbit.

As Lawrence writes, the Downtown community’s cross-cultural collaborative 
spirit was not limited to clubs. The East Village’sFun Gallery 
<http://www.thefungallery.com/>, co-founded by arts doyenne Patti Astor (one of 
the stars of the first hip-hop film, 1982’sWild Style 
<http://wildstylethemovie.com/>), presented the Bronx’s finest graffiti writers 
next to future fine-art legendsJean-Michel Basquiat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/basquiat> and Keith Haring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2001/jun/23/weekend7.weekend3>. Around 
the corner, the budding British impresario Reza Blue and Michael Holman, 
Basquiat’s bandmate inthe no-wave group Gray 
<http://blog.brooklynartproject.com/2011/07/the-expressionist-no-wave-of-gray/>
, began throwing a weekly party at the Second Avenue club Negril that brought 
together the DJing Bambaataa, his Zulu Nation MCs, breakdancers and the Fun 
Gallery’s graffiti writers. Haring, meanwhile, was also painting murals on the 
walls of Danceteria and the Garage, when not helping the actor and performance 
artist Ann Magnusson program multi-sensorial happenings atClub 57 
<http://vanishingnewyork.blogspot.com/2014/11/club-57-flyers-1979-83.html>. 
According to Lawrence, such creative intermingling had few precedents.

“The research suggested that there were a lot more connections between these 
scenes than was supposed historically,” he said. “I started to get a sense of 
the Downtown scene, of different art coming into this moment, of an interesting 
coalition of artists, musicians, choreographers and DJs. The whole artistic 
world seemed to be descending upon downtown New York.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fnew-york-city-clubs-golden-age%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3039642f72e57cae2b9bf75ba99d9e465795055f%2F0_0_3000_2209%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20golden%20age%20of%20New%20York%20clubbing%3A%20'We%20wanted%20to%20be%20part%20of%20something'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fnew-york-city-clubs-golden-age%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20golden%20age%20of%20New%20York%20clubbing%3A%20%27We%20wanted%20to%20be%20part%20of%20something%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fnew-york-city-clubs-golden-age%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3039642f72e57cae2b9bf75ba99d9e465795055f%2F0_0_3000_2209%2F3000.jpg>
 Ronnie Wood and Keith Richards at the Danceteria in 1980. Photograph: Gary 
Gershoff/Getty Images 
It didn’t last long. Lawrence dug into the three years between the decade’s 
dawn and the oncoming midnight of the crack and Aids epidemics, before Ronald 
Reagan’s neoliberal policies and Manhattan’s first real-estate boom took hold 
of New York’s cultural life. Like The Get Down, Life and Death unearths a 
golden moment when living was cheap, the crowds diverse, the community 
strengthened, creativity mutating and freedoms flourishing.

“The mythology was that New York was this hellhole of dysfunctionality, crime, 
murder, and garbage piled on the streets,” says Lawrence. “Yet to a person 
every one I’d speak to would say that far from uninhabitable, they’d never want 
to leave it. Every single night something was going on that seemed essential.”

“We did not want to go out to see something – we wanted to be a part of 
something,” said Johnny Dynell. He was seated in a seminar room at New York 
Universityon a drizzly Saturday afternoon, decked out in a leopard-print suit 
and lightly tinted shades, imparting wisdom to a gathering of grad students, 
zine writers and ageing bohemians treading memory lane.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhNbV8i8ZL90&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhNbV8i8ZL90>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhNbV8i8ZL90&media=>
A lesser-known character in Lawrence’s book, Dynell has been one of the 
Downtown’s connectors for nearly 40 years – DJing at the Mudd Club, Danceteria 
and Area; recording the 1983 electro-rap cult singleJam Hot 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A8ipWOLCAzM> (still sampled regularly); and, 
in the 1990s, with his wife Chi Chi Valenti, creating the weekly partyJackie 60 
<http://www.jackie60.com/>, one of the city’s last 20th-century hurrahs in 
Manhattan’s Meatpacking District, not yet gentrified. Dynell still plays around 
town, but on this weekend, he and a coterie of other artists and gallery 
owners, DJs and musicians, writers and editors, club owners and scenesters, 
were detailing the circumstances of Life and Death on the New York Dance Floor 
to a rapt audience. They were also reaffirming a set of values by which the 
city of their era lived – and, at times, still tries to.

Dynell’s panel, entitled Lifecycle of the NYC/Downtown Party Scene, was part 
of an all-day symposium at NYU that placed Lawrence’s book in broader 
historical contexts, one of 12 events on the author’s one-city book tour. Those 
included panels at three institutions of higher learning (NYU, CUNY and 
Columbia), book-signings at three club nights (the Loft,718 Sessions 
<https://twitter.com/718Sessions?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 andBetter Days 
<http://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2015/01/nightclubbing-better-days>), 
talks at two galleries (Howl <http://www.howlarts.org/> and Steve Harvey 
<http://www.steveharvey.com/>) and two record stores (Rough Trade and Superior 
Elevation <http://www.superiorelevation.com/>), as well as one museum 
presentation (at MoMA, which hosted a panel after a screening of writerGlenn 
O’Brien <http://glennobrien.com/>’s majestic lo-fi film, Downtown ’81 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EzGWSl7iO7Y>, starring Basquiat). Simply 
following the author’s itinerary was like getting a master’s primer of the 
city’s recent cultural accomplishments.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEzGWSl7iO7Y&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEzGWSl7iO7Y>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEzGWSl7iO7Y&media=>
As the discussions of long-gone clubs gave way to movement on living, 
breathing dancefloors, the weight and spotlight of the city’s history could be 
felt everywhere, in the crowd and in the DJ booth. At times, it seemed a 
continuation of the classic New York story – one that was interrupted by Mayor
Giuliani’s zero tolerance policies of the 90s 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/388758.stm>, which included a moral crusade on 
nightlife by excavating and enforcing a race-dividing civic ordinance from the 
1920s called a cabaret license – at others it was a brand-new one with familiar 
roots. The last 30 years have seen the city’s meaningful party scene on the 
brink of extinction – during one of the panels, Krivit put the number of 
cabaret licenses issued during the early 80s at 4,000; in 2016 it is around 
120. The insights of Lawrence’s book provided a reflection on the state of the 
party and the purpose it serves.

Many participants of the Life and Death “tour” came to that week’s installment 
of the Loft, at 46, the planet’s longest-running classic club night. Though no 
longer a weekly or commandeered by Mancuso (that night’s DJ duties were split by
Douglas Sherman 
<https://musicfordancersla.me/conversations-in-text-an-interview-with-douglas-sherman-nyc/>
 andColleen “Cosmo” Murphy <https://soundcloud.com/colleen-cosmo-murphy>), the 
Loft has retained a utopian, communal private-party vibe unlike any other, an 
older, mixed-race clientele, and an aspirational old-school positivity in its 
music and atmosphere that in America 2016 comes in extremely handy. (The party 
took place the night of the second presidential debate, which made Sherman’s 
selection ofSympathy For the Devil  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vBecM3CQVD8>beyond pointed.)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNLJc8qwjJJY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNLJc8qwjJJY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNLJc8qwjJJY&media=>
By contrast, the same evening marked the end of the 13-year weekly run of DJ 
François K’s Deep Space party at Cielo <http://deepspacenyc.com/>, in the 
Meatpacking District, which in 2017 is moving to Output, a Berlin-style club in 
Williamsburg.François Kevorkian 
<https://twitter.com/fknyc?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 is one of the New York’s beloved dance music elders, bridging today’s city to 
the one depicted in Life and Death (he rose to prominence as a DJ and remixer 
in the early 80s), continuing to champion musical multiplicity, balancing new 
and old (at his Cielo swan song he presentedScuba 
<https://twitter.com/ScubaOfficial?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
, a popular British DJ who plays minimal techno). François’s long-cultivated 
following pursues the DJ’s sonic whims wherever it takes them.

Deep Space is a party that, like the Loft, could be classified as much as a 
community social as a rave – it took place on Mondays and had free entry before 
11pm. Yet, what changes when you leave a longtime residence? Economics for one 
– but also demographics. Whether it’s the clubs or the thriving warehouse 
scene, youth and internationalism rules Brooklyn nightlife, alongside layers of 
social privilege. And where Life and Death-era musical programming actively 
attempted to cut across genres and audiences, today’s club nights are more 
tailored to individual sounds, textures and BPMs. Nowadays, the notion of a DJ 
running the gamut from dub to hip-hop to disco/house to techno to African 
sounds, playing to a large crowd that takes it all in, is less norm than its 
own peculiar lane. The origin of that lane is the New York described in the 
pages of Lawrence’s book.

Another pair of parties that took place during Lawrence’s week here directly 
reinforced this lineage. Both were DJ sets by older English men that lasted 
upwards of six hours. One featuredDJ Harvey 
<https://www.residentadvisor.net/dj/djharvey>, who spent a few years in New 
York learning his craft at the feet of Levan. The other took place in a 
Bushwick warehouse, and marked the long-awaited return ofAndrew Weatherall 
<https://www.residentadvisor.net/dj/andrewweatherall>, who came of DJing age in 
acid-house London and Manchester (helping produce some of that era’s greatest 
records) and continues to mix moods tinged with dub and psychedelia. Both sets 
were epic exercises of form, stamina and musical arc, featuring records beyond 
simple classification. And audiences that were hard to pinpoint too – more 
Caucasian and younger than at Flash, but hardly monochromatic, ready for a long 
haul, and, to echo Dynell’s self-assessment, determined to be active 
participants rather than tourists. These were one version – the best version – 
of a new New York dancefloor.

“Emotionally, critically, intellectually, it’s hard to say that New York is 
the kind of mecca for dance music that it was in the 70s and 80s. Then, people 
came here from all over the world on pilgrimages,” said Lawrence. “It feels 
like times have changed. But in a way that is because of New York’s success; 
because its influence helped grow dance scenes all over the world. This is a 
good thing. But as word was spreading, New York had a difficult period.”

To simultaneously participate, observe and process history through all of 
one’s biases is a difficult task. To do so during late nights, in dark, 
sensorially overwhelming clubs, keeping all of one’s faculties intact makes it 
more so. It may be why real-time critical context for club music has always 
been rare. Yet what Life and Death on the New York Dance Floor makes acutely 
obvious, as both volume and prism, is not just the cultural value of the city’s 
party scene, but how it also serves as a moral compass – and how it still can.

“My sense of it is that there is a will in New York to bounce back [from] the 
low point of the Giuliani period,” Lawrence added. “We’re seeing that difficult 
period shifting into something more engaged and hospitable. It’s clear that 
there are people who are invested [in the scene], and want this to become even 
more re-energized.”

Time to (re)build.
 