
The city of Liverpool is aiming to become a “fall-less” city – so that all 
older adults with limited or reduced mobility can venture forth into the 
streets, parks and other public places knowing that their chances of falling 
have been significantly reduced. One-third of older people in the UK experience 
a fall each year, rising to half the over-80s. Working with the Universities of 
Liverpool and Cambridge, the city council is implementing falls prevention and 
mitigation as part of itsAge-Friendly City  
<http://www.lilac-healthequity.org.uk/index.php/sphr-age-friendly-cities>(AFC) 
<http://www.lilac-healthequity.org.uk/index.php/sphr-age-friendly-cities> 
initiative 
<http://www.lilac-healthequity.org.uk/index.php/sphr-age-friendly-cities>.

Promoted 
<http://www.who.int/ageing/projects/age-friendly-cities-communities/en/> by the 
World Health Organisation, the age-friendly city movement has spread across the 
globe. With projections that half Europe’s population will be over 50 within a 
couple of decades and that the world will have more people over 60 than under 
16 by 2050, the age-proofing of our environments is high on the agenda.

Improving with age? How city design is adapting to older populations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/25/improving-with-age-how-city-design-is-adapting-to-older-populations>
Already more than 500 million people over 65 live in cities. The urban old 
reach 250 million in Asia, 57 million in Latin America and 23 million in 
Africa. Indeed 90% of us, young and old, will live in urban environments by the 
end of the century.

The age-friendly city initiative is now an international movement supported by 
forums across the globe. The 2015 sustainable development goals (SDGs), call 
for inclusive urbanisation that enables older persons to participate in 
planning and decision-making, have access to safe and affordable public 
transport, and enjoy safe, inclusive and accessible green and public spaces.

The age-friendly city initiative is now an international movement supported by 
forums across the globe

While there is a strong emphasis on health, including the successful 
prevention of disease, disability, frailty and the promotion of healthy lives 
and activities, the age-friendly movement has moved beyond this to include the 
natural and built environment, cultural attitudes, social capital, equity and 
inclusion.

Investing in public transport is essential to create age-friendly cities. 
Older women in particular rely on public transport to make the complex journeys 
enabling them to juggle multiple roles as caregivers, housekeepers and income 
providers. Simple initiatives like those in Ukraine, promoted by the civil 
society organisationTurbota pro Litnih v Ukraini 
<http://www.tlu.org.ua/?page_id=299> encourage older people to take an active 
role in improving public transport services, extending bus routes to 
poorly-served districts, and relocating bus stops so that local health centres 
can be easily accessed.

How can Kolkata's chaotic transport system be untangled?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/oct/10/how-can-kolkatas-chaotic-transport-system-be-untangled>
Similarly, various health initiatives encouraging physical activity and 
healthy eating, and creating communities that support people with dementia are 
being promoted. Colombia’s capital, Bogotá, has now implemented schemes with 
the assistance ofHelpAge International <http://www.helpage.org/> (HAI) which 
provides guidance to families and carers of people with dementia, signposting 
them to resources and support available in the urban community.

However, there is much to do. The recent HAI Ageing and the City report 
<http://www.helpage.org/silo/files/ageing-and-the-city-making-urban-spaces-work-for-older-people.pdf>
 found that in “the majority of low- and middle-income countries, most people 
aged over 50 reported not feeling safe walking home alone at night”. And 
reports have highlighted the increased vulnerability of older adults in times 
of crisis – such as the New Orleans hurricane in 2005 or the 2011 Japanese 
tsunami, where older people were disproportionality affected. While Ageing and 
the City may call for older people in be more involved in disaster preparedness 
planning, the evidence that this is happening is limited.

The future for the age-friendly city movement it to engage with the smart city 
debate. TheCitris Invention Lab <http://invent.citris-uc.org/> at the 
University of California is exploring “connected ageing landscapes” which link 
body, home, community and caregiving in one integrated technological flow.

Building better mental health in cities from the ground up
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/aug/17/urban-planners-improve-mental-health-cities>
Something as simple as interactive television promotes social and civic 
engagement – enabling older adults to connect with friends, neighbours and 
family, actively engage in community life, interact with healthcare provision, 
and earn an income.

But cutting-edge inventions – assistive technologies, smart medication 
management tools, smart body sensors, robotics and autonomous vehicles – can 
combine to provide a flow from person to home to cityscape. Connected medical 
devices using external sensors and remote monitoring have the potential to ease 
the struggles for older people in cities.

The city has the potential to become one integrated physical and virtual space 
– within which less-mobile adults can participate to the best of their ability. 
Age-friendly cities need to be smart cities. The age-friendly city movement 
must engage with the technology of the future to provide an urban environment 
where we can all experience a healthy old age.

Sarah Harper is professor of gerontology at the University of Oxford and 
supports theBicester Healthy New Town <http://nwbicester.co.uk/2016/03/4167/> 
initiative through research.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 