
1. In Her Prime <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GOOzZcnXt2U 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GOOzZcnXt2U 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GOOzZcnXt2U 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GOOzZcnXt2U>

The Strokes’ fabled history tends to start with The Modern Age EP, eventually 
released via Rough Trade. Back then they were a remarkably tight band – the 
booze-soaked, ramshackle quality was deceptive. Landing before the breakout, 
though, In Her Prime gives an insight into the cobbled-together group who would 
soon stumble through their first steps. Part of a collection of demos 
self-released in 2000, it’s a slippery beast, looser than any of their 
subsequent output. In three heady minutes, Julian Casablancas sounds as if he’s 
trying to channel every rock’n’roll hero from past decades. On the one hand 
it’s a rare insight into the Strokes before they developed a full identity. But 
on the other, there’s a remarkable similarity to one of their latest tracks,
Threat of Joy <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Qvhcs93C2x8>. Both share a 
similar swagger, despite being separated by a decade and a half. Some things 
never change.

2. The Modern Age <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RzO7IGWGxu8>

For purists, the story really begins with The Modern Age in 2001. At the time, 
everything the Strokes stood for rallied against the current chart flavour. 
Making the EP the single of the week in the NME, Kitty Empire kicked off the 
magazine’s love affair with the band, writing that their reference-steeped rock 
crusade was bracingly different to the time’s “hot sound [of] 80s synth 
ballads”. Comparisons to the Velvet Underground never subsided but the sheer 
energy of the Strokes’ first steps felt fresh and new: they reinvented the 
traditional route by adding a charge and enthusiasm that can’t be taught. The 
hype surrounding The Modern Age has rarely been matched since, and it irritated 
some. There’s even a Tumblr,The Strokes are Illuminati 
<http://the-strokes-are-illuminati.tumblr.com/>, which attempts to claim that 
the band’s rise has been due suspect ties than decent hard work. Whatever the 
route, they remain one of the 21st century’s most unforgettable breakthroughs, 
still capable of stirring gold from the honeypot.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIgbEWdObQAQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIgbEWdObQAQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIgbEWdObQAQ&media=>
3. Someday <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=knU9gRUWCno>

When the hype eventually hit boiling point, the band did their best to deflect 
attention. “It’s not like fuckin’ Beatlemania,” guitarist Nick Valensi claimed 
at the time. Crucially, they were aware that the buzz could move on instantly. 
Scruffy, leather jacket-sporting, nodding to relics of the past – this surely 
couldn’t be in vogue for much more than a couple of years. Plus they’d been 
together for three years by 2001, despite the “overnight success” tag. 
Alongside producer Gordon Raphael, they set about capturing a moment on their 
debut album Is This It, compressing and containing the headrush of New York in 
less than 40 minutes. Someday’s opening lyric, “In many ways they’ll miss the 
good old days”, captures the essence of their early work. Despite an awareness 
that the good times wouldn’t last for ever, they were determined to make the 
most of their creative spree. “I ain’t wasting no more time!” barks Casablancas 
at the close.

4. Last Nite <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TOypSnKFHrE>

An awful lot can happen in just under two decades. Infighting, out-of-body 
experiences, solo projects of all ridiculous shapes and sizes. One thing that 
hasn’t changed is Last Nite’s impact – it still has the power to send tremors, 
and persuades kids to form bands. It’s on a tiny list of songs that can turn a 
tragic party into an unforgettable night with the flick of a switch. Is This 
It’s most successful single has outlived the indie club’s heyday and 
soundtracked drunken stumbles for decades.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTOypSnKFHrE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTOypSnKFHrE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTOypSnKFHrE&media=>
5. 12:51 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LPAVDHo1Elc>

Against the odds, the Strokes were in the big league come album No 2. Slash 
was appearingin their videos <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=knU9gRUWCno>, 
Roman Coppola in the director’s seat. Was success going to their heads? Not 
necessarily, but their dislike of the press certainly wasn’t subsiding. Quizzed 
on religionby Rolling Stone’s Neil Strauss in 2003 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/the-strokes-elegantly-wasted-20031113>, 
Casablancas summed up the don’t-give-a-shit default by retorting: “I’d like to 
just get to a point where maybe we can say something that will be matterful. 
That’s definitely not a word, by the way. And I look forward to the future, 
blah, blah, blah, blah.” This was after reaching for the “stop” button on 
Strauss’s dictaphone. They’d reached a point where everything was going to 
happen on their terms, or not at all. Sessions with Radiohead producer Nigel 
Godrich were scrapped, so they went back to basics with Raphael. At the time, 
their follow-up albumRoom on Fire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2003/oct/17/popandrock.shopping4> was 
dismissed as being too similar to Is This It. These days, excitement levels at 
their gigs rise when they even slightly nod back to the 2001-2003 era. 12:51 
finds a sweet spot between their refined, tighter playing style and the 
pressures of churning out records to a deadline.I Can’t Win 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MH5TBm4za1M>’s final lyric, “I’ll be right 
back,” suggested another triumph was waiting in the wings, but what followed 
was a spell of absence.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPLNVnmq9Tpv3qMfOGQZ9fqG4O1ZIPHAErY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPLNVnmq9Tpv3qMfOGQZ9fqG4O1ZIPHAErY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPLNVnmq9Tpv3qMfOGQZ9fqG4O1ZIPHAErY&media=>
 The Strokes – a 10 of the best playlist on YouTube. 
6. Juicebox <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rlQlCoVUm24>

With each return, the Strokes run into a wall of critics who claim it’s not 
like the good old days. Even by 2006, they were being written off as incapable 
of rekindling their early fire. It must have been tempting to self-destruct – 
and to some extent they did. Guitarist Albert Hammond Jr remembers little of 
the sessions around their third record. “I was balls-to-the-wall fucked up, so 
it’s hard for me to judge,” he told Pitchfork in retrospect. Three years on 
from its release,Casablancas told the Guardian’s Tim Jonze 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/nov/28/julian-casablancas-strokes-interview>
 that First Impressions of Earth wasn’t up to scratch. But listen to the record 
and you wouldn’t believe its creation had been a joyless experience. Juicebox 
finds the frontman at his most deranged. Valensi’s guitar is another calling 
card, 10 times more sophisticated than at the band’s beginnings but capable of 
striking with the same edge. For all the hints from their camp at a potential 
end-of-days crisis, Juicebox is the kind of single that could kickstart a 
career, let alone keep one in bloom. It remains their highest charting single, 
peaking at No 5 in the UK.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFSdcB_3TVVs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFSdcB_3TVVs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFSdcB_3TVVs&media=>
7. Hawaii <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZSSfcjAfC9w>

Despite the New York liftoff, the Strokes spend much of their lives thousands 
of miles from home. Jet-setting’s been a way of life for decades, and never is 
it referenced more than on Juicebox’s B-side, Hawaii. Stamps racking up on his 
passport, Casablancas surges through various places and states of mind. LA, New 
York, the UK (“Where the sky is dark”) all get a shout out, but “paradise on 
Earth” is the 50th state. The frontman sounds as if he’s clutching the wheels 
of a plane leaving the runway, he’s so caught up. Cream of the offcuts, Hawaii 
could easily slot in as a highlight on their last three records.

8. Under Cover of Darkness 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_l09H-3zzgA&spfreload=10>

Things were at their most fractured during the recording of 2011’s Angles. By 
this point, new projects were taking priority. Casablancas turned solo with 
2009’sPhrazes for the Young 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/oct/29/julian-casablancas-cd-review>. 
Hammond had two full-lengths to his name. Bassist Nikolai Fraiture started his 
own project,Nickel Eye 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/jan/25/popandrock>. In 2008, drummer 
Fabrizio Moretti put out Little Joy’s self-titled debut. Everyone besides 
Valensi had their own outlet, and the guitarist was remarkably candid in 
saying: “I’m of the opinion that you’re in a band and that’s what you do. If 
there’s leftover material and time, then sure, by all means. But if you’re 
playing material that you haven’t even shown to your main band and you’re just 
sort of keeping it for yourself, I’m not a big fan of that.” On Angles, Valensi 
seems to take matters into his own hands. Under Cover of Darkness finds 
Casablancas moaning about how “everybody’s been singing the same song for 10 
years” (the single’s accompanying video gives a reference point to Last Nite, 
as it happens). Meanwhile, Valensi’s doing his best to stir things up, trading 
blows between riffs that would slot neatly into previous records, and 
razor-sharp sections determined to tread new ground. Though far from their 
greatest moment, it still gives hints of a band intent on keeping the wheels 
turning.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPU3O4Nxuu5E&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPU3O4Nxuu5E>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPU3O4Nxuu5E&media=>
9. One Way Trigger <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I0KwPHDWMEc>

Credit where it’s due – these five have spent a lot of time running away from 
their glorious shadow, trying to reinvent themselves. And on the rarely lauded 
Comedown Machine, they truly hit new notes. One Way Trigger won’t be considered 
a classic by many – it’s the Strokes meet a-ha – but it’s a landmark 
reinvention of their rough-edged trademarks. Previous efforts to flip formula, 
fromAsk Me Anything <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Xms9QGn46Wo>’s shuffling 
keys to the weird paranoia ofGames <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Wybdk7zSefI>
, don’t quite strike the same balance between old and new. There might be a 
happy ending to these previously fruitless attempts, after all.

10. Oblivius <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jEjdwhVuW74>

On the band’s new EP, Future Present Past, it sounds as though something may 
have shifted. Miracles do happen, and the Strokes actually sound as if they’re 
having fun again. Nothing can capture the momentum of their first steps, but 
with a knowing wink to their past, Oblivius is a fearless leap forward. It 
contains Valensi’s showiest arpeggio solo since the Room on Fire days, and 
should allay any fears that the band might be shuffling towards a sad, sorry 
end. Casablancas told Beats 1’s Zane Lowe the EP’s main purpose was to “kinda 
get back some of the mojo”, and they succeeded by setting off fireworks. The 
frontman might have found a new political muse, too, referencing a “wolf” of 
Wall Street. No real surprise, given all the Noam Chomsky links on the newly 
established politics section of his own website.
 