
It is tempting to see the huge swing against the National party at the Orange 
byelection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/14/new-south-wales-deputy-premier-troy-grant-stands-down-as-nationals-leader>
 as a Trump/Brexit-style wave hitting the Australian shores.


The truth is that council amalgamations and the greyhound ban were the policy 
equivalent of Dumb and Dumber in the central westNew South Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales> state seat.

It was those policies that led to the downfall of Troy Grant and the serious 
tarnishing of “Magic Mike” Baird. If anything, the Trump “up yours” result may 
have simply stiffened the spine.

Double dose of double standards 

If you live in a small country town, chances are that a local council is the 
biggest employer in the area. It is a big deal.

When Baird first proposed council amalgamations on grounds of economic 
efficiency, self-determination was the buzzword. The NSW government told 
councils to get together with like-minded councils, work out an amalgamation 
plan and we – the government – will listen to you. Otherwise it will be imposed 
from above.

NSW Nationals leader Troy Grant and deputy Adrian Piccoli stand down
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/14/new-south-wales-deputy-premier-troy-grant-stands-down-as-nationals-leader>
Smaller councils which were most vulnerable to amalgamations took the hint. 
They invested financially and emotionally in the process. Much angst and town 
hall venting took place, but a basic plan was settled.

But a week before Christmas last year 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-12-18/council-mergers/7040588>, councils were 
hit with the left-field news that their proposals had been chucked in the bin 
and the government had its own unilateral plan. There was an appeals process, 
but the writing was on the wall.

The anger in my own community was white hot. Even more galling than the 
decision itself was the feeling that the community was hoodwinked, tricked into 
a useless process. The government was not listening. Lifelong conservative 
voters vowed to vote out theCoalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition>.

Following hot on the heels of that decision came the greyhound racing ban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/24/greyhound-racing-banned-in-new-south-wales-as-bill-passes-parliament>
. You can argue with the merits of council amalgamations on economic grounds, 
just as you can argue the merits of greyhound racing on animal rights grounds.

But was the NSW ban on the “battlers’ sport” going to extend to horse racing – 
“the sport of kings” – which is implicated in just as many animal deaths? Not 
likely.

It was these two issues, more than any other, that really crystallised the 
frustration of voters tired of being taken for granted.

Powerful friends

Enter the Shooters, Fishers and Farmers party, with its candidate Phil Donato 
<http://<iframe 
src="https://www.facebook.com/plugins/video.php?href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.facebook.com%2FDonato4Orange%2Fvideos%2F770648529739651%2F&show_text=0&width=560" 
width="560" height="315" style="border:none;overflow:hidden" scrolling="no" 
frameborder="0" allowTransparency="true" allowFullScreen="true"></iframe>>, 
which organised and attracted some powerful backing from 2GB broadcasters Alan 
Jones and Ray Hadley.

They ran a simple campaign, with some very familiar themes from other protest 
parties, such as One Nation. They promised to Listen. They promised to Stand Up 
for rural people 
<http://%3Ciframe%20src%3D%22https//www.facebook.com/plugins/video.php?href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.facebook.com%2FDonato4Orange%2Fvideos%2F770648529739651%2F&show_text=0&width=560%22%20width=%22560%22%20height=%22315%22%20style=%22border:none;overflow:hidden%22%20scrolling=%22no%22%20frameborder=%220%22%20allowTransparency=%22true%22%20allowFullScreen=%22true%22%3E%3C/iframe%3E>
.

Shooters upper house MLC Robert Brown encapsulated the mood: “I don’t know if 
we will get there, but this will teach the Nationals a lesson. They have to 
grow a spine and not kow-tow to the Baird government.”

In the week before the byelection, Jones broadcast 
<http://www.centralwesterndaily.com.au/story/4285961/have-a-swing-alan-jones-ray-hadley-encourage-voters-to-send-message-photos-video/>
 from Orange Ex-Services Club and instructed voters to go in with baseball bats 
and “put the Nats last”.


“I want people here to be angry. If it’s a little trifling swing, they’ll say, 
‘see, Jones and all those people they don’t understand, the electorate are 
quite happy with us’ and away we go,”Jones said 
<http://www.centralwesterndaily.com.au/story/4285961/have-a-swing-alan-jones-ray-hadley-encourage-voters-to-send-message-photos-video/>
. “You don’t get many chances like this.”

Barnaby Joyce may be a party heavyweight but he's still light on policy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/bush-mail/2016/jun/26/election-2016-barnaby-joyce-nationals-agriculture-new-england-tony-windsor>
It was a strategy 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-10-17/2015-nsw-election-preview/5942892> 
employed in last year’s state election by the Greens in the seats of Lismore 
and Ballina. The state Nationals suffered a 21.7% swing in Lismore and a 27.8% 
swing in Ballina. The Greens candidate Tamara Smith won Ballina.

On Saturday, the baseball bats came out and in some booths, such as Molong, 
the campaign resulted in swings of 60% against the Nationals.


It was such a devastating result that the Nationals leader Troy Grant and his 
deputy Adrian Piccoli stood down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/14/new-south-wales-deputy-premier-troy-grant-stands-down-as-nationals-leader>
 to make way for a new leadership team to push the “reset button”.

A rural revolt gathering strength

If there was a lesson from Trump, it was reflected in my Saturday paper run. 
As I wandered in to my little newsagent, I asked the first person, what about 
Trump hey?

“I reckon it’s a good thing. Something might happen at last.”

And that is the point. People in main streets are sick of the status quo. By 
their measure, it has got them nothing. Marginal areas like the fringes of 
Sydney and Brisbane have felt this way for a while. It has just spread to one 
of the safest conservative seats in NSW.


There are two issues here.

The issue for the new National leader is to contain the blaze. His challenge 
is that he will be flat-out just defending his current seats,now four of the 
six most marginal seats are National 
<http://blogs.abc.net.au/antonygreen/2015/04/final-nsw-election-results-preferences-and-a-new-pendulum.html>
 – five if they manage to hold on to Orange.


My bet is that we will now see the Nationals taking more separate stands. 
Strategists inside the federal party know Barnaby Joyce’s appeal is to shout 
like a Trump, even if it comes to nought in policy terms.


The other issue is for the Coalition more generally. I have written before on 
thecontradiction at the heart of the two Coalition constituencies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/bush-mail/2014/may/08/coalition-has-budget-blind-spot-when-it-comes-to-the-rural-poor>
 – diametrically opposed in need. If the Nationals voters peel off, heading for 
the likes of One Nation and the Shooters party, where to for the Coalition? 
Liberal MPs already believe the Nationals get too many resources for small, 
widespread populations.

Country people have been notoriously slow to use their balance of power. 
Western Australian Nationals leaderBrendon Grylls has done so with his 
Royalties for Regions 
<http://www.perthnow.com.au/news/western-australia/wa-nationals-leader-brendon-grylls-in-clash-over-tax-at-perth-business-breakfast/news-story/0291812dbd79628d63ea5c7a996df1f0>
 policy. More recently he has tried to do the same with amining tax 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-10-03/brendon-grylls-sticks-to-his-guns-on-wa-mining-tax/7898634>
. The next test on this front will be the Western Australian election in March.

If the rural giant ever wakes across the country, it will change the 
landscape. The Orange byelection is the tip of the iceberg.
 