
Rani Baug means “Queen’s Garden”; the queen being Victoria, after whom this 
verdant 48-acre Mumbai sprawl was named in 1861. Originally established as a 
botanical garden, it became one of India’s first zoos – and is now caught up in 
an empress-sized controversy.

As part of a hare-brained, Rs 450m ($6.7m) redevelopment project, 
<http://indianexpress.com/article/cities/mumbai/eight-penguins-arrive-in-mumbai-zoo-2937583/>
 last July eightHumboldt penguins 
<http://www.penguins-world.com/humboldt-penguin/> were imported from Seoul to 
take up residence in the zoo. Therecent death of one of the penguins, 
<http://indianexpress.com/article/cities/mumbai/after-death-humboldt-penguin-dory-animal-rights-activist-at-its-zoo-bmc-wants-contractor-to-replace-dead-bird-3101238/>
 an 18-month-old female called Dory, has only exacerbated what was an unpopular 
project from the start.

Mumbaikars’ original complaints were twofold: the unsuitability of the 
penguins’ new home in tropical Mumbai, and the administration’s shortcomings. 
The zoo’s inventory is now seriously depleted, the big cats having succumbed to 
old age and loneliness, and there are a depressing number of abandoned cages. 
The Jijamata Udyan – as it was renamed in 1969– fulfils neither of a zoo’s 
objectives of education and recreation.

Responding to accusations of inadequate cooling and cramped space in the 
penguins’ quarantine hold, the zoo’s director, Dr Sanjay Tripathi, maintained 
he had followed the manual provided by authorised zoological associations. Dory 
was not separated from the colony when she fell ill, Tripathi said, because 
this would have “added to her stress” 
<http://indianexpress.com/article/cities/mumbai/after-death-humboldt-penguin-dory-animal-rights-activist-at-its-zoo-bmc-wants-contractor-to-replace-dead-bird-3101238/>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqEPicGfP4qo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqEPicGfP4qo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqEPicGfP4qo&media=>
 The imported penguin chicks in their quarantine pool in Mumbai 
Despite Dory’s death, Tripathi is insisting on going ahead with another 
showpiece:the zoo expansion project 
<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/mumbai/BMC-plans-110-acre-extension-of-Byculla-zoo-in-Aarey-Colony/articleshow/40618453.cms>
, budgeted at Rs 1.5bn ($22.5m). In the congested central Mumbai neighbourhood 
of Byculla, a seven-acre African savannah will roll out, replete with zebras, 
giraffes and ostriches.

Yet it is Mumbai’s beleaguered common people, not exotic African species, who 
desperately need the space to run free. These seven prodigal acres should be 
more democratically deployed, rather than becoming one more exclusive 
recreational zone in this neglected city.

The zoo is controlled by the Brihanmumbai (Greater Mumbai) Municipal 
Corporation (BMC), which, despite a budget larger than some Indian states, has 
presided over the scandalous deterioration of what was, as recently as the 
1980s, stillUrbs Primus in Indis (“India’s primary city”, as the plaque on the 
city’s Gateway ofIndia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> monument puts 
it).

Rather than an African savannah, the BMC could put these useful millions 
towards fixing quotidian and long-term infrastructure problems. The earmarked 
plot is part of a defunct cotton mill which still supports a rich ecosystem in 
its old trees and waterbodies. It’s a rare inner-city opportunity considering 
that most mill lands have now been overtaken by a concrete-and-glass jungle.

The politician/builder nexus is the acknowledged villain in the urban tragedy 
that is Mumbai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/nov/24/mumbai-verge-imploding-polluted-megacity>
. Real estate is the new money spinner of the City of Gold, which got its 
cachet from those early cotton mills. A skyline once presided over by 
benevolent chimneys is now pierced by rapacious cranes.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fhuman-zoo-mumbai-animal-penguin-death-public-space%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9a2fa44839e336fa7a9d2d482b73aeb1d4315d3%2F0_0_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20human%20zoo%3A%20Mumbai's%20new%20animal%20park%20can't%20hide%20our%20chronic%20lack%20of%20space&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fhuman-zoo-mumbai-animal-penguin-death-public-space%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20human%20zoo%3A%20Mumbai%27s%20new%20animal%20park%20can%27t%20hide%20our%20chronic%20lack%20of%20space&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fhuman-zoo-mumbai-animal-penguin-death-public-space%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9a2fa44839e336fa7a9d2d482b73aeb1d4315d3%2F0_0_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Mumbai’s population pressure has squeezed open space to just 1.28 sq metres 
per citizen. Photograph: Shailesh Andrade/Reuters 
With real-estate prices spiralling even in distant, grotty suburbs, any 
greening project appears dead on arrival. Open space has been squeezed to just
1.28 sq metres per citizen 
<http://indianexpress.com/article/cities/mumbai/most-areas-in-mumbai-lack-public-open-spaces-2826604/>
 – and even this figure is mocked by the law of averages.

Large tracts of playgrounds and public parks have been corralled for the 
privileged; many clubs built on reserved plots are owned by politicians for 
whom rules are bent. Endemic encroachment swallows another chunk; neglect and 
anti-social behaviour does the rest. The young and the old are the worst off as 
a result, but even long-married couples have nowhere to escape from their 
claustrophobic lives for a snatch of togetherness.

'Mumbai is on the verge of imploding'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/nov/24/mumbai-verge-imploding-polluted-megacity>
The new, rapacious Draft Development Plan might as well be called “the 
Developer Plan”. On its own reckoning, the total demand for open spaces by 2034 
will be 5,116 hectares – yet it provides for only 3,525 hectares, including 
both the present and the proposed. This means 2.76 sq metres of open space per 
person – twice the current allotment, but still far below the modestfour-metre 
national standard 
<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/mumbai/Open-spaces-study-for-DP-ignores-population-density/articleshow/27262099.cms>
. Moreover, “open space” is itself a cover-up: the meaningful term should be 
“freely accessible open space”.


PK Das, the activist architect recently awarded one of the first international 
Jane Jacobs medals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/oct/18/jane-jacobs-habitat-3-chief-joan-clos>
, condemns the DPP as the “exact opposite” of how cities should be envisioned. 
“It clearly undermines the interests of minimum open spaces required for 
physical quality of life and the environment,” he says.

According to Das, the most sinister aspect is section 33 of the Development 
Control Rules (DCR), which covers all concessions that can be granted. “This 
will densify the built environment further and reduce meaningful open spaces 
from the required 15-20% to 8%,” he warns.

It’s inevitable that as cities expand, public space contracts in physical and 
democratic terms, but Das speaks of a “double-sword attack ... The authorities 
don’t want to regularise the 500 acres of reserved open space which has been 
encroached upon, but don’t know how to reclaim it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fhuman-zoo-mumbai-animal-penguin-death-public-space%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2fe8fcde654512064f7f9e5e7d05f326598c83b1%2F0_86_3336_2001%2F3336.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20human%20zoo%3A%20Mumbai's%20new%20animal%20park%20can't%20hide%20our%20chronic%20lack%20of%20space&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fhuman-zoo-mumbai-animal-penguin-death-public-space%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20human%20zoo%3A%20Mumbai%27s%20new%20animal%20park%20can%27t%20hide%20our%20chronic%20lack%20of%20space&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fhuman-zoo-mumbai-animal-penguin-death-public-space%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2fe8fcde654512064f7f9e5e7d05f326598c83b1%2F0_86_3336_2001%2F3336.jpg>
 From 2010-11, 160 birds and animalsreportedly died 
<http://indiatoday.intoday.in/story/mumbai-zoo-high-mortality-deaths-animals-penguins/1/420042.html>
 at the zoo in Byculla, Mumbai. Photograph: Hindustan Times/via Getty Images 
Mumbai’s urban rot began with the redevelopment of its mill lands, covering 
600 acres in the heart of the city. To favour mill owners and developers, the 
ruling chief minister unilaterally “tweaked” DCR 58 in 2001, so that instead of
all the land being shared equally by the owners, the Maharashtra Housing and 
Development Authority and the BMC, now only “vacant, open spaces” on these mill 
lands came under the tripartite formula. Instead of the expected 166 acres, the 
city got less than 58. The public was cheated of the promised open spaces; the 
former millworkers were deprived of long-awaited housing. Only the owners, 
developers and their patrons made a killing.

Later came the proposed opening up of 800 acres of Mumbai Port Trust land 
<https://www.google.co.uk/webhp?sourceid=chrome-instant&ion=1&espv=2&ie=UTF-8#q=Mumbai+Port+Trust+land+28km+2008>
 on 28km of the eastern waterfront. Most Mumbaikars had never heard of it, let 
alone seen it, though it stretches right behind the old commercial and 
residential areas.

In 2014, plans were put forward by various stakeholders, among them 
environmentalists wanting to preserve the oil-slicked mudflats which still 
attract 140 varieties of birds, including the migrant pink flamingos. But there 
seems to be no sign of an integrated, democratic redevelopment – which is a 
colossal pity, because the now-unseen sea could open up its aesthetic and 
therapeutic benefits to the middle and poorer classes living in its vicinity.

Charles Correa wanted to design a better Mumbai – but the city let him down
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jun/18/charles-correa-mumbai-bachi-karkaria-tribute>
Instead, there have been waves of notifications exempting bays and creeks from 
the Coastal Regulation Zone, and reducing the ban on construction from500m from 
the high-tide line to a pointless 100m 
<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/mumbai/Eased-CRZ-may-see-development-boom-on-coastline/articleshow/44862349.cms>
.

Thus the zoo’s exotic penguins and giraffes may find themselves better off 
than ordinary Mumbaikars desperate for a breath of free, fresh air in green and 
open spaces. Everyone is deprived: kids, grandparents, parents, and – that 
object of widespread indignant rage – “kuppals” (young couples in need of 
togetherness).

But here’s an amusing twist: the Five Gardens are an unbelievable oasis in 
central Mumbai’s congested Dadar. Here, elderly residents of the surrounding 
Parsi colony would sit in convivial huddles each evening on the wooden benches 
– as did those kuppals.

Unfortunately, their “shameless” canoodling so offended the local municipal 
authority that itordered the lovely old benches be pulled out 
<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/mumbai/Removal-of-VIP-benches-now-may-damage-Five-Gardens-costly-turf/articleshow/34350715.cms>
, to be replaced by ugly concrete single-seaters. This deprived the fading 
members of an ageing community of their daily warmth and companionship. And 
what of the offending couples? Ah, they loved the change, because now they 
could get on with their business sitting on each other’s laps.


Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 