
That was the year that was

And so 2016 nears its end, the year of England’s revival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/03/england-australia-fast-start-no2>
, Ireland’svictory over the All Blacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/05/ireland-new-zealand-rugby-union-report>
, Saracens’domination of Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/15/toulon-saracens-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
 and Cinderella Connacht,who had a ball in the Pro12 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/28/connacht-leinster-pro12-final>. 
It was also the year when the authorities tried to find space on the pitch by 
telling referees to flourish yellow and red cards like an overzealous traffic 
warden slapping tickets on parked cars.

Conor Murray: ‘You can usually process death. But I feel Axel should be here’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/22/conor-murray-munster-ireland-anthony-foley-interview>
The next two years will tell how far money, in the form of the euro, yen and 
pound, is bellowing rather than talking, asset stripping South Africa and 
Australia and forcing New Zealand to increase its wage bill by more than half.

For much of the professional era, New Zealand, South Africa and Australia have 
occupied the top three positions of the world rankings, winning seven of the 
eight World Cups between them, but while the All Blacks end the year still on 
top, England have moved into second place and a strong Six Nations will ensure 
Ireland dislodge Australia from third.

It is against this backdrop that the debate over the international fixture 
schedule should be conducted, along with the issue of revenue sharing but it is 
typically partisan, which means there will be no meaningful change, despite the 
potential implications in the next decade. Self-serving administrators should 
beware of creating a vacuum to be filled by clubs with increasingly more money 
to spend.

That is for tomorrow. In the last Breakdown of the year, it is the time to 
look back and hand out a few awards.

Team of the year

In terms of achievement, England stand out after going through the year 
undefeated. If the team to beat remains New Zealand, the team of 2016 is 
England,grand slam winners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/19/england-win-six-nations-grand-slam-france-match-report>
 and four-times victors over the side whoshoved them out of the World Cup, 
Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/03/england-australia-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
. Under Eddie Jones, they have become smarter and more self-reliant. They still 
have a way to go but players such as Owen Farrell, the Vunipola brothers, 
George Kruis and Ben Youngs are looking top-drawer internationals, with George 
Ford, Maro Itoje, Jonathan Joseph and Joe Launchbury very close behind. And 
then there are James Haskell, Chris Robshaw, Dan Cole, Dylan Hartley and Mike 
Brown, veterans in comparison, who have developed new rules of engagement. 
England’s depth will worry the All Blacks.

New Zealand rampaged through the Rugby Championship, making light of the loss 
of players such as Richie McCaw and Dan Carter, with more than 800 caps between 
them, but at a time when the All Blacks hadbroken the record for consecutive 
Test match victories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/22/new-zealand-make-history-beat-australia-all-blacks-18-consecutive-wins>
 for a tier-one nation and the word invincible was being mentioned, Ireland 
blew them away in the Windy City.

A year ago, it was the northern hemisphere that was trying to locate its navel 
after a largely dismal World Cup

There was a big gap between England, New Zealand and the rest. Australia may 
be third in the world rankings but they had a sobering year after reaching the 
2015 World Cup final, beaten three times by England and by New Zealand. The 
Wallabies have for more than 30 years belied union’s minority status in the 
country by consistently producing teams of high quality and providing 
innovative coaching but with money talking loudly in Europe and Japan the union 
there has had to spend more on the elite end of the game to try to retain 
players at the expense of the grassroots.

There has been a drop in participation numbers in Australia and a number of 
former internationals have called for action to be taken immediately. South 
Africa are being similarly squeezed and the Springboks endured their least 
successful year, losing eight internationals, one in Italy, and suffering a 
record home defeat by the All Blacks. This week, Western Province went into 
provisional liquidation.

A year ago, it was the northern hemisphere that was trying to locate its navel 
after a largely dismal World Cup, spectators after the quarter-final stage. Now 
England are second in the rankings behind New Zealand and Ireland have defeated 
the southern hemisphere’s big three in one year for the first time, having 
recorded their maiden victory over the All Blacks.

France are playing more like France again rather than some England and South 
African hybrid and are at last trying to maximise the potential of both clubs 
and country, Scotland are stirring, needing to avoid going into hibernation 
again during the Six Nations, Argentina are fixated on Super Rugby and the 
Rugby Championship, Italy are at the start of the Conor O’Shea era while Wales 
are trying to find life after Warrenball, winning matches last month rather 
than admirers.

Coach of the year

Eddie Jones has been the most written about, ever-ready with a quip and a 
master of mind games. It is hard to look beyond him for the award, given the 
scale of England’s recovery, even if their best is still to come. He has 
enjoyed a commodity that deserted his predecessor, Stuart Lancaster, at crucial 
moments, luck, but he has made his experience count; uncomplicated and unfussy. 
He has playing resources envied by his rivals together with the financial 
muscle of the richest union in the world and is making them count.

Another grand slam would result in England breaking New Zealand’s record of 
consecutive international victories but they go to Cardiff and end the 
championship in Dublin. The match against Ireland is being billed as a likely 
grand slam decider but this year is proof enough that it rarely pays to look 
too far ahead.

Steve Hansen has piloted New Zealand with skill after the loss of so many 
players who played a major role in the2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/oct/23/rugby-world-cup-richie-mccaw-new-zealand-france>
 and2015 World Cup successes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/31/new-zealand-australia-rugby-world-cup-final-match-report>
. In one sense, the defeat by Ireland was good for him because it gave him the 
opportunity to see how his newcomers would respond to the unfamiliar; he was 
not disappointed. The All Blacks have a team for the modern era, athletic, 
astute, aggressive and adroit. A star.

Joe Schmidt enjoyed a strong second half to the year with Ireland, who at the 
start of the Six Nations looked to have come to a stop tactically. England and 
Ireland will carry the Lions’ banner in New Zealand, tactically as well as in 
terms of personnel. A fear of Warren Gatland will be the physical and mental 
state of players whose season will stretch into an 11th month, coupled with 
scant preparation time but a few have already had some time off and the 
crackdown on tackles that have the potential to be dangerous should earn a few 
some weeks on the sidelines.

Player of the year

England have a few candidates for player of the year: Billy Vunipola, Farrell 
and Kruis. The latter’s contribution has been obscured by the fuss over Itoje 
but the second-row is the oil that keeps England’s engine ticking over, strong 
in the set pieces and the loose. He does not stand out but is outstanding.

No one, though, has made more of an impact than the New Zealand outside-half 
Beauden Barrett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/13/the-breakdown-beauden-barrett-artistry-fly-half>
. The question how New Zealand could follow Dan Carter has been emphatically 
answered with nine tries and a tidal wave of attacking rugby. Those teams 
struggling to adapt to the new order, not least Wales and Northampton, should 
note the positioning of Barrett at outside-half, standing flat and maximising 
opportunities. His default mode is not defensive.

The hooker Dane Coles has also enjoyed a prominent 2016 and Ben Smith, a 
target for virtually every club in Europe with the money to spare, remains a 
reader of a game without compare. Ireland’s Robbie Henshaw and Conor Murray 
finished the year strongly, Facundo Isa made an impact at No8 for Argentina, 
Liam Williams fizzed in a less than vintage Wales side, not least in New 
Zealand in the summer, and Australia’s Bernard Foley showed he can rival 
Barrett when his forward generate momentum. Barrett, though, epitomises the 
spirit of the age.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthe-breakdown-best-of-2016-rugby-union%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f9f91ab3f4dc2355fefc615585d007ea0f2653e%2F17_137_2972_1783%2F2972.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Breakdown%E2%80%99s%20best%20of%202016%20in%20rugby%20union&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthe-breakdown-best-of-2016-rugby-union%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Breakdown%E2%80%99s%20best%20of%202016%20in%20rugby%20union&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthe-breakdown-best-of-2016-rugby-union%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f9f91ab3f4dc2355fefc615585d007ea0f2653e%2F17_137_2972_1783%2F2972.jpg>
 New Zealand’s Beauden Barrett left his rivals in his wake during 2016. 
Photograph: Anthony Au-Yeung/Getty Images 
Club of the year

The club of the year should be Saracens, Premiership and European champions 
who in 2016 only lost to one club, twice, when able to pick from a full squad. 
Their rise in recent seasons has helped Eddie Jones because they stand out in 
the English club scene, pursued by Wasps and Bath, with the rest some distance 
behind. Saracens may have assembled a squad of all the talents but as important 
to their success is the team spirit they have fostered, which makes the whole 
even greater than the sum of its parts.

But then there is Connacht, the Leicester City of rugby union, who under Pat 
Lam came from nowhere to win the Pro12. If they did not make the best of starts 
to this season, they have grown into it and are well set to qualify for the 
quarter-finals of the European Champions Cup for the first time. Lam, missed by 
his former club Northampton, is off to Bristol, which will not be the last stop 
on his coaching jersey. A joint award for two teams who do it their way.

A lack of Christmas spirit

This is the season of giving but when it involves two fingers it is hardly in 
the Christmas spirit. In the last week, Johan Goosen has announced his 
retirement from the game at the age of 24 to pursue consultative work and Denny 
Solomona has left Castleford, where he was under contract, andswitched codes to 
join Sale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/13/sale-controversial-denny-solomona-deal-castleford-rugby-league-union>
 after saying he had retired.

Reports in France suggest that Goosen made his decision to get out of his 
contract with Racing 92 early and, to avoid being bogged down by registration 
problems, move countries and join Gloucester. Castleford are taking Sale to 
court over Solomona, as well as the player himself and his agent, claiming the 
contract should hold even if he changes sports.

The Rugby Football Union has not opposed Solomona’s move, saying it is a 
matter for the clubs involved to resolve as it relates to a player’s employment 
status in a different sport, but whether it would have the same view should the 
South Africa international Goosen sign for Gloucester would probably depend on 
what pressure, if any, the French Rugby Federation exerted on it.

Would the RFU have the same hands-off approach should Owen Farrell announce in 
the weeks of the opening Six Nations international next February against France 
that he was retiring and a few hours later announce he was returning to rugby 
league? Or Eddie Jones pack it in and then be unveiled in the other code? Of 
course not but as rugby league does not have the money to attract a leading 
union player, or coach, it knows it is an academic question.

As the governing body, it should be concerned about the integrity of the 
sport, which has been compromised by the Solomona affair. When rugby union was 
amateur, it suffered at the hands of league, in Wales especially, but players 
were then free to make the choice unencumbered by contractual obligations. The 
Solomona case is different and leaves rugby league clubs operating in a climate 
of uncertainty.

There is no history of cooperation between the two codes, hardly surprising, 
given the draconian punishment dished out in the amateur era to union players 
who were contaminated in some way by league; even talking to a professional 
club was enough to get some stripped of their amateur status.

It should be different now. The Rugby Football League chief executive, Nigel 
Wood,said he is worried <http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/rugby-league/38341209> 
about the implications for his game through up by the Solomona case, arguing 
that the sanctity of contracts needed to be respected, as would the head of a 
rugby union should be positions be reversed.

Sale maintain it is a contractual issue, not a cross-code conflict but having 
signed a three-year contract with Solomona have they given him licence to 
return to rugby league during that time without a transfer fee or compensation?

The Goosen affair, should the stories in France linking him to Gloucester have 
substance, is different because he would not be changing sports but it would be 
equally as cynical. Were he to look to change clubs in the Top 14, and 
Montpellier, a refuge for South Africans, are said to be interested, he would 
have to sit idle for 18 months under league rules, which would not apply should 
be relocate to another country.

So Goosen could not play for another club in France just as Castleford hold 
Solomona’s registration in rugby league but 21 years after embracing 
professionalism, union has not lost all trace of its amateur heritage. World 
Rugby tends to maintain a watching brief in disputes, leaving them to unions to 
sort out and only intervening as a last resort, as it did with Joe Marler 
during this year’s Six Nations, but a line needs to be established, and quickly.

Castleford are right to take Solomona to court, where it may be decided that a 
player retiring is held to mean from all sport rather than the one he is 
employed in at the time and that the rugby league club is due compensation for 
the remaining period of his contract, which presumably Sale would end up paying.

The implications are as great for union as they are for league. What is there 
to stop clubs making huge offers to players in New Zealand who are under 
contract there? Tell them to retire and await delivery of a handsome cheque, a 
recipe for anarchy that would threaten one of the sport’s precepts, that the 
international game has primacy.

Test rugby is union’s financial driver but with South Africa in a state of 
collapse and Australia struggling financially, should New Zealand decline, a 
vacuum would be created that clubs would surely look to fill. Which is why the 
unions and the body they make up, World Rugby, should give themselves far more 
than a watching brief over the Solomona case. Their duty lies beyond their own 
domain.

All that remains is to wish everyone the merriest of Christmases and, with a 
nod to those who like sampling the products of some of the game’s backers, a 
hoppy new year!

• This is an extract taken from the Breakdown, the Guardian’s weekly rugby 
union email. To subscribe just visit this page and follow the instructions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/18/sign-up-to-the-breakdown>

 