
One of the genius touches in Wes Anderson’s film The Grand Budapest Hotel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/06/the-grand-budapest-hotel-wes-anderson-review>
 was to set it, not in Budapest, but in a generic eastern European country from 
central casting, between the wars. The fictional state of Zubrowka starts out 
as a decadent monarchy, becomes a mafia state, goes fascist, gets conquered, is 
absorbed into the Warsaw Pact and then, as a form of closure in the movie, 
becomes the classic, inconsequential member of the EU, somewhere east of the 
Alps.

But in the real-life countries of eastern Europe, there is no closure with the 
past. In fact, with the rise of rightwing nationalism and outright fascism, 
Anderson’s film begins to look less funny and more prescient. On 22 May, 
Austria facesa presidential run-off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/25/austrian-far-right-partys-triumph-presidential-poll-turmoil-norbert-hofer>
, where the choice is between the leader of the far-right Freedom party and a 
Green standing as an independent. In the first round, the combined votes of the 
two main parties that govern Austria – the socialists and the conservatives – 
would still have had them running third. The far-right won in every region 
except Vienna, and, even then, won half of the Austrian capital’s sub-districts.

The swing happened despite the centrist coalition government putting razor 
wire on Austria’s border 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/04/austrian-police-barbed-wire-border-chancellor>
 with Hungary, deporting thousands of refugees and demonstratively excluding 
Greece from the summit that effectively closed the Balkan route. Police in 
Austria reporta 60% year-on-year rise in racist incidents 
<http://www.thelocal.at/20160322/racism-in-austria-at-its-highest-in-years>, 
while those who monitor racism online report numerous instances of 
Nazi-glorification linked to anti-migrant hate speech.

Take a 60-minute drive from Vienna to Bratislava, the capital of neighbouring 
Slovakia, and you’ll find in the parliament 14 MPs from an outright fascist 
party and another 15 from a cleaned-up rightwing nationalist grouping. The 
socialist prime minister, Robert Fico, had fought the March election on a 
platform of accepting “not one Muslim” refugee and defying the EU quota system, 
and has now taken the rightwing nationalists into a coalition government. Two 
hours away is Budapest, where the rightwing nationalist prime minister, Victor 
Orbán, is under challenge from the far-right Jobbik party. Jobbik once had a 
jackbooted militia but is now, too, trying to clean up its fascist image. An
opinion poll <> last year found 24% of Hungarians willing to express open 
antisemitic views, with the figure rising to 49% in the capital.

Go north to Poland and the rightwing conservative Law and Justice party is 
busy altering the constitution to suppress judicial oversight of the government 
and stifle the press. Of course, the emergence of rightwing conservative 
parties that oppose migration and want to break up the EU is not confined to 
eastern Europe. We’ve got Ukip here and Marine Le Pen’s Front National, which 
is currently hoveringjust under 30% 
<http://www.bva.fr/data/sondage/sondage_fiche/1849/fichier_pop2017_-_intentions_de_vote_-_vague_1_-_210416c60cf.pdf>
 in the run-up to next year’s presidential election and would come first in two 
out of three likely scenarios next April.

But the combined rise of authoritarian nationalism, outright fascism and 
anti-minority racism in the east of Europe should alarm us more. First, because 
it’s happening in immature democracies, where the media is oligarchic and under 
state manipulation, graft is endemic and levels of democratic consciousness and 
traditions are low. When a far-right politician in eastern Europe wants to make 
the kind of transition Le Pen has made for the FN – from squadism to Chanel 
suits – it does not have to travel so far. Second, because it is not being 
driven by the normal driver of extremism – economic failure. GDP per head in 
Slovakia, for example, rose sharply after EU membership in 2004. And while 
unemployment there remains high, at 10%, it’s fallen by a third in the past 
three years. This is, instead, an existential swing away from centrism in 
eastern Europe – based on anxieties about traditional lifestyles, above all in 
response to the refugee crisis. Third, the rise of the far-right in eastern 
Europe is part of a geopolitical game. Areport for the Martens Centre 
<http://www.martenscentre.eu/sites/default/files/publication-files/far-right-political-parties-in-europe-and-putins-russia.pdf>
 last year pointed out, despite the differences between the patchwork fascisms 
of the region, “their astonishingly similar stance towards Putin’s Russia”.

The European far-right not only shares Putin’s goal – the breakup of Nato and 
the EU – but sees his authoritarian, socially conservative nationalism as a 
model for how their own countries should be run. While the far-right inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> is not simply a creation of the 
Kremlin, the concrete ties are manifest: regular appearances on the Russian 
media, regular visits, invitations to monitor elections in Russia and its 
allied states, and then money, with Marine Le Pen’s €9m (£7m) loan from a 
Russian bank the best known example.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Fdont-let-trump-fool-you-rightwing-populism-is-the-new-normal-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F5%2F1452007986577%2FKP_1216525_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Don't%20let%20Trump%20fool%20you%3A%20rightwing%20populism%20is%20the%20new%20normal%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Fdont-let-trump-fool-you-rightwing-populism-is-the-new-normal-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Don%27t%20let%20Trump%20fool%20you%3A%20rightwing%20populism%20is%20the%20new%20normal%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Fdont-let-trump-fool-you-rightwing-populism-is-the-new-normal-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F5%2F1452007986577%2FKP_1216525_crop_640x480.jpg>
Don’t let Trump fool you: rightwing populism is the new normal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2016/jan/06/dont-let-trump-fool-you-rightwing-populism-is-the-new-normal-video>
Faced with these developments, the EU and its centrist governments seem 
paralysed. Article 7 of the EU Treaty allows a country to be sanctioned or 
suspended if it commits a severe breach of fundamental rights. But it needs 
two-thirds majority in the parliament and has never been invoked. This month it 
must draw the line in Austria. Europe must make clear it will refuse to 
recognise a far-right president in Vienna. It’s their democratic right to elect 
a cleaned-up fascist; it’s ours – by treaty – to suspendAustria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/austria> from the EU.

We know the EU can act ruthlessly against a government it does not like – 
because we watched it try to smash the most anti-racist, pro-social justice 
government ever elected, in Greece last summer. Today the countries that stood 
alongside Germany in its attempt to boot Greece out of the euro are the same 
ones who refuse to take refugees, whose media and judiciaries are under threat. 
As Europe dithers in the face of the authoritarians and racists, the 
populations in the mature democracies that founded the EU should insist: our 
grandparents didn’t defeat fascism in 1945 to see it weasel back into the 
mainstream now, dressed in suits instead of uniforms, but trailing the same 
pathetic victimhood that excused the crimes of the past.
 