
Sito Veracruz lives in the centre of Amsterdam. Some years ago, he 
enthusiastically rented out a room on Airbnb. “At first I thought it was a 
great idea,” he recalls. “But I now realise there are side-effects that we 
didn’t foresee.Airbnb <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/airbnb> can be a 
threat for cities.”

Veracruz, an urban planner, witnesses daily how the large number of apartments 
rented out on Airbnb and other short-stay rental websites are bringing more and 
more tourists to the central areas of Amsterdam. He says this has a negative 
effect on life in these neighbourhoods – and he’s not only talking about the 
nuisance that noisy, partying tourists can create for the local residents.

“I think it’s obvious that Airbnb contributes to gentrification,” Veracruz 
says. “It drives up real estate prices that are already searing in Amsterdam. 
Neighbourhood business that create ties between residents are replaced by 
businesses that only focus on tourists. Bike rental companies replace local 
grocery shops. And apartments that are continuously rented out to tourists are 
lost to people who want to actually live here.”

Such is Veracruz’s concern that he is trying to create an alternative service: 
Fairbnb <https://www.meetup.com/FairBnB/events/232918052/>. What he proposes is 
a short-stay rental platform that is beneficial to the city – with hosts who 
are registered with the council, and neighbours who are involved in the 
management of the platform.

Gentrification is a global problem. It's time we found a better solution
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/sep/29/gentrification-global-problem-better-solution-oliver-wainwright>
“I am talking about a platform that really complies with the principles of a 
fair, non-extractive and collaborative economy,” Veracruz says. “We would like 
to encourage visitors to stay in areas where they are not a disturbance, but 
could add something to the neighbourhood.”

The issues triggered by the global rise of Airbnb are a subject of ongoing 
debate in Amsterdam. It has become extremely popular, and lucrative, to rent 
out a flat or room here on one of the short-stay rental platforms, of which 
Airbnb is by far the biggest. An estimated 22,000 rooms and flats in the Dutch 
capital are nowoffered for rent this way 
<https://www.amsterdam.nl/wonen-leefomgeving/wonen/nieuws-wonen/amsterdam-versterkt/#h80fede74-010e-487d-846c-949eb3dcc794>
 at least once a year. In the most popular neighbourhoods, as many as one in 
six homeowners rent out a room or flat on Airbnb.

Earlier this year, the Dutch bank ING stated in a report 
<https://www.ing.nl/nieuws/nieuws_en_persberichten/2016/04/airbnb_heeft_flink_opwaarts_effect_op_amsterdamse_huizenprijzen.html>
 that Airbnb drives up real estate prices, because people are prepared to pay 
more for a flat when they can make extra money by renting it out. The bank 
found the effect to be “considerable”, although not everybody agrees on this 
conclusion. “The studies that have been done are not very well founded,” says 
Janine Harbers, a spokeswoman for Amsterdam’s city council. “But some effect 
seems likely.”

According to Peter Boelhouwer, professor of housing systems at the University 
of Technology in Delft: “When so many flats are rented out to visitors, it has 
an effect on the availability of real estate. There is a great shortage in the 
housing market in Amsterdam and this doesn’t do it any good – but one shouldn’t 
exaggerate it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fthe-airbnb-effect-amsterdam-fairbnb-property-prices-communities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F482aa0bd7765f422596123edfe2b85ac33e34ba9%2F0_0_4724_3454%2F4724.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20'Airbnb%20effect'%3A%20is%20it%20real%2C%20and%20what%20is%20it%20doing%20to%20a%20city%20like%20Amsterdam%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fthe-airbnb-effect-amsterdam-fairbnb-property-prices-communities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20%27Airbnb%20effect%27%3A%20is%20it%20real%2C%20and%20what%20is%20it%20doing%20to%20a%20city%20like%20Amsterdam%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fthe-airbnb-effect-amsterdam-fairbnb-property-prices-communities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F482aa0bd7765f422596123edfe2b85ac33e34ba9%2F0_0_4724_3454%2F4724.jpg>
 Amsterdam hosts millions of tourists each year, with many of them choosing to 
stay in Airbnb rentals. Photograph: Horacio Villalobos/Corbis via Getty Images 
Boelhouwer says the “Airbnb effect” is by no means a primary factor in the 
city’s gentrification, which “has been going on for a long time in the central 
areas of Amsterdam”.

“The council welcomed it at first because it meant an upgrading of the city,” 
he adds. “But now that it continues, you see the rise of very unilateral 
neighbourhoods. Families with children are leaving this city because they can’t 
afford to live in the good areas.”

In fact, Amsterdam has taken some steps to address the impact of Airbnb on its 
housing markets. Back in 2014, it was the first city tosign an agreement with 
the multinational 
<http://www.iamsterdam.com/en/media-centre/city-hall/press-releases/2014-press-room/amsterdam-airbnb-agreement>
, which saw Airbnb agree to levy and hand over tourist taxes to the city, 
remove addresses where the council has intervened because of complaints, and 
inform users of its rules (typically, that apartments should be rented out for 
no longer than 60 days per year, to not more than four guests at a time).

What the city has been unable to do, however, is make Airbnb disclose the 
identity of those hosts who do not stick to its rules. The company still 
refuses to do so on privacy grounds.

This means that enforcement of these rules is difficult. According to the 
independent websiteInside Airbnb <http://insideairbnb.com/amsterdam/>, around 
half of the Amsterdam flats on Airbnb are rented out more than 60 days a year. 
A quarter of the hosts were found to have multiple listings – with some 
identified as “more likely to be running a commercial business and to violate 
the rules”.

Has Vancouver found the solution to a super-heated housing market?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/sep/30/vancouver-canada-house-prices-solution-super-heated-housing-market>
Harbers from the city council, however, says the problem is less serious than 
Inside Airbnb suggests. “According to our statistics, a majority 81% of the 
hosts respect the rules – and we are working on [those who do not]. We have 
established a hotline for complaints as well as researching online, and we have 
raised the fine for people who break the rules to €20,000.”

Bernard D’heygere, a spokesman for Airbnb, describes its relationship with 
Amsterdam 
<https://www.airbnbaction.com/setting-priorities-for-airbnb-in-amsterdam/> as “
our longest and strongest partnership with any city in the world”.

“Airbnb puts money in the pockets of regular Amsterdammers,” he adds. “The 
typical hostearns €3,800 a year 
<https://www.airbnbaction.com/sharing-data-on-the-airbnb-community-in-amsterdam/>
 by sharing their space for a total of 28 nights [each year]. And we will 
continue to work with policymakers to make the city’s communities stronger.”

Fairbnb creator Veracruz recently held his first “meet-up”, with about 20 
like-minded people who were keen to collaborate on his new rental platform. 
“With Fairbnb,” he says, “we hope we can reduce some of the pressure on 
Amsterdam’s popular neighbourhoods.”

Meanwhile, the city council has opened new negotiations with Airbnb. Whether 
this will address the problem of identifying those hosts and guests who don’t 
respect the rules, remains to be seen.

Are you experiencing or resisting gentrification in your city? Share your 
stories in the comments below,through our dedicated callout 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/cities/2016/sep/19/city-resist-gentrification-displacement>
, or on Twitter using #GlobalGentrification
 