
Tony Blair is damned. We have seen establishment whitewashes in the past: from 
Bloody Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/jan/29/derry-bloody-sunday-forty-years>
 toHillsborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/sep/10/hillsborough-lie-post-truth-politics>
, officialdom has repeatedly conspired to smother truth in the interests of the 
powerful. But not this time. The Chilcot inquiry was becoming a satirical 
byword for takingfarcically long 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/04/chilcot-inquiry-iraq-war-whitewash>
 to execute a task; but Sir John will surely go down in history for delivering 
the most comprehensivelydevastating verdict on any modern prime minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/06/chilcot-report-crushing-verdict-tony-blair-iraq-war>
.

Those of us who marched against the Iraq calamity can feel no vindication, 
only misery that we failed to prevent a disaster that robbed hundreds of 
thousands of lives – those of 179 British soldiers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/06/250-dead-attack-war-iraq-chilcot-report>
 among them – and which injured, traumatised and displaced millions of people: 
a disaster that bred extremism on a catastrophic scale.

One legacy of Chilcot should be to encourage us to be bolder in challenging 
authority, in being sceptical of official claims, in standing firm against an 
aggressive agenda spun by the media. Lessons must be learned, the war’s 
supporters will now declare. Don’t let them get away with it. The lessons were 
obvious to many of us before the bombs started falling.

For what Chilcot has done is illustrate that assertions from the anti-war 
movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/feb/15/did-you-protest-iraq-invasion>
 were not conspiracy theories, or far-fetched, wild-eyed claims. “Increasingly, 
we appear to have a government who are looking for a pretext for war rather 
than its avoidance,”declared the anti-war Labour MP Alan Simpson 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200203/cmhansrd/vo030226/debtext/30226-24.htm>
 weeks before the invasion. And indeed, as Chilcot revealed, Blair had told 
George W Bush in July 2002: “I will be with you, whatever. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/06/tony-blair-deliberately-exaggerated-threat-from-iraq-chilcot-report-war-inquiry>
”

This, as Chilcot puts it, was no war of “last resort”: this was a war of 
choice, unleashed “before the peaceful options for disarmament had been 
exhausted”. Simpson said: “We appear to produce dossiers of mass deception, 
whose claims are dismissed as risible almost as soon as they are released.” And 
now Chilcot agrees that the war was indeed based on “flawed intelligence and 
assessments” that were not “challenged, and they should have been”. Nelson 
Mandela was among those who, in the runup to war, accused Blair and Bush of 
undermining the United Nations. Mandela lies vindicated. As Chilcot says: “We 
consider that the UK was … undermining the security council’s authority.”

So many warnings. A month before the invasion the US senator Gary Hart said 
that war would increase the risk of terrorism. “We’re going to kick open a 
hornet’s nest, and we are not prepared in this country,”he warned 
<http://www.sfgate.com/politics/article/Hart-says-Iraq-invasion-will-increase-terror-2671154.php>
.

Consider this, from the anti-war Dissident Voice website 
<http://www.dissidentvoice.org/Articles2/Mokhiber-Weissman_Iraq.htm> a month 
before the conflict: “A US attack and subsequent occupation of Iraq will 
provide new inspiration – and new recruitment fodder – for al-Qaida or other 
terrorist groups, and will stimulate a long-term increased risk of terrorism, 
either on US soil or against US citizens overseas.” It is not to belittle the 
authors to point out this was a statement of the obvious, except to those 
responsible for the war and their cheerleaders. Then read Chilcot: “Blair was 
warned that an invasion would increase the terror threat by al-Qaida and other 
groups.”

The former prime minister claimed that the terrible aftermath was only obvious 
in hindsight, yet Christian Aidwarned 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/2781783.stm> of “significant chaos and suffering 
in Iraq long after military strikes have ended”. An aid agency had far better 
foresight than the senior general who – at an off-the-record chat I attended at 
university – claimed that 99% of Iraq would be throwing flowers at the invading 
soldiers. As Chilcot put it, the government “failed to take account of the 
magnitude of the task of stabilising, administering and reconstructing Iraq”.

Blair’s risible claim is wrong: as Chilcot puts it, “the conclusions reached 
by Blair after the invasion did not require the benefit of hindsight”. The 
threats of everything from Iranian meddling to al-Qaida activity “were each 
explicitly identified before the invasion”.WhenRobin Cook resigned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2003/mar/17/labour.uk> from the cabinet 
before the invasion, he declared that “Iraq probably has no weapons of mass 
destruction in the commonly understood sense of the term”. Chilcot has now 
damned the intelligence services for believing otherwise.

The Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament threatened a legal challenge against the 
government in 2002 if it went to warwithout a second security council resolution
 
<http://www.nuclearinfo.org/article/archive/uk-government-faces-legal-challenge-over-war-iraq>
. Several lawyers and Kofi Annan, the then UN secretary general, are among 
those who have since described the invasion as illegal.

The original advice by the UK attorney general, Lord Goldsmith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2005/apr/27/iraq.iraq2>, was indeed that a 
war without a second resolution would be illegal, but Chilcot highlights the 
fact that by the time Goldsmith gave a subsequent oral statement he appears, 
mysteriously, to have changed his mind.

The legality of the war may not have been within Chilcot’s remit. But even 
then he finds that the process through which the government arrived at its 
legal basis “was not satisfactory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/06/iraq-war-inquiry-chilcot-tony-blair-prosecute>
”. Surely the legality of this calamitous war must now be challenged in a court 
of law.

If Blairites want a future they must divorce themselves from Blair | Owen Jones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/07/blairites-divorce-tony-blair-chilcot-report-iraq-labour-mps>
We always claimed that the Iraq war was based on lies. Reading prewar 
articles, such as “The lies we are told about Iraq 
<http://articles.latimes.com/2003/jan/05/opinion/op-marshall5>” in the Los 
Angeles Times, is instructive indeed. The Chilcot report did not accuse Blair 
of lying. But too much emphasis is put on this question. Blair was clearly 
determined to go to war long in advance. He relied on dubious evidence to make 
his case, evidence that others at the time knew to be dubious. Did he deceive 
himself, or the public, or was he just driven by the righteousness of a messiah 
complex? He pursued a war with a dodgy prospectus that many at the time – 
including139 Labour MPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2003/mar/19/uk.houseofcommons2> – knew 
would result in disaster. And that is damning enough.

Let’s laud the Chilcot inquiry for giving the official seal to the truths we 
have always known, but be aware that this is all it has done. The truths it has 
exposed were there already, long before the gates of hell had been opened – as 
thesecretary general of the Arab League warned 
<http://www.arabnews.com/node/223999> would happen, before the invasion.

It was the obviousness of what was going to happen that created the biggest 
anti-war movement in history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/feb/14/iraq-war-2-million-transformed-politics>
. It was a movement belittled, not least by media that largely backed the rush 
to war. How perverse it was that those who opposed or criticised the war – from 
politicians to the BBC’s bosses – were the ones to lose their jobs, while Blair 
has since pursued his lucrative careerworking for dictators 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/07/blairites-divorce-tony-blair-chilcot-report-iraq-labour-mps>
.

Many cheerleaders of this great catastrophe still show scant remorse or 
penitence. Some even heckled the Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn – who campaigned 
against bothBritain’s backing for Saddam Hussein when he gassed the Kurds in 
the 1980s <https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/aug/18/letters.iraq>, and the 
2003 invasion – as he deliveredhis parliamentary response to Chilcot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jul/06/chilcot-report-live-inquiry-war-iraq?page=with:block-577cf2ade4b0445bf0e070d4>
 today.

And the horror continues, the 250 Iraqis killed by car bombings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/06/iraqs-interior-minister-resigns-in-wake-of-baghdad-bomb-attack>
 this weekend a devastating reminder of the chaos for which Blair must take 
responsibility. This was not a blunder, not an error, not a mistake: whatever 
the law decides, this was – from any moral standpoint – one of the gravest 
crimes of our time. Those responsible will be for ever damned. After today, we 
can single them out – and call them by name.
 