
On the pin-board in my office in parliament is a letter from the BCA, the 
Bangladesh Caterers Association, “established 1960” as the letterhead points 
out, to fight for the rights of Indian restaurant workers – the nearest thing 
we have to a curry trade union. It thanks me for raising the “curry crisis 
<https://amp.twimg.com/v/c76f5314-6c7c-4e34-b358-929f6b83abcf>” in the House of 
Commons to George Osborne last November. At the time I lamented thattwo Indian 
eateries a week were closing 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/london/immigration-curbs-a-threat-to-thriving-curry-restaurants-a3272066.html>
 and declared it would be anational tragedy 
<http://parliamentlive.tv/event/index/20a8bef5-ab08-455c-9183-7aecd54e1ea2?in=15:04:18>
 if this much-loved staple of theUK high street were to disappear 
<https://hansard.parliament.uk/Commons/2015-12-09/debates/15120945000028/Engagements#contribution-15120945000141>
.

A year later it seems so many more tragedies have unfolded – not least the 
referendum result. Osborne and David Cameron have gone; the latter has 
completely left the crime scene, and the leave supporting BCA, furious that it 
has beensold down the river by the Brexiteers 
<https://www.facebook.com/Oli.Khan.UK/videos/1067523666627127/>, is spitting 
feathers in the FT and Mirror. I hate to say “I told you so” but we remainers 
were always sceptical when the pro-leave side promised that a vote to leave the 
EU would meansubcontinental chefs would be welcomed with open arms 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/brexit-backing-curry-industry-furious-9190224#ICID=sharebar_twitter>
. Alas, the curry unions bought it.

The Economist has observed “The curry house is a British institution 
<http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21588077-future-curry-houses-looks-grim-giving-up-gosht>
”. At the high watermark of New Labour, Robin Cook declared chicken tikka 
masala was the national dish. Of course it is British Bangladeshis, not 
Indians, who are the main engine of the Indian restaurant industry, providing 
the UK’s balti, jalfrezi and korma dishes among others. I’m a product of the 
trade: my late father had two tandoori establishments at one time, and toiled 
tirelessly to support us. Even my mum did her share of unsociable hours for the 
Huqs’ curry career.

The contribution of the curry trade to the exchequer is substantial; it is 
estimated to be worth £5bn to the British economy, and annually employs 200,000 
people – but it hasstaffing problems 
<http://www.goldstarchefs.co.uk/recruitment/>. The British Bangla population is 
now coming of age and branching out – the nation’s most famous Bengali is 
probablyNadiya Hussain, last year’s Great British Bake Off winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/14/bake-off-nadiya-hussain-bbc-paul-hollywood-channel-4>
, a title attained not by making naan but cupcakes. My siblings and I didn’t 
fancy working in the family business – one became a Blue Peter presenter, while 
I became a lecturer and am now an MP. Following a familiar immigrant 
trajectory, there’s also been diasporic shift from the inner cities to the 
leafier suburbs.

Back in 1971 George Harrison sang “Bangladesh, sure looks like a mess”. This 
description now applies to the situation unleashed by the self-destructive 
decision to leave the EU following the monumental miscalculated gamble of the 
referendum. Government back-of-a-fag-packet immigration policy aiming to reduce 
immigration down to the tens of thousands is not only a flop but it’s 
unworkable. Constrained by dogma, the Tories are intent on aping Ukip rather 
than addressing genuine skills shortages in our economy be it in fruit-picking, 
IT or curry cooking. Another unwelcome byproduct of a vote that centred on 
immigration is the attendant climate of emboldened xenophobia and rocketing 
hate-crime – and we haven’t even left the EU yet.

When I was growing up we were all Asians together. Now faith seems to be more 
clearly asserted, and those who are mixed race make up an ever-bigger 
demographic. No party can take Asian votes for granted. Perhaps it was for this 
reason that Priti Patel was chosen to woo the subcontinental chefs during the 
referendum campaign. On the Today programme and elsewhere curry leaders 
accordingly came out for Leave, believing this was the only way to save their 
industry from extinction. I doubt that the curry constituency could have swung 
the result, but it was sorely misled.

This week, addressing the Commons from the opposition frontbench for the first 
time as newly promoted shadow home affairs minister, I asked about that 
promise. I wanted to know when we could expect the red carpet to be rolled out 
for curry cooks from the subcontinent. I got a big fat raspberry. Theresa May’s 
immigration minister declared that there are no plans to deviate from the 
long-stated strategy to have our own home-grown curry chefs rather than to 
import them. Just as Osborne said 12 months ago. No change there then. The 
pledge had as much value as the NHS money promised on the side of that infamous 
bus.

My office has also received an invitation to the glitzy British Curry awards. 
This year it promises the Right Hon Priti Patel at the event as chief guest. 
It’s not made the pin-board, even if we so-called “remoaners” have had some 
wind in our sails afteryesterday’s high court judgement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/parliament-must-trigger-brexit-high-court-rules>
. I’m giving the bash a miss – Brexit and its entanglement with curry has left 
a bit of a sour aftertaste.
 