
“You aren’t half as important as you think you are.” That was the implicit 
message for Britain in thestate of the European Union address 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/14/junckers-speech-was-all-about-concrete-ideas-to-heal-a-divided-eu>
 by European commission president Jean-Claude Juncker. It was a welcome signal 
for European citizens and politicians exasperated by British indecision and 
outright incompetence post-referendum. But it was a message unlikely to even 
register with all those pundits and politicians in Britain still convinced that 
the EU needs the UK more than vice versa.

Modelled on the rather more showily delivered American version, the state of 
the European Union speech marks the beginning of the political season in 
Brussels. With the Brexit vote less than three months ago, it naturally 
contained a number of allusions to British politics. Juncker stated that 
Europeans face “the unhappy prospect of a member leaving our ranks”. This he 
“respected” and “regretted”, as hehighlighted the rise in hate crimes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/sep/14/jean-claude-juncker-uk-a-la-carte-access-single-market-video>
 against Europeans in Britain since the Brexit vote. Since the penny does not 
seem to have dropped yet, Juncker reiterated that there is no way the UK can 
end up with a better deal post-Brexit than it enjoyed as a member.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fjean-claude-juncker-uk-a-la-carte-access-single-market-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Juncker%3A%20Europe%20cannot%20accept%20violence%20against%20Polish%20workers%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fjean-claude-juncker-uk-a-la-carte-access-single-market-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Juncker%3A%20Europe%20cannot%20accept%20violence%20against%20Polish%20workers%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fjean-claude-juncker-uk-a-la-carte-access-single-market-video&media=>
Juncker: Europe cannot accept violence against Polish workers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/sep/14/jean-claude-juncker-uk-a-la-carte-access-single-market-video>
But these were a handful of remarks scattered around a 6,000-word speech that 
took a good 50 minutes to deliver. Juncker wanted to address theconcerns that 
actually exercise Europeans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/13/jean-claude-juncker-eu-is-facing-existential-crisis>
: refugees, terrorism, economic stagnation, a dysfunctional eurozone 
architecture and Russian expansionism. Add to that the real possibility of 
chaos in Turkey, of EU-phobeMarine Le Pen winning the French presidential 
election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/07/francois-hollande-would-be-swept-aside-in-presidential-election-poll-shows>
 and of a Trump presidencyblowing up Nato 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/27/donald-trump-nato-isolationist>
 and it should be clear that Brexit is somewhere on page two or three of the EU 
priority list. In fact, the prospect of Brexit seems to have helped the EU at 
least in the short term, with a number of countries seeing an unexpected surge 
in support for the EU. In the words of prominent German member of the European 
parliament Manfred Weber: “Many people are now in favour of the EU [after the 
Brexit vote]. In Germany we have not had these results since the 1970s.”

Meanwhile in the Netherlands, the country often held up by Brexiteers as the 
next to leave, all major parties say they want to reform rather than leave the 
EU. It is onlyGeert Wilders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/18/dutch-far-right-leader-geert-wilders-goeson-trial-for-inciting-hatred>
’ PVV party that actually wants an exit. He currently polls at just under 20%.

Medical science uses the word “crisis” for the point where a patient either 
irrevocably collapses or turns the corner towards recovery. On the basis of 
Juncker’s speech, this is the stage where the commission now feels the EU and 
the eurozone find itself. Following the speech, Vivien Pertusot from the French 
Institute for International Relations called them the polycrises: urgent and 
potentially devastating crises occurring simultaneously and often amplifying or 
feeding on one another while driving member states apart.

Welcome to the world of restricted travel, British people | Chibundu Onuzo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/13/restricted-travel-british-people-nigerian-visa-passports>
“Never before have I seen so little common ground between our member states,” 
said Juncker, himself an EU veteran like few others. The EU is in greater 
danger than ever before, he continued, with greater levels of selfishness, 
nationalism and parochialism.

Yet Juncker also slipped in good news of the sort that somehow rarely reaches 
the mainstream British press. There had been one million jobs created in Spain 
over the past three years, and seven million more elsewhere. Public deficits 
are, on average, now below 2% across the eurozone, down from a terrifying 6.3% 
in 2009. Juncker might have added the eurozone’s healthy current account 
surplus, meaning it continues to export more than it imports. This is a stark 
contrast to the US and Britain, two nations that are becoming ever more 
indebted because they buy more from foreign countries than they sell.

Easily the most refreshing element in the speech, at least for those who have 
had to endure the Brexit “debate”, was Juncker’s emphasis on realism. Where 
Brexiteers continue to indulge in narcissistic fantasies about getting the best 
of all worlds from the EU while making Britain a world power again, Juncker 
struck a very different tone. Insisting that “solidarity is the glue that holds 
the union together” he pointed out that Europeans today make up 8% of the world 
population. In 2050 that will be down to 5%. “By then you would not see a 
single EU country among the top world economies,” Juncker went on. “But the EU 
together? We would still be topping the charts.”

To which he might have added: “And that is true with or without Britain.”
 