
A familiar figure turned up at Leicester’s training ground on Wednesday but 
any cosy suggestion of business as usual was conspicuously absent. Even as 
Richard Cockerill was bidding farewell to the squad in person followinghis 
removal as the Tigers’ director of rugby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/02/leicester-tigers-may-miss-richard-cockerill>
, his interim successor, Aaron Mauger, was making it crystal clear that 
irreconcilable coaching differences had prompted the pair’s professional 
break-up.

Richard Cockerill ‘sadness’ after being sacked by Leicester Tigers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/02/leicester-tigers-part-company-richard-cockerill>
While the two men, according to Mauger, never fell out personally and shared 
an amicable 10-minute chat at Oval Park on Wednesday, the former All Black 
centre made no attempt to deny that significant tactical and philosophical 
disagreements lay behind Leicester’s decision to end Cockerill’s lengthy tenure 
in charge. “We probably have a lot of fundamental differences of philosophy in 
how to play and train to the point where I’d be saying black and Cockers would 
be saying white,” Mauger said. Small wonder the club’s players have looked 
slightly confused this season.

Mauger also confirmed the club’s board had been contemplating a change at the 
top for some time, even beforethe Tigers were thrashed 38-0 by Munster in 
Limerick last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/10/munster-leicester-european-champions-cup-match-report>
. “When they look at performance they want to know why we are not getting 
there,” he said. “A lot of questions have been asked over the last couple of 
months … lots of people have given feedback and the feedback has been pretty 
consistent: that we are all responsible. It’s not one person, although one 
person might be the front man. We are all responsible for the situation we are 
in. If we had our time again we all would like to have done a better job.”

Given it was Cockerill who approached Mauger to ask for assistance in 
rejuvenating Leicester’s attacking game, it was also interesting to hear the 
Kiwi suggest both individuals were aware from the start they would clash 
stylistically. “Cockers and I knew when I took the role on – and Cockers was 
the guy who brought me over to work with him – that there would be a lot of 
differences between us but we thought that could be a good thing. Personally we 
get along well but, unfortunately, we couldn’t work through those barriers. 
When you have too many differences it is often hard to give clarity to people 
and that is probably where we came a bit unstuck.”

So was it a case, in the end, of the board choosing between him and Cockerill? 
“I wasn’t privy to every conversation that has gone on behind closed doors,” 
came the measured reply. “I’m not sure.”

Like everyone else, though, Mauger is having to come to terms with the large 
hole left by Cockerill’s abrupt departure followingthe home defeat against 
Saracens last Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/01/leicester-saracens-premiership-match-report>
. Leicester are fifth in the Premiership table but face the leaders, Wasps, in 
Coventry on Sunday with an increasing injury list. The news thatManu Tuilagi 
will be forced to sit out the rest of the season with a knee injury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/04/manu-tuilagi-miss-season-cruciate-knee-ligament-injury-england-leicester-rugby-union>
 has come at a delicate time, with several players clearly unnerved by the 
coaching reshuffle. “It has certainly been very unsettling,” said Mauger, who 
has been placed in charge until the end of the season. “Cockers is a family 
man, he’s a good man, he’s got kids and he’s got feelings too. I certainly feel 
for him in the situation he is in … it could easily have been me.”

Richard Cockerill pays price for barren spell but Leicester will miss his 
loyalty | Robert Kitson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/02/leicester-tigers-may-miss-richard-cockerill>
In the short term the former Tigers forward Brett Deacon has been asked to 
help coach the first team’s defence while the board assess their next move. The 
choice will probably come down to importing another seasoned coach from 
overseas to try to deliver fresh impetus or inviting a gnarled ex-Tiger such as 
Martin Johnson to assume some kind of managerial role. Mauger did his best to 
sound neutral on Johnson – “That’s other boys’ decisions … he’s probably one 
guy you’d look at, he’s aLeicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> legend” – but made clear he 
wants to stay at Welford Road. “I just want to survive and get through the next 
few weeks. It can be a pretty fickle game, as we have just found out with 
people getting fired.”

His prospects are set to hinge on how swiftly he can improve Leicester’s 
results and mindset, particularly away from home, while his erstwhile coaching 
partner seeks alternative employment. “You could probably name 10 clubs around 
the world he could walk into and make a massive difference with his style and 
approach,” Mauger said.

Leicester may have chopped Cockerill but that could prove to be the easy bit.
 