
For one year and six months my home was Mount Gourougou in Morocco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/morocco>, a temporary settlement overlooking 
Melilla, a Spanish enclave and the gateway to Europe and a future I had always 
dreamed of.

I am from Mali <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mali>, a country of many 
problems, but I now live in Bayern, a town in southern Germany. I have 
temporary asylum status, which I’m trying to make permanent.

When I was living in a makeshift camp on the mountain, outside the city of 
Nador 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2014/oct/14/migrants-gurugu-mountains-melilla-in-pictures>
, I was approached by two film-makers who wanted to work with me to record our 
story.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fmalian-refugee-on-his-journey-to-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4bdc1de8f8d754f03fe5975cb6c560ae6f282050%2F80_0_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20wrong%20side%20of%20the%20fence%3A%20a%20Malian%20refugee%20on%20trying%20to%20reach%20Europe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fmalian-refugee-on-his-journey-to-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20wrong%20side%20of%20the%20fence%3A%20a%20Malian%20refugee%20on%20trying%20to%20reach%20Europe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fmalian-refugee-on-his-journey-to-europe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4bdc1de8f8d754f03fe5975cb6c560ae6f282050%2F80_0_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
 A still of Abou Bakar Sidibé from the film. Photograph: Those Who Jump 
I agreed, but only if I could do it in my own way. I wanted to film the 
reality of our daily lives: how we lived, how we washed, how we got food, how 
we shared everything and, most importantly, how we helped each other.

I wanted to record everything about our survival, which centred on three 
things. Finding food and water; running from the Moroccan police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/08/melilla-fences-spain-morocco-migration-europe>
 who would chase us from our camp and destroy our belongings at least twice a 
week; and attempting to scale the six-metre-high, 11km-long fence as many as 
three times a day.

I lost count of how many people died when I was living on Gourougou – there 
were just too many. People hit their heads when they were being chased by the 
police, and some died trying to jump the fence. Once I had to leave a voicemail 
for the family of my friend who had died attempting to cross it.

If you were to spend one or two days on the hill you would become familiar 
with the evil sprits that reside there. They made our days very difficult and 
at night all we dreamed of was jumping the fence.

Our life was so full of pain and stress but we would try to continue with some 
sort of normality. We’d play football, we prayed and we celebrated our 
religious festivals in the best way we could. Humour also helped us get by. 
Looking out overEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> we would 
sometimes joke that our skin would start to bleach when we finally got there.

My camera was small enough to hide in my pocket when the police came and I 
would charge it at one of the nearby shops when it ran low. Filming my life 
helped me to feel like I existed and that people were interested in hearing our 
side of the story.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fmalian-refugee-on-his-journey-to-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7779bdccdf586ed3a1b89c434a49a96bad87d78a%2F0_0_4608_3456%2Fmaster%2F4608.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20wrong%20side%20of%20the%20fence%3A%20a%20Malian%20refugee%20on%20trying%20to%20reach%20Europe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fmalian-refugee-on-his-journey-to-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20wrong%20side%20of%20the%20fence%3A%20a%20Malian%20refugee%20on%20trying%20to%20reach%20Europe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fmalian-refugee-on-his-journey-to-europe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7779bdccdf586ed3a1b89c434a49a96bad87d78a%2F0_0_4608_3456%2Fmaster%2F4608.jpg>
 A migrant looks at Europe in the distance. Photograph: Those Who Jump 
Increased security patrols on both sides of the border have meant that the 
number of people trying toscale the fence 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-spain-immigration-idUSKCN0ZC0KR?il=0> has 
dropped dramatically since my time there between 2013 and 2014. I don’t know 
anyone in Calais but I think the situations are the comparable,hundreds stuck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/14/child-refugees-in-limbo-in-calais-because-of-home-office-delays>
 in limbo dreaming of a better future.

I hope that people who watch Those Who Jump 
<https://whatson.bfi.org.uk/lff/Online/default.asp?doWork::WScontent::loadArticle=Load&BOparam::WScontent::loadArticle::article_id=049A689C-2121-438E-9FBF-3ECCE9429D8D&BOparam::WScontent::loadArticle::context_id=AD200DE7-BF73-43AA-8F1B-8C078F5236CC>
 will get a better understanding of why people risk death for a better life. I 
am now working on a second film about what it’s like on the other side of the 
fence.


The day I arrived in Europe I felt like a newborn baby. I had a new life and 
new ideas. Life on Gourougou was traumatic but it was worth it. I’d do it all 
again if I had to.

As told to Maeve Shearlaw <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/maeve-shearlaw>

Those Who Jump 
<https://whatson.bfi.org.uk/lff/Online/default.asp?doWork::WScontent::loadArticle=Load&BOparam::WScontent::loadArticle::article_id=049A689C-2121-438E-9FBF-3ECCE9429D8D&BOparam::WScontent::loadArticle::context_id=AD200DE7-BF73-43AA-8F1B-8C078F5236CC>
 is screening at the BFI London film festival this week Saturday 15 October
 