
1. Diamond Head – Am I Evil? <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QMvSSLZPC9w>

If there’s a single song that epitomises the new wave of British heavy metal, 
it’s this one, even thoughMetallica’s cover 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-u-HCHCuHMg> is probably better known nowadays 
than the original (Metallica’s drummer,Lars Ulrich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2013/oct/09/metallica-drummer-lars-ulrich-film-through-the-never-video>
, travelled to London from Denmark to see Diamond Head in 1981; on moving to 
California, his small ad seeking musicians to form a band cited Diamond Head 
and Tygers of Pan Tang and Iron Maiden as role models). Diamond Head were once 
touted as the second coming of Led Zeppelin – and this song was described as 
having more riffs than the first four Black Sabbath albums. They should have 
been huge but failed because of bad timing and bad management, as well as more 
practical details such as the entire pressing of their “difficult second album” 
being unplayable because of manufacturing faults. But this monumental song 
remains their enduring legacy.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dmbgv587ooNM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dmbgv587ooNM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dmbgv587ooNM&media=>
2. Tygers of Pan Tang – Don’t Stop By 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kDNnobC49AA>

Metal <https://www.theguardian.com/music/metal> doesn’t really do difficult 
second albums (unless you were in Diamond Head) and indeed NWOBHM threw up 
quite a few bands whose second album was their best. The Tygers of Pan Tang, 
taking their name from one of Michael Moorcock’s novels, were one such band, 
bolstered by a change of singer and the addition of guitar wizard John Sykes, 
later of Thin Lizzy and Whitesnake. This song represents the more commercial 
side of the band’s much, chosen because of John Sykes’ amazingly fluid solo. It 
shows why he went on to bigger and better things, and why the band faded away 
once he left.

Roy Wilkinson on the new wave of British heavy metal 30 years on
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/jan/02/saxon-rock-music> 
3. Angel Witch – Angel Witch <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YXH_9707PLc>

Angel Witch were perhaps too far ahead of their time in the early 1980s: for 
years they were best known as the answer to the quiz question: “Which band has 
spent the least time on the singles charts?” (Their 1980 single Sweet Danger 
spent a single week at No 75, the bottom slot). Though they were sometimes 
dismissed as a poor man’s Black Sabbath, their music hinted at a potential that 
was never realised. They did, however, foretell the direction metal would take 
in future decades, especially on songs likeAngel of Death 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nm6LSTcVL3c>. But it’s the title track of 
their eponymous album that’s remembered the best. At Reading festival in 1983, 
the between-bands DJ had the entire audience singing the chorus. As one of the 
band later remarked, had that many people had actually bought the record, it 
would have been far more of a hit than it was.

4. Def Leppard – Getcha Rocks Off <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_dg5dkJAGSM>

Nowadays we think of Def Leppard as an AOR band with a sound airbrushed for 
American radio by Robert John “Mutt” Lange on the albums Pyromania and 
Hysteria. It’s as if they had the same sort of relationship with metal as 
Blondie had with punk. But they didn’t start out like that, and their debut 
single on their own label, Bludgeon Riffola, helped kickstart the whole NWOBHM 
movement. This raucous twin-guitar gallop is an ocean away fromPour Some Sugar 
on Me <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0UIB9Y4OFPs>, and sounds like the 
product of working-class Sheffield rather than something out of LA.

5. Demon – Father of Time <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C5TJuQo2fhk>

The NWOBHM label covered many different styles within the broad spectrum of 
hard rock. For every band who hinted at the more aggressive sounds that would 
come to define metal in later decades, there was another who had evolved from 
the more melodic sounds of the previous one. Demon fell into the latter 
category, with the soaring guitars and bluesy vocals of Dave Hill, but their 
reliance on Hammer Horror occult lyrical themes was more than enough to put 
them firmly in the metal camp.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPLNVnmq9Tpv3r63rRXWoopOVdPARcvdSLC&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPLNVnmq9Tpv3r63rRXWoopOVdPARcvdSLC>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPLNVnmq9Tpv3r63rRXWoopOVdPARcvdSLC&media=>
 Our New Wave of British Heavy Metal playlist on YouTube 
6. Iron Maiden – Phantom of the Opera 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h8IuFl3sMhk>

Iron Maiden were one of the few NWOBHM bands who managed to achieve escape 
velocity by the time the scene faded away in the early 80s, and fill arenas and 
stadiums around the world to this day. But in the early days, with original 
singer Paul Di’Anno, they were a different beast from the polished metal 
machine they are today, with a rawer, almost punky element to their sound 
(though in the TV series Metal Evolution, band mastermind Steve Harris denied 
any affinity for punk). If you don’t already know the song, you might recognise 
the intro from theLucozade advert 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xBetudbtRto#t=3s> featuring Daley Thompson. If 
there was a punk element to their sound, there was also a prog rock side, too – 
which is still present in their music – as shown by the complex middle section.

7. Girlschool – C’Mon Let’s Go <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BYNWo93fPG8>

Nowadays we’re used to women in metal bands, with hordes of Scandinavian 
symphonic metal bands fronted by opera-trained sopranos. Back in the early 80s, 
though, an all-girl band playing metal with a punk attitude were pioneers, and 
metal fans of the day warmly accepted them as part of the gang. Though they are 
best known fortheir link-up with Motörhead 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sYFwN-l46r8> for the St Valentine’s Day 
Massacre EP, they deserve their place here in their own right: they epitomised 
metal’s ambivalent relationship with punk; taking punk’s aggression and can-do 
attitude while rejecting the genre’s lack of musicality.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBYNWo93fPG8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBYNWo93fPG8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBYNWo93fPG8&media=>
8. Samson – Vice Versa <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UCSkjYE5-So>

Before he jumped ship and became the voice of Iron Maiden for their imperial 
phase,Bruce Dickinson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/06/bruce-dickinson-interview-iron-maiden>
 used to go by the name of Bruce Bruce and fronted Samson, a band initially 
known for their masked drummer Thunderstick, who used toperform in a cage 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l7I6xfEIqrY>. Some of their dodgy imagery and 
lyrical themes probably wouldn’t be acceptable three decades later, but this 
song shows Bruce’s “human air-raid siren” – the reason Harris wanted him to 
replace Di’Anno in Iron Maiden – in fine early form.

Stevie Chick meets Venom, the legendary heavy metal group
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2008/jun/27/filmandmusic1.filmandmusic8> 
9. Venom – Warhead <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S7kNRp00G3o>

Celebrated as the founding fathers of “black metal” (a phrase that was the 
title of their second album), Venom are something of an enigma. They’re a 
hugely influential band in metal’s history, yet their earliest records were 
quite comically awful, far removed from theglorious bombast of Dimmu Borgir 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_jw7yk8hm_0> or the fiendish experimentalism 
of Ihsahn <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0VxbJb_Gs8w>, who would follow 
decades later in their wake. They’ve been described as village idiots meddling 
with demonic forces they didn’t understand, and they did seem to have mislaid 
the musical chops you’re supposed to get in return for selling your soul to 
Satan, though perhaps that was because, as their third album put it, they were 
At War With Satan. But their music has a primal power that can’t be denied, and 
this 1984 single shows them at their best.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGFh1NTiud3Q&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGFh1NTiud3Q>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGFh1NTiud3Q&media=>
10. Saxon – Machine Gun <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8gA70urVnbs>

While they never became quite as huge as Iron Maiden, Saxon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/jun/14/cult-heroes-saxon-barnsley-boys-who-forged-the-80s-metal-boom>
 were one of the bands that emerged from the scene to hit the big time. 
Alongside bands from the previous generation of metal such asMotörhead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/motorhead>, Gillan and Judas Priest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/may/20/judas-priest-rob-halford-british-steel>
, Saxon regularly bothered the singles chart and saw big noisy guitars erupt 
into the otherwise safe world of Top of the Pops. They remained an 
arena-filling band long after most of their peers had returned to the working 
men’s clubs where they started. If you’re still reading, you probably know the 
hits. So we’ll finish with this electrifying piece of proto-thrash that closed 
their seminal album, Wheels of Steel.
 