
Florida <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/florida> real estate has a bad 
habit of reflecting the boom-and-bust cycles of the US economy but Babcock 
Ranch, a new development opening early next year and designed to be the world’s 
first solar-powered town, is hoping it can provide the Sunshine state with a 
model for sustainable living.


That, at least, is the hope of Syd Kitson, a former offensive guard with the 
Green Bay Packers turned real estate developer, who is behind an ambitious 
project that Kitson describes as the country’s most “sustainable, most 
innovative and health-focused” new town in the US.

Bordered by the Babcock Ranch preserve and the 65,000-acre Cecil M Webb 
wildlife management area, Babcock Ranch is at the centre of south-west 
Florida’s newest growth corridor, just 20 minutes east of downtown Fort Myers.

Kitson and his backers bought the estate for more than $500m in 2006 from the 
heirs of Edward Vose Babcock, a former mayor of Pittsburgh. The developer sold 
73,000 acres to the state, creating the preserve, and designated 18,000 acres 
to the development and 9,000 acres to parkland.

At its completion, Babcock is expected to grow to 19,500 homes, with a 
downtown with commercial space and extensive infrastructure, including a 
75-megawatt solar facility generating electricity for the town, self-driving 
cars, groves of oak and natural plants for landscaping, community and kitchen 
gardens, a farm-to-table restaurant, a charter school and an extensive network 
of lakes and irrigation designed to reduce the development’s environmental 
impact.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fsolar-powered-town-babcock-ranch-environmentalist-panther%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda09289a202dd1d3f002ce87bc3d8f49b1ab6b34%2F0_912_3593_4488%2F3593.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20solar-powered%20town%3A%20a%20dream%20for%20the%20environment%20%E2%80%93%20or%20a%20wildlife%20nightmare%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fsolar-powered-town-babcock-ranch-environmentalist-panther%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20solar-powered%20town%3A%20a%20dream%20for%20the%20environment%20%E2%80%93%20or%20a%20wildlife%20nightmare%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fsolar-powered-town-babcock-ranch-environmentalist-panther%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda09289a202dd1d3f002ce87bc3d8f49b1ab6b34%2F0_912_3593_4488%2F3593.jpg>
 Environmentalists claim the project threatens the habitat of the Florida 
panther. Photograph: Alamy 
“I want to prove that development and preservation can work hand in hand,” 
says Kitson. “You see the carelessness of new developments in terms of energy 
consumption, care for the environment, how you think about energy, technology, 
transportation, there’s a responsibility on us to prove it can be done 
differently.”

But can it? Florida is expecting population growth of 6 million by 2030. Many 
of the state’s natural resources are under pressure from environmental 
degradation, including from sea level rise and overuse of ground water. Babcock 
is 20ft above sea level, and built on land that had been disturbed by rock 
mining.

Kitson’s plan was to make Babcock sustainable from the outset. Gone are 
energy-draining McMansions and water-demanding lawns. The houses are designed 
smaller in scale, with dining rooms eliminated, and built in traditional 
Floridian ranch style with front and back porches.

“We’re looking at the average house performing 10-20% better than Florida 
energy code,” says Dr Jennifer Languell, a green practices adviser on the 
project. Ultimately, however, there’s no way to get around the demand for air 
conditioning in Florida’s environment.

“We can create airflow through the house, but the bottom line is we have to 
address the humidity and the only way to get the moisture out is to 
mechanically remove it.”

Kitson says he toured large-scale communities to see how sustainability could 
be incorporated into real estate developments, including Serenbe on the edge of 
Atlanta; he travelled as far as Abu Dhabi in the process. Kitson says surveys 
he commissioned revealed that people “want to be part of something that is 
sustainable, and want to know that where they’re going to live is not only not 
harmful to the environment but actually helps it”.

Kitson says his determination was to create a sustainable community that 
functioned as a complete community. “It’s about a well-rounded good life,” he 
says, “not about being locked away from the world. It’s kind of like going back 
to the way things used to be.”

Florida measure calls itself pro-solar but critics say it's 'a wolf in sheep's 
clothing'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/04/florida-solar-power-amendment-1-vote-al-gore-criticism>
But how much of that is feasible? Egrets and a large alligator moving through 
a channel in the Babcock preserve suggest that the 10-year delay in starting 
the development has been beneficial to indigenous species. Kitson’s 
environmental projects include placing a pollinating garden around the solar 
field to attracting bees and beetles to help the environment and 
sustainability; the Babcock plans envisage landscaping “that can be beautiful 
but not thirsty”.

One expectation is that by using a network of driverless cars, Babcock 
residents will ultimately scale back on car ownership, bring a family’s auto 
needs down from two cars to one, allowing land that would be used for multi-car 
garages to be reassigned.

Still, the development of land in south-west Florida is controversial. Babcock 
lies close to one of the last habitats of Florida’s dwindling panther 
population. Wildlife groups say the Babcock development risks cutting off the 
big cat’s passage between the two parcels of land large enough to support a 
population.

A 2006 report by the Fish and Wildlife Service found there would be no direct 
effect in the form of mortality or injury of the Florida panther resulting from 
this project. But it is feared that additional habitat loss from development of 
land around Babcock, and injury to the animals from traffic and illegal 
hunting, will further reduce the viability of the population.

“The Florida panther is an endangered species and this development is locking 
them into a small area,” says Matthew Schwartz of the South Florida Wildlands 
Association. “Roadkill and habitat loss is just destroying the population 
because it has nowhere to expand into.”

Schwartz says the town of Babcock Ranch is going smack into what the Fish and 
Wildlife Service identified as a possible expansion area. “That’s tragic not 
only for the panther, but for black bears, eastern indigo snakes, red-cockaded 
woodpeckers and a whole range of species living under its umbrella.”


The environmentalist says the threat to wildlife is not simply the development 
of Babcock itself, but the development of surrounding areas.

“They say they’re only using land that was previously disturbed but other 
private lands nearby will also be developed once people start moving in. People 
will want movie theaters and shopping centres, all the things that are part of 
urban sprawl. This project is making undeveloped habitats around it much more 
vulnerable.

“The developers didn’t need to come into undeveloped habitat to start a solar 
project – there are plenty of communities they could have retrofitted with 
solar,” Schwartz adds.

When Babcock opens to the public early next year, it will be greeted as a new 
model town. How far it can serve as a model for a more sustainable future 
remains open to question.

It’s an experiment, says Kitson. “I’ve spent half my life hiking, camping, 
being part of nature. A lot more people are thinking about how they’re living 
and how they’re affecting their environment. We have a unique opportunity to 
create a place in a way that hasn’t been done before. If we can get it right, 
we think it’s going to set a standard.”
 