
Which museum will be the next to appoint a female director? Most of the 
world’s great visual arts institutions remain firmly under male control. The 
current bosses of the British Museum and the National Gallery in London are 
men, as are the directors of the Prado in Madrid, the Louvre in Paris and the 
Metropolitan Museum ofArt <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> in New 
York. So which groundbreaking top-rank art museum will be run by a woman from 1 
January 2017?

It is one of the oldest and grandest of them all, and you will find it at the 
heart of perhaps the most male-dominated enclave in Europe. The new director of 
the Vatican Museums, whose collections started to be amassed in the Renaissance,
is the Italian art historian Barbara Jatta 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/21/arts/vatican-museums-get-first-female-director.html?_r=0>
, who previously curated prints there and rose to be deputy director. She has 
now been appointed by Pope Francis to succeed the current 77-year-old director, 
Antonio Paolucci, in the new year.

This is not as surprising as it seems. The Vatican may be one of Europe’s last 
surviving medieval city states, run by cardinals and policed by Swiss guards 
with halberds (at least that’s how tourists are likely to see them – they have 
guns and tanks too), but its incredible complex of museums has a history of 
unexpected modernity. What other religious institution collects atheist art? 
The modern gallery of the Vatican Museums proudly displays a grotesque painting 
of a suffering pope by the defiantly godless painterFrancis Bacon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jun/24/francis-bacon-catalogue-art-historian-stephen-smith>
. That’s probably the most provocative presence in a sensitive and imaginative 
collection of modern religious art that also includes Van Gogh’sPietà (after 
Delacroix) 
<https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Collection_of_Modern_Religious_Art,_Vatican_Museums#/media/File%3AVincent_van_Gogh_-_Pietà_(after_Delacroix).jpg>
 and paintings by Dalí and Picasso.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fvatican-museums-female-head-barbara-jatta%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48bca4bd0b2e8d9f5af135b7c7d95508fe4e3e32%2F0_0_5090_3510%2F5090.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Vatican%20appoints%20its%20first%20female%20museum%20head%20%E2%80%93%20but%20it%20can%20go%20further&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fvatican-museums-female-head-barbara-jatta%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Vatican%20appoints%20its%20first%20female%20museum%20head%20%E2%80%93%20but%20it%20can%20go%20further&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fvatican-museums-female-head-barbara-jatta%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48bca4bd0b2e8d9f5af135b7c7d95508fe4e3e32%2F0_0_5090_3510%2F5090.jpg>
 The Last Judgment by Michelangelo, inside the Sistine chapel. Photograph: Alamy
The Vatican’s museum is so vast and diverse that it is a plural. It is called 
the Vatican Museums and consists of a connected sprawl of collections that fill 
a large part of the Vatican itself. Queues often stretch right along the 
outside of the papal palace complex. Once you get inside, the cornucopia of art 
includes the Pinacoteca, where such paintings as Leonardo da Vinci’sSt Jerome 
<http://www.italian-renaissance-art.com/St-Jerome.html> and Caravaggio’s The 
Entombment of Christ hang; numerous archaeological collections that have 
everything from giant bowls from Nero’s palace to an extraordinary Egyptian art 
installation fromHadrian’s villa 
<http://mv.vatican.va/3_EN/pages/MEZ/MEZ_Sala03_01.html>; and a fine museum of 
global art <http://mv.vatican.va/3_EN/pages/MET/MET_Main.html>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fvatican-museums-female-head-barbara-jatta%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffea95204826bc93e9a19f56d488c3d0713106878%2F0_0_2849_4265%2F2849.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Vatican%20appoints%20its%20first%20female%20museum%20head%20%E2%80%93%20but%20it%20can%20go%20further&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fvatican-museums-female-head-barbara-jatta%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Vatican%20appoints%20its%20first%20female%20museum%20head%20%E2%80%93%20but%20it%20can%20go%20further&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fvatican-museums-female-head-barbara-jatta%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffea95204826bc93e9a19f56d488c3d0713106878%2F0_0_2849_4265%2F2849.jpg>
 A recreation of the Raphael Loggias at the Hermitage Museum in St Petersburg. 
Photograph: Dave Bartruff/Getty Images 
At the heart of it all is the Belvedere courtyard, one of the oldest extant 
art galleries on earth. Here stand some of the most renowned masterpieces of 
classical sculpture including theApollo Belvedere 
<https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apollo_Belvedere#/media/File%3AApollo_of_the_Belvedere.jpg>
 and theLaocoon <http://www.mlahanas.de/Greeks/Arts/Laocoon.htm>. For 
centuries, this was the most hallowed destination of the Grand Tour. Young 
aristocrats from all over Europe came to see the Apollo Belvedere, considered 
in the 18th century to be the most beautiful statue ever made. After paying 
antiquity its due reverence they made their way, as the crowds still do today, 
towards the climax of the Vatican Museums – through therooms of Raphael 
<https://www.wikiart.org/en/raphael/the-fire-in-the-borgo-1514> to emerge into 
the glory of the Sistine chapel.

It is great that such a majestic and venerable museum has Jatta as its new 
director. But what should she do to modernise it further? Can such a marvellous 
collection be improved? In recent years, the big issue for this museum has been 
to deal with its colossal crowds in spaces that were originally designed for 
cardinals and popes to spaciously hang out in.Measures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/dec/21/sistine-chapel-tourists-vacuumed-cooled>
 have had to be taken to preserve the Sistine frescoes, at risk from the sheer 
number of people passing through. Jatta will no doubt have to wrestle with 
these problems just as Paolucci has.

Yet I have a suggestion that, as well as enriching this great complex of 
museums, might also alleviate overcrowding, simply by providing more spaces to 
explore. It seems incredible that with so much art and architecture on display 
the Vatican still has hidden treasures – but it does. Hidden behind closed 
doors tantalisingly near the museum are Michelangelo’s paintingsin the Capella 
Paolina 
<https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cappella_Paolina#/media/File%3AMartyrdom_Michelangelo.jpg>
 and Raphael’s Loggia, his greatest work, whose opening might help us 
understand much better why he is one of the greatest of all artists. In the 
21st century it seems archaically exclusive to keep these glories for the eyes 
of the Vatican elite only. The same progressive spirit that has given the 
Vatican Museums a female director ahead of comparable art collections must now 
democratise public access and open up this clerical city’s hidden spaces. That 
would be a great cultural demonstration of the Vatican’s readiness to change.
 