
A little-known wasteland nearly 20 miles long, the Petite Ceinture (“little 
belt”) is an urban phenomenon: an abandoned railway built more than 150 years 
ago in the centre ofParis <https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris>. At a time 
when cities everywhere are struggling for space, the future of this expanse of 
land, precious in its biodiversity as well as its prime location, is a 
contentious issue.

“Foxes and various other wildlife use the railway as a passage to get from one 
place to the other in Paris,” says nearby resident Denis Loubaton. “To chop the 
Petite Ceinture up and sell it off in chunks would destroy the wildlife that 
lives here.”

A treasure trove for entrepreneurs, graffiti artists and nature-lovers alike, 
the disused line – Paris’s last great green space – also serves as a haven for 
social recluses and a shelter for the homeless. Sixty-year-old Daniel has lived 
on it for almost two decades after deciding to withdraw from society; Marc from 
Russia lives in a glass-roof hut he built himself; Michel has chosen to retire 
into the darkness of his cave to indulge in crack cocaine.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F26%2F-sp-petite-ceinture-paris-entrepreneurs-environmentalists-abandoned-railway%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F25%2F1411660660279%2F7bc7ae57-d1c7-452c-b951-aefb2262a8ae-2060x1526.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Petite%20Ceinture%3A%20the%20battle%20over%20Paris's%20abandoned%20railway&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F26%2F-sp-petite-ceinture-paris-entrepreneurs-environmentalists-abandoned-railway%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Petite%20Ceinture%3A%20the%20battle%20over%20Paris%27s%20abandoned%20railway&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F26%2F-sp-petite-ceinture-paris-entrepreneurs-environmentalists-abandoned-railway%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F25%2F1411660660279%2F7bc7ae57-d1c7-452c-b951-aefb2262a8ae-2060x1526.jpeg>
 The Petite Ceinture is a haven for wildlife in Paris. Photograph: Pascal Bagot 
The line is also dotted with entry points to the Paris catacombs, so it is not 
unusual for the bucolic peace and quiet to be disturbed by “les cataphiles”, as 
the city’s urban explorers are known, rising from the depths of the city’s 
underbelly through secret passageways.

Floating up above and diving deep below the French capital, the Petite 
Ceinture still boasts 17 stations (there were originally 29). Building started 
in 1851 and passenger and freight steam trains circulated on the railway from 
1862 until it was forced into decline by the development of the Paris Métro and 
the widespread use of motor vehicles. By 1934, passenger trains were a thing of 
the past, and in 1993 the railway was completely abandoned.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F26%2F-sp-petite-ceinture-paris-entrepreneurs-environmentalists-abandoned-railway%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F25%2F1411661015352%2F14889313-176e-4c00-bd96-bbded595ae54-2060x1350.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Petite%20Ceinture%3A%20the%20battle%20over%20Paris's%20abandoned%20railway&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F26%2F-sp-petite-ceinture-paris-entrepreneurs-environmentalists-abandoned-railway%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Petite%20Ceinture%3A%20the%20battle%20over%20Paris%27s%20abandoned%20railway&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F26%2F-sp-petite-ceinture-paris-entrepreneurs-environmentalists-abandoned-railway%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F25%2F1411661015352%2F14889313-176e-4c00-bd96-bbded595ae54-2060x1350.jpeg>
 La Recyclerie bar in the old Ornano station. Photograph: Palmryre Roigt 
“Back then, my neighbourhood, the Clignancourt section of the Petite Ceinture, 
was a real mess,” recalls Loubaton. “It was a dumping ground – people would 
even throw rubbish from their kitchen windows onto the rails. It also suffered 
from acute prostitution and crack cocaine dealing; something had to change to 
improve the area and to preserve this precious corridor of biodiversity.”


So, in 1998, Loubaton founded the Jardins du Ruisseau 
<https://www.facebook.com/jardinsduruisseau> (“garden of the creek”) 
association with other residents of Villa des Tulipes, an idyllic cobbled lane 
nearby in the city’s 18th arrondisement. Established along one of the neglected 
platforms of the Petite Ceinture’s former Ornano station, thepioneering project 
<http://www.larecyclerie.com/la-gare-ornano/> has received worldwide acclaim. 
“We cleaned the entire area,” Loubaton says proudly, “before planting flower 
and vegetable gardens, and we organised all sorts of art events.”

The 20-year-old Association Sauvegarde Petite Ceinture 
<http://www.petiteceinture.org/> (ASPCRF) also believes in keeping the track as 
one line, and is campaigning for the revival of public transport along the line 
to relieve the city’s overburdened metro system, stating on its website: “Our 
association considers that urban ecology doesn’t limit itself to planting 
trees, but must consider a broader approach to the city’s functions.”


The mayor of Paris, Anne Hidalgo 
<http://www.anne-hidalgo.net/actualites/anne-hidalgo-devoile-son-projet-pour-rendre-la-petite-ceinture-aux-parisiens>
, has a more commercial vision for the land, however. While she backs the 
Petite Ceinture’s gentrification in the 15th arrondissement – it is now a green 
space that lends itself to strolling and jogging – her ambitious plans could 
see the railway’s many tunnels turned into cinemas, aquariums and the like – 
against the wishes of Loubaton and his supporters. The green space in the 15th, 
with its wooden platforms and elevators, is more reminiscent of theNew York 
High Line 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/sep/22/final-stretch-new-york-high-line-complete>
 project than the grassroots Jardins du Ruisseau. “The problem is that this 
sort of rehabilitation isn’t a mineral one and risks minimising biodiversity 
instead of supporting it,” Loubaton says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F26%2F-sp-petite-ceinture-paris-entrepreneurs-environmentalists-abandoned-railway%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F25%2F1411661344976%2F1f532fda-428f-4360-b098-0d3d767e413c-2060x1291.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Petite%20Ceinture%3A%20the%20battle%20over%20Paris's%20abandoned%20railway&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F26%2F-sp-petite-ceinture-paris-entrepreneurs-environmentalists-abandoned-railway%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Petite%20Ceinture%3A%20the%20battle%20over%20Paris%27s%20abandoned%20railway&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F26%2F-sp-petite-ceinture-paris-entrepreneurs-environmentalists-abandoned-railway%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F25%2F1411661344976%2F1f532fda-428f-4360-b098-0d3d767e413c-2060x1291.jpeg>
 Graffiti art on the disused tracks of the Petite Ceinture. Photograph: Pascal 
Bagot 
Loubaton’s Jardins project has become a prime example of successful urban 
conservation: the garden, which comprises a chicken shed and beehives, is cared 
for by members of the association (now some 450-strong) and local schools – and 
the result is striking. Among the flowerbeds and allotments that run along the 
station platform people settle into chairs to read or play a game of Scrabble, 
while school children do their homework. Thanks to this community garden, over 
a decade down the line, the neighbourhood has experienced a second lease of 
life.


Across the platform, La Recyclerie <http://www.larecyclerie.com/> bar sits 
inside the Ornano station. “Our objective was that nothing we use should be 
bought, but found,” says Martin Liot, a co-founder ofSinny & Ooko 
<http://www.sinnyooko.com/site2/>, the company behind the bar. The bric-à-brac 
style apparently appeals to the customers, as does the “eco-fun”, including the 
mini urban goat and chicken farm outside on the platform. “We want to see a 
return to a mutualisation of resources in an age where everything is thought of 
as disposable,” Liot says. Members of theAmis les Recycleurs 
<http://www.larecyclerie.com/les-amis-recycleurs/> (Recycling Friends) 
association, are able to borrow seldom-used equipment such as araclette grill 
pan or a hand drill, while a handyman named René will repair your broken 
equipment.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F26%2F-sp-petite-ceinture-paris-entrepreneurs-environmentalists-abandoned-railway%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F26%2F1411724215320%2Fec59b8ce-1a29-4792-a8c5-8b2ce2c849cd-2060x1375.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Petite%20Ceinture%3A%20the%20battle%20over%20Paris's%20abandoned%20railway&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F26%2F-sp-petite-ceinture-paris-entrepreneurs-environmentalists-abandoned-railway%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Petite%20Ceinture%3A%20the%20battle%20over%20Paris%27s%20abandoned%20railway&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F26%2F-sp-petite-ceinture-paris-entrepreneurs-environmentalists-abandoned-railway%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F26%2F1411724215320%2Fec59b8ce-1a29-4792-a8c5-8b2ce2c849cd-2060x1375.jpeg>
 A renovated train carriage at Le Casp on the Petite Ceinture. Photograph: 
Palmryre Roigt 
But the Petite Ceinture is also nurturing even greater social impact: in the 
industrial Bercy-Charenton area of south-east Paris, a long-term night shelter 
for the homeless has been created inside six old sleeper train carriages.

Set up in 2008, the emergency shelter, run by Casp 
<http://www.casp.asso.fr/index.php/nos-actions/structures-et-services/pole-accueil-et-hebergement-durgence/bercy.html>
, saw 40% of its residents reintegrated into society last year alone. “It was a 
first for us and I think it’s due to the fact that this shelter isn’t as 
alienating as most,” says Rachid Ferchouli, the shelter’s director. “The fact 
that you’re half still on the street and half inside is vital, which is why the 
Petite Ceinture lends itself so well to our purpose.”

While the mayor of Paris’s precise intentions for the Petite Ceinture are 
still uncertain, the official owner of the abandoned railway, the RFF (the 
French Railway Network), is starting to sell off sections. Close to the CASP 
shelter, a housing project will absorb part of the old track, going against 
Denis Loubaton’s efforts to preserve its biodiversity. The city’s current urban 
housing crisis is leaving the future of this unique urban green belt, with its 
precious fauna and flora, looking decidedly precarious.

• The weird afterlife of the world’s subterranean ‘ghost stations’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/sep/25/-sp-world-subterranean-ghost-stations-tube-abandoned-underground>

 