
In April 2002, Jean-Marie Le Pen stunned all of Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2002/apr/22/thefarright.france> by defeating 
the socialist candidate, Lionel Jospin, in the first round of the French 
presidential election, and advancing to the final round between the top two 
candidates. Terrified by the prospect of a far-right victory, the French left – 
including communists, Greens and the Socialist party – threw their support 
behind the incumbent president,Jacques Chirac 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/jacques-chirac>, a pillar of the 
centre-right establishment who had served as mayor of Paris for 18 years before 
becoming president in 1995. This electoral strategy effectively isolated Le 
Pen’s Front National (FN), depicting it as a cancerous force in the French body 
politic.

Two weeks later, on 5 May, Chirac won the election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2002/may/06/france.thefarright2> with an 
astronomical 82% of the vote, trouncing Le Pen by the biggest margin in a 
French presidential election since 1848. Raucous celebrations spilled into the 
streets of Paris. “We have gone through a time of serious anxiety for the 
country – but tonight France has reaffirmed its attachment to the values of the 
republic,”Chirac declared in his victory speech 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/1969902.stm>. Then, speaking to the 
joyous crowds in the Place de la République, he lauded them for rejecting 
“intolerance and demagoguery”.

But May 2002 was not, in fact, a moment of triumph. Rather it was the dying 
gasp of an old order, in which the fate of European nations was controlled by 
large establishment parties.

Jean-Marie Le Pen was an easy target for the left, and for establishment 
figures such as Chirac. He was a political provocateur who appealed as much to 
antisemites and homophobes as to voters upset about immigration, drawing his 
support largely from the most reactionary elements of the old Catholic right. 
In other words, he was a familiar villain – and his ideology represented an 
archaicFrance <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>, a defeated past. 
Moreover, he did not seriously aim for power, and never really came close to 
acquiring it; his role was to be a rabble-rouser and to inject his ideas into 
the national debate.

Europe’s new far right is different. From Denmark to the Netherlands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/netherlands> to Germany, a new wave of 
rightwing parties has emerged over the past decade-and-a-half, and they are 
casting a much wider net than Jean-Marie Le Pen ever attempted to. And by 
deftly appealing to fear, nostalgia and resentment of elites, they are rapidly 
broadening their base.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fthe-ruthlessly-effective-rebranding-of-europes-new-far-right%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e5b905a162e3f32fa2a1be95646856b6e7cedfa%2F0_0_3824_2295%2F3824.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20ruthlessly%20effective%20rebranding%20of%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20new%20far%20right&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fthe-ruthlessly-effective-rebranding-of-europes-new-far-right%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20ruthlessly%20effective%20rebranding%20of%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20new%20far%20right&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fthe-ruthlessly-effective-rebranding-of-europes-new-far-right%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e5b905a162e3f32fa2a1be95646856b6e7cedfa%2F0_0_3824_2295%2F3824.jpg>
 Deftly appealing to fear, nostalgia and resentment of elites … the Front 
National May day rally in Paris in 2012. Photograph: 
Chamussy/SIPA/Rex/Shutterstock 
Le Pen’s own daughter is a prime example of the new ambitions of the right: 
unlike her incendiary father,Marine Le Pen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/marine-le-pen> is running a disciplined 
political operation and has already proven that her party can winupwards of 40% 
of the vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/06/front-national-wins-opening-round-in-frances-regional-elections>
 in regions from Calais in the north to the Côte d’Azur in the south. She and 
her Danish and Dutch counterparts are not – as some on the left would like to 
believe – neo-Nazis or inconsequential extremists with fringe ideas lacking 
popular appeal.

These parties have built a coherent ideology and steadily chipped away at the 
establishment parties’ hold on power by pursuing a new and devastatingly 
effective electoral strategy. They have made a very public break with the 
symbols of the old right’s past, distancing themselves from skinheads, 
neo-Nazis and homophobes. They have also deftly co-opted the causes, policies 
and rhetoric of their opponents. They have sought to outflank the left when it 
comes to defending a strong welfare state and protecting social benefits that 
they claim are threatened by an influx of freeloading migrants.

The ruthlessly effective rebranding of Europe’s new far right – podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/audio/2016/nov/25/the-ruthlessly-effective-rebranding-of-europes-new-far-right-podcast>
They have effectively claimed the progressive causes of the left – from gay 
rights to women’s equality and protecting Jews from antisemitism – as their 
own, by depicting Muslim immigrants as the primary threat to all three groups. 
As fear of Islam has spread, with their encouragement, they have presented 
themselves as the only true defenders of western identity and western liberties 
– the last bulwark protecting a besieged Judeo-Christian civilisation from the 
barbarians at the gates.

These parties have steadily filled an electoral vacuum left open by social 
democratic and centre-right parties, who ignored voters’ growing anger over 
immigration – some of it legitimate, some of it bigoted – or simply waited too 
long to address it.

They have shed some of the right’s most unsavoury baggage while responding to 
both economic anxiety and fear of terrorism by blending a nativist economic 
policy – more welfare, but only for us – and tough anti-immigration and border 
security measures. Their message is beginning to resonate widely with a fearful 
population that believes the liberal governing elite no longer listens to them. 

European far right hails Brexit vote
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/24/european-far-right-hails-britains-brexit-vote-marine-le-pen>
Brexit <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> was just the 
start. Europe’s new far right is poised to transform the continent’s political 
landscape – either by winning elections or simply by pulling a besieged 
political centre so far in its direction that its ideas become the new normal. 
And when that happens, groups that would never have contemplated voting for a 
far-right party 10 years ago – the young, gay people, Jews, feminists – may 
join the working-class voters who have already abandoned parties of the left to 
become the new backbone of the populist right.

On 6 May 2002, one day after revellers filled the streets of Paris to 
celebrate Chirac’s historic victory, the flamboyant and iconoclastic leader of 
the Dutch far right, Pim Fortuyn,was gunned down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2002/may/06/3> by a radical animal rights 
activist as he emerged from a radio interview. His assassin later claimed that 
he had killed Fortuyn to stop him from using Muslims as “scapegoats”. In 
national elections nine days later, Fortuyn’s eponymous party – the Pim Fortuyn 
List –became the second largest in the Netherlands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2002/may/16/eu.thefarright> with 17% of the 
vote.

Fortuyn, a former communist and openly gay man who boasted of sleeping with 
Muslim immigrants while calling for a ban on Muslim immigration, was an 
electrifying figure in a country known for its staid politics. His time in the 
limelight was short but transformative.

It was Fortuyn who blazed the trail for the new generation of far-right 
leaders across Europe. He may not have intended to be a pioneer, but his brand 
of plain-spoken political incorrectness and his depiction of Islamic culture as 
a “backwards” and reactionary threat to the hard-won progressive values of 
western Europe would provide a potent template for a modernised far right. His 
ideological inheritors in Dutch politics, as well as the revamped Front 
National in France, theDanish People’s Party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/25/danish-peoples-party-triumphant-in-european-elections>
 andGermany’s Alternative für Deutschland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/06/afd-leader-frauke-petry-criticised-comparing-migrants-compost-germany>
 have all emulated Fortuyn in their own ways.

Fortuyn proved that the winning argument for the European far right was not a 
US-style appeal to conservative religious values, but rather to claim it was 
“defending secular, progressive culture from the threat of immigration,” argues 
Merijn Oudenampsen of Tilburg University. The Netherlands was a perfect 
laboratory for this new strategy because, unlike France, it did not have a 
strong contingent of religious traditionalists opposed to women’s liberation 
and gay rights.

Before founding his own party in 2002, Fortuyn had tried to join an 
establishment centre-right party, the People’s Party for Freedom and Democracy 
(VVD), in the late 1990s. The party’s then-leader, Frits Bolkestein, who had 
been one of the first figures to speak critically about immigration in the 
early 1990s, remembers Fortuyn as a talented but inflammatory politician. “He 
had a thoroughly theatrical personality, and that played in his favour,” said 
Bolkestein, now in his 80s, from his office overlooking the canals of 
Amsterdam. “I didn’t want him to be in my parliamentary group, so I 
cold-shouldered him … He would have acted as a fragmentation bomb.”

Fortuyn took his explosive rhetoric elsewhere and, by creating a new type of 
far-right politics in progressive garb – “a form of xenophobia ideally suited 
to a nation that prides itself on its tolerance,” asa New Yorker profile 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2002/09/09/beyond-tolerance> once described 
it – he redirected the entire national debate in a way that has endured long 
after his death.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fthe-ruthlessly-effective-rebranding-of-europes-new-far-right%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe498f179bba391b90d276a86cb881e8f9d32ac93%2F128_291_1872_1123%2F1872.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20ruthlessly%20effective%20rebranding%20of%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20new%20far%20right&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fthe-ruthlessly-effective-rebranding-of-europes-new-far-right%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20ruthlessly%20effective%20rebranding%20of%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20new%20far%20right&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fthe-ruthlessly-effective-rebranding-of-europes-new-far-right%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe498f179bba391b90d276a86cb881e8f9d32ac93%2F128_291_1872_1123%2F1872.jpg>
 Pim Fortuyn was an electrifying figure in the Netherlands, a country known for 
its staid politics. Photograph: Phil Nijhuis/AP 
Two years after Fortuyn was killed, the Netherlands was traumatised by another 
political assassination. Early one morning in November 2004, the filmmakerTheo 
van Gogh was murdered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2004/nov/07/terrorism.religion> by a young 
Dutch-Moroccan, Mohammed Bouyeri, who shot van Gogh eight times, slashed his 
throat and then pinned a letter to his chest with a knife. The letter was a 
death threat aimed at the Somali-born Dutch parliamentarianAyaan Hirsi Ali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayaan-hirsi-ali> – a vocal critic of Islam 
who was soon placed under the protection of the Dutch security services.

The two assassinations shook the Netherlands to its core and catapulted a 
little-known and theatrically coiffed politician,Geert Wilders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/geert-wilders>, to popularity as an 
ideological successor to Fortuyn. Wilders had also flirted with Bolkestein’s 
VVD, beginning his political career as a staffer in the party office. In late 
2004, he split off and formed his own. With Hirsi Ali in hiding, he quickly 
became the most prominent anti-immigration voice in the country – and has 
remained so ever since.

For those who cared to look, the political ground had already begun to shift. 
Six months before Chirac’s trouncing of Le Pen and Fortuyn’s assassination,
Denmark <https://www.theguardian.com/world/denmark> had an election. On its 
surface the result was not a historical watershed; the centre-right Venstre 
party ousted the Social Democrats, handing power from one establishment party 
to the other. What had changed was that the Danish People’s Party, which had 
campaigned on an overtly anti-immigrant platform, took 12% of the vote – 
transforming it into a kingmaker in parliament.

Danish People’s party leader demands border crackdown after election success
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/19/danish-peoples-party-dahl-border-controls-election>
Unlike France, which revelled in its triumph over the FN, or the Netherlands, 
where the remains of Fortuyn’s party failed to become a real parliamentary 
force, the DPP immediately became a serious player with real influence over 
policy. And it was not only taking votes from the right; it was also attracting 
disgruntled social democratic voters who felt that their leaders had abandoned 
them.

The DPP had crafted a social and economic policy that was in many ways more 
socialist than that of the Social Democrats – promising better health care, 
better care for the elderly, and more subsidised housing. As the outgoing 
Social Democratic prime minister Poul Nyrup Rasmussen told me in 2002, a few 
months after his defeat: “They took a part of our rhetoric and tried to sell it 
as a new package to the people, and with some success, one may say.” Back then, 
Naser Khader, a Danish member of parliament who immigrated from Syria as a 
child, argued that “the best way to weaken the DPP is to give them influence”. 
He was wrong.

The headquarters of the Front National sits on a quiet street in the 
unassuming Paris suburb of Nanterre, near a car repair shop and a Portuguese 
restaurant. Only when you approach the grey building with its mostly closed 
blue shutters do the armed guards come into view. In her modest second-floor 
office, surrounded by books and a cloud of vape smoke, Marine Le Pen explained 
earlier this year how she transformed a party previously known for calling the 
Holocaust a “detail of history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/06/jean-marie-le-pen-fined-again-dismissing-holocaust-detail>
” into a genuine contender for the presidency.

“Voluntarily or not, he gave ammunition to our adversaries,” Le Pen said of 
her father. But she insisted that she has now cleaned house. “I fired them all 
… all those people who expressed an ideology or held views that I found 
unacceptable.”

Julien Rochedy, a 28-year-old who headed the FN’s youth wing but has since 
left the party, told me that he believes the changes are real. Whereas the 
party’s former leader used to pepper his speeches with lines that made Jews’ 
hair stand on end, today, if someone tells a racist joke within the party, “you 
will be attacked straight away,” Rochedy said. “There is such self-discipline 
these days. They are so afraid they’ll be accused once again of being 
antisemitic or racist.”

Still, the party’s detractors continue to level the same charges at the FN, 
which outragesMarine Le Pen <https://www.theguardian.com/world/marine-le-pen>. 
“Today our adversaries no longer have that ammunition, and they repeat on loop” 
old tropes about fascists and racists. “At a certain point this argument loses 
its force,” she continued, “because voters see clearly that there’s absolutely 
nothing in our platform that remotely resembles fascism or racism.”

Le Pen has done more than kick out the most blatant racists and antisemites. 
She has consciously crafted a campaign designed to appeal to voters of the 
centre and left – and other constituencies – who could never have imagined 
voting for her father’s Front National.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fthe-ruthlessly-effective-rebranding-of-europes-new-far-right%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F89bcb82ae9eac10389507825747a4270de85ccdb%2F0_242_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20ruthlessly%20effective%20rebranding%20of%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20new%20far%20right&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fthe-ruthlessly-effective-rebranding-of-europes-new-far-right%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20ruthlessly%20effective%20rebranding%20of%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20new%20far%20right&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fthe-ruthlessly-effective-rebranding-of-europes-new-far-right%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F89bcb82ae9eac10389507825747a4270de85ccdb%2F0_242_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 Anti-racist graffiti on a FN campaign office … but Le Pen claims that ‘this 
argument loses its force because voters see clearly that there’s nothing in our 
platform that resembles fascism or racism’. Photograph: Pascal Pavani/AFP/Getty 
Images 
As Le Monde’s Olivier Faye has written 
<http://www.lemonde.fr/politique/article/2016/04/12/l-attraction-en-hausse-du-front-national-aupres-de-la-communaute-gay_4900269_823448.html>
, she is “trying to erase another image that has stuck to the skin of the FN – 
that of homophobia”. And it is working: a survey showed that her share of the 
vote among married gay couples in the 2015 regional elections was over 32% – up 
from just 19% in a similar poll from 2012.

As Le Pen has filled her inner circle with more and more openly gay advisers 
and party leaders, she has also made her pitch to Jewish voters more explicit: 
“For a lot of French Jews, the FN appears to be the only movement that can 
defend them from this new antisemitism nourished in the banlieues,” Le Pen told 
me. “In a very natural way they have turned toward the FN, because the FN is 
capable, I think, of protecting them from that.”

Among French voters threatened by the country’s new diversity, rejection of a 
multicultural society increasingly takes the form of longing for a bygone era. 
And peddling nostalgia is the centrepiece of many new far-right parties across
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. In France, Marine Le 
Pen has promised a return to a time when the French had their own currency and 
monetary policy, when there were fewer mosques and less halal meat, when no one 
complained about nativity scenes in public buildings, and when French schools 
promoted a republican ethos of assimilation.

“A growing number of French people feel uncomfortable in their own country,” 
the prominent philosopher,Alain Finkielkraut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/09/right-wing-new-reactionaries-stir-up-trouble-among-french-intellectuals>
, declared in January duringa debate 
<http://www.lepoint.fr/chroniques/juppe-finkielkraut-le-grand-debat-du-point-13-01-2016-2009511_2.php>
 with the centre-right presidential candidate Alain Juppé – who has taken a 
less strident line on Islam and migration than his rival Nicolas Sarkozy. 
Finkielkraut depicted contemporary France as a country of halal butchers and 
tea shops filled only with men, pleading that “the public good isn’t in the 
clouds, it’s made from tangible things – the French of Proust and Montaigne … 
the Jardin du Luxembourg and the cows of Normandy”.

Finkielkraut, a 67-year-old Jewish liberal, is not an admirer of the Front 
National, but Marine Le Pen’s deliberate appeals to Jews and gay people have 
given political expression to an argument that he first made more than a decade 
ago – that the left, with its indulgence of Islam, poses a greater threat to 
France than the far right. After Chirac “saved” the republic from Jean-Marie Le 
Pen in 2002, Finkielkraut watched the celebrations in the streets and warned 
that the victors were the real danger: “The future of hate is in their camp and 
not in the camp of those nostalgic for Vichy,” he wrote, “ … in the camp of the 
multicultural society and not that of the ethnic nation – in the camp of 
respect, not that of rejection.”

Fourteen years later, after the terrorist attacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/15/why-does-france-keep-getting-attacked>
 on Charlie Hebdo, the Bataclan and Nice, Finkielkraut is even more certain he 
was correct. “Anti-racism today frequently serves as a pretext for not seeing 
the true danger that threatens us,” he told me when we met in his Paris 
apartment this summer. While he is still no fan of the FN, he believes it has 
changed and argues that it “should be resisted, but for what it is today and 
not what it was in the past, and not in the name of anti-fascism”. The French 
must, he insisted, “avoid simplistic analogies with the 1930s. We must not 
mistake what era we live in. Europe doesn’t only have demons; it also has 
enemies, and it needs to know how to fight those enemies.”

He worries that integration has been such a failure that France will have to 
“reconquer” its “lost territories” – by which he means the suburbs surrounding 
Paris. “Integrating people is not telling them ‘You are how you are and we are 
how we are’ … Integration means making them an integral part of our 
civilisation.” And if that doesn’t happen, he warned darkly, “at best we’ll 
have secession and at worst civil war”. Continued immigration from Muslim 
countries, he argues, is nothing less than the “planned demise of Europe”.

Across the country, nostalgia for an older, whiter France has become a potent 
political force. In the southern city of Béziers, Mayor Robert Ménard, a former 
Trotskyist who cofounded the press freedom groupReporters Without Borders 
<https://rsf.org/en>, is seeking to place a moratorium on the opening of kebab 
shops and has renamed a street after one of the French officers who joined a 
failed coup against De Gaulle in 1961 to preventAlgerian independence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/02/algeria-insurrection-bombings-independence-france>
. Ménard comes from a family ofpieds-noirs, French settlers in Algeria. He 
regards the Evian accords that ended the Algerian war as a “capitulation”, and 
those who tried to preserve French Algeria as heroes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fthe-ruthlessly-effective-rebranding-of-europes-new-far-right%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcff0611bde0fba150bc394adf309650b133d88f7%2F0_271_4135_2481%2F4135.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20ruthlessly%20effective%20rebranding%20of%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20new%20far%20right&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fthe-ruthlessly-effective-rebranding-of-europes-new-far-right%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20ruthlessly%20effective%20rebranding%20of%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20new%20far%20right&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fthe-ruthlessly-effective-rebranding-of-europes-new-far-right%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcff0611bde0fba150bc394adf309650b133d88f7%2F0_271_4135_2481%2F4135.jpg>
 Whereas young Britons overwhelmingly voted to remain in the EU, and the 
elderly voted to leave, in France it’s the opposite. Photograph: Franck 
Pennant/AFP/Getty Images 
This nostalgia has an unmistakable appeal, but not necessarily for the sort of 
voters one might expect. Whereas young Britons overwhelmingly voted to remain 
in the EU and the elderly voted to leave, in France it is the opposite. 
According to Julian Rochedy, the former FN youth leader, appeals to nostalgia 
work better with the young in France – who dream of an era they never witnessed 
– than with the old, who lived through the era Marine Le Pen promises to 
restore. It is older voters, Rochedy argues, who are the greatest obstacle to 
Le Pen’s victory. “They are afraid of leaving the euro,” he says. “They are 
afraid of huge changes.” Rochedy is convinced that the FN will never win simply 
by fetishising the past. “They just want to go back 30 years,” he said of his 
erstwhile colleagues. “It’s a discourse that doesn’t at all take into account 
the world as it is and what France has become.”

Even if Le Pen cannot win over enough older voters for her to become 
president, there is one ageing constituency that has already moved 
significantly to the right – the former members of what used to be the largest 
communist party in western Europe.

As the French Communist party collapsed, its supporters were left rudderless. 
According to Andrew Hussey, a Liverpool-born academic who teaches in Paris, the 
technocratic leaders of the Socialist party –many of them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/may/14/france-power-elitism-peter-gumbel>
 graduates of the ultra-elite Ecole Nationale d’Administration – “are so 
disconnected from ordinary people” that even former Marxists won’t consider 
voting for them. Distrustful of the establishment and searching for a state 
that protects them, many have turned to the FN. “I think you’ve got a big 
political question here about who looks after you,” Hussey said. “This is a 
very communist way of thinking.”

Le Pen knows that she is attracting these people. Many of her supporters “used 
to be socialists, but they aren’t any more”, she told me. Although she prefers 
to avoid the phrase welfare state – “That’s a socialist concept,” she insisted 
– Le Pen has appealed directly to this yearning for a large and nurturing state 
that fights for the common man and not the rich.

“I defend fraternity – the idea that a developed country should be able to 
provide the poorest with the minimum needed to live with dignity as a human 
being. The French state no longer does that,” she told me. “We’re in a world 
today in which you either defend the interests of the people or the interests 
of the banks.” And she has seen results. She points to the northern 
Pas-de-Calais region. “It was socialist-communist for 80 years,” she says. “I 
won 45%.”

At the same time as Marine Le Pen was working to “de-demonise” the FN, the 
leaders of the Dutch far right successfully seized the mantle of radicalism by 
positioning itself as the only force that dares to challenge an out-of-touch 
political establishment, and the only party willing to speak out about what 
many voters fear: extremist Islam.

Geert Wilders and his Party for Freedom (PVV) have surpassed the Dutch Labour 
party to take up a close second place in polls ahead of the March 2017 
election. Last September, Wilders declared that Europe was facing an “Islamic 
invasion 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/us-europe-migrants-netherlands-idUSKCN0RA0WY20150910>
” – the sort of comments that landed him in court this weekon charges of 
inciting racial hatred 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/31/geert-wilders-trial-throws-netherlands-divisions-in-sharp-relief>
, which he dismisses as an attack on freedom of expression.

The presence of “masses of young men in their 20s with beards singing ‘Allahu 
Akbar’ across Europe”, Wilders warned at the peak of last year’s refugee 
crisis, posed a dire threat to “our prosperity, our security, our culture and 
identity”. Across the country, grassroots groups responded to Wilders’s 
warning, attempting toblock the resettlement of asylum seekers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/17/thousands-riot-in-small-dutch-town-over-plan-for-asylum-seeker-centre>
 in their towns. Last October, Klaas Dijkhoff, the deputy minister responsible 
for refugee resettlement, arrived for a visit to the tiny north-eastern village 
of Oranje, where the Dutch government had decided to place 700 refugees. 
Outraged locals blocked the road leading to town, kicked Dijkhoff’s car and 
tore off its rearview mirrors. A few days later, near Utrecht, an asylum centre 
was attacked by masked men with smoke bombs and fireworks.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fthe-ruthlessly-effective-rebranding-of-europes-new-far-right%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb02d25bd71d105799a7fe9384e3d0015ea45140%2F0_0_4308_2585%2F4308.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20ruthlessly%20effective%20rebranding%20of%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20new%20far%20right&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fthe-ruthlessly-effective-rebranding-of-europes-new-far-right%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20ruthlessly%20effective%20rebranding%20of%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20new%20far%20right&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fthe-ruthlessly-effective-rebranding-of-europes-new-far-right%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb02d25bd71d105799a7fe9384e3d0015ea45140%2F0_0_4308_2585%2F4308.jpg>
 A 2010 rally in support of Geert Wilders during his trial for inciting racial 
hatred, with posters reading ‘Freedom Yes, Islamisation No’ and ‘Geert is 
Great’. Photograph: Peter Dejong/AP 
In the decade following the assassinations of Fortuyn and Van Gogh, the 
integration of Muslim immigrants became the most divisive issue in Dutch 
politics. Suddenly, Turkish and Moroccan-born Dutch citizens became “Muslims”. 
And as the public debate over Islam and migration grew even more hostile, even 
the most basic forms of visible religious observance – wearing the hijab, 
buying halal meat, fasting during Ramadan – became politically loaded.

The Dutch Labour MP Ahmed Marcouch, who came to the Netherlands from rural 
Morocco when he was 10, recounted how controversies have erupted everywhere 
from supermarkets to classrooms. It is a jolt to the traditionally liberal 
Netherlands when teenage girls tell their male teachers they can’t shake hands, 
or that they fast and pray while many other Dutch kids are out drinking and 
having sex. As Marcouch remarked, it runs against everything that Dutch youth 
culture promotes.

Wilders’s PVV has capitalised on this cultural angst by using simple and 
deliberately brash slogans about immigration, crime, and refugees – one of his 
latest memes is simply “De-Islamise” – to win over voters who feel that 
everything familiar to them is slipping away.

By framing its anti-migrant politics as a battle against imperious elites and 
political correctness, the PVV has been able to capitalise on a panoply of 
grievances, from anger over asylum seekers to Euroscepticism. Meanwhile, many 
causes of the radical left – including anti-racism and anti-colonialism – have 
now become establishment thinking in the Netherlands. “Idealism has been 
bureaucratised,” argues the journalist Bas Heijne, who writes a column in the 
liberal daily newspaper NRC Handelsblad. “And when the establishment enforces 
universalism, you react against it.” That’s why there is such a strong anti-PC 
tone to the Dutch right: do not tell us what to say, what to celebrate and who 
we must live next to.

Geert Wilders trial throws Netherlands' divisions in sharp relief
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/31/geert-wilders-trial-throws-netherlands-divisions-in-sharp-relief>
Just as Marine Le Pen’s FN has become a huge presence on social media in 
France, the right is in the midst of colonising the Dutch media. Geen Stijl 
(“No Style”), a popular Breitbart-style news site featuring abrasive articles 
and videos, encourages its best and angriest commenters to visit mainstream 
news sites and go on the attack. “It is massively important,” says Tilburg 
University’s Merijn Oudenampsen, “like a social movement”. The site began as a 
blog dedicated to those who felt politically homeless after Fortuyn’s murder, 
and has since become a ubiquitous presence in Dutch public debate, with an army 
of “reactors” on Twitter. According to Oudenampsen, some politicians have told 
him that Geen Stijl is the first site they check in the morning.

The right’s newfound media clout has also helped shape what the journalist 
Kustaw Bessems, from the leftwing Volkskrant newspaper, sees as a new, 
inverted, form of political correctness. In the old days, he says, there were 
taboos enforced by the left: badmouth immigrants and “you were immediately 
called a racist and extreme right and basically pressured to shut up”. Now, 
it’s the other way around. “As soon as you say anything other than ‘immigration 
is a problem’ or ‘Islam is the cause of terrorism’ … the thought police 
immediately jump on your neck to correct you.”

A Dutch government official who focuses on security issues complained that 
even as the integration of Muslim immigrants and the threat of radical Islam 
had become the most heated and polarising issues in the Netherlands, almost 
none of the feverish public debate was informed by knowledge of Islamism or 
terrorism. While politicians fan the flames of fear, the official said, “the 
economists look for the economic roots of the problem, sociologists look for 
social causes and the anthropologists try to explain jihadi culture – but none 
of them have any idea about theology”. Even scholars of radicalisation tend to 
study today’s extremists through the historical lens of the European radical 
left – which does little to explain what leads a small number of young Muslim 
men such as Van Gogh’s killer, Mohamed Bouyeri, to devote themselves to the 
cause of jihad. “It’s easy to be a Marxist,” the security official quipped. 
“It’s fucking hard to be a salafi.”

As the perception that the state is helpless to prevent the radicalisation of 
Muslim teenagers deepens and the fear of terrorism increases, so does the share 
of voters who are newly receptive to the far right’s tirades about 
“Islamisation”. These days it is not only anti-migration activists pushing back 
against the bureaucratised consensus. There are also many disappointed 
progressives – the people who saw the cultural victories of the 1960s and 1970s 
as major battles that had long since been won, making sexual freedom, feminism 
and gay rights an unquestioned part of Dutch society. Suddenly those old 
victories seem tenuous. “There is a sense that, ‘We are welcoming and then they 
do this,’ says Bas Heijne. “They have been terribly let down in their good 
intentions.” And in such an environment, traditionally leftist constituencies 
such as gay people and Jews feel threatened – and some have become reflexively 
suspicious of Muslims.

The stereotype that observant Muslims hate gay men and lesbians has become so 
entrenched in the Netherlands that neither side can fathom evidence to the 
contrary. When the Moroccan-born Labour MP Ahmed Marcouchfirst joined in 
Amsterdam’s legendary gay pride parade 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2009/12/07/parades-end-2>, he was, as he 
puts it, the “first hetero-active Muslim” to participate. The gay community 
feared violence from extremists; conservative Muslims were baffled and angry. 
Both groups concluded, “Oh, maybe Marcouch is homosexual too,” he says with a 
laugh. Neither group could imagine a straight Muslim doing what he did.

But public displays of solidarity such as Marcouch’s are rare. Among openly 
gay couples and religious Jews alike, there is a palpable fear of being 
targeted by homophobic or antisemitic young Muslim men. Much as in France, this 
fraught atmosphere has made far-right parties seem a palatable option for 
groups who would never previously have considered voting for them.

In Amsterdam earlier this year, I had several meetings with a staunch Jewish 
supporter of Wilders’s PVV, who insisted on remaining anonymous. He described 
his own backing for the far right in terms that echoed Alain Finkielkraut. 
“It’s an outdated reflex for Jews to always say the problem is the extreme 
right,” he told me. “We have new enemies and we need new ideas.”

The experience of his own family during the second world war has convinced him 
that Europe’s capacity for murderous violence is always lurking beneath the 
surface. “Anne Frank wasn’t betrayed by the Germans,” he argued. “But by Dutch 
people. Regular Dutch.” Jews need to find new allies in a new war, he argues, 
because they will never be safe. “The trains for the Jews will always come,” he 
added, ominously. “I’d rather be wrong than be too calm and end up on the 
trains.”

He is not unsympathetic to the plight of European Muslims, and told me that he 
even sees parallels with the persecution his own family faced. “If I were a 
Muslim in Europe at this moment I’d be very uneasy,” he admitted. “If Europeans 
regain their manhood, it could be bad. It’s the history of Europe to treat 
foreigners terribly. We Jews know that.”

For that reason, he argues, Muslims should regard Wilders as a lesser evil. 
“Every Muslim should be happyGeert Wilders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/geert-wilders> exists. If someone else 
channelled these hateful feelings it would be much worse,” he told me 
menacingly. “Wilders is civil. He is a democrat. He is not the new Hitler.”

To Frits Bolkestein, who led the Netherlands’ centre-right VVD in the 1990s – 
and was briefly Wilders’ boss when he was a young aide in the party office – 
the rise of the far right is as much about class as it is about Islam. The 
Dutch Labour party, he argues, gave up on its working-class base: “They made a 
major mistake,” he says of his old rivals, with a tinge of satisfaction. Faced 
with “the choice between the foreign-born and the labour classes, they chose 
the foreign-born … and they’ve paid for it dearly”. Current polls project that 
the party will drop from the 36 seats it now holds (out of 150) to just 10.

Marcouch concedes that, like the old leftists in France, many former Labour 
voters now back Wilders. Moreover, he says, they still live in the very 
neighbourhoods that families such as his own moved into in the 1980s, as many 
white Dutch families were moving out. “Their message to the Labour party,” he 
said, “is: ‘You ignored us. You let it happen.’”

The Danish People’s Party has been seeking out such voters for years, and they 
have masterfully leveraged anti-immigrant sentiment to siphon away the Social 
Democrats’ traditional base – people who fear that the “bread will be buttered 
more thinly”, as the Danish journalist Lars Trier Mogensen puts it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fthe-ruthlessly-effective-rebranding-of-europes-new-far-right%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F485d0c998c114015e268653a91c652c962a01076%2F0_0_6016_3611%2F6016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20ruthlessly%20effective%20rebranding%20of%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20new%20far%20right&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fthe-ruthlessly-effective-rebranding-of-europes-new-far-right%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20ruthlessly%20effective%20rebranding%20of%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20new%20far%20right&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fthe-ruthlessly-effective-rebranding-of-europes-new-far-right%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F485d0c998c114015e268653a91c652c962a01076%2F0_0_6016_3611%2F6016.jpg>
 Kristian Thulesen Dahl, leader of the Danish People’s Party. Photograph: Linda 
Kastrup/AFP/Getty Images 
The DPP has effectively combined anti-immigrant rhetoric with a strong 
pro-welfare message that stresses quality health benefits and good care for the 
elderly. Søren Espersen, the DPP’s deputy leader, doesn’t think that former 
Social Democrats will ever go back. “When one of those takes the step to vote 
for us, it is a very, very huge step he is taking,” he says of voters who 
supported the Social Democrats all their lives. “And why should he go back? I 
mean, to come over this first hurdle of voting for us, then he’s done it.”

The Social Democrats first began to lose their dominance in and around the 
major cities in the 1990s, with many of their votes going to the DPP. One of 
those places is the small satellite town of Herlev, about 10 miles west of 
Copenhagen. The 41-year-old Social Democratic mayor, Thomas Gyldal Petersen, 
has lived there all his life, and he is adamant that controlling immigration 
numbers is the only way to reverse his party’s political misfortunes.

For Gyldal Petersen, the key to successful integration is a demographic 
balance. As soon as a school or housing estate becomes majority immigrant – or 
majority unemployed – he says, problems start to arise. He blames his own 
party’s leaders: “Mayors in the 80s, they were warning, something is going 
wrong, you have to change.” But the party leadership “shut their eyes”, he says.

Then came the Muhammad cartoons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/muhammad-cartoons>. In 2005, the editors at 
Jyllands-Posten, Denmark’s largest newspaper, invited a group of well-known 
cartoonists to draw the prophet. The initial response was underwhelming, but 
within a few months – through a combination of diplomatic pressure, a 
dismissive response from the Danish government, and a concerted campaign by 
local imams – the cartoons became a full-blown crisis, with boycotts of Danish 
products and violent protests occurring throughout the Middle East. Danes who 
had never contemplated voting for the DPP now saw their embassies on fire and 
death threats against some of their best-known journalists. Suddenly, the DPP’s 
platform was making sense. They had warned that Muslims were extremists in 
waiting, and now those warnings seemed to come true. Politicians such as Naser 
Khader, who once warned that giving the DPP influence would weaken them, found 
themselves moving steadily to the right of the political spectrum. When Khader 
founded a new organisation called “Democratic Muslims” in the wake of the 
cartoon controversy, he received death threats.

Danish newspaper apologises in Muhammad cartoons row
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/feb/26/danish-cartoons-muhammad-politiken-apology>
Those at the top of the Social Democrats are now taking a tough stance, too. 
Earlier this year the party leader, Mette Frederiksen, went to Stockholm to 
meet with fellow Scandinavian social democrats. There she gave a speech that 
rattled her colleagues. “We social democrats must accept that there is a 
clash,” she declared. “It is a very strong part of our identity that we help 
when people need help … but just as strong is our value that we must have a 
well-functioning welfare state.” Frederiksen continued: “My position is that a 
universally funded Scandinavian welfare state with free and equal access to 
healthcare, education and social subsidies is not compatible with an open 
immigration policy.”

But in its zeal to get tough on migration, Denmark has damaged its 
international reputation as a bastion of progressivism – the sort of place that
Bernie Sanders liked to mention 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2016/02/17/politics/bernie-sanders-2016-denmark-democratic-socialism/>
 at campaign rallies. In January, just three months after the refugee crisis 
peaked, Denmark passed what became known as the “jewellery law 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/26/danish-parliament-approves-plan-to-seize-assets-from-refugees>
”, which stipulated that any refugees carrying valuables worth more than 10,000 
kroner (£1,200) would have them confiscated to fund the cost of accommodating 
asylum-seekers. Editorial pages and columnists across the world lined up to 
condemn the law. According to Kenneth Kristensen Berth, a babyfaced MP for the 
DPP, it was about deterrence. “The goal was, of course, that we should try to 
tell people that they should not seek asylum in Denmark,” he said. The 
jewellery provision was a minor part. “More important is the fact that many 
people will be waiting longer for family reunification, like waiting three 
years,” he added. And it wasn’t just the DPP and government who supported it – 
the Social Democrats voted for it, too.

Bent Melchior, Denmark’s 87-year-old former chief rabbi, was outraged. He 
bristled at the suggestion that refugees are rich because they flee with some 
money in their pockets. He would know: although Denmark is always hailed for 
saving its Jews during the second world war, it is often forgotten that Danish 
Jews paid fishermen huge sums to ferry them across to Sweden. Melchior’s family 
paid the equivalent of “almost a year’s rent of a six-room flat” just for his 
own passage. “Denmark is not a poor country, for God’s sake,” Melchior says. 
“There’s food for everybody here, and even if we get a few tens of thousands 
more people, there will still be food for everybody.”

The road that led a centre-left party to support such a law has been long and 
tortuous, but the trajectory has been clear. The Scandinavian welfare system 
has always been premised on solidarity, with everyone paying their fair share 
and receiving what they deserve. As the country has become more diverse, some 
of the trust sustaining it has broken down. There has been abuse of the system 
by immigrants, and there has been even more tabloid fearmongering depicting 
immigrants as cheats and leeches sucking the system dry. But the larger issue, 
as the Oxford economist Paul Collier has argued, is the growing unwillingness 
of natives to subsidise those seen as the foreign poor.

Herlev’s mayor does not oppose asylum, but he insists that the numbers have to 
be capped. “We have to help refugees, and we have to take refugees to Denmark 
in a number that we can help. If the balance tips, the welfare society cannot 
hold together,” Petersen warns.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fthe-ruthlessly-effective-rebranding-of-europes-new-far-right%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7662fe0c7e25d4f00611391611d0c4f03cfc2d92%2F0_0_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20ruthlessly%20effective%20rebranding%20of%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20new%20far%20right&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fthe-ruthlessly-effective-rebranding-of-europes-new-far-right%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20ruthlessly%20effective%20rebranding%20of%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20new%20far%20right&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fthe-ruthlessly-effective-rebranding-of-europes-new-far-right%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7662fe0c7e25d4f00611391611d0c4f03cfc2d92%2F0_0_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 When cartoons of the prophet Muhammad in a Danish newspaper led to protests 
across the world in 2006, the DPP’s anti-Islamic rhetoric gained more traction. 
Photograph: Wathiq Khuzaie/Getty Images 
But such balance may only help so much. Aydin Soei, a Danish sociologist and 
the son of immigrants from Iran, believes there is a larger blind spot in the 
thinking of the Danish government – one that native Danes who have never been 
on the receiving end of the state’s integration policy have failed to see. “A 
lot of refugees were just parked on social welfare instead of [the state] 
recognising their education and their skills,” Soei told me, citing the case of 
his own mother, who arrived in Denmark with a physics degree that was regarded 
as worthless. “If your motivation is to create a liberal society where the 
individual can create a good life for him or herself, then you would have 
solved this problem years ago,” he argues.

Instead the state has effectively provided newcomers with an allowance and 
keys to an apartment, and ignored them – assuming that its work was done. The 
problem, Soei claims, is that there is no political incentive to integrate 
asylum seekers into the job market. “It doesn’t have consequences for the 
politicians … because they don’t have the right to vote.” Either way, it plays 
into the DPP’s argument. “Immigrants can’t do right,” said Gyldal Petersen. 
“When they’re unemployed they’re a burden to society. When they’re in a job, 
they just stole the job from a Dane.”

Whether or not Marine Le Pen wins next year’s French election or Wilders’ PVV 
becomes the largest party in the Netherlands, the new far right is not going 
away. The reflex among many establishment parties – and media institutions – 
has been to dismiss them, sideline them or mock them. Others, however, have 
begun to mimic them in an effort to win their old voters back.

Rhetoric might, in the long run, matter more than election results. When I 
spoke again recently with the Jewish Wilders supporter from Amsterdam, he was 
convinced that the battle has in some ways already been won – regardless of the 
outcome of next year’s elections. “The PVV has shifted the whole political 
discussion to the right. The Labour party is saying almost exactly the same 
thing Wilders said five years ago,” he told me. “You can have a lot of 
influence in politics by steering the debate.”

If traditional political parties want to win, they must first abandon the old 
strategy of marginalising populist movements and instead engage them on the 
merits – and flaws – of their policies and counter their messages of fear.

Not least among the lessons of Brexit was that, for millions of disaffected 
voters, immigration is justone more thing nobody asked them about 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/25/brexit-vote-poor-elite>. 
This is what makes the issue an especially potent weapon: it combines the 
resentful energies of nativism, economic instability, and hatred of a remote 
and unaccountable political elite. And the leaders of the new far right have 
learned to wield it effectively. They know better than to let themselves be 
dismissed, as Jean-Marie Le Pen was, as antisemites or racists. 

In France, the new majority Marine Le Pen hopes to build is strikingly similar 
to the coalition that brought the Brexit campaign victory. In a park near 
Calais’ castle-like town hall in May, Samuel and Pascal, activists from a group 
named Retake Calais, railed against the town’s centre-right mayor. They blamed 
her for the growth of the sprawling, trash-strewn tent city known as the 
Jungle, which sat three miles east of the town untilit was dismantled this month
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/31/1000-children-left-in-calais-refugee-camp-say-charities>
. “Those who govern us are completely against us. The illegals, who aren’t 
French, can do whatever they want,” they told me. For them, even Marine Le Pen 
is “too soft”.

If resettlement programmes take refugees away from Calais to other parts of 
France, as dozens of buses have in the past week since the destruction of the 
camp, they would not be any happier. “They’re sending them to all the little 
villages in France,” says Samuel. After they start to open businesses and bring 
family members, “in two years the village will be dead”.

Us v Them: the birth of populism | John B Judis | The Long Read
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/13/birth-of-populism-donald-trump>
About a mile down the road, the Calais ferry terminal lies behind layers of 
tall steel fences and coiled barbed wire. I met Rudy Vercucque and Yohann 
Faviere, the local FN leaders, on a blustery morning in June outside the 
terminal, where they were anxiously awaiting a visiting EU dignitary. Giant 
seagulls circled and squawked above as they denounced the mayor, Natacha 
Bouchart, a member of Sarkozy’s Republicans party.

“It’s she who has permitted this,” Vercucque, a portly 35-year-old, fumed. And 
it was Sarkozy, he reminded me, who negotiated the notoriousLe Touquet accords 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/30/uk-plays-down-calais-border-tensions-with-critical-ally-france>
, effectively moving the British border to where we were standing. Calais 
depends on British tourism and revenues are down sharply. The result is 
crippling economic and social malaise: “Find a doctor who wants to move to 
Calais. Find a surgeon who wants to move to Calais,” Vercucque exclaimed. “You 
work your whole life, you pay off your house and you lose money. It’s 
intolerable.” Their support locally may have once been a protest vote, said 
Faviere, but no longer. “Today we really have people who adhere to our ideas.”

Vercucque was more blunt: “We say out loud what people think deep down.”

• Sasha Polakow-Suransky is an Open Society Fellow 
<https://www.opensocietyfoundations.org/people/sasha-polakow-suransky>. His 
book on the rise of anti-immigration politics will be published by Nation Books 
in autumn 2017. Follow the Long Read on Twitter at@gdnlongread 
<https://twitter.com/gdnlongread?ref_src=twsrc^google|twcamp^serp|twgr^author>, 
or sign up to the long read weekly emailhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/jul/20/sign-up-to-the-long-read-email>.

• Producing in-depth, thoughtful, well-reported journalism like the Long Read 
is difficult and expensive – but supporting us isn’t. If you value the 
Guardian’s independent journalism, please help to fund it bybecoming a 
Supporter. 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/uk/supporter?INTCMP=gdnwb_copts_editorial_mem_LREuropeanFarRight_footer>
 