
Why is candlelight so beautiful? At this time of the year candles burn 
brightly to celebrate Hanukkah or Christmas, casting a subtle, ever changing 
light into the long, dark midwinter nights. We love this magic and ancient form 
of light – but why?

Art can illuminate that – take the French 17th-century painter Georges de La 
Tour, entranced by the complex poetry of candlelight. In his paintings people 
hold, gaze at or are revealed by pale white candles and burning lamps. The 
ethereal brightness of the candlelight painted by De La Tour suggests both time 
passing – as the flame gutters – and the light of holy truth. In his painting
The Education of the Virgin 
<http://collections.frick.org/view/objects/asitem/items$0040:214> (1640) a book 
is illuminated by a single candle flame. The Virgin Mary’s reading is 
spiritual, as pure and luminous as that candle. In another painting by him,Job 
Mocked by His Wife 
<https://www.wikiart.org/en/georges-de-la-tour/job-mocked-by-his-wife-1650>, 
the candle reveals the timeworn body of an old man, andin another 
<http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/Collection/art-object-page.54386.html>, a 
repentant Mary Magdalene sits contemplating a skull by the flickering light of 
a candle.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fcandlelight-joseph-wright-el-greco%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7a87b4dddef799b3c6862138d87e32a00ef4b3a%2F0_0_2375_3677%2F2375.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20timeless%20wonder%20of%20candlelight%2C%20a%20glimmer%20of%20love%20in%20our%20dark%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fcandlelight-joseph-wright-el-greco%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20timeless%20wonder%20of%20candlelight%2C%20a%20glimmer%20of%20love%20in%20our%20dark%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fcandlelight-joseph-wright-el-greco%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7a87b4dddef799b3c6862138d87e32a00ef4b3a%2F0_0_2375_3677%2F2375.jpg>
 Job mocked by his wife by Georges de La Tour, c. 1650. Photograph: DEA /G 
Dagli Orti/Getty Images/DeAgostini 
Setting aside their religious meanings, these paintings – as well as many more 
by the same artist – clarify candlelight’s beauty. Paradoxically, the candles 
painted by Georges de La Tour do not look hot. The small flame of a candle is 
more a source of light than heat, and that takes it out of the carnal realm. It 
seems to come from some other place, to be a piece of pure magic light: a 
sacred flame.

It’s not easy to separate aesthetics and spirituality when it comes to 
candles. But there is another aspect of this source of light that fascinates De 
La Tour: its gentleness. Cast on a naked body or a contemplative face, it is 
soft, humanising, and forgiving. Then again, candles go out: their light is 
precious and time bound. Since no candle burns forever, it is always a memento 
mori. In De La Tour’s paintings of Mary Magdalene with a skull and candle (or 
sometimes an oil lamp), it is not only the skull that warns of life’s brevity. 
The candle flame, too, is mortal. Electric light is steady, long lasting and 
banal. The light from candles ebbs and flows, flickers and smokes, must be 
carefully lit and tended, and casts a light at once ethereal and kind.

Georges de La Tour is far from the only artist to love it for those reasons. 
In El Greco’s paintingAn Allegory 
<https://art.nationalgalleries.org/art-and-artists/34184>, painted in about 
1580 to 1585, a monkey and two boys gather round a silvery candle flame whose 
pale light casts enigmatic, wondrous light on their faces. This is a 
supernatural light, casting its grace on the world.

In Joseph Wright of Derby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jun/20/derby-museum-joseph-wright-collection-mortal-danger>
’s paintingThe Orrery 
<https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/A_Philosopher_Lecturing_on_the_Orrery#/media/File%3AWright_of_Derby%2C_The_Orrery.jpg>
 (about 1766), a candle has been positioned at the centre of a clockwork model 
of the solar system. It lights up the model as the sun lights up the solar 
system. Yet it also casts its kind glow on the watching faces, revealing the 
joy of understanding as children are told about Copernicus. Wright’s paintingAn 
Experiment on a Bird in the Air Pump 
<https://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/paintings/joseph-wright-of-derby-an-experiment-on-a-bird-in-the-air-pump>
 similarly shows faces by candlelight in an atmosphere of mystery and 
revelation. Wright reveals that science can have a spiritual power and beauty, 
a poetry – and candlelight lets him show this.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fcandlelight-joseph-wright-el-greco%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ca95c37d647b14ca6121765bb26da44f04b646e%2F0_0_6840_5207%2F6840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20timeless%20wonder%20of%20candlelight%2C%20a%20glimmer%20of%20love%20in%20our%20dark%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fcandlelight-joseph-wright-el-greco%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20timeless%20wonder%20of%20candlelight%2C%20a%20glimmer%20of%20love%20in%20our%20dark%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fcandlelight-joseph-wright-el-greco%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ca95c37d647b14ca6121765bb26da44f04b646e%2F0_0_6840_5207%2F6840.jpg>
 Enigmatic, wondrous light … An Allegory (Fàbula) by El Greco. Photograph: 
National Galleries of Scotland/Getty Images 
Joseph Wright's Derby homecoming: dazzling, daring – and still in danger
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jun/20/derby-museum-joseph-wright-collection-mortal-danger>
There are two fundamental reasons for the unique beauty of candles, according 
to these artists: ethereality and kindness. The apparently bodiless being of a 
candle flame, passing constantly into nothingness, warms the faces that it 
shines on. It is a subtle, atmospheric, and loving light. When candles are 
burning we feel better about the world. They light the soul.
 