
The average Jakartan spends 10 years of their life in traffic, wrote novelist 
Seno Gumira Ajidarma <https://duniasukab.com/>, and you don’t have to spend 
long in the Indonesian capital to believe it.


Three and a half million people a day commute into this hot and humid city 
from the wider metropolitan area of Greater Jakarta and many come by car, 
attracted by the status and the air-conditioning. Their cars, though, are 
motionless inmacet (gridlock) during most of the 5am to 8am and 5pm to 8pm rush 
hours, and for much of the day.

Jakarta was named the world city with the worst traffic 
<http://time.com/3695068/worst-cities-traffic-jams/> in one index last year 
based on satellite navigation data, which found the average driver starting and 
stopping more than 33,000 times in a year. An estimated70% of the city’s air 
pollution comes from vehicles 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/27/world/asia/as-indonesia-prospers-air-pollution-takes-toll.html?_r=0>
.

It typically takes two hours to drive 25 miles to the centre from Bogor, the 
largest of the satellite cities, where many office workers live. A bad journey 
can take three hours. As cars idle in endless queues,scooters slalom past 
<https://twitter.com/nickvanmead/status/799195423076450304>, missing by inches. 
It seems there are often more passengers on the bikes than in the cars.

There are often more passengers on motorbikes than in cars

Efforts to reduce car use are limited to an odd/even scheme on the main 
thoroughfare of Sudirman and few other key routes during rush hour: vehicles 
with odd numbered plates are allowed on odd dates, with even plates on even 
dates. Odd/even came in after athree-in-one car-pooling rule was scrapped in 
April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/04/end-of-the-road-jakartas-passengers-for-hire-targeted-by-carpooling-crackdown>
 after years of abuse. “Jockeys” would stand at the side of the road, offering 
themselves for rent so the driver could get the required two passengers; many 
were children, who took huge risks getting into the vehicles of strangers.

With the population of Greater Jakarta expected to increase from about 30 
million today to more than 40 million by 2040 
<http://www.newcitiesfoundation.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/11/PDF-PR-Jakarta-to-host-New-Cities-Summit-2015-EN.pdf>
 , wasting hours trapped in traffic looks set to become even more of a daily 
frustration for residents. Is Jakarta destined to be jammed forever, or does 
the city have an alternative?
 A motorcycle taxi for smartphone app Go-Jek picks up a customer. Photograph: 
Bloomberg via Getty Images 
Scooter city: ‘You can get anything delivered by bike here’

“Motorbikes are twice the speed of a car in Jakarta, they use a 10th of the 
fuel, are a 10th of the cost and use far less space,” saysNadiem Makarim 
<http://en.tempo.co/read/news/2015/11/03/241715453/Nadiem-Makarim-We-are-ready-to-bleed>
, founder and chief executive ofGo-Jek <https://www.go-jek.com/>, the city’s 
two-wheeled version of Uber. “Motorbikes are much more efficient. There’s no 
reason for cars to exist in this city at all.”

Since Makarim’s company revolutionised the motorcycle taxi – or ojek – 
industry with the launch of a smartphone app last year, numbers have risen 
dramatically. Along with Malaysian rivalGrab 
<https://www.grab.com/id/en/bike/?utm_source=google&utm_medium=cpc&utm_term=&utm_content=&utm_campaign=ID_G021_JKTDPKTGRBKS_PAX_GB_COM_120716_CTWA_GGR_SEM_CMP_EN&gclid=CK3sq5nwvdACFc6HaAodZ8YKRA>
, andUber’s Motor service <https://www.uber.com/en-ID/cities/jakarta/>, they 
have driven down fares – to theanger of some drivers 
<https://www.techinasia.com/gojek-lowers-prices-spur-demand-drivers-protest>. 

The app has been downloaded 25 million times. As well as getting around, 
customers can get a massage therapist or a cleaner delivered to their door 
within 90 minutes. His food delivery business is now Asia’s largest outside 
China, and the Go-Jek also offers makeovers, theatre tickets, flowers, 
prescription medicines …
 See the full visual 
Motorcycle taxis kill public transport
Yoga Adiwinarto 
“It’s pretty hard to find something you can’t get by motorbike delivery,” says 
Makarim. “You don’t need to waste time in traffic to get what you want. We 
bring everything to you. If you didn’t want to you wouldn’t have to leave your 
apartment.”

Some in the city, though, are concerned the rise of motorbike taxi apps could 
tempt people away from buses and trains. “Motorcycle taxis kill public 
transport,” says Yoga Adiwinarto, country director ofITDP-Indonesia 
<http://www.itdp-indonesia.org/>, the local branch of the non-profit Institute 
for Transportation and Development Policy.

Makarim doesn’t see it that way. “Our customers are smartphone users,” he 
says. “They are middle class people switching from private cars. They wouldn’t 
have travelled on buses anyway.”
 A commuter train in East Jakarta in 2012. A recent crackdown means excess 
passengers no longer ride on the roof, or hang out of the doors, but inside the 
carriages the rush hour crush is as bad as ever. Photograph: Ulet 
Ifansasti/Getty Images 
The largest south-east Asian city without a metro 

Regional rivals Manila (1984), Singapore (1987), Kuala Lumpur (1995) and 
Bangkok (2004), all got there first. But four decades after it was first 
mooted, construction has at last begun on Jakarta’s $1.7bn (£1.4bn) metro line, 
known asMass Rapid Transit (MRT) 
<http://www.thejakartapost.com/longform/2016/04/01/mrt-jakarta-digging-the-city.html>
.

Difficulties acquiring land rights in the south of the city have delayed the 
overground section of the project but, when the first stage opens in 2019, it 
is set to halve the hour it takes to travel 12 miles from Lebak Bulus to 
Bunderan HotelIndonesia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/indonesia> in the 
centre by car.

Commuter Line trains make the journey from Bogor to the city centre in 55 
minutes – twice as fast as the car

A northern extension to Kampung Bandan near the waterfront is set to open in 
2020. A second line running east-west, where many journeys are made, is under 
consideration.


A long-awaited link from the airport is set to start operating next year 
<http://www.railwaypro.com/wp/jakartas-airport-rail-link-to-be-completed-in-2017/>
 and the first phase of a light rail system is due to open in 2018, in time for 
theAsian Games 
<http://www.ocasia.org/game/GameParticular.aspx?9QoyD9QEWPeFpHpEhgXsDA==>. The 
new network should boost rail capacity from 800,000 to 1.2 million passengers a 
day.

Jakarta’s ageing Commuter Line trains make the journey from Bogor to the city 
centre in 55 minutes – twice as fast as the car. Excess passengers no longer 
ride on the roof or hang out of the doors after a recent crackdown, but inside 
the carriages the rush hour crush is as bad as ever.

The metro, light rail, airport link – and a planned bullet train from Bandung 
100 miles to the east – will centre on a new hub at Dukuh Atas. The inevitable 
swanky shopping mall is being planned.

But is there a faster way to transform public transport in the city? Yoga says 
Jakarta’s Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) system, which the ITDP helped promote and 
design, took just two years to set up and the bill to the city was a fraction 
of the cost of the metro.
 Passengers on a bus in Jakarta. Photograph: Beawiharta/Reuters 
Bus Rapid Transit: ‘It’s quicker than cars for sure’

Twelve years ago Jakarta became the first south-east Asian city to open a BRT, 
inspired by visits from former Bogotá mayor Enrique Peñalosa.

The 120-mile Transjakarta network gives good coverage, within the city at 
least, and carries 350,000 people a day. Buses are air conditioned, with a 
separate section for women at the front, and 10 pink women-only buses have 
recently started operation.

“Within Jakarta itself the BRT is quite good,” says Yoga. “It’s quicker than 
cars for sure – and sometimes it’s quicker than motorcycle – but only within 
the city of Jakarta.”

Commuters trying to get to and from the outer cities of Bogor, Depok, 
Tangerang and Bekasi find the dedicated lanes stop as soon as they leave the 
city limits. A rush-hour BRT from Bogor to the centre takes two or three hours, 
and in Jakarta itself police officers turn a blind eye tocars and motorbikes 
using bus lanes when gridlock strikes 
<https://twitter.com/nickvanmead/status/798550502556528641>.

Better links to the wider Great Jakarta area are vital to get more people on 
BRT, says Yoga. “Getting links to the outer city is problematic, with 
businesses pushing back and the government lacking political will. The city 
government is much more progressive in terms of mobility – they’re bringing in 
MRT, pushing public transport, charging for parking – but the national 
government never takes any action.”
 Jakarta’s weekly car-free mornings are hugely popular. Photograph: Romeo 
Gacad/AFP/Getty Images 
Cycling: ‘Cars are usually stopped so they’re ok’

Every Sunday morning thousands of people take to the main drags of Sudirman 
and Thamrin totake advantage of Jakarta’s car-free day 
<https://twitter.com/nickvanmead/status/800308016193028097>. 

Spotting cyclists on other days is harder. One is Gandrie Ramadhan, who rides 
10 miles a day to work as a transport associate at the ITDP. He uses smaller 
side streets where he can but says major roads are unavoidable.

He takes me on a cycle around the expensive embassy district of Menteng, where 
light traffic and shady tree-lined streets make for a pleasant ride, butas soon 
as we get on the main thoroughfare of Sudirman 
<https://twitter.com/nickvanmead/status/799199148520116224> it quickly gets 
more serious. Worst are the unpredictable, battered green Kopaja and 
orange/blue MetroMini buses which belch black smoke from poorly maintained 
diesel engines.

Related: Waiting for Glodok: the ghost street haunted by Indonesia’s riots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/nov/22/glodok-jakarta-recover-indonesia-1998-riots-chinatown>

“Cars are usually stopped so they’re ok but it is motorbikes which make it 
most dangerous,” says Gandrie. “Cycling has low status, and because we are seen 
as slow, the motorbikes always want to overtake us and get to the front. The 
Kopaja and MetroMinis are the worst, though. They make it horrible.”

Jakarta’s existing three cycle lanes are painted a foot or two wide – and 
ignored by motorists. Gandrie believes installing protected bike infrastructure 
is the only way to get more people cycling in the city. “And more offices with 
showers,” he adds.


Can Jakarta escape its nightmare traffic?

Instead of providing showers, most companies are more concerned with 
subsidising parking for their employees, says Yoga. Meanwhile, the government 
has approved plans for six new elevated toll highways crisscrossing the centre 
of the city, and its Low Cost Green Car initiative encourages car use by 
offering zero deposit and low interest on small-engined vehicles.

“Jakarta’s moving in the right direction but it’s not enough,” Yoga says. “The 
government is allowing low-density development outside the city, and the wider 
metro area is spreading. That makes it difficult for public transport because 
there isn’t the coverage. We need high density development where your first 
option is walking or cycling, and for longer journeys you can use the bus or 
metro.”


That may seem a long way from the current reality in Jakarta, but the 
government has a target to increase the share of trips on public transport from 
23% to 60% by 2030 – and there is an incentive. As Yoga says: “Four hours every 
day wasted in a car is really not that pleasant.”

What are your experiences of transport in Jakarta and what do you think would 
make it better? Share your ideas, thoughts, stories and pictures here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/nov/14/the-future-of-jakarta-what-needs-to-change-share-your-thoughts>
. You can also contribute onTwitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Instagram <https://www.instagram.com/guardiancities/> using the hashtag 
#GuardianJakarta

 