
Cameron Leslie has had better weeks. On Tuesday, the co-founder of Fabric 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/fabric>, arguably the UK’s best known 
nightclub, faces Islington council in a licence review hearing that will 
determine the future of the venue. But with a growing discourse around the 
cultural and economic significance of the capital’s clubland and increasing 
frustration from clubbers after years of venues closing their doors, Tuesday’s 
meeting represents so much more than the survival of one club.


“I can’t say I can give you confidence,” says Leslie. “I’m hopeful. But this 
is a real complex challenge. Look at the picture of London in 2006 then in 
2016, and just take that as a snapshot. This is not a thriving industry. If we 
close I think it would be a rather damning testament to exactly where we are at 
the moment.”

Fabric’s situation has shocked the clubbing community. Three weeks ago the club
closed its doors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/11/fabric-london-nightclub-close-weekend-deaths-teenagers>
 after its licence was suspended following two drug-related deaths this summer. 
Since then there has been an outpouring of support for the venue, with DJs, 
promoters and clubbers sharing their memories – using the hashtag#fabricmoments 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23fabricmoments> – of a club that has played a 
pivotal role in introducing a generation to underground music.

With nightclubs in decline, what does modern Britain get up to after dark?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2016/aug/14/young-people-night-time-social-activities-museums-running-tim-lewis>
A Change.org petition 
<https://www.change.org/p/save-london-s-nightlife-stop-the-closure-of-fabric> 
was launched calling on Mayor Sadiq Khan to: “Save London’s nightlife. Stop the 
closure of Fabric.” It has since gained over 100,000 signatures. Khan – who is 
currently advertising for anight tsar 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-london-37172335> for the capital – 
responded, stating that he wants the club to survive, though he has since made 
clear in an interview withTime Out 
<http://www.timeout.com/london/blog/sadiq-tells-time-out-i-dont-want-fabric-closing-down-its-a-great-night-out-090216>
 that he “does not have the power to intervene in licensing cases”.

On Friday, MP for Islington Emily Thornberry chimed in too, writing on Facebook
 
<https://www.facebook.com/permalink.php?story_fbid=1270309743019070&id=142202379163151>
 that she strongly believes Fabric should stay open and that some of what is 
being asked of the club is “neither reasonable nor appropriate”.

“As a parent, my heart goes out to the family and friends of anyone who has 
lost loved ones at such a young age,” she wrote, “But we must guard against the 
assumption that dangerous drug use would cease simply if we were to close a 
nightclub like Fabric.”

For Fabric, a 2,500-capacity venue that programmes the world’s top electronic 
music acts, the licence review highlights the catch-22 situation many venues – 
but particularly clubs – find themselves in. It has been described as a “beacon 
of best practice” when it comes to safety, yet faces closure as a result of 
incidents many would argue the club could not have prevented.

For Alan Miller, chairman of the Night Time Industries Association 
<http://www.ntia.co.uk/> (NTIA), if the operational measures Fabric already 
have in place aren’t enough to satisfy a licence committee, then no club stands 
a chance.

“It’s obviously very sad people died, but to isolate it and say it’s down to 
the responsibility of the nightclub … If you close Fabric, you’ll have to close 
every nightclub in Britain, because no one has the due diligence, extra staff 
and safety measures they employ,” he says.

Save Fabric: our clubs are under threat as never before | Bill Brewster
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/26/save-fabric-clubs-drugs-licensing-laws-rent>
Fabric says that since opening 17 years ago, it has always been pioneering in 
its approach to safety. All drugs confiscated are audited, signed off and 
handed to the authorities. Anyone suspected of dealing is taken into a CCTV 
monitored room and the police called.

“We’ve always had a fantastic relationship with police and particularly the 
council,” says Leslie. “Only eight months ago a judge tested all our systems 
and said we’re a beacon of best practice. Eleven weeks ago another licensee, 
from a venue that had a death, was sent to visit us to see how we managed 
things. How can this suddenly have changed overnight in such a damning way?”

In statements from the police in supporting documents 
<http://democracy.islington.gov.uk/ieListDocuments.aspx?CId=152&MId=3062> 
provided to the licensing committee, Fabric is described as “a safe haven for 
the supply and consumption of illegal drugs”.

Superintendent Stuart Ryan, from Islington police wrote: “If the premises is 
permitted to remain open and operating in its current form, then there is a 
strong possibility that further drug related deaths will occur.”

“How do you stop people taking drugs before they get into a club? [The 
government] can’t even keep drugs out of prison.”
Duncan Dick, editor of Mixmag 
Recent deaths in Fabric have not happened in a vacuum, however. Deaths from 
ecstasy have been increasing – with the drug said to be at itsstrongest in over 
a decade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jun/15/ecstasy-mdma-warning-after-pills-found-with-double-or-triple-doses-in-uk>
. According to theOffice for National Statistics 
<http://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/deaths/bulletins/deathsrelatedtodrugpoisoninginenglandandwales/2015-09-03>
, deaths from ecstasy rose from eight in 2010 to 50 in 2014. This year reports 
of those dying from ecstasy – usually teenagers – have been frequent. Last week 
a 17-year-old boy, believed to have taken drugs,died at Leeds festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/28/two-held-suspicion-drug-offences-leeds-festival>
.

Despite incidents like these becoming more common, the most sincere 
harm-reduction efforts have not come from the government, rather the 
initiatives of smaller groups and charities. In August Mixmag launched acampaign
 
<http://mixmag.net/feature/were-launching-a-campaign-to-promote-safe-ecstasy-use>
 to promote safer ecstasy use, advising its readers: “Don’t be daft, start with 
a half.” Meanwhile charities such asChill Welfare <http://chillwelfare.org.uk/> 
andthe Loop <http://wearetheloop.co.uk/> – whom Fabric has collaborated with – 
have taken their pioneering drug testing and advice centres to festivals in the 
UK. But this is by no means the norm.

“The government isn’t doing anything at all in terms of harm reduction,” says 
Duncan Dick, editor of Mixmag, explaining why the magazine started the 
campaign. He points out that harm reduction strategies are far more critical to 
stopping future drug deaths than trying to stop drugs coming into clubs. “How 
do you stop people taking drugs before they get into a club?” he says. “They 
can’t even keep drugs out of a prison.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Ffabric-nightclub-closure-uk-nightlife-drugs-death%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a3dcb42287933a52d3fec0a0bbd9745239d9f7a%2F0_0_2037_3072%2F2037.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20fate%20of%20Fabric%20reveals%20the%20future%20of%20UK%20nightlife%20%7C%20Will%20Coldwell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Ffabric-nightclub-closure-uk-nightlife-drugs-death%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20fate%20of%20Fabric%20reveals%20the%20future%20of%20UK%20nightlife%20%7C%20Will%20Coldwell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Ffabric-nightclub-closure-uk-nightlife-drugs-death%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a3dcb42287933a52d3fec0a0bbd9745239d9f7a%2F0_0_2037_3072%2F2037.jpg>
 ‘Reduced opening hours would be a slow and painful death’ … Fabric nightclub 
in Farringdon, London. Photograph: Sarah Lee for the Guardian 
Fabric hopes the licensing committee will take its ambition to “set a new gold 
standard for safe clubbing” seriously. Among the measures it wants to introduce 
is a new search policy, industry-leading training for staff to identify and 
tackle drug­ taking and drug dealing in clubs and a working group with the 
police and drugs awareness charity the Loop to establish best practice and 
continually review its operations. The hope is that Islington council will 
support them in doing this.

As for what the outcome will be on Tuesday, it may not be a binary one. 
Perhaps the most difficult for the club would be if it is allowed to stay open 
but with conditions that make it unworkable as a business – such as reduced 
opening hours – a situation that led to the recentclosure of the Arches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/10/glasgow-arches-club-goes-into-administration-and-is-set-to-close>
 in Glasgow. “It would be a slow and painful death,” says Leslie, who has 250 
members of staff to think about as well as himself.

At a time when City Hall is only just beginning to shape a policy on the 
night-time economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/jul/13/open-all-hours-24-hour-businesses-night-time-economy>
 and the cultural value of dance music and its venues barely starting to be 
acknowledged, Fabric’s closure would set an unnerving precedent for the 
capital. Clubs of that size could become a thing of the past.

“You can’t get bank funding and why would any private individual put their 
money into building a large-scale venue when the risks are so great that your 
licence can be removed for events sometimes out of your control?” says Leslie. 
“Why would anybody do that? The night-time economy is broken.”

In a letter to Islington council’s licensing board, Mixmag’s editor, along 
with more than 900 others, wrote passionately in support of Fabric. Shutting it 
down, he wrote, would be an act of “self-mutilation”.

“Please don’t rip the heart out of London by closing Fabric,” he wrote. “Once 
it’s gone we will have lost so much more than just a club.”
 