
Part of the fun at any show is the hang-out. Usually, the bigger the show, the 
better the hang. This is one of the times it happened that way.

Britt [Ekland, then Phantom’s wife] and I went to see Bruce Springsteen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/springsteen> and the E Street Band at the LA 
Coliseum. This would have been theBorn in the USA tour and there was a lot 
excitement. Britt’s a huge a fan, guitaristNils Lofgren 
<http://www.nilslofgren.com/> was a good buddy, The Boss was a fan of the Stray 
Cats <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stray_Cats> and had been on stage with us 
for a jam the summer before, so we were pretty welcome at the gig. There was a 
pre-show hang-out in one the skyboxes above the stadium.

I had been at this game for a few years already and felt comfortable and 
confident meeting and talking to anyone, especially in a rock’n’roll setting. 
Britt had been everywhere and seen everything. There was an elevator that led 
from the parking area right up into the owner’s box. This was a civilised, 
cocktail party-type of backstage hang, not exactly the punk rock dressing room 
melees I had started out in. I was drinking a mixed drink out of a plastic cup, 
I had a record on the radio and I’m there with my movie star wife, so 
everything’s just fine.

I happened to be looking towards the elevator at the exact moment the doors 
opened and a hush fell over the room. Out walksMichael Jackson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/michaeljackson> and Elizabeth Taylor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/elizabethtaylor>, just the two of them. MJ 
was in his fullThriller-era regalia: sparkly, sequined military jacket with 
gold rope dangling from the epaulet, mirrored aviators, hair perfectly 
jheri-curled, glitter socks, black loafers and, most importantly, one bedazzled 
glove.

MJ was in full Thriller-era regalia: sparkly military jacket, gold rope, 
epaulet, glitter socks and one bedazzled glove

Elizabeth Taylor <https://www.theguardian.com/film/elizabethtaylor> looked 
every bit the world’s greatest movie star in a jewelled gown and matching 
shoes. This is all happening in the middle of the afternoon in a big glass box 
at the top of a football stadium. No one is saying anything and an uneasy quiet 
held the room. Is anyone there to meet them? Who will they talk to? Will 
someone offer them a drink? What are they actually doing here?

MJ slowly saunters up to me, offers his gloved hand and, in his unique, 
child-likesotto voce, half-whispers: “I really like that song you guys do about 
the cat.” “Um, thanks, man,” I managed to quietly croak out as I shook the 
gloved hand.

I’m flabbergasted. There’s a difference between a “Wow this is cool” moment 
and being totally blown away. I think Liz and Britt said hello to each other 
and spoke for two seconds. MJ and Liz made their way around the room, got back 
into the elevator and were gone before the show even started. I don’t remember 
another time quite like this, before or since. For me, most of those wacky 
moments hit me after the fact and I realise, a little later, that something 
special had happened.•

A Stray Cat Struts: My Life as a Rockabilly Rebel by Slim Jim Phantom is 
published by St Martin’s Press at £18.99. To order a copy for £15.57. go to
bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/stray-cat-struts.html>
 