
Like many of the UK’s coastal towns, Blackpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/blackpool> has its fair share of challenges, 
with widespread poverty, a seasonal economy and a highly transient population.

Like other coastal towns, it has turned to the arts in search of hope and 
prosperity. On the other side of the Pennines, Hull is set to become the UK 
City of Culture in 2017 and in Blackpool, in the next weeks, you will be as 
likely to run across aYoko Ono artefact 
<http://www.blackpoolgazette.co.uk/whats-on/arts/festival-set-to-feature-works-by-yoko-ono-1-8188896>
 as a “kiss me quick” hat.

Blackpool council, alongside LeftCoast and Arts Council England’s Creative 
People and Places 
<http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/fund/creative-people-and-places> programme, 
which has the task of increasing arts engagement, have set about reinventing 
what the seaside experience means and how to match local needs with visitor 
expectations.

Now in its 137th year, Blackpool Illuminations has long been billed as the 
greatest free light show on Earth, spanning a whopping six miles of coastline. 
A trip to the lights is part of northern folklore and it’s the single most 
important event in the town’s calendar, contributing an estimated £200m to the 
local economy. This year, the newLightPool festival 
<http://illuminations.visitblackpool.com/us_main_page_section/lightpool-brilliance/>
 will refresh tradition and reinvigorate the lights for the future, using arts 
as the driver.

It’s an ambitious transformation led by Blackpool-born producer Mykey Young 
and Manchester-based creative lead Alex Rinsler. The festival kicks off on 
Friday with “Captain Kronos: Return to Planet Earth”, a visual spectacle of a 
time-travelling hero arriving in a spacecraft flying through Blackpool’s night 
sky. Sure to be a dramatic curtain-raiser, the show hints at the other-worldly 
experience to come… Aiming to attract more visitors into town during what is 
already the busiest week of the year, the festival hopes to seduce local 
people, too. Bob and Roberta Smith’s artworkArt Is Your Human Right 
particularly resonates in a town where 30% of children are living in poverty. 
Artistic aspirations are being driven high and culture is a priority in 
regeneration plans.

On the promenade at LeftCoast’s under-construction Art B&B, the windows will 
be adorned withRon Haselden’s <http://www.ronhaselden.com/> Brothers and Sisters
, including three new works by children at Revoe primary school, which sits off 
the tourist trail in one of the more deprived areas of town. The performance 
programme doesn’t forget about the next generation of artists either, with 
students from Blackpool and the Fylde College’s School of Creative Arts taking 
part.

Throughout the festival, an illuminated trail will guide visitors around the 
town centre and promenade, taking them to some familiar locations and those 
that might be a little more unexpected. In stark contrast to the usual 
Blackpool experience of visiting the Tower Circus,Goodbye Coco, by Michael 
Trainor, invites you inside the old Jesuit chapel at Sacred Heart church to 
attend the funeral of a fictional clown, complete with illuminated coffin.

For a local, LightPool underlines the wider change taking place across the 
town, with arts and culture at the centre of plans for a reimagined Blackpool. 
Walking around, one can sense the hope – as if a change is happening before our 
very eyes.

Blackpool is also becoming a producer of art, hinting at a new economic input, 
with Abingdon Studios, Blott and the Old Rock Factory providing a home for 
visual artists to create their work just a stone’s throw from the promenade. 
Festivals also abound, with theWinter Gardens film festival  
<http://www.wintergardensfilm.co.uk/>celebrating black-and-white cinema, Other 
Worlds <http://otherworldsfestival.co.uk/> providing an annual dose of 
experimental music and sound art andSand, Sea & Spray 
<http://www.creativecharity.org.uk/sand-sea-spray-2016> attracting 
international urban artists dressing, as is now becoming the way, the town’s 
buildings with art.

Duncan Hodgson is editor in chief of alt Blackpool. LightPool runs in 
Blackpool from this Friday to next Wednesday
 