
When Sir John Rose stepped down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/sep/30/john-rose-quits-rolls-royce> 
as chief executive of Rolls-Royce in March 2011, the company had been 
transformed.

The so-called “Lion of Rolls-Royce” had been in charge for 15 years and 
overseen the expansion of one of Britain’s best-known blue-chip companies into 
an engineering giant on the world stage.

The firm that had made engines for Spitfires during the second world war had 
become a £13bn leviathan. Yet, cracks in its carefully crafted corporate image 
were about to emerge.

Exactly how it started is still unclear, but by December 2012, Rolls-Royce had 
put itself on red alert. It acknowledged, somewhat opaquely, that it had a 
problem – and theSerious Fraud Office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/serious-fraud-office> said it was 
investigating.

At first, the SFO focused on the company’s activities in the emerging markets 
ofIndia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> and China, but the list of 
jurisdictions was to grow.

Before long, the SFO declared it had opened a criminal investigation into 
allegations of bribery and corruption 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/dec/23/rolls-royce-sfo-bribery-corruption-investigation-indonesia>
 at Rolls-Royce.

Rolls-Royce middlemen may have used bribes to land major contracts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/31/rolls-royce-middlemen-may-have-used-bribes-to-land-major-contracts>
In an unusual move, the company, which had conducted its own internal review 
of its business, made clear the seriousness of the situation. “It is too early 
to predict the outcomes, but these could include the prosecution of individuals 
and of the company. We will cooperate fully,”Rolls-Royce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/rollsroycegroup> said.

In an effort to get ahead of the problem, but in a way that underlined its 
predicament, thecompany appointed Lord Gold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/jan/10/rolls-royce-lord-gold-anti-corruption-procedures>
, a former head of litigation at City law firm Herbert Smith, to review 
Rolls-Royce’s “compliance procedures”.

Four years since the first reports of potential problems, and three years 
since the SFO began its inquiry in earnest, the scale of the investigation has 
become apparent.

The Guardian has established the SFO team is now 30-strong, and is being 
supported by so-called “blockbuster funding” – money from the Treasury to cover 
exceptional costs.

“It soon became clear that it was multiple jurisdictions, across several 
strands of its business,” said a source with knowledge of the inquiry.

So what has happened in the past three years?

The SFO has given little away and has only confirmed making two arrests. They 
happened in February 2014, when it emerged that two businessmen Sudhir 
Choudhrie and his son Bhanu were questioned as part of its wide-ranging 
investigation into the activities of Rolls-Royce.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fthe-intriguing-choudhrie-family-at-the-heart-of-rolls-royce-investigation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F905056e7ee4c5e2599751ec249fa379173bb9d17%2F0_55_2126_1275%2F2126.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20intriguing%20Choudhrie%20family%20at%20the%20heart%20of%20Rolls-Royce%20investigation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fthe-intriguing-choudhrie-family-at-the-heart-of-rolls-royce-investigation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20intriguing%20Choudhrie%20family%20at%20the%20heart%20of%20Rolls-Royce%20investigation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fthe-intriguing-choudhrie-family-at-the-heart-of-rolls-royce-investigation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F905056e7ee4c5e2599751ec249fa379173bb9d17%2F0_55_2126_1275%2F2126.jpg>
 Rolls-Royce staff working on the BR725 engine. Photograph: Rolls-Royce 
Deutschland/Rolls-Royce plc 
Neither has been charged and a few months after the arrests, the two men had 
their bail conditions lifted, but the Guardian understands the SFO’s inquiries 
are continuing.

The early focus on the Choudhries has been intriguing – their lawyers said 
they had not and have never been middlemen for Rolls-Royce, nor paid bribes to 
government officials or acted as middlemen in defence deals.

In short, they say they have done nothing wrong.

So who are they? The Choudhries are among the wealthiest and best-known 
families in India. They have a wide range of business interests and have become 
familiar faces in political circles in the UK too.

They are entrepreneurs and philanthropists, and have also been major donors to 
the Liberal Democrats. They and their extended families own a number of 
mansions in the heart of London’s Belgravia.

With such a high profile, they have not avoided scrutiny – or criticism. 

The 12 countries where suspicious activity linked to Rolls-Royce has been 
identified
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/31/the-12-countries-where-suspicious-activity-linked-to-rolls-royce-has-been-identified>
In India, for instance, Sudhir Choudhrie was investigated in 2004 by India’s 
Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) – the country’s foremost law enforcement 
agency – over suspicions related to alleged payoffs to a company agent.

Years later the investigation was dropped, with Choudhrie insisting he had 
been a victim of a plot to damage his reputation. His lawyers told the 
Guardian: “Sudhir Choudhrie was investigated but was never arrested. He was 
subsequently cleared of all allegations of wrongdoing and the investigation as 
a whole was closed in 2011.”

In a closure report filed in a Delhi court that year, the CBI stated it did 
not find any evidence to suggest there was any payoff to Choudhrie or his 
companies.

A list compiled and disseminated by the CBI names Sudhir Choudhrie as one of 
23 “unscrupulous persons” on a list of “undesirable contact men”. The list, 
which has been seen by the Guardian, is undated but is understood to still be 
in circulation in the Indian government. Choudhrie has challenged its 
authenticity. His lawyers say that although he has been made aware of it, he 
has no knowledge of its content and has never been contacted about it by any 
official body.

Separately from their alleged interaction with Rolls-Royce, there have been 
other occasions when the family’s finances have raised concerns.

One Swiss banking source has described to the Guardian and BBC how money 
transfers between the Choudhrie family group’s companies sparked an anti-money 
laundering alert at Clariden Leu, which was then a private banking division of 
Credit Suisse.

The Guardian has seen a report created by the risk management team at Clariden 
Leu in October 2008, which highlights the flow of vast sums that triggered the 
inquiry.

The report analysed 18 “account relationships” and looked at money transfers 
between companies owned or managed by members of Bhanu Choudhrie’s extended 
family. One was Belinea Services Limited, which received €37,200,000 
(£33,400,000) from Rosoboronexport State Corporation, the Russian state’s arms 
dealership. Bhanu Choudhrie was a director of Belinea.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fthe-intriguing-choudhrie-family-at-the-heart-of-rolls-royce-investigation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffb56ab5dcf6ba75f2709f341217b8ad692a37d28%2F0_154_5197_3118%2F5197.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20intriguing%20Choudhrie%20family%20at%20the%20heart%20of%20Rolls-Royce%20investigation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fthe-intriguing-choudhrie-family-at-the-heart-of-rolls-royce-investigation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20intriguing%20Choudhrie%20family%20at%20the%20heart%20of%20Rolls-Royce%20investigation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fthe-intriguing-choudhrie-family-at-the-heart-of-rolls-royce-investigation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffb56ab5dcf6ba75f2709f341217b8ad692a37d28%2F0_154_5197_3118%2F5197.jpg>
 Visitors at the Rosoboronexport stand at the 2015 Dubai Airshow. Photograph: 
TASS / Barcroft Media 
In the year leading up to the report, another company, the 
Seychelles-registered Cottage Consultants, received €28,100,000 from 
Rosoboronexport and transferred €22,700,000 to an Isle of Man bank.

On company documents, Bhanu Choudhrie is described as the “first and sole 
director” of Cottage Consultants. The company is owned through bearer shares, 
which means it is owned by whoever physically holds the share certificates. 
Bhanu Choudhrie has denied being a beneficial owner of the company.

Cottage Consultants had also received €9,700,000 from an entity called “ABC”, 
with the money originating from Vnesheconombank, a now-sanctioned Moscow bank.



The Guardian asked Bhanu Choudhrie about the transfers that had alerted 
Clariden Leu. His lawyers said he had no knowledge of the internal report and 
any suggestion that these payments were improper or illegal was false and 
defamatory.

The twists and turns of the Choudhries’ business empire have rarely been out 
of the news in recent years, but it is their apparent knowledge of the 
bureaucracy and red tape in their home country – and how best to navigate it – 
that might make them seem ideal middlemen for any company hoping to break into 
the lucrative Indian market. One such firm is alleged to have been Rolls-Royce.

The firm was involved in the the massive – and massively complicated – Hawk 
deal, which involved India buying Rolls-Royce engines and BAE-produced planes.

A first tranche of this was agreed in 2004, a second in 2010. The total value 
of all the contracts involved came to £2.1bn.

Why the Rolls-Royce investigation is so important to the SFO
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/31/why-the-rolls-royce-investigation-is-so-important-to-the-sfo>
The parts were assembled at Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, an Indian 
state-owned aerospace and defence firm, where Sudhir Choudhrie’s uncle had been 
the chairman.

The Guardian has spoken to one Rolls-Royce source. The source said the 
Choudhries and their companies had worked with the firm during this period.

“You had to work your way and it took time,” said the Rolls-Royce source. “We 
needed to have Indian partners or a sister company in India.”

The source said local fixers would help arrange the deal, before senior 
Rolls-Royce figures arrived to complete it.

The Guardian and the BBC understand that millions of pounds of Rolls-Royce 
money went to the Choudhrie family.

Even if this were true, it does not mean there has been any wrongdoing. Using 
middlemen is not illegal, so long as they abide by the rules.

The Guardian asked the Choudhries to explain what role, if any, they – or 
their companies – had played in the Hawk deals. Lawyers for the Choudhries said 
they had not been middlemen or intermediaries and that any allegation that 
Rolls-Royce had paid them for the purpose of securing deals in India was untrue.

The Guardian has been told about a curious meeting between Bhanu Choudhrie and 
a British businessman.

It came from a banking source who spoke to the Guardian. The source alleged 
that Bhanu Choudhrie and a former BAE executive called Peter Ginger visited 
Geneva together in 2007. Ginger was BAE’s president in India until 2005.

The Guardian has been told that during this trip, Ginger allegedly deposited 
hundreds of thousands of pounds in cash into a Clariden Leu account from 
another account he held.

By 2009, the account, which was called No 120467 Portsmouth, held about 1m 
Swiss francs.

The Guardian has seen a copy of a bank document that shows the details of the 
Portsmouth account.

Separately, documents discovered among the Panama Papers – the investigation 
into the Mossack Fonseca law firm carried out by the Guardian, the 
International Consortium of Investigative Journalists and Süddeutsche Zeitung – 
also reveal the family of Peter Ginger asking for a payment from an educational 
foundation with an apparent link to Bhanu Choudhrie.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fthe-intriguing-choudhrie-family-at-the-heart-of-rolls-royce-investigation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80e2012fc53e6224282b6f563ec3b6b96256b854%2F0_185_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20intriguing%20Choudhrie%20family%20at%20the%20heart%20of%20Rolls-Royce%20investigation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fthe-intriguing-choudhrie-family-at-the-heart-of-rolls-royce-investigation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20intriguing%20Choudhrie%20family%20at%20the%20heart%20of%20Rolls-Royce%20investigation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fthe-intriguing-choudhrie-family-at-the-heart-of-rolls-royce-investigation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80e2012fc53e6224282b6f563ec3b6b96256b854%2F0_185_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 The Mossack Fonseca law firm sign in Panama City. Photograph: Carlos Jasso / 
Reuters/Reuters 
An email seen by the Guardian shows the Panamanian foundation paid to cover 
the university costs of one of Ginger’s relatives. In one email, a member of 
the family requested money from the foundation to pay an allowance. “[…] is now 
back in [university ] for the summer term so we would be most grateful for 
payment to the same account as before,” he wrote.

He added: “I hope this is in order and meets with [the] foundation council’s 
approval. Please don’t hesitate to contact me or […] if you have any questions.”

The payment was for £540 for four weeks of “food and subsistence”.

We asked Ginger and Choudrie to explain these apparent interactions. Is there 
a benign explanation? Could the banking source in Geneva have got it wrong? 
Lawyers for Bhanu Choudhrie insist he has. “Our client has no knowledge of what 
bank accounts have been set up or operated by Mr Ginger or what sums (if any) 
he has deposited in them in cash. Mr Choudhrie did not pay any bribe to Mr 
Ginger.”

They added: “Our client has no knowledge of any payments made [by the 
Foundation].”

The Guardian asked Ginger why he visited Geneva with Bhanu Choudhrie, and why 
the Panamanian foundation was funding his relative’s education. He declined to 
comment on the allegations: “I am not prepared to talk about it at all. I’m not 
going to respond to the media at all.”

BAE Systems said it had “no record indicating that Mr Ginger had a personal 
financial relationship with Mr Choudhrie during the period that Mr Ginger was 
employed by the Company”.

The episode may be nothing more than an intriguing vignette, but the SFO may 
have an opportunity to judge for itself. The source, who asked not to be named, 
has offered to speak to the SFO’s investigators.

The Choudhries had to wait seven years to be cleared after Indian authorities 
launched an inquiry – the SFO has been looking at them, and at Rolls-Royce, for 
a mere three. And the investigation appears to be broadening even now.

 * Panorama: Rolls-Royce will be broadcast on BBC1 at 8.30pm on Monday 31 
October. 
 * If you would like to pass on any confidential information, you can send a 
message via the Guardian’s SecureDrop service (see howhere 
<https://securedrop.theguardian.com/> and here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jun/05/guardian-launches-securedrop-whistleblowers-documents>
).  