
When fighters linked to al-Qaida swept into Timbuktu on 1 April 2012, Dr 
Ibrahim Maiga found himself living a nightmare. The new rulers of west Africa’s 
most famous centre of Islamic scholarship immediately set about destroying its 
history. Over the following months they set fire tothousands of ancient 
manuscripts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jan/28/mali-timbuktu-library-ancient-manuscripts>
,destroyed the mausoleums of local holy men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jul/02/mali-islamists-attack-world-heritage-mosques-timbuktu>
 andforced musicians into exile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/oct/23/mali-militants-declare-war-music>
. For the invaders, many of whom were from Algeria and other parts of the 
region, “saint worship” and music were un-Islamic. The new sharia court wasted 
no time issuing death sentences to anyone who violated its creed.

State officials fled before the onslaught, and Dr Ibrahim became the most 
senior medic in Timbuktu. Overnight, he found himself responsible for providing 
healthcare to a population of 60,000. “The first responsibility of government 
is governance, then security,” he said. “But the state left. They all ran away.”
Mali 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/11/mali-zip/giv-32650Eb9TzYtAZreD/>
The rebellion had started that January. Tuareg nationalists who had served in 
the army of Colonel Muammar Gaddafi had returned from Libya the previous 
summer, armed with heavy weapons plundered from the collapsing regime’s 
arsenal. They then launched an uprising in pursuit of an independent Tuareg 
homeland in northern Mali. The government’s shambolic mismanagement of the 
uprising angered army chiefs, and in March they conducted a coup in the capital 
Bamako, hundreds of miles to the south. With the state in disarray, the Tuareg 
rebels teamed up with Islamist groups, and together they drove the army out of 
northernMali <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mali> – an area the size of 
Spain. But the jihadists soon cast the Tuaregs aside and imposed their own 
brutal form of governance across the northern regions of Gao, Kidal and 
Timbuktu.

The occupation lasted 10 months. On 28 January 2013, French and Malian troops 
retook Timbuktu, and it was placed under the protection of United Nations 
peacekeepers.UN vehicles still patrol the town 
<https://news.vice.com/article/on-patrol-with-the-soldiers-battling-bandits-islamist-militants-and-mistrust-in-mali>
, guarding it from bandits who raid the surrounding villages. But while the UN 
provides essential services, the government has yet to return. The few 
officials who have ventured north have been threatened, or simply assassinated. 
This June, a senior UN official in Timbuktu told us that “the return of 
administrators is a key priority”, but they admitted that many of the Malian 
officials who had been flown into the north on UN planes quickly abandoned 
their posts.

In the state’s absence, Mali’s northern desert has become a vast, lawless 
expanse at the centre of west Africa; a crossroads for drugs, people and arms 
that links territories held by Boko Haram in Niger and Nigeria to the bases of 
veteran jihadists in Libya and Algeria. It is a security nightmare for west
Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, and increasingly for Europe, 
which fears the creation of yet another haven for terrorism.

Despite the presence of UN peacekeepers and ongoing French counter-insurgency 
operations, Islamist militants haveattacked civilian targets 
<http://newirin.irinnews.org/dataviz/2015/11/20/map-of-conflict-in-mali-2015> 
all over Mali. At least 342 people have been killed this year alone. Driving 
into towns on motorbikes, gunmen have torched government buildings and executed 
local officials. In March, a lone attacker hurled a grenade into La Terrasse, a 
popular nightclub in Bamako, then opened fire with an automatic weapon, killing 
five people. Themost deadly attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2015/nov/20/mali-hotel-attack-gunmen-take-hostages-in-bamako-live-updates>
 came last week, on Friday 20 November, when170 people were taken hostage at 
the Radisson Blu, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/20/mali-attack-highlights-global-spread-extremist-violence>
 a luxury hotel in the capital. Before the captives could be liberated, 19 were 
killed. Two foreign jihadist groups, al-Mourabitoun and al-Qaida in the Islamic 
Maghreb,claimed responsibility 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/22/world/africa/mali-hotel-attackers-are-tied-to-an-algerian-qaeda-leader.html?smprod=nytcore-iphone&smid=nytcore-iphone-share&_r=1>
.

The next day, the Malian president Ibrahim Boubacar Keïta delivered a defiant 
statement outside the hotel, declaring that terrorism would not win. But the 
attack highlighted once again the chronic weakness of the Malian state.

The army’s ousting from the north, political turmoil in Bamako and the rise of 
banditry and terrorism have exposed a system that is corrupt and ineffective at 
almost every level. With the government unable to provide basic services to 
much of the population, many Malians have turned to more traditional sources of 
social support, material assistance and moral leadership – their imams.

In Timbuktu, three years after the jihadist occupation, one of the most 
prominent local religious leaders is Daouda Ali Maiga, who presides over a vast 
mosque on the outskirts of the city. When we met one evening earlier this year, 
lightning flashed outside and the wind whistled around the building as the 
first rainstorm in 18 months thrashed down on the roof. The electricity was 
out, and the ageing imam’s face was illuminated from below by a solitary torch. 
Around him, his students sat in the shadows, listening to his measured words. 
Like Dr Ibrahim, he stayed in Timbuktu throughout the occupation. As the 
headmaster of the Askia Daoud Centre, he ran one of the largest schools in the 
city.

“Today we have over 400 students and 19 teachers. We teach all subjects, not 
justIslam <https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam>, but languages and modern 
sciences. We teach boys and girls, from seven years old onwards,” he said.

There are other schools in Timbuktu, but Daouda’s is special: when the economy 
was shattered by war he decided to stop charging fees. To fill the funding gap, 
he tapped into Islamic charities based in the Gulf, and activated his personal 
network of contacts from the years he spent in Saudi Arabia. He has even 
secured funding to send the best students to study in the Gulf. When he set up 
the centre, the imam of the Sacred Mosque in Mecca sent his own son to attend 
the opening ceremony.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-struggle-for-mali%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd0e7ef3b4e6eb813cbe12f8727511357b7df0bb6%2F0_368_5760_3457%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20struggle%20for%20Mali%20%7C%20Jack%20Watling%20and%20Paul%20Raymond&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-struggle-for-mali%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20struggle%20for%20Mali%20%7C%20Jack%20Watling%20and%20Paul%20Raymond&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-struggle-for-mali%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd0e7ef3b4e6eb813cbe12f8727511357b7df0bb6%2F0_368_5760_3457%2F5760.jpg>
 Soldiers patrol outside the hotel in Bamako that was attacked by Islamic 
extremists. Photograph: Jerome Delay/AP 
But locally, Daouda’s reputation has been tarnished by his involvement with 
the jihadists during the occupation. One day, a 25-year-old called Mahaman 
Diedou was accused of stealing a sack of rice. He was brought before the sharia 
court, which ruled that he should have his hand amputated. It was Dr Ibrahim, 
the medic, who had to tend to his stump after the sentence was carried out. 
Daouda was one of the judges.

Daouda insists that he took up the position under duress. During the 
occupation, armed jihadists would come to his mosque for Friday prayers. “If 
someone came to your mosque to pray and had a gun, would you refuse to pray 
with them?” he asked. “They forced people to do things. If you are with someone 
in appearance but oppose them in your heart you are not really with them.”

But there was a reason why the jihadists selected him as a judge. Daouda is a 
Salafist, a Saudi-trained scholar who had long preached against the Sufi 
practice of praying at the graves of holy men. He continues to espouse a deeply 
conservative faith that is at odds with the syncretic Islam, which blends many 
religious customs, that is traditionally practised in Mali.

Daouda eventually resigned from the sharia court, not because its sentences 
were too extreme, but because the jihadists refused to execute one of their own 
Arab fighters who killed a child. “They believed that the soul of a white 
person is more important than the soul of a black person,” he explained.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-struggle-for-mali%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F520c7714e4b68c5e1c9d4da60033d1d2d9d0b70b%2F1526_674_2130_2590%2F2130.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20struggle%20for%20Mali%20%7C%20Jack%20Watling%20and%20Paul%20Raymond&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-struggle-for-mali%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20struggle%20for%20Mali%20%7C%20Jack%20Watling%20and%20Paul%20Raymond&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-struggle-for-mali%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F520c7714e4b68c5e1c9d4da60033d1d2d9d0b70b%2F1526_674_2130_2590%2F2130.jpg>
 Imam Daouda Ali Maiga is a prominent religious leader in Timbuktu. Photograph: 
Jack Watling for the Guardian 
Despite his role in abuses during the occupation, Daouda has remained an 
influential figure in Timbuktu. With state authorities all but absent from the 
region, an investigation into his collaboration with the jihadists has been 
dropped, and his school remains one of the biggest providers of education in 
town.

The collapse of the state has if anything increased Daouda’s influence and 
drawn greater attention to his teachings, but his Salafism was controversial 
before 2012. Daouda’s beliefs, at odds with the religious practices of a 
majority of his community, are deemed by many to be, like the jihadists, 
foreign. His connections to Saudi Arabia lead to accusations that he serves 
foreign interests. And yet, for all that, he continues to attract followers, 
expanding a communal divide.

The divisions that have hung over Timbuktu since the jihadist occupation 
reflect a struggle that affects the whole of Mali. The November attack was a 
reminder that a plethora of militant Islamist groups, many with their origins 
in Algeria, are free to operate in Mali. However they are not the only foreign 
forces seeking to change the way Islam is practised there. Local religious 
leaders, backed by foreign charities and governments, are pushing rival 
interpretations of the faith that are creating deep tensions in Malian society.

* * *

In July 2012, when the Malian government decided to send an envoy to talk with 
the jihadists occupying Timbuktu, they did not send a diplomat. They sent
Mahmoud Dicko 
<http://www.jeuneafrique.com/140316/politique/mali-mahmoud-dicko-imam-m-diateur/>
, president of the High Islamic Council of Mali. When Mali was desperate for 
foreign help in resolving the ongoing crisis in the north, it was not the 
foreign minister whotoured Europe 
<http://www.lesinfosdumali.com/index.php/news-societe/item/4409-mahmoud-dicko-ch%C3%A9rif-ousmane-madani-ha%C3%AFdara-monseigneur-jean-zerbo-en-tourn%C3%A9e-europ%C3%A9enne-nous-allons-demander-de-l%E2%80%99aide-pour-trouver-une-solution-%C3%A0-la-crise-dans-le-nord/4409-mahmoud-dicko-ch%C3%A9rif-ousmane-madani-ha%C3%AFdara-monseigneur-jean-zerbo-en-tourn%C3%A9e-europ%C3%A9enne-nous-allons-demander-de-l%E2%80%99aide-pour-trouver-une-solution-%C3%A0-la-crise-dans-le-nord>
, but Dicko and his deputy, Chérif Ousmane Madani Haïdara, along with the Roman 
Catholic archbishop of Bamako, Jean Zerbo. When a local community needs a new 
mosque, they do not call the Ministry for Religious Affairs. They call Dicko. 
Neither Dicko nor Haïdara holds government office, but they have the power to 
mobilise street protests that can prevent laws being passed.

Although they work together, the two men are bitter rivals. Dicko heads the 
minority Salafist community, a recent addition to Mali’s colourful patchwork of 
religious groups. Haïdara, who has roots in the Maliki tradition that has 
dominated Mali since the 13th century, is one of the richest, most influential 
holy men in west Africa. Malikism, a school of Islamic jurisprudence, 
incorporates communal custom to assist in interpreting the Qur’an and hadith, a 
practice rejected by more literal interpretations of the faith.

Both Dicko and Haïdara exemplify how religious patronage has supplanted the 
institutions of the Malian state. In their spiritual role, they wield immense 
moral authority, and through the essential services they fund, have a practical 
relevance to the lives of ordinary Malians in regions where the government has 
disappeared.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-struggle-for-mali%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F03a7ff41ec09f25194588da7c2aa57d7b12d53d1%2F1180_556_1255_1883%2F1255.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20struggle%20for%20Mali%20%7C%20Jack%20Watling%20and%20Paul%20Raymond&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-struggle-for-mali%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20struggle%20for%20Mali%20%7C%20Jack%20Watling%20and%20Paul%20Raymond&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-struggle-for-mali%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F03a7ff41ec09f25194588da7c2aa57d7b12d53d1%2F1180_556_1255_1883%2F1255.jpg>
 Mahmoud Dicko, president of the High Islamic Council of Mali Photograph: Paul 
Raymond for the Guardian 
Dicko was born in 1954 in the desert village of Tonka, near Timbuktu. Son of a 
religious judge, he was raised by a conservative family and memorised the 
Qu’ran by the age of 15. Wahhabism, the austere form of Islam practised in 
Saudi Arabia, has had a presence in Mali since the 19th century, when it was 
brought back by Malians who had travelled to Mecca on hajj. It won few converts 
as it rejected the mixing of local traditions with strict Islamic law. But 
during Dicko’s teenage years, Saudi charities began to fund mosques and schools 
in Mali’s cities, and some young Malians were offered the chance to go to Saudi 
Arabia to study. Dicko was among them. After a short spell studying Arabic in 
Mauritania, he headed to Medina, the second most holy city in Islam, where he 
studied Islamic theology. 

On his return to Mali, Dicko worked briefly as an Arabic teacher, then, like 
many of the early Gulf-educated graduates, became an itinerant preacher, giving 
sermons and leading prayers around Bamako. He quickly built up a following, and 
in 1983 a community of Salafists invited him to become imam of a mosque in 
Badalabougou, a middle-class suburb of Bamako.

Haïdara was born a year after Dicko 
<http://www.ancardine.com/ancardine/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=1:vie-et-enseignement-de-cherif-ousmane-madane-haidara&Itemid=102&showall=1&limitstart=>
, near the city of Ségou in the south of Mali. Educated at a French school, he 
began preaching as a teenager in Bamana, a language spoken across Mali, Guinea, 
Burkina Faso and Senegal. He continued his religious education under Saad 
Touré, a local scholar steeped in Mali’s Maliki traditions. Haïdara moved to 
Bamako and began to distribute his sermons on cassette. By 1991, when mass 
protests prompted the army to overthrow the dictatorship of Moussa Traoré, 
Haïdara had gathered a large following.

Traoré’s government had long suppressed civil society, but the 1991 
constitution created a new space for cultural and religious expression. 
Religious organisations were quick to take advantage, and hundreds of new 
Islamic associations were founded. Few would be as influential as Haïdara’s 
Ansar Dine (Arabic for “defenders of the faith”). Over the course of the 1990s, 
its membership grew into the tens of thousands. Relying on private donations, 
Haïdara established a nationwide network of schools, hospitals and mosques.

But given the country’s secular constitution, these associations had little 
political clout. Mali has been officially secular since its independence, a 
legacy of French colonialism. The state has become so detached from religious 
institutions that a senior UN official liaising with the Malian government in 
Bamako earlier this year told us that “Malian society is not fundamentally 
religious”.

In 2002, a group of senior imams set out to change this state of affairs by 
establishing the High Islamic Council, widely referred to by its French 
acronym, HCIM. The council brought together around 400 Islamic associations, 
giving them a platform through which they could coordinate their activities and 
influence government. Dicko and Haïdara, both influential preachers and 
respected imams, were elected to its executive committee. In 2007, Dicko was
elevated to the presidency 
<http://mali-web.org/mali-actu/breve-imam-mahmoud-dicko-reconduit-la-tete-du-haut-conseil-islamique>
. The Salafists were on the rise, and the council was to become a key player in 
Malian politics.

In August 2009, the Canadian government 
<http://www.international.gc.ca/department-ministere/evaluation/2014/dev-mcpe-eppm14.aspx?lang=eng>
 and other donors pressed the Malian parliament to change the country’s 
conservative Personal Status and Family Code. Under the proposed new law, girls 
would have more inheritance rights, women would no longer be required to obey 
their husbands, and only secular marriages would be recognised. The HCIM saw 
the bill as un-Islamic. Dicko and his colleagues mobilised protests across the 
country. Tens of thousands demonstrated on the streets of Bamako. Weeks later, 
under intense pressure from the HCIM, the then president Amadou Toumani Touré
refused to sign the bill into law 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/sep/07/mali-women-human-rights-islam>. 
It was a turning point in Mali’s hitherto largely secular politics: a religious 
organisation had shown it could stop the government in its tracks.

The events of 2012 only increased the HCIM’s power. The army’s rapid retreat 
from the north exposed widespread corruption 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/08/22/world/africa/for-malis-new-president-corruption-issue-lingers.html>
, prompting a collapse of confidence in the political class. Imams became the 
sole surviving source of moral authority. Unlike any of the country’s 
politicians, Dicko and Haïdara are both treated like rock stars by their 
supporters. And theirs is a popularity that politicians cannot afford to 
ignore. These days, President Keïta telephones Dicko twice a week.

Imams became the sole moral authority, treated like rock stars by their 
supporters

Dicko stays aloof from the day-to-day business of politics, but he wields 
immense influence behind the scenes. Despite being a small minority of the 
population, Salafists have come to dominate the HCIM’s executive committee. 
This position gives them enormous influence, from the presidential palace to 
the poorest villages in Mali.

One consequence of religion in Mali becoming politicised is that differences 
in religious practice have become markers for political allegiance, fuelling an 
increasingly sectarian shift in Malian society. Where people once simply 
referred to each other as Muslim, they are now labelled Wahhabist, Sufi or Shia 
– and these labels, meant to suggest links toforeign political agendas 
<http://foreignpolicy.com/2015/08/19/the-iran-saudi-proxy-wars-come-to-mali-shiite-sunni-islam/>
, often accompany accusations of sinister intent.

Among the Maliki majority, the Salafist minority’s takeover of the elected 
leadership of the Islamic Council is the subject of endless speculation. Imam 
Diallo, a Maliki leader and member of the HCIM executive committee, accuses 
Dicko of being “a moral referee who has started to kick the ball. How, in a 
country where only 15% of the population are Salafi, do they have so much 
power? With funding from Saudi Arabia. Dicko is trying to take over the 
country.”

* * *

A few days before the start of Ramadan in June, Combey Adamah explained his 
faith. Sitting in a small breeze-block shack, nestled amid wiry trees at the 
top of a hill overlooking Bamako, he was surrounded by a wicker tray of shells, 
a bible open at Leviticus, and an array of mystical symbols drawn onto the 
electric blue walls of his dwelling. Adamah is a witch doctor and member of a 
community of Rastafarians who live above the village of Lassa. In their hilltop 
retreat, the Rastas smoke weed, listen to reggae music and try and purge 
themselves of the material excesses of the world. Their beliefs are diffuse, 
combining Rasta wisdom, new-age spirituality and west African animism.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-struggle-for-mali%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60882a221eaf92db200b6d9a047d28330b132a5b%2F0_196_4776_2866%2F4776.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20struggle%20for%20Mali%20%7C%20Jack%20Watling%20and%20Paul%20Raymond&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-struggle-for-mali%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20struggle%20for%20Mali%20%7C%20Jack%20Watling%20and%20Paul%20Raymond&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-struggle-for-mali%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60882a221eaf92db200b6d9a047d28330b132a5b%2F0_196_4776_2866%2F4776.jpg>
 Witch doctor Combey Adamah explains how he works magic in the front room of 
his cinderblock house. Photograph: Jack Watling for the Guardian 
Adamah is the son of a Christian father and Muslim mother. In Mali this is not 
unusual. The country has a long tradition of religious tolerance, and most 
Muslims incorporate indigenous religious practices into their daily lives, 
along with Islam. The Rastafarians of Lassa rub along happily with their Muslim 
neighbours.

“Muslims and Rastas are all equal here,” said Dani Camara, the son of a 
village elder. Lightly bearded and dressed in a long robe that would not be out 
of place in the Arabian Gulf, Camara was preparing for the Ramadan fast. “We 
get on fine. We all face the same problem: lack of water.” It was soon clear 
that Camara had more pressing concerns than the religious beliefs of his 
neighbours: the village has neither a pharmacy nor a medical clinic. Even in a 
village that is being swallowed up by the expanding capital, the government 
does not provide irrigation, decent roads or basic medical facilities. This is 
a common situation across the country, and a gap that Islamic charities are 
keen to fill.

One of the most powerful of those charities has its offices just down the hill 
from the Rasta sanctuary, in a multistorey office block beside a large mosque 
in north-western Bamako. Al-Farouk – named after the epithet for Omar, the 
austere second caliph of Islam who is a hero for Salafists – manages projects 
across Mali. Al-Farouk’s director, Imam Ibrahim Kantao, sat behind an ornate 
desk in his immaculate, air-conditioned office, signing cheques and approving 
plans for new initiatives. As well as sponsoring more than 300 mosques, 30 
medical clinics and several schools, Al-Farouk runs the University of the 
Sahel, where 400 students learn Arabic, Islamic law and computer science.

Al-Farouk’s financial backers come from across the Gulf, Turkey and the UK. 
The charity moves more than $3m into Mali every year. It is charities such as 
Al-Farouk that provide crucial funding to Salafist schools, including the 
centre run by Daouda Ali Maiga in Timbuktu.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-struggle-for-mali%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F68e33d01e416f5cee8e1e7fbd25e2331b510d05b%2F0_193_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20struggle%20for%20Mali%20%7C%20Jack%20Watling%20and%20Paul%20Raymond&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-struggle-for-mali%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20struggle%20for%20Mali%20%7C%20Jack%20Watling%20and%20Paul%20Raymond&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-struggle-for-mali%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F68e33d01e416f5cee8e1e7fbd25e2331b510d05b%2F0_193_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 A rastafarian stands with Lassa’s Imam outside the village mosque. Photograph: 
Jack Watling for the Guardian 
But Kantao is much more than the director of a charity. He is a leading figure 
in the Salafist movement and a founding member of the HCIM’s executive 
committee. He has risen to the post of HCIM’s director of external relations. 
The voting system within the HCIM gives each member association one vote, 
granting disproportionate sway to the Salafists, who also control many of 
Mali’s NGOs and the funds they disburse.

Kantao was open about wanting to exercise that power to advance their cause: 
“If you don’t speak out politically then you leave your country to rot,” he 
said.

He is well connected across the Gulf. Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid al Maktoum, 
the ruler of Dubai and prime minister of the United Arab Emirates, sends 
Al-Farouk 400 computers a year for the charity to distribute to its schools and 
colleges. Maktoum’s charity alsoworked with Kantao 
<http://www.malijet.com/la_societe_malienne_aujourdhui/90609-distribution-de-vetements-les-emirats-arabes-unis-donnent-20-000.html>
 to distribute 20,000 sets of clothes to Malian children in 2013. The best 
students from the University of the Sahel are sent for further study in Saudi 
Arabia, where Kantao himself trained as a young man. Kantao is also Dicko’s 
fixer when it comes to securing connections with the Kingdom.

“If Dicko wants a mosque he often asks me and I raise the funds,” he said. “If 
he wants contacts in Saudi Arabia he talks to me.” But despite the material 
benefits it brings into Mali, the Salafist bloc’s Gulf connections make some 
Malian Muslims deeply uneasy. Saudi diplomatic cables released by WikiLeaks 
have shown, in considerable detail, the extent of Riyadh’s efforts to deploy 
aid in the service of promoting Salafism and to advance the kingdom’s political 
objectives – including in Mali, where many people now accuse local Salafists of 
serving foreign interests.

“We totally reject the idea of sending people to Saudi Arabia or elsewhere out 
of Mali,” said Mohammed Makiba, president of the Young Muslims’ Association of 
Mali. Makiba’s association was set up in 2007, the same year as Dicko’s 
election, to create educational and work opportunities for young people. The 
activities of its members range from establishing a scouting movement to 
organising blood donations to local hospitals and teaching the elderly to read 
the Qu’ran. Makiba believes that Islam should be a means for young people to 
get an education, find work and participate in development – not serve as a 
conduit for foreign agendas.

“Foreign funding for mosques and schools is a vehicle for foreign ideologies, 
because the Malian state has no policy on religion,” he said. The state’s 
history oflaïcité has left it blind to the growth of religious groups, and 
powerless to tackle the expanding sectarian identification within communities. 
Until the jihadist insurrection of 2012, there was no government department 
overseeing mosques and religious schools.

Until the jihadist insurrection of 2012, there was no government department 
overseeing mosques and religious schools

Theirno Diallo, a former diplomat who is now minister for religious affairs, 
is tasked with monitoring an influx of foreign donations to Islamic charities 
and countering extremism. He has his work cut out: he admitted his department 
has no data on how many mosques there are in Mali, who runs them, or who funds 
them. “Today, with all the security problems, we can’t just let people build 
mosques as they like,” he said. “We need to know who is financing them, why 
they are being constructed, who are the imams and what message they bring.”

He agreed that the Salafist camp had more access to funding – and more 
political clout – than the traditional, Maliki majority. “The Salafists are 
more strategic,” said Diallo. “The other camp is scattered. Even if they’re the 
majority, they are divided.”

* * *

The man who many Malakis look to for a counterweight to the Salafist rise is 
Cheikh Chérif Ousmane Madani Haïdara, who is said to be descended from the 
prophet Muhammad. For Haïdara, who is a multimillionaire, the connection 
between the Gulf-educated Salafists and the spread of extremism is 
indisputable, and he has used the funds at his disposal to promote religious 
education closer to home.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-struggle-for-mali%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F439cc93f10dba3ed6caa2bcf67912abc76d5c3af%2F0_12_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20struggle%20for%20Mali%20%7C%20Jack%20Watling%20and%20Paul%20Raymond&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-struggle-for-mali%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20struggle%20for%20Mali%20%7C%20Jack%20Watling%20and%20Paul%20Raymond&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-struggle-for-mali%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F439cc93f10dba3ed6caa2bcf67912abc76d5c3af%2F0_12_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 Cheikh Haidara sits in his palatial reception room on the fourth floor of his 
home in Bamako. Photograph: Jack Watling for the Guardian 
“All extremists come from the Gulf. All of them,” Haïdara pronounced in the 
thunderous tones of a man who is a spiritual guide to millions. We met Haïdara 
on the first night of Ramadan in the fourth-floor lounge of his palatial 
residence in north-eastern Bamako. Sat on one of a dozen white leather sofas, 
he explained how “students who go to those countries change their views. They 
make them into Islamists. That’s what we’re concerned about.”

It has become a cliche in the Francophone press to write of Haïdara’s ability 
to fill a stadium with worshippers. But a visit to his vast complex, which 
includes a hospital, a school, a fleet of Hummers, a mosque and his vast home, 
guarded by his army of security men, makes the claim seem like a careless 
understatement.

As he strode into his mosque to lead Friday prayers, his red silk robe flowing 
behind him, cries of “Allahu akbar!” and “Haïdara!” rang out from the 
congregation. Worshippers knelt to kiss his feet. At the entrance two devotees 
ran up, each to bear away one of his sandals. Inside, he settled on a low 
stool, in front of two television cameras and a ring of disciples, and as one 
of his entourage fanned his neck, began the evening’s lesson.

Despite the hundreds of people in the stifling building, Haïdara quickly built 
an air of intimacy with the congregation. He answered questions and even 
cracked jokes as he worked through that night’s Qu’ranic text. A young follower 
at his side read each verse in turn, then Haïdara translated it, explaining the 
Arabic in Bamana. With his height, deep voice and easy manner, he exuded charm 
and authority.

Haïdara has become deeply concerned by the politicisation of religion. “The 
constitution is secular,” he explained. “But some of Mali’s Islamic leadership 
got involved in politics. I totally reject this.

“Everybody needs religious leaders: they go to them with their dead so they 
can pray over the funeral. If they have a wedding, they need them to lead the 
ceremony. If there is a conflict between two people, the imams resolve the 
situation. Politicians are all against each other. An imam shouldn’t be against 
anyone.”

Although Haïdara sided with Dicko to block the reforms of the Personal Status 
and Family Code in 2009, his political interventions have been sporadic and 
ambiguous. Unlike his Salafist rivals, who are open about the need for 
religious figures to be moral guides in politics, Haïdara declared emphatically 
that “as long as we are alive we will resist” making the religious political. 
It is a battle that most Malians think may already be lost – and there are 
other reasons why Haïdara is not the best candidate to oppose what he describes 
as “foreign influence”.

On the wall above the plush couches in his reception room hangs a picture of 
Haïdara and King Mohammed IV of Morocco. For centuries, Moroccan kings, revered 
by Muslims across west Africa, have led the Tijaniyyah school of Sufism and 
taken the title Commander of the Believers. Mali has strong historical 
connections with Morocco; many of the notable families of Timbuktu hail from 
Fez, another centre of Islamic learning. Through his connections with the 
Moroccan royal court, Haïdara has been influential in promoting an initiative 
to educate 500 Malian religious students in Fez, ostensibly part of Morocco’s 
efforts to counter extremist ideologies. The fear is that this training is 
being used as apolitical tool in the nation’s  
<http://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/features/2014/03/morocco-expands-clout-sub-saharan-africa-20143309821942545.html>
regional struggle for soft power against Algeria.

Then there are Haïdara’s ties to Turkey. Boxes of Turkish Qu’rans were piled 
high in his waiting room. On the first night of Ramadan he dined with 
representatives of Turkey’s Gülen movement, an Islamic organisation that runs a 
vast network of schoolsaround the world 
<http://fgulen.com/en/gulen-movement/fethullah-gulen-and-the-gulen-movement-in-100-questions/48442-in-which-countries-are-there-schools-how-many-schools-have-been-established-how-many-are-universities>
, including in Bamako. 

Haïdara’s work with the Moroccan government has provoked criticism even from 
people who are deeply opposed to the Salafist project. Some accuse the Moroccan 
programme of only selecting elite candidates and failing to educate those most 
in need. But others see it as yet another vehicle for foreign religious 
influence in Mali. Hanan Keïta, a prominent female theologian, voiced an 
increasingly common fear that the competing agendas of religious communities – 
often with foreign support – had encouraged Malians to embrace sectarian 
identities. The schools and training programmes funded by specific sects, she 
said, deepened fractures among Muslims rather than uniting Malians to confront 
the many challenges that they and their country face.

“Students learn to be sectarian and only to serve their own constituency – 
rejecting other sects. That is fanaticism,” she said. “We are not a society 
where you say the wrong thing and they kill you the next day, but we could 
become that way.”

* * *

At his modest house on a muddy back street in Bamako, Mahmoud Dicko trimmed 
his grey goatee, put on a simple black robe and a yellow turban, descended past 
the chalkboard in the porch where two of his children were doing their 
chemistry homework, and climbed into an SUV with a hulking bodyguard and two 
fellow imams. The car rolled to the end of the street, past goats scavenging in 
a pile of rubbish, and turned towards Senou, where Dicko had been invited to 
lead prayers at a newly constructed mosque a week before the start of Ramadan.

At the approach to the town, about 25 miles south of Bamako, hundreds of 
children lined the main road: boys on the left and girls on the right. “God is 
great,” they cheered in Arabic, “Welcome!” As the car turned onto a muddy 
track, they raced alongside, laughing, shouting and stretching out to touch the 
vehicle and get a glimpse of Dicko. A girl of about 12 fiddled with her niqab 
as she ran. The full face-covering is a rare sight in Mali.

Dicko’s car came to a halt before the mosque, a pristine blue and white 
building that dwarfed the surrounding mud-brick huts. Over a thousand people 
had gathered to pray at the opening ceremony, and were spilling out onto the 
sun-baked courtyard and the dusty street beyond. The imam was lovingly mobbed 
as he climbed out of the car. His bodyguard pushed through as Dicko picked his 
way into the mosque. Minutes later, the call to prayer rose from the minaret.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-struggle-for-mali%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F135d2bd316c79f3fcc1087dd2af677f99e56a759%2F618_0_3670_2848%2F3670.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20struggle%20for%20Mali%20%7C%20Jack%20Watling%20and%20Paul%20Raymond&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-struggle-for-mali%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20struggle%20for%20Mali%20%7C%20Jack%20Watling%20and%20Paul%20Raymond&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-struggle-for-mali%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F135d2bd316c79f3fcc1087dd2af677f99e56a759%2F618_0_3670_2848%2F3670.jpg>
 Crowds await the arrival of Mahmoud Dicko at the new mosque in Bamako. 
Photograph: Paul Raymond for the Guardian 
Dicko appeared at the microphone and began his sermon. “The face of Allah 
delights in he who builds a mosque,” he said in Arabic, quoting the prophet 
Muhammad. He instantly translated, switching between Arabic and Bamana, his 
voice booming from the gleaming loudspeakers.

After the sermon and prayers were over, he and his entourage politely muscled 
their way back through the crowd. Dicko slipped 10,000 franc notes – enough to 
feed a small family for a week – to a few needy souls. Then he was off, back 
into town to inaugurate another mosque.

“For 10 years it has been like this,” he said as he took a brief break for a 
lunch of fish stew. He spoke in clear Arabic with a slight Gulf accent. 
“Yesterday I was in the office from morning until evening. Sometimes I go for a 
whole month and only pray once on my own. I have my mosque in Bamako too, but 
sometimes I go out 100km to a mosque and preach.”

It is easy to see why Dicko is adored by his followers. Approachable and given 
to smiling, he makes time for anyone. His phone rang every few minutes as he 
made his rounds. Politicians, fellow imams and villagers in rural Mali 
constantly call to ask for advice and prayers. Even after dozens of 
conversations, he never showed a sign of impatience, but carefully considered 
each request and offered his counsel and blessings. He never turns his phone 
off. “I don’t want people who need me not to be able to reach me. I find that 
hard. Even at night I leave it on, out of respect for people,” he said. When 
asked how many people in Mali have his number, he chuckled. “I don’t know. 
Maybe all of them.”

Dicko’s sincerity and approachability has enabled him to reach an audience far 
beyond his core Salafist constituency. His austere lifestyle and dedication to 
his followers give him a powerful authenticity that many admire, including a 
large number of young people.

“There has been a big change,” he said, smiling with satisfaction. “Every day 
people embrace Islam more. Didn’t you see the crowds? It’s like this at every 
opening of a mosque. It’s the same at openings of schools. And it’s not just 
the poor, it’s every social class. Now there are mosques in the government 
schools, colleges, even in military bases and at police stations there are 
prayer rooms.”

To underline the point, as Dicko’s car passed a police checkpoint on the way 
to his next engagement, two officers raised their hands in a sharp salute – a 
remarkable gesture in an officially secular state. This transformation of 
Malian society is testament to the effectiveness of the Salafist movement. For 
Dicko, Kantao and Daouda the shift is something to be celebrated. Daouda, the 
Imam in Timbuktu, talks up the benefits of sending religious students to the 
Gulf. “People who go abroad find ideas different to those at home. They learn 
more about the world,” he said.

For the Maliki traditionalists, these changes represent an existential threat 
that they do not hesitate to associate with the jihadist incursion in the north 
– and the Malakis are not shy about equating the Salafists’ foreign funding 
with the foreign jihadists menacing the country. Mohammed Makiba, president of 
the Young Muslims of Mali, said: “We learned a lesson from 2012. When Malians 
study abroad they come back with dangerous ideas. These universities abroad 
don’t just teach Islam. They teach ideologies that are alien to Mali.”

This reporting was supported by funding from the International Reporting 
Project <http://internationalreportingproject.org/>

• Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread 
<https://twitter.com/gdnlongread>, or sign up to the long read weekly email here
 <https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/jul/20/sign-up-to-the-long-read-email>
 