
There’s a clip on YouTube 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y7af9LEUUpM&app=desktop> of the Jesus and Mary 
Chain frontman Jim Reid at his hilarious and terrifying peak as an interviewee. 
It’s 1985 and he’s just been told, off-camera, by an assistant on a Belgian TV 
show that the host is a Joy Division fanatic, so on no account should he say 
anything bad about the band. Jim is a fan himself, but of course, he feels 
obliged to lay waste to Joy Division. The host looks like he wants to either 
throw a punch or throw up.

Twenty-nine years later, I meet Jim in Manchester, where he’s being 
interviewed for 6 Music by Mary Anne Hobbs. She gets a much easier time of it 
than the Belgian guy. Jim’s negativity, no longer weaponised, is dryly comical 
as he dismisses everything from his school days (“I wasn’t even important 
enough to be bullied”) to dancing (“I think I danced once in 1985”). The only 
subjects that elicit undiluted enthusiasm are the Velvet Underground (“the best 
band in the world ever”) and Francis Bacon, whose paintings he describes as 
“reality reconstructed in a way that it ought to have been in the first place”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dy7af9LEUUpM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dy7af9LEUUpM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dy7af9LEUUpM&media=>
You could say the same of the 1985 album that Jim and his guitarist brother, 
William, areperforming in full for the first time next month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/may/14/jesus-and-mary-chain-psychocandy-30th-anniversary>
.Psychocandy (“it’s a one-word review of what it contains,” says Jim) was an 
explosive anomaly. Into the chasm between the expensive, imperial realm of pop 
and the insular, underachieving ghetto of indie erupted the most notorious band 
since the Sex Pistols, attended by riots, bans and breathless headlines, even 
though the Reids were painfully shy. Some ofPsychocandy is beautifully wasted 
pop, like Lou Reed working in the Brill Building; some sounds like being 
trapped in a wind tunnel full of broken glass and bees; the rest sounds like 
both happening at once. The Jesus and Mary Chain were a band without a middle. 
There was only melody and noise, beauty and violence, love and hate.

“Contrast’s dead,” says Douglas Hart, who played bass in the Mary Chain before 
quitting in 1991 to become asuccessful music video director 
<https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLA16546A082A90D19>. “We live in this 
slightly anodyne world. That contrast was important psychologically. If you 
were pissing people off it made you feel great.”

Alan McGee, the Creation Records founder who made a fortune from Oasis, is 
managing the Mary Chain again almost 30 years after they fired him. He still 
sounds like their biggest fan, seeing them as a vital bridge in British rock 
between punk and the 90s. “I believed the Mary Chain were the greatest group in 
the world,” he gushes. “I genuinely believed they were the revolution.”

Speaking to the brothers separately about Psychocandy is both confusing and 
illuminating because they often disagree. Jim, who now lives in Devon and has 
two daughters, is very funny in a self-deprecating, Eeyoreish way. William, 
speaking from Los Angeles (he moved there in 1998) apologises for his 
inarticulacy and bad memory. “My 14-year-old son asks me these questions and I 
just say I don’t know,” he says pleadingly. “We just did it. I don’t know how 
we did it. It’s a little miracle. It could all have been different.”
 The sleeve artwork for Psychocandy. The title is “a one-word review of what 
it contains,” says Jim Reid. 
The Reids grew up in the suburban new town of East Kilbride, “the edge of the 
universe”, spiritually distant from Glasgow, let alone London. You had to be a 
fantasist to think of making it from there. Unable to get their act together in 
time for punk (Hart calls the Mary Chain “a punk band out of time”), they quit 
their jobs in 1980. For the next three years they would stay up all night, 
fuelled by tea and biscuits, dreaming up the perfect band. “We were like weird 
twins in those days, finishing each other’s sentences,” says Jim. “We were very 
much of the same mind.”

Eventually, they imagined music that fused the noise of German industrial band 
Einstürzende Neubaten with the pop sweetness of the Shangri-Las. When they 
first heardThe Velvet Underground & Nico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2012/oct/29/velvet-underground-nico-album-stream>
, says Jim, “Our jaws hit the floor. They were the Mary Chain before the Mary 
Chain. That was the point at which we were kicked off our sofa.”

By 1983 Jim was 21 and William 24. William had given himself until his 27th 
birthday for the band to succeed before moving to Israel to work on a kibbutz. 
“I think everybody thought we were a couple of wasters, and, to be honest, we 
probably were,” says Jim. “We thought, well, if we don’t do this now, we’re 
never going to do it.”

That year their dad lost his factory job and gave his sons £300 from his 
redundancy pay-off. They spent it on a Portastudio to make demos of the songs 
that would become their first singles, Upside Down and Never Understand. 
Neither of them wanted to be the singer so they flipped a coin and Jim lost. 
“It could have gone the other way,” he says. “After a while I started to shag 
more girls than he did and he was like, ‘I want to be the singer!’ And I was 
like, ‘Sorry, son, the coin doesn’t lie.’”

“I’ve got a great job,” counters William. “I get to hide in the shadows and do 
what the hell I want. Jim’s got to be the guy that everybody looks at.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7EgB__YratE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7EgB__YratE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7EgB__YratE&media=>
Despite the unfavourable odds, the Reids felt confident because they felt 
necessary. “We hated the 1980s music scene,” says Jim. “I mean, we detested it. 
The Mary Chain were more influenced by bad music than good. We did well out of 
that. We only started a band because we thought, ‘Why isn’t anyone else doing 
this?’”

Through a stroke of luck their demo tape reached future Primal Scream frontman 
Bobby Gillespie. He sent it to his friend Alan McGee, who released Upside Down 
on Creation and became their manager. “McGee’s enthusiasm was a driving force,” 
says Jim. “He was like your battery charger. You’d look at Alan and he’d be 
frothing at the mouth and you’d be like, ‘Fucking hell, he’s right!’”

After recording Upside Down <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UnO41-rKUsc> and 
hiring Bobby Gillespie as their drummer in late 1984, the Mary Chain looked for 
a major-label deal. “We had expectations we were going to be the Beatles or the 
Stones, so you have to go big,” says William. “We had huge balls.”

They soon signed to Blanco Y Negro, the WEA subsidiary established by Rough 
Trade’s Geoff Travis. Jim’s biggest regret is that they didn’t choose Rough 
Trade. “At the time, everyone was indie-schmindie,” explains Jim. “I wasn’t 
interested in a spotty kid with an Oxfam jumper playing in a room above a pub 
to his 22 mates. I wanted to be Marc Bolan, David Bowie, Jim Morrison. I saw us 
at Wembley Stadium. What I didn’t realise was that Warner Brothers weren’t 
interested in the Mary Chain. Nobody there liked the band, nobody there did 
anything for the band. There was a sense that people just wanted you out of the 
building as quickly as possible.”

At times it seemed the whole music industry was resistant to them, like a body 
rejecting a transplanted organ. They butted heads with pressing plant workers 
who refused to manufacture the pungently named B-side Jesus Fuck and BBC sound 
engineers who wanted to “fix” the band’s unorthodox sound.
 An early live shot from Jim Reid’s collection, with Douglas Hart centre. 
“You’d go to the toilet and come back and the guitars were all turned down,” 
remembers Jim. “We didn’t know what the rules were. What we did know was what 
sounded good.”

Then there was their live reputation. They drank heavily to drown their 
nerves, so their early shows, sometimes as short as 15 minutes, projected chaos 
and alienation which a growing number of troublemakers mistook for violence. 
When they played the North London Polytechnic in March 1985, audience members 
trashed the stage while the band hid in their dressing room.The music press 
reported a “riot” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/jun/14/jesus-mary-chain-riot>; McGee, 
in the spirit of Malcolm McLaren, excitedly declared it “art as terrorism”; 
suddenly the band’s reputation was out of control.

“After that, you had to come to a Mary Chain gig with a baseball bat,” says 
Jim. “The notoriety did sort of… spiral, and we had to nip it in the bud.”

“That was McGee trying to make it an event,” says William. “We had a lot of 
arguments with him about that. It wasn’t Alan going on stage and being a target 
for these lunatics. It was us.”

The Reids’ scabrously self-aggrandising interview style, however, was all 
their own work. They used words the same way they deployed white noise and 
feedback: to provoke and excite but also to conceal their shyness. “To knock 
things down that people held in high regard got you noticed,” says Jim. “A lot 
of it was bravado. You’re almost trying to talk yourself into it. Nobody else 
is saying this so we will: we’re better than the Beatles.”

“A lot of people thought we were snotty little brats,” says William. “We were 
snotty little brats. You need a bit of that when you’re young, don’t you?”

To the hysterically impatient 80s music press, the Mary Chain felt 
electrifying but not necessarily built to last. Only the brothers knew that 
they had a fistful of great songs that had never been played live. William was 
the more prolific songwriter but Jim was a shrewd editor and together they were 
formidable.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Foct%2F26%2Fjesus-and-mary-chain-psychocandy-live-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F21%2F1413891923443%2F63315fed-7ed7-44bf-81f4-1f67179081be-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Jesus%20and%20Mary%20Chain%20on%20Psychocandy%3A%20%E2%80%98It%20was%20a%20little%20miracle%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Foct%2F26%2Fjesus-and-mary-chain-psychocandy-live-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Jesus%20and%20Mary%20Chain%20on%20Psychocandy%3A%20%E2%80%98It%20was%20a%20little%20miracle%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Foct%2F26%2Fjesus-and-mary-chain-psychocandy-live-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F21%2F1413891923443%2F63315fed-7ed7-44bf-81f4-1f67179081be-1360x2040.jpeg>
 William (left) and Jim Reid in 1985. Photograph: Mark and Colleen 
Hayward/Redferns 
“‘Mary Chain’ and ‘hype’ were synonymous,” says Jim. “We knew that a lot of 
people thoughtPsychocandy was going to be the singles and a collection of 
B-sides. So we were quietly confident, quite smug about it. We felt as if 
everything onPsychocandy was a potential single.”

The songs were one secret weapon; their discipline was another. The men who 
always performed drunk recordedPsychocandy entirely sober: “Lots of tea and 
Wimpy [burgers], not speed and alcohol,” says Hart. The apparent chaos was in 
fact meticulously choreographed: they sampled white noise and feedback and 
carefully punched it into the mix. Getting the sound exactly right is why the 
album, recorded at north London’s Southern Studios with engineer John Loder, 
took six weeks.

“To us, it seemed like an eternity,” says Jim. “We thought we were budding 
Phil Spectors. I’m sure a fly on the wall would have been thinking: ‘These guys 
are nuts.’”

Musical disagreements were sometimes settled with fists. At one point Jim 
threw William into a studio door with such ferocity that it came off its 
hinges. “They were really great at fighting [verbally] because they could push 
each other’s buttons,” Hart says admiringly. “Sometimes I would stand by in 
awe. How can people slag each other so beautifully? And then they’d start 
throwing punches and you’d have to intervene.”

The Reids felt “pretty cocky” about Psychocandy and critics adored it, but the 
industry remained frosty. According to Jim, Warner Music UK chairman Rob 
Dickins told them, “Nobody’s going to buy it.” Radio 1 DJ Mike Smith 
blacklisted follow-up single Some Candy Talking because he was convinced, 
wrongly, that it was about heroin. When the Mary Chain toured the US, their 
Jesus Fuck T-shirts didn’t go down well. “The promoter in Texas said, ‘They’ll 
lynch you,’ so he put a bit of tape [on the T-shirts]. He put the tape over the 
word ‘Jesus’ and left the word ‘Fuck’.” Jim rolls his eyes. “That speaks 
volumes.”

The Reids’ shyness made even cult success hard to enjoy. “They were fucking 
miserable,” says McGee. “We’d been offeredTop of the Pops and they were looking 
at me like I’d asked if they wanted to take a walk around Auschwitz.” Jim 
rejects this (“McGee’s talking bollocks”), but Hart seems to concur. “When 
bands are great they create a little gang mentality that excludes others by 
necessity. Our spiky reputation would go before us, which we enjoyed at first, 
but after a while you get a bit lonely and think: ‘Why aren’t we having a good 
time?’”
 The Jesus and Mary Chain performing live on Channel 4’s music programme The 
Tube in 1985, with Bobby Gillespie on drums. Photograph: ITV/Rex Features 
At any rate, the brothers’ reticence created a glass ceiling. As songs such as 
In a Hole and My Little Underground made clear, the Mary Chain were introverts. 
Their wall of noise was defensive rather than aggressive, a prickly cocoon that 
anticipated the hermetic roar of My Bloody Valentine. However great the songs, 
they lacked the common touch, so how on Earth did they ever believe they’d play 
Wembley?

“What were we thinking?” Jim agrees. “Psychocandy in a stadium? It was never 
going to happen. But we had such utter self-belief. We were absurdly naive.”

In retrospect, it was for the best, because the Reids weren’t primed to 
withstand celebrity. “Massive fame would have probably screwed with my head,” 
agrees Jim. “I think William would have enjoyed the adulation.”

William flatly disagrees. “I really think we would have fallen to pieces.”

Instead, the Jesus and Mary Chain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/jesus-and-mary-chain> fell to pieces slowly. 
Starting with 1987’s cleaner-soundingDarklands (William’s favourite), each 
subsequent Mary Chain album was good and different but each one took longer to 
make as they drank more and spoke less.

“In 85 I drank to get over my nerves; in 97 I drank because I just had to,” 
says Jim. “That process gradually ended up with me being an addict. I’d be 
sitting in the living room with a bottle of whisky and phoning up my dealer to 
get a gram of coke. But [despite] the drugs, the drink, the bickering, the 
music never suffered. I stand by every record we made.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmIYqUHhjIQE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmIYqUHhjIQE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmIYqUHhjIQE&media=>
After William quit the band in 1998, during an onstage punch-up in LA, the 
brothers didn’t speak for a year or perform together for almost a decade. Since 
their first reunion show at the Coachella festival in 2007, where Scarlett 
Johansson joined them forPsychocandy highlight Just Like Honey 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MdC8L31tHro>, they’ve maintained enough 
harmony to tour regularly and work on a seventh album that, Jim promises, “will 
be bloody good”.

I ask Jim to describe their relationship and he sighs heavily. “Oh God. It’s 
complicated. We tolerate each other. I know how to wind him up, he knows how to 
wind me up. Sober, we give each other space. Bring drink into the equation, it 
can get a bit bloody again.” On this subject, unusually, William is in complete 
agreement.

The impossibility of recreating the turmoil and combat of 1985 in front of a 
reverential older crowd led the Reids to decline previous offers to tour
Psychocandy, but now it’s part of the appeal. “Even when the album was out, it 
was about riots and falling over drunk on stage,” says Jim. “It was about 
everything but the music. If you’re looking for skinny young kids in a strop, 
kicking their guitars, stay at home.”

I ask William how he thinks the audience would react if they regressed 30 
years, got drunk, played for 15 minutes and stormed off. He sounds intrigued.

“What if we did play exactly what we did in 1985?” he muses. “I wonder if 
people would embrace it.”

The Jesus and Mary Chain’s five-date UK tour, Psychocandy Live, begins at 
London’sTroxy <http://www.troxy.co.uk/> on 19 November. Jim Reid is on Mary 
Anne Hobbs <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b01pp0xq>’s 6 Music show on 1 and 2 
Nov
 