
Remember Malcolm Turnbull’s dog blog 
<http://www.malcolmturnbull.com.au/dog-blog>? Back in 2008 or so, that, his 
iPad, and his use of Twitter were proffered as signs that an admittedly 
ambitious man was nevertheless savvy, forward-looking and possessed of a human 
touch. His use of various platforms offered channels of direct communication 
that weren’t overseen by media gatekeepers. Back then, “Web 2.0” signified an 
opportunity for politicians like him, operating in a familiar, careerist mode.

Or remember the first Obama campaign? Back in 2008, it was received not only 
as an astute political use of new media technologies, but as the apotheosis of 
the internet itself as a liberalising force.

Inside the hate-filled echo chamber of racism and conspiracy theories
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/18/gab-the-social-network-for-the-alt-right>
One op-ed published 
<http://www.usnews.com/opinion/articles/2008/11/19/barack-obama-and-the-facebook-election>
 right after the election captured the tone shared not only across the 
mainstream media, but within much of progressive politics.

Obama’s masterful leveraging of Web 2.0 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/web20> platforms marks a major 
E-ruption in electoral politics – in America and elsewhere – as campaigning 
shifts from old-style political machines toward the horizontal dynamics of 
online social networks. The Web, a perfect medium for genuine grass-roots 
political movements, is transforming the power dynamics of politics. There are 
no barriers to entry on sites like Facebook and YouTube. Power is diffused 
because everybody can participate.

Notice that the technologies are understood in this passage as progressive and 
transformational in and of themselves. Structural features like easy access are 
seen, ipso facto, as a challenge to entrenched power.

Every new technology attracts optimism; this is related to a deep, abiding, 
and seemingly unshakeable idea that scientific and technological advancements 
lead inexorably to moral and political progress. This tendency is at least as 
old as the Enlightenment.

But the internet, even before the the world wide web, was a particular locus 
fordreams of civic renewal 
<https://www.amazon.com/Virtual-Community-Homesteading-Electronic-Frontier/dp/0262681218>
, and the repudiation of corrupt institutions.

The advent of social media put all of this optimism into overdrive. Twitter, 
Facebook, YouTube and all of the usual suspects were credited with powering 
uprisings fromIran 
<http://content.time.com/time/world/article/0,8599,1905125,00.html>, to the 
Arab Spring 
<https://mic.com/articles/10642/twitter-revolution-how-the-arab-spring-was-helped-by-social-media#.OVlNGn8zm>
, toOccupy 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2011/10/06/occupy-wall-street-social-media\_n\_999178.html>
.

Eight years after Obama’s victory, talk like this has been turned inside out. 

Excitement about online people power has disappeared; now there is only horror 
about the “alt-right’s” online army, andconfusion about how to even cover them 
<http://jezebel.com/stop-calling-them-the-alt-right-1789231922>. 

Prominent commentators have been howling 
<https://twitter.com/KeithOlbermann/status/808846556929654784> like Birchers 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Birch_Society> about Russian hacking. Major 
mastheads aregiving over their front pages 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/economy/russian-propaganda-effort-helped-spread-fake-news-during-election-experts-say/2016/11/24/793903b6-8a40-4ca9-b712-716af66098fe_story.html?utm_term=.67fc1ec01288>
 to coverage ofgroups who make apps that would blacklist journalists 
<http://www.alternet.org/media/anonymous-blacklist-promoted-washington-post-has-shocking-roots-ukrainian-fascism-eugenics-and>
.

Something akin to panic has arisen about the easy diffusion of “fake news” by 
uncredentialled actors who have managed to game Facebook’s algorithms. In 
general, truth seems like a hard thing to get any traction on.

And Trump’s Twitter game 
<http://www.cnbc.com/2016/12/08/trump-twitter-unions-attack-commentary.html> – 
which breaks every risk-averse rule of political communication – is not 
celebrated as a new model for campaigning, but rightly feared as a new model 
for demagoguery. There’s also an emerging, queasy recognition that his campaign 
employednew kinds of analytics 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/storyline/2016-election-day/trump-campaign-pays-millions-overseas-big-data-firm-n677321>
 and social media outreach that left his shambolic opponents for dead.

Suddenly, it looks like social media is a perfect fit for the far right. 
Suddenly, “grassroots organising”, “lowered barriers to entry”, and “horizontal 
dynamics” seem to have acquired newer, darker meanings .

At the same time, we find Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> beached, and 
gulping the unfamiliar air of failure. The erstwhile dog blogger and great 
small-l liberal hope seems maladapted to the times. The new year promises to be 
worse for him than this one.

Extremists within and beyond his own party have taken advantage of social 
media, its affordances for grassroots organisers, and the decay of our own 
institutions of media and government to organise their own rightwing 
insurgencies.

If people like George Christensen have moved in from the obscurity where they 
might in earlier times have dwelled, it is because they are more capable of 
seizing the opportunities that a chaotic, affectively charged environment 
presents.

Now is not a time that favours moderates. And the convulsions are likely to 
continue for a good while yet.

How can the left respond to the global resurgence of far right populism? | 
Jason Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/24/how-can-the-left-respond-to-the-global-resurgence-of-far-right-populism>
In 2017, the progressive response to all of this need not be a retreat into 
pessimism. We just need to face a few facts.

Communications technologies have no inherent political orientation or moral 
weight. The idea that they might be inherently liberalising is given the lie 
by, among other things, the fact thatthe far right has been successfully using 
ICTs since the 1980s <http://www.publiceye.org/hate/online_85/racist_bbs.html> 
to create their own counter-publics.

They’ve been at it for a long time, and they’ve always been good at it. Our 
brief seasons of optimism just led us to forget that.

The recent, broad revival of repellent ideologies that were once presumed dead 
should tell us something. No technology, let alone the internet, bends human 
values in desirable directions. They are rather tools that human beings use to 
realise their values, for good or ill.

The right are succeeding right now because their ideas, however awful, are 
clear, and their tactics resolute. Technology will not do the work of honing or 
promoting our ideas for us.
 