
January 1976 was as bitter as any winter in Nashville and, as the young New 
York film-maker Jim Szalapski made his way back north, his camera caught the 
land’s starkness: snow flurries, icy roads, trailers upturned and cargo 
spilled. Szalapski had just finished shooting a documentary he would name 
Heartworn Highways, a profile of a new country scene emerging out of Texas and 
Tennessee; singer-songwriters such asGuy Clark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/17/guy-clark-song-tribute-country-music>
, Townes Van Zandt, and the young Steve Earle and Rodney Crowell who would 
become known as proponents of “outlaw country”. Working with a small crew, and 
even smaller budget, over the course of a few weeks he had caught these 
musicians playing across liquor-soaked evenings in trailer lots, blacksmiths’ 
workshops and penitentiaries, attempting to place their music in a cultural 
landscape.

Ten months later, over Thanksgiving weekend, Martin Scorsese 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/martinscorsese> began shooting The Last Waltz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/dec/04/the-last-waltz-review>, a 
recording of Canadian-American group the Band’s farewell concert in San 
Francisco. It featured not only songs by the Band, but also a glut of their 
musical friends:Bob Dylan <https://www.theguardian.com/music/bobdylan>, Muddy 
Waters, Neil Young, Van Morrison, and theStaple Singers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/12/mavis-staples-i-often-think-what-would-have-happened-if-id-married-bob-dylan>
 among them. In between, Scorsese ran interviews with the group, reflecting on 
the end of their 16 years on the road.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTCSzL5-SPHM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTCSzL5-SPHM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTCSzL5-SPHM&media=>
 The Band perform The Weight with the Staple Singers in The Last Waltz. 
The Last Waltz was released two years later, and became one of the most 
revered music documentaries of all time. Heartworn Highways did not surface 
until 1981, when it played for a week at the Art Cinema on Eighth Street in New 
York. And though it has garnered a cult following (and a low-key DVD release) 
in the years since, it has stood somewhat in the shadows. When he died in 2000, 
Szalapski believed his great labour of love had been a failure. It is 
interesting to see 1976 as framed by these two films. That year’s US album 
charts were dominated by [Peter Frampton’s] Frampton Comes Alive, Wings at the 
Speed of Sound, Their Greatest Hits (1971-1975) byEagles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/eagles> and Stevie Wonder’s Songs in the Key 
of Life. Heartworn Highways and The Last Waltz offer something quite different, 
and helped to spawn the musical genre we have come to know as Americana.

When I grew up, country music represented a frame of mind that I didn’t care 
for – it was redneck music
Philip Schopper 
At the time Szalapski began shooting, country music was in the midst of an 
upheaval. Four years earlier had seen the opening of Opryland, an extravagant 
theme park that offered rollercoasters and log flumes, and provided a new home 
for the Grand Ole Opry – the phenomenally popular country music radio show 
recorded before a studio audience, whose organisers considered themselves the 
fierce conservators of the country sound.

But country had begun to change: in the early 60s, a folk scene had sprung up 
in the south, promoting not only contemporary and traditional folk artists but 
blues greats such as Lightnin’ Hopkins and Mance Lipscomb. By the time Bob 
Dylan arrived in Nashville to record Blonde on Blonde in early 1966, the first 
of three albums he recorded in the city, it felt as if the formulaic Nashville 
country sound was giving way to something more reflective of a traditional 
heritage, and of the decade’s countercultural movement. In the years that 
followed, the next generation of country stars drew on these folk and rock 
influences, as well as honky tonk and rockabilly, and the resulting “outlaw 
country” movement, led byWaylon Jennings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/feb/15/guardianobituaries1>, Willie 
Nelson and Kris Kristofferson found a ready audience; in 1976 the compilation 
Wanted! The Outlaws became the first platinum-selling country music album.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzprRZ2wFQD4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzprRZ2wFQD4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzprRZ2wFQD4&media=>
 Townes Van Zandt performs Pancho And Lefty in Heartworn Highways. 
“I was not a fan of country music,” says Philip Schopper, who edited Heartworn 
Highways. “I’m originally from Arizona, and where I grew up and when I grew up, 
country music represented a frame of mind that I didn’t care for – it was 
redneck music. In my mind it was associated with prejudice and intolerance and 
that sort of thing.” Still, he had made a pact with Szalapski some years 
earlier that if either of them managed to get a film off the ground the other 
would work on it.

And Szalapski was persuasive. He told Schopper that, “these fellas were 
writing their own material, and it was a new kind of country music, and they 
were outlaw musicians in the sense that they were outside the mainstream of 
country music production at that time”. Szalapski, he recalls, had already made 
a couple of field trips down to Texas and Tennessee. “He went down with a tape 
recorder first of all, sat in their homes, their living rooms recording some of 
the music as they play. The musicians would tend to get together of an evening, 
playing – pickin’ and grinnin’ as they call it.” He returned to New York 
enamoured with it, says Schopper: “He would play it for people and say: ‘Listen 
to this! Something should be done with this!’ And he would try to pitch a film.”

Though he was unsure of the commercial value of such a film, Schopper was soon 
smitten, too. “What these folks were playing was different. I was drawn to it. 
I would hear the writing and the skill of musicianship and was really knocked 
out by it, and the values it was embracing were much closer to hippy values. 
These songs were about real people and real experiences, and weren’t simply 
songs about driving your truck, getting drunk and cheating on your girlfriend.”

Szalapski also proved very convincing to a young British art dealer named 
Graham Leader. The pair had grown friendly over a couple of years, and when 
Leader found himself with time on his hands he decided to head to Nashville 
with his director friend to hear the music Szalapski had raved about.

 “I just went there on an adventure,” he recalls. “The thing that really 
captured my imagination was entering this world, a world I would never have 
stepped into. And being there, in a way, was a revelation and I thought: ‘Who 
wouldn’t be interested in this music, this world and these people?’ So I asked 
Jim what it would take to make the film and he gave me a number and I said: 
‘OK, let’s just do it.’” Leader signed on as producer, and five weeks later 
they were filming.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFjnXkhwubzQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFjnXkhwubzQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFjnXkhwubzQ&media=>
 Trailer for Heartworn Highways. 
There has been nothing throughout Leader’s career that has given him quite the 
same satisfaction as Heartworn Highways. “Because of its purity,” he explains, 
“and the way it was made. Jim was the proverbial fly on the wall, able to get 
in very close to the subject, whatever the subject. I don’t think the music 
world is a world that’s wide open, and it’s certainly a distrusting world, but 
because of his nature and his ability to be sublimated to whatever was going 
on, he was able to move in very close, and through that find the real depth of 
colours, of tones, of pictures that you would never ever see, normally.”

Upon the film’s brief release in 1981, the New Yorker 
<http://www.newyorker.com/culture/culture-desk/postscript-guy-clark-1941-2016> 
ran a three-page review of Heartworn Highways, and while it praised the film 
highly bemoaning the lack of structure or narration. In truthThat perceived 
messiness was wholly intentional. “Jim and I used to joke that we were making a 
content-free documentary,” Schopper laughs. “Meaning we had no agenda, we 
weren’t out to do a documentary about the music industry or the music business, 
we were making a film that felt like an experience; you step into it and when 
you step out of it you feel like you’ve been somewhere and been immersed in 
something.”

“It was non-narrated, and in those days to have a film that was non-narrated 
and cuts away from the action to action that was going on elsewhere… [didn’t 
happen],” Leader explains. “We wanted the whole film to be like a song,” 
Schopper adds. “Everything had to do with feeling. What feels right to be next, 
until finally we have something all together that took you along on an 
emotional and musical trip, and you can come away feeling like you’ve met some 
people. And not to be overly corny about it, but maybe you’ve met some friends.”

At the opening chords of I’m a Man, Marty just went into complete panic - he 
had told everyone to turn off their camera
Jonathan Taplin 
What The Last Waltz had that Heartworn Highways did not was money, famous 
subjects and a pre-ordained narrative structure. “It came together incredibly 
quickly,” recalls the film’s producer, Jonathan Taplin. “We just all ran up to 
San Francisco, brought the best cameramen we knew and literally arrived the 
night before. In one night, we got 90% of the film. But like any documentary it 
begins to have an interesting flow to it, and you begin to tell a story, and 
that was the story both of the Band but also of the music.”

There were hair-raising moments; shooting on 35mm film meant that the 
magazines had to be changed every 10 minutes, leading to some performances 
being sacrificed. When Muddy Waters turned up too late to rehearse and 
announced he would be playing Mannish Boy and Caledonia, Scorsese decided they 
would change magazines during the first song. “Marty didn’t understand that 
Mannish Boy was Muddy’s term for I’m a Man,” recalls Taplin. “And at those 
opening chords of I’m a Man, Marty just went into complete panic, he realised 
that was the most important song for Muddy and he had told everyone to turn off 
their cameras.” Only by fluke – one of the cameramen had removed his headphones 
and therefore had not heard Scorsese’s instruction to stop filming and change 
the magazine – did the the song get filmed.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D91Eg95vF72k&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D91Eg95vF72k>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D91Eg95vF72k&media=>
 The Band perform Further on up the Road with Eric Clapton in The Last Waltz. 
For the most part, Taplin remembers the joy of that night – the way “those 
friends of theirs really raised their performances to the best level possible,” 
he says. “To me it’s one of the best Van Morrison performances ever. Neil Young 
was astonishing. I think everybody who was there felt the strength of the 
moment. There’s a sequence whereEric Clapton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/ericclapton>’s doing Further on up the Road, 
and Robbie Robertson takes the second solo, and they were both pushing each 
other to play at a level that I hadn’t seen either of them play for a while. 
And there’s a kind of grin going back and forth.” His personal highlight, 
however, is Levon Helm singing The Night They Drove Old Dixie Down. “For me 
that’s the kind of elegiac tune that the Band represents, and the film 
represents. It’s about the end of a time, and obviously the song is about the 
end of another time, but it has a sad but beautiful we’re gonna somehow still 
survive mood to it that’s pretty unique.”

The legacy of these two 40-year-old films is tangible. Leader says: “I can be 
anywhere in the world, at a party or a dinner, and people tell me how much they 
love that film. I was once in an elevator in Sydney wearing a Heartworn 
Highways T-shirt, and a young band got in and one of the guys looked at me and 
said: ‘That’s my favourite film.’It was very special, because it had been in 
the dark for so long.” Among its many fans areFather John Misty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/31/father-john-misty-josh-tillman-fleet-foxes>
, and Colin Greenwood ofRadiohead <https://www.theguardian.com/music/radiohead>
. An anniversary edition of Heartworn Highways released this year was also 
accompanied by a sequel, Heartworn Revisited, which focused on contemporary 
musicians ploughing a similar furrow – among them Justin Townes Earle, 
Langhorne Slim and Jonny Fritz, with contributions from the players of the 
original film. Leader now plans to turn Highways into a series.

For Taplin, The Last Waltz “did something to preserve a sense of this roots 
music” – music with “rough edges” made without aid ofAuto-Tune or Pro-Tools”. 
He speaks of the young artists, including Mumford & Sons andSturgill Simpson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/31/sturgill-simpson-country-music-reluctant-saviour-metamodern-sounds-interview>
, who have cite its influence. “I think that next generation of kids that began 
to make this Americana thing real, that was a touchstone for them. It was a way 
for them to go back and to think about more simple, grounded music in a time 
when that wasn’t what was really going on.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Flast-waltz-heartworn-highways-americana-scorsese-country-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7092b1ed9a1c2cb0cce9edbd8fb651026e9f88de%2F0_40_3386_2031%2F3386.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Last%20Waltz%20and%20Heartworn%20Highways%3A%20two%2040-year-old%20films%20at%20the%20birth%20of%20Americana&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Flast-waltz-heartworn-highways-americana-scorsese-country-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Last%20Waltz%20and%20Heartworn%20Highways%3A%20two%2040-year-old%20films%20at%20the%20birth%20of%20Americana&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Flast-waltz-heartworn-highways-americana-scorsese-country-music%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7092b1ed9a1c2cb0cce9edbd8fb651026e9f88de%2F0_40_3386_2031%2F3386.jpg>
 Rodney Crowell, as seen in Heartworn Highways. 
One of those artists is Simone Felice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/sep/23/life-after-death-simone-felice>, 
once of the Felice Brothers, and now a solo performer and producer. “I was born 
and grew up in the shadow of Big Pink,” he says, meaning the house in West 
Saugerties in upstate New York where the Band holed up in the late 60s. “We 
used to ride our bicycles past it as kids … Teleport to 2006. By the greasy 
hand of fate my brothers and I found ourselves living in an extremely creepy 
mansion on the Hudson River, writing songs and shooting deer rifles. There was 
an old TV with a VHS player. We found a tape of The Last Waltz and put it in … 
Two words: Holy Shit.”

He would later play with Helm, and hear about the darker side of life with the 
Band, but still he likes to keep the memory of what The Last Waltz inspired 
safe. “Those nights by the river, watching and learning with my brothers and 
friends,” he says, “when the music business was still a glittering Oz where 
songs and dreams collided and not the festering toilet I’ve come to know – the 
unfettered spirit of music flowed from those men and women on the TV as from 
some wild, legendary river in aSteinbeck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/johnsteinbeck> novel. That’s what I’ll 
choose to take away. That’s what I’ll choose to carry.”

The legend that The Last Waltz helped to instill, remains part of the Band and 
their contemporaries’ appeal. “The Band are the ultimate exponents of the 
melting pot that is Americana,” says Barney Hoskyns, author ofSmall Town Talk: 
Bob Dylan, The Band, Van Morrison, Janis Joplin, Jimi Hendrix and Friends in 
the Wild Years of Woodstock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/02/small-town-talk-bob-dylan-the-band-van-morrison-joplin-hendrix-woodstock-barney-hoskyns-review>
. “They’re the band cited by all the innumerable acts that mine that seam. You 
could probably say 5,000 bands since who have wanted to be the Band, though 
they’re not as talented or as steeped in music and they’re middle-class 
pretenders. But that’s the fantasy to life in Big Pink.

“Did they create Americana at Big Pink?” he asks. “Probably. That is music 
taken from every element of American roots. It’s neither black nor white. It’s 
rural but not entirely rural. It’s southern but not entirely. It’s soulful, 
it’s bluesy, it’s folksy. It’s got gospel in there, but rock’n’roll elements 
there, too. What would you have called it then? So it began a strain of 
retromania, of pulling away from the contemporary moment and retreating into 
some sort of cocoon of authenticity. Which, of course, isn’t authentic at all.”

Forty years on – whether through a shared retromania or a celebration of 
songwriting prowess and the countercultural voice – these two films do seem to 
speak to one another. They portray a time in 1976 when a group of musicians 
were helping to define one of the US’s distinct musical voices. “Those roots of 
Americana go deep,” says Hoskyns, “and if we look at the musical tree, then I’d 
say The Last Waltz and Heartworn Highways are branches of the same tree.”

• The soundtrack to Heartworn Highways is out now on Light in the Attic
 