
Australia is closing the gap between our democratic ideals and the oppressive 
regimes asylum seekers are fleeing from.


Our greatest fear while working in Nauru – that someone would die while being 
detained offshore – has been realised many times over. On 17 February 2014 Reza 
Barati, a 23-year-old Iranian man, wasbeaten to death by two detention centre 
staff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/19/reza-barati-men-convicted-of-asylum-seekers-to-be-free-in-less-than-four-years>
 on Manus Island during a protest. Seven months later, on 5 September, Hamid 
Kehazaei, 24, who was detained on Manus Island,died after contracting a 
treatable infection in his foot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/10/hamid-kehazaei-inquest-exposes-failures-of-australias-secretive-immigration-regime>
. Hamid’s death was avoidable, but poor healthcare and bureaucratic delays 
caused by the Australian Department of Immigration and Border Protection meant 
he didn’t receive proper treatment.


Hamid Kehazaei inquest exposes failures of Australia's secretive immigration 
regime
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/10/hamid-kehazaei-inquest-exposes-failures-of-australias-secretive-immigration-regime>
Fazel Chegeni, an Iranian Kurd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/21/how-australias-immigration-detention-regime-crushed-fazel-chegeni>
, was found dead on 8 November 2015, after escaping the Christmas Island 
detention centre. He had been held in immigration detention for four years 
despite being granted refugee status. A coronial inquest will formally 
determine Fazel’s cause of death, but reports say he had been psychologically 
crushed by years of waiting for settlement in the detention system. And then in 
April 2016, 23-year-oldOmid Masoumali set fire to himself 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/03/asylum-seekers-set-themselves-alight-nauru>
 while on Nauru in protest against Australia’s treatment of people seeking 
asylum. He died two days later in a Brisbane hospital, again amid concerns that 
delays in medical treatment may have prevented his survival.

These are just a few examples of the deaths caused directly or indirectly by 
the pressures of our immigration system. Since 13 June 2013, 17 people seeking 
asylum in Australia have died while in detention or in the Australian 
community. These people have been subjected to horror upon horror upon horror, 
and yet our politicians continue to justify human rights abuses as humanitarian 
and essential to protecting our borders. Changes to government and leadership 
have had no effect on the unofficial bipartisan agreement to abuse people 
seeking asylum in Australia.

The inexcusable continues to be excused because “We are stopping the boats”. 
And yet, in the first year theNauru <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nauru> 
camp was reopened, the boats had not stopped arriving in Australian territorial 
waters. When it became clear that offshore detention had failed as a deterrent, 
the military-led Operation Sovereign Borders commenced in September 2013. Boats 
suspected of carrying asylum seekers were to be returned to Indonesian 
territorial waters: a refusal policy rather than a deterrence policy that 
admits the only way of truly stopping the boats is to forcibly remove people 
from our waters.

In enacting Operation Sovereign Borders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/16/operation-sovereign-borders-begins-wednesday>
, the government has broken international laws and conventions and threatened 
our relationship with Indonesia after it was revealed that the Australian navy 
breached Indonesia’s territorial waters six times. Tony Abbott, prime minister 
at the time, refused to deny that Australia paid people smugglers to turn 
around an asylum seeker boat, even while claiming that breaking the people 
smugglers’ “business model” was vital to “stopping the boats”. The Australian 
governmenteven donated two patrol boats to the Sri Lankan government 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2013-11-16/abbott-boost-cooperation-on-people-smuggling-with-sri-lanka/5097132>
 to assist it in intercepting asylum seekers fleeing the country by boat.

But even that has failed to completely deter boat arrivals. We don’t know how 
many boats have arrived in Australian waters since the commencement of 
Operation Sovereign Borders due to the government’s secrecy surrounding 
“on-water matters”. However, the occasional story emerges, such as in 2014when 
two boats fleeing Sri Lanka were intercepted by Australian authorities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2014/nov/29/australia-hands-over-37-intercepted-asylum-seekers-to-sri-lankan-navy>
. One boatload of people was held on an Australian Customs vessel for four 
weeks before being deported to Nauru. The other group was returned to the Sri 
Lankan authorities and the very persecution they claim they were fleeing from. 
The most recent boat arrival the media reported on, again from Sri Lanka,made 
it to the Cocos (Keeling) Islands in May 2016. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/06/asylum-seekers-who-reached-cocos-islands-could-be-back-in-sri-lanka>

If this was truly about saving lives, the easiest way to stop the boats would 
be to bring people to Australia by plane

According to the findings of the Houston panel (the expert panel on which our 
current detention centre system was designed),stopping the boats was only ever 
meant to be a “circuit breaker” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/16/after-the-nauru-files-how-can-australia-go-about-ending-offshore-detention>
 to allow us the opportunity to recalibrate our regional resettlement policies. 
However, under the calculating eye of the former immigration minister Scott 
Morrison and Abbott, the resettlement of UNHCR-registered refugees from 
Indonesia to Australia ceased as of June 2014. We were removing the “legal” 
avenues for migration at the same time as we were demanding that refugees 
adhere to them.

If this was truly about saving lives, the easiest and quickest way to stop the 
boats would be to bring people to Australia by plane. This would smash the 
people-smuggling syndicate, it would encourage people to wait for a legal 
avenue of migration, it would ensure we don’t incarcerate children in torturous 
conditions indefinitely and it would be a lot cheaper than the billions of 
dollars spent on maintaining our offshore detention centres.

I’m not suggesting this as an alternative policy. But it is clear: the current 
system isn’t about saving lives. Our detention centre regime is about taking 
control of our borders and deciding, as John Howard said,“who comes to this 
country and the circumstances in which they come 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2001/nov/10/immigration.uk>”. 

While there has been little positive change in our politicians’ attitudes 
towards people seeking asylum in the last few years, I believe there is a 
growing sense of outrage among the Australian people regarding our offshore 
detention centre system.The “Let Them Stay” campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/10/let-them-stay-australia-backlash-267-asylum-seekers-island-detention-camps>
 saw thousands of Australians gather in public spaces demanding that the 
government not return asylum seekers who had been transferred to Australia for 
medical attention back to Nauru. Doctors at Brisbane’s Lady Cilento children’s 
hospitalrefused to release one-year-old baby Asha 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/20/baby-asha-protest-swells-at-hospital-amid-fears-of-imminent-removal>
, who had been badly burned on Nauru, as they feared the government would 
return her to the island.

How Australia's immigration detention regime crushed Fazel Chegeni
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/21/how-australias-immigration-detention-regime-crushed-fazel-chegeni>
All of the state governments, except Western Australia, offered to resettle 
asylum seekers rather than return them to Nauru. The “Love Makes a Way” 
campaign has gathered leaders of all religions together in peaceful protest. 
Our doctors are marching in the streets demanding the closure of Nauru and 
Manus Island. Whistleblowers continue to defy the Australian Border Force Act. 
The most famous example wasin Eva Orner’s documentary Chasing Asylum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/30/eva-orner-on-chasing-asylum-every-whistleblower-that-i-interviewed-wept>
. Lawyers continue to battle the legalities of our system in the courts. In
April 2016 Papua New Guinea’s supreme court ruled Australia’s detention of 
asylum seekers on Manus Island to be illegal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/26/papua-new-guinea-court-rules-detention-asylum-seekers-manus-unconstitutional>
 and ordered the PNG and Australian governments to immediately take steps to 
end the detention of asylum seekers in PNG.

While the Australian people continue to protest agaubst our politicians’ human 
rights abuses and fight for a just policy, there is hope that positive change 
will come. While I agree with the necessity of “stopping the boats”, the answer 
does not lie in the abuse of children. There are alternatives to the hellholes 
of Nauru andManus Island 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/manus-island>. NGOs, academics and 
immigration experts have suggested better, more humane ways of offering these 
people protection through regional resettlement programs and establishing 
viable migration alternatives. This will mean we have to increase our refugee 
intake, but we currently accept 168,000 migrants a year; the only reason we 
can’t find room for more refugees is because our politicians won’t allow it.

There is a glimmer of hope. It seems the Australian government has finally 
acknowledged that Nauru and Papua New Guinea are unsuitable resettlement 
options for refugeesby offering a “one-off” resettlement deal to the United 
States for “some” refugees detained in Nauru and Manus Island 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/13/australias-deal-to-resettle-refugees-in-the-us-what-we-know-so>
. At this stage, the details of the deal have not been released, so it’s hard 
to judge who will be allowed to leave, why they will be prioritised over 
others, and what is the timeframe of this deal. There areconcerns the 
inauguration of Donald Trump as America’s next president may jeopardise it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/15/trump-tear-up-australia-refugee-deal-us-expert-warns>
.

The Nauru files: cache of 2,000 leaked reports reveal scale of abuse of 
children in Australian offshore detention
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/10/the-nauru-files-2000-leaked-reports-reveal-scale-of-abuse-of-children-in-australian-offshore-detention>
There is, of course, a catch. The Turnbull government is proposing a lifetime 
ban for those who tried to come to Australia by boat since July 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/30/asylum-seekers-face-lifetime-ban-on-entering-australia-if-they-arrive-by-boat>
, regardless of whether they have been found to be refugees. This accounts for 
everyone currently on Manus Island and Nauru. Many of these people have family 
in Australia. Just why they deem this to be necessary is unclear. By their own 
admission, the boats have stopped and the policy has been a success. What 
purpose does this cruelty have other than to punish people further?

It is clear we have to find all the people detained in Manus Island and Nauru 
another home. But by that time they will be traumatised, damaged shells of 
people, their trust in our country completely eroded.

Extracted from the updated edition of The Undesirables by Mark Isaacs, 
published byHardie Grant Books <http://www.hardiegrant.com/au/books> on 1 
January, RRP $24.99
 