
Every administration tries to reshape American policy to reflect its ideals. 
But the discrepancy between outgoing president Barack Obama and president-elect 
Donald Trump is especially stark.

From health insurance access to abortion rights, Trump and his cabinet 
nominees proffer the opposite of the progressive stance that has defined the 
last eight years in this country.

And with a Republican-controlled House and Senate, it’s possible that our new 
chief executive could make real headway rolling back Obama’s agenda. Next year 
at this time, America could look very different different than it does today. 
Here are some issues that could be in the crosshairs.

US supreme court

A year from now, the US supreme court will probably look like … it has since 
Samuel Alito replaced Sandra Day O’Connor in 2006. Antonin Scalia’s vacant seat 
will be filled by a justicevery comparable to Scalia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-legacy-right-wing-supreme-court-civil-rights>
, and on most politically important issues Anthony Kennedy will be the swing 
vote. This means a court that is generally conservative but liberal on a few 
key issues.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fwho-is-donald-trumps-secretary-of-state-nominee-rex-tillerson-video-profile&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Who%20is%20Donald%20Trump's%20secretary%20of%20state%20nominee%20Rex%20Tillerson%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20profile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fwho-is-donald-trumps-secretary-of-state-nominee-rex-tillerson-video-profile>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Who%20is%20Donald%20Trump%27s%20secretary%20of%20state%20nominee%20Rex%20Tillerson%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20profile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fwho-is-donald-trumps-secretary-of-state-nominee-rex-tillerson-video-profile&media=>
Who is Donald Trump’s secretary of state nominee Rex Tillerson? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/dec/13/who-is-donald-trumps-secretary-of-state-nominee-rex-tillerson-video-profile>
This is a tragic missed opportunity for the Democratic party, who lost its 
chance to have a Democratic-majority court for the first time since early in 
the Nixon administration. But Donald Trump will not immediately be able to 
transform the court upon taking office.

Still, with three justices who are approaching or have already passed their 
80th birthday, the possibility of a second Trump appointment is very real right 
now. And since the oldest justices on the court are the liberals Ruth Bader 
Ginsburg and Stephen Breyer and the moderate conservative Kennedy, a second 
Trump nomination would be mean a major lurch to the right that would juststart 
<https://newrepublic.com/article/139338/its-not-looking-good-roe-v-wade> with 
the destruction of Roe v Wade. Electing Trump might mean a holding pattern for 
the supreme court, or it may mean a majority dedicated to rolling back civil 
rights and liberties entrenched on the bench for decades.

Scott Lemieux <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/scott-lemieux>

Healthcare access

While Senate majority leader Mitch McConnell declared that his party would 
begin its repeal 
<http://thehill.com/homenews/senate/309032-obamacare-repeal-first-item-on-2017-senate-agenda>
 of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) on day one, the extent to which we will soon 
see departures from the status quo of healthcare access may hinge upon 
Republicans’ concerns about electoral punishment in the 2018 midterm elections.

While Donald Trump expressed some interest in protecting against loss of 
coverage for those with pre-existing conditions, this would not be feasible 
absent the far-less-popular insurance mandate, which broadened the risk pool. 
The Urban Institute recently projected that with the Republican “repeal and 
delay” of the ACA,29.8 million Americans would lose health insurance 
<http://www.urban.org/sites/default/files/publication/86236/2001013-the-implications-of-partial-repeal-of-the-aca-through-reconciliation_0.pdf>
 (disproportionately those without a college education), in addition to 
inducing market chaos that would produce conditions worse than prior to the 
ACA’s passage.

Good luck getting healthcare in Donald Trump's America | Miranda Yaver
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/30/donald-trump-tom-price-healthcare-affordable-care-act>
While health and human services nominee Tom Price 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/28/tom-price-health-human-services-secretary-trump-administration>
 and House speaker Paul Ryan make no secret of their desire to repeal the ACA, 
the electoral consequencescould potentially constrain their decision-making, 
even if the health consequences do not.

Otherwise, it is likely that millions will struggle to obtain coverage, with 
the ACA market eliminated and with the restored ability to raise premiums for 
those with pre-existing conditions.

Miranda Yaver <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/miranda-yaver>

Abortion access

There is no overstating how dangerous a time the next year will be for 
reproductive rights. Already national anti-choice organizations are gearing up 
for a fight to overturn Roe v Wade – a real possibility – and state legislators 
are starting to pass the most egregious policies with an aim towards making 
abortions impossible to obtain.

A year from now, we could be witnessing the beginning of the end of legal 
abortion in this country and a rise in the already-high number of illegal 
abortions. It will be a public health crisis.

‘Please, I am out of options’: inside the murky world of DIY abortions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/21/home-abortions-emails-secret-world>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fdonald-trump-first-year-in-office-different-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69d87fa1ac231b2f6d3ea6c3f751dc47a4c1c258%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20US%20could%20be%20vastly%20different%20a%20year%20from%20now.%20Here's%20how&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fdonald-trump-first-year-in-office-different-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20US%20could%20be%20vastly%20different%20a%20year%20from%20now.%20Here%27s%20how&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fdonald-trump-first-year-in-office-different-america%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69d87fa1ac231b2f6d3ea6c3f751dc47a4c1c258%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Women protest against Donald Trump’s position on their rights on 12 December. 
Photograph: McGregor/Pacific/Barcroft Images 
It’s also important to remember that the people who are going to be most 
impacted by any abortion rights rollbacks will be the most vulnerable: women of 
color, immigrant women, young women and poor women. These women are already 
suffering because of anti-choice policies and will undoubtedly be in even more 
danger a year from now. That’s why people who care about reproductive rights 
are going to need to start supporting small, local organizations now, before 
the worst happens.

Jessica Valenti <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jessicavalenti>

Public education

By this time next year, the US public education may look very different. With 
Betsy DeVos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/23/betsy-devos-education-secretary-trump-administration>
 almost certain to be confirmed by the Senate as the next secretary of 
education, fundamental planks of public education could begin to be dismantled.

The 2015 Every Student Succeeds Act curtailed 
<https://www.edweek.org/ew/issues/every-student-succeeds-act/> the powers of 
the education secretary, but DeVos could tap into billions of Title I funding 
to bankroll a vouchers scheme, aggressively use the bully pulpit and craft 
devastating legislation that would likely pass the Republican-controlled 
Congress.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fdonald-trump-strong-on-israel-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Donald%20Trump%3A%20I'm%20very%20strong%20on%20Israel%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fdonald-trump-strong-on-israel-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Donald%20Trump%3A%20I%27m%20very%20strong%20on%20Israel%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fdonald-trump-strong-on-israel-video&media=>
Donald Trump: I’m very strong on Israel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/dec/29/donald-trump-strong-on-israel-video>
This is frightening, but there are inklings of a growing and more organized 
resistance movement led by students, teachers and parents. Thousands of 
students in Boston, Portland, Maryland, New York City, the Bay Area and others 
have staged walkouts in protest of Trump’s election with Boston students, in 
particular,condemning <https://twitter.com/i/moments/805933396019052544> 
DeVos’s nomination and her privatization agenda.

I also expect the parent-led “opt out of standardized testing” movement to 
continue to pick up steam. A few states, too, may jettison these tests in favor 
ofperformance-based assessments 
<http://www.fairtest.org/overhauling-assessment-improve-teaching-and-learni>, 
and launch moreinnovative 
<http://www.philly.com/philly/education/20161216_Phila__School_District__PHA_partner_up_to_reopen_Vaux_High.html>
,child-centered <http://liberatedlearners.net/> schools 
<http://agilelearningcenters.org/> and programs that offer radically different, 
experiential and engaging learning experiences for young people.

Our mission in 2017 is to show the public that yes, while our oppressive, 
curiosity-crushing public education system requires a sweeping overhaul, it 
must be protected from the whims of the billionaire class.

Nikhil Goyal <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/nikhil-goyal>

Energy policy

Donald Trump’s energy plans are nothing if not bold – an “America first” 
strategy to bolster domestic oil and coal production while still supporting the 
growing natural gas sector. The president-elect donned a miner’s helmet on the 
campaign trail to tell supporters that the decades-long decline of coal could 
be reversed, that the jobs will be coming back.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fdonald-trump-first-year-in-office-different-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4fefb372eddfc55444f2a4901604029d576b20e%2F0_198_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20US%20could%20be%20vastly%20different%20a%20year%20from%20now.%20Here's%20how&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fdonald-trump-first-year-in-office-different-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20US%20could%20be%20vastly%20different%20a%20year%20from%20now.%20Here%27s%20how&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fdonald-trump-first-year-in-office-different-america%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4fefb372eddfc55444f2a4901604029d576b20e%2F0_198_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Demonstrators outside the Pennsylvania capitol building before electors arrive 
to cast their votes from the election on 19 December. Photograph: Mark 
Makela/Getty Images 
Trump’s prescribed solution is to tear up environmental regulations, open up 
public land for drilling and cut funding for climate change and clean energy 
programs.Scott Pruitt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/07/trump-scott-pruitt-environmental-protection-agency>
, his chosen Environmental Protection Agency administrator, is a staunch 
supporter of the fossil fuel industry and will facilitate this.Rick Perry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/rick-perry>, the former Texas governor, 
has been nominated to lead the department of energy, an agency he has 
previously wanted to shut down. Perry, an advocate for oil and gas drilling, 
has close ties to large fossil fuel firms.

Scott Pruitt's EPA: a dream for oil and gas firms is nightmare for environment
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/08/scott-pruitt-trump-administration-epa-oil-gas-environment>
But this agenda will do little to alter neither the market forces that have 
undermined coal nor the low global price for oil. Republicans remain keen to 
pare back the regulations, but the result may well be courtroom fights with 
environmental groups and growing public concern over air and water pollution, 
rather than new jobs.


Trump is likely to gut federal clean energy funding although tax breaks for 
wind and solar were extended last year, and it’s unlikely that Congress will 
want to reverse this. The president-elect has said he wants to approve the 
controversial Keystone andDakota Access oil pipelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/dakota-access-pipeline>, which could be 
done relatively quickly, and offshore drilling in the Atlantic and Arctic could 
be back on the agenda.

Without huge federal subsidies coal mines will continue to shut down, however, 
even if the Clean Power Plan is killed off. Renewable energy may steadily 
advance under Trump, albeit at a slower rate and certainly not quickly enough 
to help stave off the worst consequences of climate change.

Oliver Milman <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/oliver-milman>
 