
For Jenny Griffiths, eight months in limbo ended with a phone call shortly 
before midday on 11 March. Abody had been found in the woods 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-bristol-35781898> near the Cribbs 
Causeway shopping centre, north of Bristol. Personal effects strongly suggested 
that it was Jenny’s missing great-uncle Derek Serpell-Morris, better known asDJ 
Derek <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DJ_Derek>.

For 50 years, Derek had been a fixture of the Bristol music scene, DJing 
reggae, ska, rocksteady, dancehall and R&B. Over the past two decades, he had 
become a national cult figure, playing to packed venues across England and 
appearing in the video forDizzee Rascal’s Dirtee Disco 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=01AbOpqS1zc>. Beyond the novelty value of a 
white former accountant playing Jamaican music, his love of the music and 
culture was sincere and profound.

“He was a reggae encyclopedia,” says his friend Don Letts 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Don_Letts>, the film-maker and 6 Music DJ. “He 
taught me about the importance of culture in bringing people together. He was 
an English treasure.”

The 73-year-old’s disappearance last July was national news 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jul/28/wetherspoon-pub-chain-enlisted-in-hunt-for-missing-dj-derek>
, boosted on social media by Bristolian musicians such as Roni Size and 
Portishead’s Geoff Barrow. The media covered every development in a search that 
turned Jenny, who was Derek’s informal personal assistant for a decade, into 
both family spokeswoman and amateur detective. With that phone call, however, 
the search was over. The most famous missing person in Britain was no longer 
missing.

“I prepared myself for the worst, but I stayed strong and didn’t let anything 
get to me,” Jenny says five days later. “I didn’t cry and I didn’t grieve. So 
when I had the phone call that confirms your worst nightmare, it was a shock. 
Maybe I’m still in shock.” Her voice is soft and weary. “I don’t think it’s hit 
me yet. I haven’t had that crying session yet where you just break down.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fdj-derek-life-death-unlikely-reggae-legend-bristol%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca1c619c501020e24a52750fcfd436e2bfe6f391%2F0_0_5120_3073%2F5120.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20life%20and%20death%20of%20DJ%20Derek%2C%20an%20unlikely%20reggae%20legend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fdj-derek-life-death-unlikely-reggae-legend-bristol%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20life%20and%20death%20of%20DJ%20Derek%2C%20an%20unlikely%20reggae%20legend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fdj-derek-life-death-unlikely-reggae-legend-bristol%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca1c619c501020e24a52750fcfd436e2bfe6f391%2F0_0_5120_3073%2F5120.jpg>
 Derek DJing in 2007. Photograph: Jamaway/Alamy 
Jenny and her grandmother, Derek’s twin sister Shirley, are sipping tea in 
Jenny’s living room. The 29-year-old learning support assistant is between 
jobs, so since last July her sole focus, apart from raising her two children, 
has been looking for Derek.

“We had concern for Jennifer because she’s been so active,” Shirley says. 
“This activity can keep you going to a certain extent, but we did try to warn 
her that after a while, if he hadn’t been found, there had to be a moment when 
she stops.”

“Which I wouldn’t have done,” Jenny says firmly. “I’d have carried on and 
carried on.”

Police confirm death of missing DJ Derek
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/17/dna-tests-confirm-death-of-missing-dj-derek-bristol>
While we’re talking, Avon and Somerset police announce that DNA tests have 
confirmed the body is Derek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/17/dna-tests-confirm-death-of-missing-dj-derek-bristol>
. Jenny’s phone vibrates constantly with condolences and interview requests.

Derek’s disappearance was unusual. Up to 300,000 people are reported missing 
in England every year, but the vast majority are found within 48 hours and 
rarely is a missing person well known. Derek was particularly loved in Bristol. 
In recent years, he received the Lord Mayor’s medal and a certificate from the 
people of Bristol declaring him an OBE, or “Outstanding Bristolian Entertainer 
<http://www.bristolpost.co.uk/Retiring-DJ-Derek-awarded-O-B-E/story-19580480-detail/story.html>
”. “I remember getting on a bus with Derek once and everyone started clapping,” 
says Jenny. “That’s how well known he was.”

Before Derek’s disappearance, Letts and Daddy G from Massive Attack were 
making a documentary that entwined his biography with the story of race 
relations inBristol <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/bristol>. Daddy G calls him 
“an ambassador for cultural exchange”. Letts goes further: “He’s a testament to 
the power of music to change individuals and, in so doing, change the idea of 
what it means to be British.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fdj-derek-life-death-unlikely-reggae-legend-bristol%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffdacca9111c90e36346fbd33878e7efdf2cec015%2F726_932_6629_3980%2F6629.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20life%20and%20death%20of%20DJ%20Derek%2C%20an%20unlikely%20reggae%20legend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fdj-derek-life-death-unlikely-reggae-legend-bristol%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20life%20and%20death%20of%20DJ%20Derek%2C%20an%20unlikely%20reggae%20legend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fdj-derek-life-death-unlikely-reggae-legend-bristol%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffdacca9111c90e36346fbd33878e7efdf2cec015%2F726_932_6629_3980%2F6629.jpg>
 Jennie and Shirley Griffiths. Photograph: Linda Nylind for the Guardian 
Derek was born in Bristol in 1941, the second son of a carpenter and a 
housewife. “He was very introvert,” Shirley remembers. “Nobody ever really knew 
what he was thinking. If I could have summed him up then, I would have said he 
was going to be eccentric.”

Derek played washboard in a skiffle group and drummed in a rock’n’roll band 
before finding a job as an accountant for the Cadbury-owned chocolate company
Fry’s <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/J._S._Fry_%26_Sons>. In the early 1960s, 
he discovered Jamaican music and began attending parties in the St Paul’s 
district. “I didn’t tell a lot of my white friends,” he wrote in Crossfade, a 
2004 essay anthology produced by the Big Chill festival. “It wasn’t worth the 
hassle. Because all you got was: ‘Oh, it’s rough down there, I wouldn’t go down 
there.’”

Daddy G had known Derek since he was a child in the 60s. “When my parents 
first came to England, there wasn’t any infrastructure for the West Indians to 
integrate with English people, so they used to hold parties themselves,” he 
says. “Derek was a real novelty to my parents because he was a white guy who 
had embraced their culture. He was probably the blackest white man that people 
knew in Bristol.”

In the mid-70s, Derek’s life was upended. Within five years he lost both 
parents, divorced his first wife and had a brief, volatile second marriage. 
Oxford DJ Aidan Larkin met Derek regularly and discussed ghostwriting his 
memoirs, so he knows more about Derek’s past than almost anyone. “The time they 
[Derek and his second wife] spent together was pretty horrific,” he says. “I 
think that was the fulcrum of his whole story. I think it’s fair to say in 
modern terminology that he had a nervous breakdown.”

In 1978, Derek moved into the small basement flat in St Paul’s 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/St_Pauls,_Bristol> where he spent the rest of 
his life, and quit his job. “I didn’t really want to spend the rest of my life 
totting up figures relating to chocolate bars,” he said in a1994 BBC documentary
 <https://vimeo.com/53691544>. He found DJ work at the Star & Garter, a West 
Indian pub where customers thanked him for bringing back memories of home, 
hence his full stage name DJ Derek Sweet Memory Sounds.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSkI38PHAv6M&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSkI38PHAv6M>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSkI38PHAv6M&media=>
 BBC documentary DJ Derek’s Sweet Memory Sounds. 
“He lost his home, his job, everything,” says Larkin, “and the black community 
got him back on his feet. He was totally adopted by them.”

“I think he sometimes felt the odd one out,” says Shirley. “And then he found 
all this love and affection from the black community. Maybe he felt that was 
more like a family for him.”

The BBC documentary gave Derek nationwide exposure, and by the mid-2000s he 
was regularly playing such festivals as Glastonbury and Womad, had monthly 
residencies inLondon <http://www.timeout.com/london/clubs/sweet-memory-sounds-7>
 and Oxford, released acompilation album on Trojan Records 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Derek-presents-Sweet-Memory-Sounds/dp/B000DXSBPA> and 
toured with reggae legends such as the Wailers. He usually ended his set with 
One Love by Bob Marley, a song that summed up his belief in bringing people 
together.

“It’s one of those classic word-of-mouth things. It just grew and grew,” says 
Big Chill founder Pete Lawrence. “It was great that such an unlikely person 
could become a superstar within particular communities. He was massively loved 
by so many people.”

Derek switched from vinyl to MiniDisc (“He backed the wrong horse there,” says 
Larkin) but still introduced each record in Jamaican patois, which he had 
learned in a Bristol barber shop. “I found the contrast of this bespectacled 
old Englishman in his cardigans and fancy waistcoats throwing down some serious 
Jamaican slanguage quite endearing,” says Letts. “I don’t know anyone who had a 
problem with it.” Older Jamaican artists loved him. When Derek introduced 
himself to Toots Hibbert of ska veterans Toots and the Maytals, Hibbert 
replied: “You don’t have to tell me who you are. You’re the white man who talks 
the people’s talk and plays the people’s music.”

Derek’s friends became used to his quirks and rituals. They remember him as 
gentle, good-humoured and scrupulously well-mannered, but prone to complaining 
loudly when his routine was disrupted. The former accountant remained 
methodical and frugal in every area of his life. He had a ringbinder full of 
vinyl catalogue numbers, a cupboard crammed with annotated bus timetables and a 
giant map of England studded with pins to mark the locations of Wetherspoon 
pubs. Between gigs, he enjoyed journeying around England on his free bus pass 
to visit new Wetherspoon branches. “He used to plan his journeys 
strategically,” says Letts. “It was a military exercise.”

Derek was stubbornly independent. He never remarried or had children, which 
Shirley suspects may have been his only regret. “He would have been a wonderful 
father, I think. I don’t really know how he felt. He was a very private man.” 
His bachelor’s flat was a base rather than a home, with no central heating, hot 
water, TV or food in the fridge. “I think it was just a place for Derek to 
sleep,” says Jenny.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fdj-derek-life-death-unlikely-reggae-legend-bristol%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd77411bbf2bad183ed285a924bd729760afc938%2F0_0_3326_4155%2F3326.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20life%20and%20death%20of%20DJ%20Derek%2C%20an%20unlikely%20reggae%20legend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fdj-derek-life-death-unlikely-reggae-legend-bristol%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20life%20and%20death%20of%20DJ%20Derek%2C%20an%20unlikely%20reggae%20legend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fdj-derek-life-death-unlikely-reggae-legend-bristol%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd77411bbf2bad183ed285a924bd729760afc938%2F0_0_3326_4155%2F3326.jpg>
 Derek at the Larmer Tree festival in 2008. Photograph: Alamy 
Derek could usually be found at the Commercial Rooms, a Wetherspoons in 
central Bristol, drinking pints of Ruddles with the regulars. “He was a lovely 
bloke,” says his friend Steve Noble. “I didn’t have a bad word for him. He’d 
get a group of girls coming over: ‘DJ Derek! Can we have a photo?’ He loved 
that. He’d say to me: ‘Look, ladies’ man tonight.’” He grows quiet. “I’m still 
looking at the door now, waiting for him to walk through. It’s a big part 
missing.”

In 2013, Derek decided to retire from regular DJing, telling Jenny that he was 
tired of the late nights and would only play occasional special shows. The gig 
he played with Letts in Bristol onNew Year’s Eve 2014 
<http://www.bristolpost.co.uk/DJ-Derek-NYE-Bristol-Thunderbolt-sold/story-25768814-detail/story.html>
 turned out to be his last. Jenny later learned that he had opened a savings 
account for his retirement but, like his pension, it was never touched.

Jenny and Shirley last saw Derek at a family wedding on 13 June last year. 
When he left, he said he would meet Jenny soon to go through a backlog of 
Facebook messages and buy a laptop. He had told Letts and Daddy G that he was 
looking forward to resuming the documentary. “He said he was looking forward to 
moving forward,” Letts says with a heavy sigh. “He was a trip, man. They ain’t 
going to make them like that any more.”

The last time Noble drank with Derek at the Commercial Rooms was 10 July 2015. 
When he didn’t show up on subsequent evenings, Noble initially assumed that 
Derek, who didn’t own a mobile, was on one of his solitary Wetherspoons jaunts, 
but after a week he began to worry. Eventually, he reached Jenny through a 
mutual friend, and Derek was reported missing on 24 July.

“He didn’t want people keeping tabs on him,” Jenny says. “We didn’t live in 
each other’s pockets. That’s why it took so long to report him missing.”

There were few clues. His bank card hadn’t been used since 6 July and his 
passport was found in his flat. CCTV footage showed that he had visited the 
Criterion pub in St Paul’s after leaving the Commercial Rooms on 10 July, while 
bus company records revealed that he had boarded a number 78 bus to Thornbury, 
12 miles north of Bristol, at 10.32 the next morning. After that, his movements 
were a mystery.

The family considered every possibility: he had killed himself; he had been 
hit by a car; he had been mugged and fatally injured; he had fallen into a 
ditch. More optimistically, it was possible that he was lying, unidentified, in 
a hospital somewhere, or perhaps he had staged a vanishing act. “Maybe he 
wanted to be known as the legendary Bristol DJ who just disappeared,” Jenny 
remembers thinking. “Maybe that’s how he wanted to go out.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fdj-derek-life-death-unlikely-reggae-legend-bristol%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F83891cb638ead4f81b7b2909b29c9996f162f9b2%2F0_150_4693_2818%2F4693.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20life%20and%20death%20of%20DJ%20Derek%2C%20an%20unlikely%20reggae%20legend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fdj-derek-life-death-unlikely-reggae-legend-bristol%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20life%20and%20death%20of%20DJ%20Derek%2C%20an%20unlikely%20reggae%20legend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fdj-derek-life-death-unlikely-reggae-legend-bristol%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F83891cb638ead4f81b7b2909b29c9996f162f9b2%2F0_150_4693_2818%2F4693.jpg>
 A search for Derek in Bristol, July 2015. Photograph: Alamy 
Derek’s friends joined searches of the woodland around Thornbury, played 
fundraisers and kept the story in the public eye. Bar a few cranks and trolls, 
the public response was overwhelmingly supportive. “All this wonderful coverage 
and care from people I don’t even know, that’s what you’ve got to hang on to,” 
says Shirley. “If he hadn’t been famous, there wouldn’t be any of this.”

Jenny explored every avenue, even accepting help from several psychics. “I 
take it with a pinch of salt, but I wouldn’t leave any stone untouched.” Her 
own sleuthing was restricted by confidentiality laws. Had she been able to 
access bus company records herself, she thinks now, they might have helped lead 
her to Cribbs Causeway. “It’s bloody difficult,” she says angrily. Meanwhile, 
all leads and possible sightings reported to the police turned out to be red 
herrings.

“There have been times when I’ve felt like shutting myself away and denying it 
all,” says Shirley. “I can bear it but I can’t bear too much. The wondering 
every day if you’re going to hear something: is today going to be the day?”

As time went on, his friends and family began looking for clues as to Derek’s 
state of mind. Larkin remembers Derek first mentioning retirement when they 
spoke in January 2013 about summer DJ bookings. “He said: ‘I might not still be 
here in July. It’s not unknown for people at my time of life to drop dead. And 
it’s happened to people I know.’ So I think it was on his mind.”

He sold or gave away his vinyl and reacted strangely when Larkin gave him a 
retirement gift: an album of photographs and gig flyers. “He got a little bit 
embarrassed and went quiet,” says Larkin. “It was like he was suppressing some 
kind of emotion.” Before Derek’s body was found, Larkin says: “I’d come to the 
opinion that he might have taken his own life. Little things he’d said and done 
had led me to that way of thinking.”

Shirley, meanwhile, couldn’t get out of her head a conversation with Derek at 
the wedding. He had said that, were his physical or mental health to fail, he 
didn’t want to be looked after. “So don’t be surprised,” he added cryptically. 
He hadn’t seen his GP since 2010, but Shirley later learned that he had 
complained to Noble of a pain in his face the last night they met. “I feel 
quite strongly that he wasn’t going to say, so he just dropped a few hints 
about how he was feeling,” she says. “I think he was iller than he was letting 
on.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fdj-derek-life-death-unlikely-reggae-legend-bristol%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9b4112659b381c61402aae5623990b1f7e075aa%2F0_258_1440_1799%2F1440.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20life%20and%20death%20of%20DJ%20Derek%2C%20an%20unlikely%20reggae%20legend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fdj-derek-life-death-unlikely-reggae-legend-bristol%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20life%20and%20death%20of%20DJ%20Derek%2C%20an%20unlikely%20reggae%20legend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fdj-derek-life-death-unlikely-reggae-legend-bristol%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9b4112659b381c61402aae5623990b1f7e075aa%2F0_258_1440_1799%2F1440.jpg>
 Derek and Jennie. Photograph: Courtesy of Jennifer Griffiths 
As summer turned into autumn, hope dwindled, especially when he failed to 
reappear for a DJ gig for rave collective Arcadia in Queen Square, Bristol. 
“The moment I gave up hope that Derek was alive was when he didn’t turn up for 
his Arcadia set,” Jenny says. “He would not have missed that for the world. I 
knew I was looking for his body, that was my feeling. I wasn’t looking for a 
live person any more.”

The uncertainty became too painful. On 2 March, Derek’s older brother Gerald, 
his next of kin, made an application under the 2013 Presumption of Death Act so 
that his bank accounts, which were still paying his rent and bills, could be 
closed and a memorial service held. Nine days later, exactly eight months after 
his final bus journey, Derek’s body was found. “It’s weird,” Jenny says quietly.

The discovery has given Derek’s family partial closure, but it may be 
impossible to determine the cause of death from a body that has spent eight 
months in the open air. While we’re talking, the police call to ask to see 
Shirley and Jenny again. “See how I mean it goes on?” says Shirley, dipping her 
head. “Why? What? How? When?”

“I feel guilty that I was looking in the wrong places,” says Jenny. “I went to 
see the spot the other day and I felt physically sick to think that he’d been 
there on his own for the whole eight months, right by a busy road. I feel sick 
that it took so bloody long to find him. I don’t feel like I did enough.”

“That’s natural,” Shirley says gently. “You will feel like that, Jenny, but 
you did more than enough.”

“He didn’t deserve to have a death like that,” says Jenny. “I’d rather he’d 
had a heart attack while he was DJing because at least then he’d have died 
doing something he loved.”

She still cannot grieve. She thinks that will only happen when Derek is laid 
to rest in April. Her memories, at least, are sweet.

“Derek always had a quote: ‘Live the life you love and love the life you 
live,’” she says with a tired smile. “And that’s exactly what he did. He lived 
his life and loved it. So I’m at peace with that bit. He’s done amazing.”
 