
I have just spent two days in Barcelona, one of the most densely populated 
urban settlements in the world. There are103 road intersections per sq km 
<http://www.irbnet.de/daten/iconda/CIB11398.pdf> – high compared to Brasilia’s 
41 or Shanghai’s Pudong area, which has only 17. Yet despite these high 
densities, residents of Barcelona will tell you how profoundly liveable their 
city is.

Visitors are charmed by the pedestrianised streets that thread their way 
through a maze of buildings constructed over the centuries – between four and 
seven storeys high, on narrow streets leading to piazzas where people sit at 
cafe tables or under shady trees. Many residents walk or cycle to work, and 
public transport functions very well.


For the first time in human history, most of us live in urban settlements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/jun/27/rise-fall-great-world-cities-5700-years-urbanisation-mapped>
 – from megacities of 10-20 million, of which there were 28 in 2014, to 
medium-sized cities of 1-5 million (417 in 2014), and smaller settlements (525 
of between 500,000 and one million people in 2014 
<https://esa.un.org/unpd/wup/Publications/Files/WUP2014-Highlights.pdf>). 
Looking ahead, the biggest growth will occur not in megacities but these small- 
and medium-sized cities.

Metropolises expand and contract. It is estimated that 40% of Europe’s cities 
are shrinking 
<http://vuh-la-risprt.herts.ac.uk/portal/files/9234199/Shrinking_cities_final_Land_Soil.pdf>
 (though this is a trend that migration might help to reverse). Even in Africa, 
there are some countries where the percentage of the total population living in 
citieshas declined at various times over the past two decades 
<http://www.africaresearchinstitute.org/publications/whatever-happened-to-africas-rapid-urbanisation-new/>
.

Overall, however, our current urban population of around 3.9 billion is 
expected to grow to around 6.34 billion by 2050, out of a total global 
population ofat least 9.5 billion 
<https://esa.un.org/unpd/wup/Publications/Files/WUP2014-Report.pdf>. If we 
continue to design and build as if the planet can provide unlimited resources, 
then this near-doubling of the urban population will mean a doubling of the 
natural resources required to build and operate our cities – which is not 
sustainable.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Furban-sprawl-how-cities-grow-change-sustainability-urban-age%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff4557d1a4a6fac9c55e930c672433871e875c606%2F0_0_4101_2992%2F4101.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20curse%20of%20urban%20sprawl%3A%20how%20cities%20grow%2C%20and%20why%20this%20has%20to%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Furban-sprawl-how-cities-grow-change-sustainability-urban-age%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20curse%20of%20urban%20sprawl%3A%20how%20cities%20grow%2C%20and%20why%20this%20has%20to%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Furban-sprawl-how-cities-grow-change-sustainability-urban-age%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff4557d1a4a6fac9c55e930c672433871e875c606%2F0_0_4101_2992%2F4101.jpg>
 The Eixample district in Barcelona, one of the most densely populated cities. 
Photograph: Amos Chapple/Rex 
As cities grow, perhaps our most serious concern should be how they expand out 
into the surrounding countryside. Contrary to popular belief, over the past 
century urban settlements have not only expanded demographically, they have 
also sprawled outwards – covering some of the world’s most valuable farmland in 
the process.

Continued urbanisation in its current form could threaten global food supplies

The result has been a steady de-densification of urban settlements, by about 
–2% per annum 
<https://www.lincolninst.edu/pubs/dl/1861_1171_Angel%20III%20Final.pdf>. Even 
where inner-city areas have densified over the past few decades (Copenhagen, 
for example), the citywide trend is still for an overall reduction in average 
densities.

In 2010, the total area covered by all the cement, asphalt, compacted clay, 
park areas and open spaces that comprise the footprint of the world’s urban 
settlements was around 1 million sq km. In comparison, the total area of France 
is 643,000 sq km.

If the urban population and long-term de-densification trends continue, the 
area of the planet covered by urban settlements will increase tomore than 3 
million sq km by 2050 
<https://www.lincolninst.edu/subcenters/atlas-urban-expansion/google-earth-data.aspx>
. And since the most intensively cultivated farmland is typically located near 
where the bulk of the food is consumed, much of this additional 2 million sq km 
is currently our most productive farmland.

In short, continued urbanisation in its current form could threaten global 
food supplies at a time when food production is alreadynot keeping up with 
population growth 
<http://www.unep.org/resourcepanel-old/Publications/AreasofAssessment/AssessingGlobalLandUseBalancingConsumptionw/tabid/132063/Default.aspx>
.

Understanding rapid urbanisation

A key determinant of rampant urban sprawl – especially in North America, where 
it is a particularly serious problem – has been the existence of cheap oil. 
When oil prices reached record highs in 2008 and exacerbated the global 
economic crisis, the people who travelled furthest tended to be the first to 
default on their mortgage payments.

As their fuel expenses for travelling to work and school rocketed, so their 
capacity to afford urban sprawl drastically diminished. Visiting Detroit a few 
weeks ago, I found that of the city’s 300,000 buildings, 70,000 currently stand 
empty – and mostly derelict.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Furban-sprawl-how-cities-grow-change-sustainability-urban-age%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26260b6217bd2d102396a08165f369a28b0c5edd%2F0_0_5050_3030%2F5050.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20curse%20of%20urban%20sprawl%3A%20how%20cities%20grow%2C%20and%20why%20this%20has%20to%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Furban-sprawl-how-cities-grow-change-sustainability-urban-age%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20curse%20of%20urban%20sprawl%3A%20how%20cities%20grow%2C%20and%20why%20this%20has%20to%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Furban-sprawl-how-cities-grow-change-sustainability-urban-age%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26260b6217bd2d102396a08165f369a28b0c5edd%2F0_0_5050_3030%2F5050.jpg>
 Of Detroit’s 300,000-odd buildings, an estimated 70,000 currently stand empty. 
Photograph: James Cheadle/Alamy 
From the 1960s onwards, the city built more and more ring roads to suburbanise 
the middle and upper classes into the surrounding countryside – and in the 
process bankrupted Detroit’s urban core, leaving it unable to manage the 
economic impact of the closure of its once-giant car factories.

Indeed, most of the extra 2.5 billion people who will be living in urban areas 
by 2050 will be in cities of the global south, in particular in Asia and 
Africa; 37% of all future urban growth is expected to take place in only three 
countries:China, India and Nigeria 
<https://esa.un.org/unpd/wup/Publications/Files/WUP2014-Report.pdf>.

Other than in China, rapid urbanisation in these developing counties has 
resulted in an explosion of informal urban settlements, or slums. In India, 
millions of slum-dwellers live within the core urban areas, creating the fairly 
unique Indian phenomenon of neighbourhoods where the urban poor and middle 
class live together.

By contrast, in African cities – where 62% of all urbanites are in slums 
<http://unhabitat.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/07/WHD-2014-Background-Paper.pdf> 
– the majority of slum-dwellers live in expanding urban settlements on the 
peripheries of cities. With Africa’s urban population (currently around 400 
million people) expected to triple to 1.2 billion by 2050, this form of 
urbanisation will result inmassive, sprawling, relatively low-density urban 
settlements <http://www.grida.no/graphicslib/> across the continent. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Furban-sprawl-how-cities-grow-change-sustainability-urban-age%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fuploads.guim.co.uk%2F2016%2F07%2F07%2FAddis-Ababa-1990_1_940_32c_lossy80.gif>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20curse%20of%20urban%20sprawl%3A%20how%20cities%20grow%2C%20and%20why%20this%20has%20to%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Furban-sprawl-how-cities-grow-change-sustainability-urban-age%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20curse%20of%20urban%20sprawl%3A%20how%20cities%20grow%2C%20and%20why%20this%20has%20to%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Furban-sprawl-how-cities-grow-change-sustainability-urban-age%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fuploads.guim.co.uk%2F2016%2F07%2F07%2FAddis-Ababa-1990_1_940_32c_lossy80.gif>
 Conflicts of an urban age: Slum conditions have changed in Addis Ababa over 
the last 25 years, with fewer wooden and mud constructions. Source:Urban 
Age/LSE Cities <https://urbanage.lsecities.net/events/conflicts-of-an-urban-age>
But it’s not happening like this everywhere. Take Ethiopia, an east African 
country of 99 million people with one of the fastest growing economies in the 
world. While80% of the population is still rural 
<http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.RUR.TOTL.ZS?end=2015&start=1984>, 
urbanisation is accelerating fast, placing huge pressures on the capital, Addis 
Ababa.

Government investments have turned this city into a massive building site. 
Endless cranes are silhouetted against the African sky as a huge number of 
relatively high-rise buildings emerge in the urban core.

At the same time, with funds and expertise provided by the Chinese, a 
light-rail system has been built that runs across the city 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/sep/25/addis-ababa-first-sub-saharan-light-rail-network>
 – a remarkable feat in a city where 80% of the population lives in slums. This 
creates incentives for the middle class to live in high-density, multi-storey 
apartments that are starting to spring up around the stations – reducing the 
need to subsidise longer-distance, road-based travel by private car.

Coupled with the building of multi-storey, subsidised housing for the urban 
poor (some located close to transit nodes), the result is that Addis Ababa is 
densifying, setting an example for what is possible in other cities facing 
similar challenges.


Johannesburg, the largest city in South Africa, provides a very different – 
but also promising – case study. Under apartheid, the urban poor were forcibly 
relocated into outer-city settlements – often located between five and 40km 
from the urban periphery. Many of these turned into slums as population numbers 
far exceeded what these settlements were designed to accommodate.

After democratisation in 1994, there was a major inward flow of people into 
the urban core that could not be accommodated, despite a massive housing 
construction programme. Land invasions took place in all South African cities, 
including on inner-city land.

Johannesburg’s metropolitan government realised it could not build an 
integrated city by moving millions of people around, because so many already 
lived in formal townships. Instead, it identified a set of strategically 
located urban development hotspots, and then invested in mass transit services 
to link them together.

The aim is to rapidly intensify job and residential densities in these 
development hotspots, thus increasing the number of people who can access 
publicly funded mass-transit services.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Furban-sprawl-how-cities-grow-change-sustainability-urban-age%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fuploads.guim.co.uk%2F2016%2F07%2F07%2FAddis-Ababa-1990_Housing_940_32c_lossy80.gif>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20curse%20of%20urban%20sprawl%3A%20how%20cities%20grow%2C%20and%20why%20this%20has%20to%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Furban-sprawl-how-cities-grow-change-sustainability-urban-age%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20curse%20of%20urban%20sprawl%3A%20how%20cities%20grow%2C%20and%20why%20this%20has%20to%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Furban-sprawl-how-cities-grow-change-sustainability-urban-age%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fuploads.guim.co.uk%2F2016%2F07%2F07%2FAddis-Ababa-1990_Housing_940_32c_lossy80.gif>
 In Addis Ababa, increasing urbanisation has seen public housing decrease from 
57% to 40% of total stock between 1990 and 2015. Source:Urban Age/LSE Cities 
<https://urbanage.lsecities.net/events/conflicts-of-an-urban-age> 
This will increase average densities over time, and integrate the city via 
transit rather than expensive residential relocations. This, coupled with 
strategies to upgrade informal settlements rather than building new houses on 
the peripheries, has contributed significantly to enhancing densification, 
rather than encouraging the sprawl promoted by Johannesburg’s property 
developers and banks since 1994.

There is no doubt that sprawling, de-densifying cities are a major threat to 
the future sustainability of the planet. Neither the UN’ssustainable 
development goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/sustainable-development-goals> 
nor theParis agreement’s climate targets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/13/paris-climate-deal-cop-diplomacy-developing-united-nations>
 will be achieved if this challenge is not addressed – but it means going up 
against property developers who tend to prefer greenfield developments on the 
peripheries to the complexities of brownfield regeneration.

Towards liveable urban settlements

Across the world, it would be a mistake to focus solely on improving the 
average densities of cities. Los Angeles has a higher average density than New 
York, for example, yet LA is regarded as a dysfunctional urban form while NY is 
functional, because it comprises a network of high-density neighbourhoods 
interconnected by efficient and affordable mass transit systems.

Seoul is similar: a megacity that has avoided sprawl with this approach. When 
the mayor decided to dismantle the eight-lane highway that used to run through 
the centre of the city, he said: “Seoul is for people, not cars.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Furban-sprawl-how-cities-grow-change-sustainability-urban-age%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00d5acc5100c133b5063fb79d76eac045b283581%2F0_0_4500_3000%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20curse%20of%20urban%20sprawl%3A%20how%20cities%20grow%2C%20and%20why%20this%20has%20to%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Furban-sprawl-how-cities-grow-change-sustainability-urban-age%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20curse%20of%20urban%20sprawl%3A%20how%20cities%20grow%2C%20and%20why%20this%20has%20to%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Furban-sprawl-how-cities-grow-change-sustainability-urban-age%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00d5acc5100c133b5063fb79d76eac045b283581%2F0_0_4500_3000%2F4500.jpg>
 Although Seoul has a population of more than 10 million, it has avoided 
sprawling outwards. Photograph: Alamy 
An alternative road was not built – resulting in an increase in the number of 
people using mass transit which, in turn, made mass transit financially viable. 
Building more highways for cars, then introducing trains and buses in the hope 
that they will be financially viable, simply does not work (the greater 
Johannesburg region is learning that lesson now).

China, meanwhile, has urbanised hundreds of millions of people over the past 
three decades. This has tended to be in high-rise, multi-storey buildings 
located in “superblocks” with wide, traffic-congested streets and few 
intersections per sq km. The result is relatively low densities in 
neighbourhoods with virtually no street or community life – in short, not the 
kind of urban area one would call liveable.

Compare this with the neighbourhoods you find in Barcelona, where buildings 
are five to eight storeys high, located on narrow streets with pavements, trees 
and small piazzas for social engagement, and all well connected to both 
motorised and non-motorised forms of transport.

The rise and fall of great world cities: 5,700 years of urbanisation – mapped
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/jun/27/rise-fall-great-world-cities-5700-years-urbanisation-mapped>
This is what makes for liveable urban neighbourhoods. China has realised its 
mistake, adopting an urbanisation strategy that breaks away from sprawled-out 
superblocks in favour of ahigh-density neighbourhood approach 
<http://trove.nla.gov.au/work/25152033?selectedversion=NBD41100708>, with 
narrower streets, a high number of intersections, and improved public transport.

While the population of the world’s cities will likely double in size between 
now and 2050, rising oil prices and carbon constraints make urban sprawl 
increasingly untenable. Eradicating it in favour of liveable, accessible, 
multi-centred, high-density cities should become a shared global commitment.

Mark Swilling <http://markswilling.co.za/about/> is distinguished professor of 
sustainable development at Stellenbosch University, South Africa. He will be 
speaking at theUrban Age Shaping Cities conference 
<https://urbanage.lsecities.net/conferences/shaping-cities-venice-2016> at La 
Biennale di Veneziaon 14-15 July, co-organised by LSE Cities 
<https://lsecities.net/> and Deutsche Bank’s Alfred Herrhausen Gesellschaft 
<https://www.alfred-herrhausen-gesellschaft.de/index_en.htm>
 