
When this week’s charts are revealed, Drake’s One Dance could be one week away 
from Wet Wet Wet’s Love Is All Around as the second-longest consecutive stint 
held by a single at No 1. Add one more week, and it’ll be joint top alongside 
Bryan Adams’s (Everything I Do) I Do It For You.

Wet Wet Wet might have stayed there longer had they not intervened – worried 
that it become an albatross over their career –and deleted their single 
<http://www.officialcharts.com/chart-news/number-1-today-in-1994-wet-wet-wet-see-off-kylie-s-comeback__7728/>
, meaning that when copies ran out, there would be no new CDs to restock. For 
artists fearing a similar fate, that’s impossible in the digital age: 
theoretically, One Dance could be No 1 for all eternity. It’s top of the US 
charts for a ninth week, and is getting about 460,000 streams on Spotify a day 
in the UK alone – 100,000 more than the song in second place (which is Too 
Good, also by Drake). Last week, One Dance had been streamed 79m times in the 
UK across all platforms.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fone-dance-phenomenon-drake-no-1%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d1cf81cf8b0b3a97526ac98827c370618124ec6%2F535_130_1351_1689%2F1351.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20One%20Dance%20phenomenon%3A%20why%20Drake%20could%20be%20No%201%20for%20eternity&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fone-dance-phenomenon-drake-no-1%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20One%20Dance%20phenomenon%3A%20why%20Drake%20could%20be%20No%201%20for%20eternity&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fone-dance-phenomenon-drake-no-1%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d1cf81cf8b0b3a97526ac98827c370618124ec6%2F535_130_1351_1689%2F1351.jpg>
 Kyla, sampled on One Dance from her track Do You Mind. Photograph: mn2s 
How has the Canadian artist installed himself so firmly at the top? Sales of 
downloads count for more than streams, but the market is eroding – and buying a 
series of intangible files for your hard drive rather than subscribing to 
millions of intangible files online will soon be seen as a bonkers blip in the 
music industry. Instead, it’s instructive to look at Spotify’s chart for a 
glimpse at the future – it tends to be centred on a relatively small number of 
tracks that hang around for weeks on end. The inclusion of One Dance on 1.3m
Spotify <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/spotify> playlists, which 
listeners return to again and again, gives it an energy source that powers it 
up the charts and keeps it there.

But that doesn’t entirely explain its popularity. First of all, it’s catchy, 
and sits at the heart of a listening-activity Venn diagram: it works for 
jogging, for driving, and at any point on a night out, from pre-drinking to 
straight-up smashed. It also followed Drake’s huge singleHotline Bling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/oct/20/drake-hotline-bling-dancing>. 
Before that he was, in the UK’s popular imagination, a rapper who sang pop 
songs, that guy who sweetly skulked around Rihannain the milk aisle 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U0CGsw6h60k>. Only his crooner tracks (Take 
Care; Hold On, We’re Going Home) made it into the charts previously. Hotline 
Bling’s ubiquity changed the dynamic – he was now a pop singer who rapped, a 
concept Britons are much better at swallowing. One Dance moved into its 
slipstream, and a renewed relationship with Rihanna,following the track Work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/22/rihannas-work-music-videos-the-five-best-moments>
, added a tabloid boost.

The female vocal on One Dance comes from UK singer Kyla 
<http://mn2s.com/booking-agency/live-roster/kyla/>, sampled from her track Do 
You Mind, a cult hit amid theUK funky craze of the late noughties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/aug/29/cooly-g-ill-blu-uk-funky-lives-on>
. Nigerian producer and singer Wizkid also appears, his voice scrunched with 
static, and there are licks of highlife guitar and tuned percussion; the beat 
straddles the Atlantic, with one foot in west Africa, the other in dancehall 
syncopation. Its singer is a mixed-race Jewish Canadian who has been embraced 
by the US rap scene, using London-via-Jamaica slang such as “ends”. At one of 
the most isolationist moments in its history, Britain is, in the charts at 
least, championing multiculturalism.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fone-dance-phenomenon-drake-no-1%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9931f7e519114b0e2f5e4df01fc50277f8ee8ab5%2F1509_291_830_1037%2F830.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20One%20Dance%20phenomenon%3A%20why%20Drake%20could%20be%20No%201%20for%20eternity&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fone-dance-phenomenon-drake-no-1%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20One%20Dance%20phenomenon%3A%20why%20Drake%20could%20be%20No%201%20for%20eternity&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fone-dance-phenomenon-drake-no-1%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9931f7e519114b0e2f5e4df01fc50277f8ee8ab5%2F1509_291_830_1037%2F830.jpg>
 Scrunched with static … Wizkid, who is featured on One Dance. Photograph: Joe 
Penney/Reuters 
You could argue that, with this globalised sound, Drake is trying to cynically 
build an audience outside rap’s core demographics. Others might accuse him of 
diluting UK funky and Afrobeats, just as he turns the furiously sexual “bounce” 
style of New Orleans into more Galaxy-advert silk on album track Child’s Play. 
Critics have been unimpressed withhis most recent album, Views 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/29/drake-views-review-hip-hop-king-tightens-grip>
 – “A suffocating echo chamber of self,” said Pitchfork, fairly representative 
of those who found it too solipsistic. More fundamentally, the scansion and 
narrative logic in one couplet of One Dance (“But I never run away, even when 
I’m away”) are on a pre-school level.

His impressive chart run shows that none of this matters. In building One 
Dance from sounds he’s found online, Drake creates a microcosm of the way many 
of us listen to music now: a cherry-picked, hyper-personal blend. We’re totally 
individual in our tastes, but paradoxically that makes us all the same –Drake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/drake> is the leader of this new global 
mono-tribe.

And where critics hear solipsism, listeners hear themselves – a key element of 
Drake’s success. “Soon as you see the text, reply me / I don’t want to spend 
time fighting” is a typical Drake lyric, fixated on romantic squabbles mediated 
by modern technology. One Dance’s blithe chorus is as relatable as it gets, 
too: one of life’s greatest pleasures is, after all, dancing with a drink in 
your hand. Of those streaming One Dance on Spotify, 66% are under 25; for 
anyone on Tinder with disposable income ring-fenced for frozen margaritas, 
Drake is, in the millennial parlance, your spirit animal.

It would be churlish to suggest that Drake, and everyone playing One Dance on 
repeat, is blind to the issues of today. In fact Drake himself, using – what 
else? – Instagram,gave an eloquent response  
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BHim8QWjFTx/?taken-by=champagnepapi&hl=en>to the 
recent spate of police brutality in the US, and One Dance’s popularity should 
be seen not as brain-dead but as a necessary bacchanal. The record-breaking 
power ballad No 1s of the 90s were their own kind of luxury; a boom-times 
indulgence of undistracted love. The world of One Dance – tense, 
interconnected, hedonistic – reflects a more fraught moment in time.

 * This article was updated to correct the chart record for Wet Wet Wet’s Love 
Is All Around.  