


Tory policies often come from unlikely places, but when George Osborne 
unveiled his grand plan for a "propergarden city 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/mar/16/george-osborne-garden-city-ebbsfleet-budget>
" at Ebbsfleet in Kent, did he realise he was backing a socialist movement for 
collective land reform?

"Garden city" may have become a byword for the cosy middle England ideal of 
privet hedges and twitching net curtains, but it began as a radical campaign 
for co-operative development, set out by parliamentary stenographer Ebenezer 
Howard in the 1890s. In reaction to the overcrowding and industrial pollution 
of growing Victorian cities, Howard launched his vision for a series of ideal 
towns, contained by rolling green belts, that would separate housing from 
industry and combine the best of the city and the countryside.

"Human society and the beauty of nature are meant to be enjoyed together," he 
wrote inTomorrow: A Peaceful Path to Real Reform 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Tomorrow-Peaceful-Path-Real-Reform-ebook/dp/B000Q6ZJAO>
, in 1898. "Town and Country must be married, and out of this joyous union will 
spring a new hope, a new life, a new civilization."

Planned on a concentric model 
<http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/3/3d/Garden_City_Concept_by_Howard.jpg>
, these garden cities would set the primary civic functions in a central park, 
ringed by a great glass shopping arcade, beyond which would lie halos of 
housing and schools, encircled by a peripheral necklace of factories and 
services. But fundamental to the plan was that the value would be retained in 
the community: every citizen was to be a shareholder, with the "unearned 
increment" ploughed back into civic facilities, rather than to absent landlords 
or speculative investors. Blue- and white-collar workers would live side by 
side in pastoral harmony.

Letchworth and Welwyn, the first garden cities planned in the 1910s and 1920s, 
stand as a testament to his thinking, although both have struggled to remain 
affordable, their low-density planning and fine arts and crafts houses making 
them hugely desirable. Welwyn's proximity to London meant it would always be 
more commuter dormitory town than self-sustaining city.

Affluent garden suburbs and postwar new towns would be the garden city legacy 
of the following decades, both of which departed from Howard's original 
conception of community-led planning. So how can his model be useful today?

"The principles of collective land ownership, long-term stewardship and land 
value capture for the benefit of the community couldn't be more relevant now," 
said Katy Lock of theTown and Country Planning Association 
<http://www.tcpa.org.uk>, which was originally founded in 1899 as Howard's 
Garden City Association. "But it requires strong political leadership. 
Development in this country is led by short-term local politics and dominated 
by volume house-builders, whereas garden cities don't begin to pay back until 
20 or 30 years later."

Fifteen thousand homes at Ebbsfleet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/mar/17/ebbsfleet-garden-city-george-osborne-homes>
 may sound like Osborne's Letchworth, but there have been plans for such a 
development since 1996, again in 2007 and most recently 2012, yet only 150 
homes have been built. "Opportunities to capture the land value for the 
community are much more difficult when the project is underway, with a private 
developer on board," said Lock. "Is it really possible to make Ebbsfleet a 
garden city when it's this far down the line?"
 