
Tomasz Kacprzak <http://en.uml.lodz.pl/local_authorities/city_council/>, 
chairman of the city council of Łódź, the third-biggest city in Poland, was 
telling me about the time he met David Lynch.

“We went to his house in California,” Kacprzak said. “He loves Łódź. He wants 
to build us a cultural centre.” (Lynch’s plan for a 90-acre site comprising a 
film studio, cinema, gallery, offices and bar in an abandoned power plant in 
Łódź – the city that also inspired the cult director’s film Inland Empire – is 
expected to open in 2016.)

“Actually,” Kacprzak continued, “Lynch’s house is not great. The interior. It 
is not modern.”

“Oh, no,” I said. “Retro? Nineties?”

“No,” Kacprzak said. “Eighties. Gehry’s house was much nicer.”

“You went to Frank Gehry’s house, too?”

This was interesting. We were standing in the soaring atrium of the Guggenheim 
Museum in Bilbao, designed by Gehry. Through the window, in the courtyard, you 
could make out the back of Jeff Koons’ huge, Edward Scissorhands-style plant 
sculpture, Puppy.

“Yes,” Kacprzak said. “We asked for the Guggenheim in Łódź.”

“You wanted Gehry to design a new museum?”

“No,” Kacprzak said. “The same.” He swept his arm over the pine, glass and 
steel that curved above our heads.

“You wanted him to build the exact same building?”

“Yes,” Kacprzak said casually. “The same. But we would use it for a concert 
hall.”

Much is made of the so-called ‘Bilbao effect 
<http://www.economist.com/news/special-report/21591708-if-you-build-it-will-they-come-bilbao-effect>
’, the idea that attracting a world-class cultural institution – in Bilbao’s 
case, a branch of New York’s Guggenheim art museum – will put your city on the 
map, and in turn attract more investment, brands, tourism and cultural energy. 
This was the first time, however, that I’d heard someone say they wanted to 
copy Bilbao’s building exactly, swooping metal sheet for swooping metal sheet.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F30%2Fbilbao-effect-gehry-guggenheim-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F28%2F1430220846593%2F08640045-c2ad-4bb3-962d-7cd1bf238d7b-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Bilbao%20Effect%3A%20is%20'starchitecture'%20all%20it%E2%80%99s%20cracked%20up%20to%20be%3F%20A%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2027&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F30%2Fbilbao-effect-gehry-guggenheim-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Bilbao%20Effect%3A%20is%20%27starchitecture%27%20all%20it%E2%80%99s%20cracked%20up%20to%20be%3F%20A%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2027&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F30%2Fbilbao-effect-gehry-guggenheim-history-cities-50-buildings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F28%2F1430220846593%2F08640045-c2ad-4bb3-962d-7cd1bf238d7b-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Jeff Koons’ topiary sculpture Puppy, which sits outside the Guggenheim Museum 
in Bilbao, Spain. Photograph: Mark Baynes/Rex Features 
“What did Gehry say?” I asked.

“He said, ‘OK – but it will very expensive.’” Kacprzak shrugged. “We are a 
small city.”

So, of course, was Bilbao 18 years ago when it rose to fame almost overnight. 
The fourth-largest city in Spain had lost its former glory as a manufacturing 
centre: its factories shuttered, its port decrepit. But afterSpain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/spain> joined the EU in 1986, Basque Country 
authorities embarked on an ambitious redevelopment programme for their biggest 
city.

They drafted in expensive architects to design an airport 
<http://www.arcspace.com/features/santiago-calatrava/sondika-airport/> 
(Santiago Calatrava), ametro system 
<http://www.arcspace.com/features/norman-foster--partners/fosteritos-metro-system/>
 (Norman Foster), and a footbridge (Calatrava again), and in 1991 landed their 
biggest fish – the Solomon R Guggenheim Foundation, which decided to bring a 
new branch of the legendary Guggenheim Museum to the city, and hiredstar 
California architect Frank Gehry 
<http://www.architecturaldigest.com/architecture/2014-10/best-of-frank-gehry-slideshow_slideshow_Olympic-Fish-Pavilion---Barcelona_6>
 to build it.

The building was an instant hit. Critics agreed Gehry’s deconstructed meringue 
of sweeping metal, which opened in 1997, was a work of “mercurial brilliance 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1997/09/07/magazine/the-miracle-in-bilbao.html>”. The 
collection inside, featuring art by Willem De Kooning, Mark Rothko, Anselm 
Kiefer and Richard Serra, was world-class. The construction even came in on 
budget, at $89m.

What’s more, Bilbao now had a landmark. Visitor spending in the city jumped, 
recouping the building cost within three years. Five years after construction, 
Bilbao estimated that its economic impact on the local economywas worth €168m 
<http://www.forbes.com/2002/02/20/0220conn.html>, and poured an additional €27m 
into Basque government tax coffers – the equivalent of adding 4,415 jobs. More 
than one million people annually now visit the museum, which became the 
centrepiece of the Bilbao Art District: a cluster composed of the maritime 
museum, the fine arts museum and the Sala Rekalde art centre.

In 2010, French designer Philippe Starck completed his renovation of a former 
wine cellar to create theAlhondiga culture and leisure centre 
<http://www.dezeen.com/2010/09/09/alhondiga-cultural-and-leisure-centerby-philippe-starck/>
 (recently rebranded as Azkuna Zentroa). And Zaha Hadid has presented radical 
plans to redevelop the neglected Zorrozaurre peninsula and turn it into a 
high-tech residential and cultural island. A struggling city, decimated by the 
decline of its manufacturing base, had seemingly reinvented itself by – of all 
things – betting big on culture.

Other post-industrial cities noticed. When I told Kacprzak’s story to Maria 
Fernandez Sabau, a cultural and museum consultant for cities around the world, 
she sighed.

“Yes, many of my clients say the same thing: give us the Guggenheim,” she 
said. “Often the exact same building! But you can’t just copy it.”

A struggling city, decimated by the decline of its manufacturing, had 
seemingly reinvented itself by betting on culture

Don’t tell that to Abu Dhabi. Possibly in an attempt to buttress itself 
against the day the oil runs out, the city is building a museum complex called 
Saadiyat Island, which will feature branches of not just the Guggenheim (again) 
but the Louvre as well. In Hong Kong, the West Kowloon Cultural District will 
be home to M+, a new museum of Chinese contemporary art. There are plans for 
new cultural hubs centred on museums in Mecca, in Tirana, in Belo Horizonte and 
in Perth, Australia.

It’s the same in the UK: Dundee has drafted in Kengo Kuma to build a new V&A 
Museum of Design, while Liverpool and Margate have welcomed theTate Liverpool 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/visit/tate-liverpool> (designed by James Stirling) and 
the Turner Contemporary 
<http://www.artfund.org/what-to-see/museums-and-galleries/turner-contemporary> 
(David Chipperfield). Every city, it seems, wants to create the next 
Bilbao-Guggenheim-Gehry vortex.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F30%2Fbilbao-effect-gehry-guggenheim-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F28%2F1430238369371%2F6a1df0ad-5248-4409-8aeb-46556f14ba46-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Bilbao%20Effect%3A%20is%20'starchitecture'%20all%20it%E2%80%99s%20cracked%20up%20to%20be%3F%20A%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2027&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F30%2Fbilbao-effect-gehry-guggenheim-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Bilbao%20Effect%3A%20is%20%27starchitecture%27%20all%20it%E2%80%99s%20cracked%20up%20to%20be%3F%20A%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2027&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F30%2Fbilbao-effect-gehry-guggenheim-history-cities-50-buildings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F28%2F1430238369371%2F6a1df0ad-5248-4409-8aeb-46556f14ba46-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A plane over Bilbao in 1986, when the city was experiencing serious economic 
difficulties following the decline of its industry. Photograph: Imacon 
X5/National Geographic/Getty Images 
Praise for this model reached its zenith last month, as mayors, cultural 
attachés and city representatives descended on Bilbao for the UCLG Cities and 
Culture Conference. Walking the streets with Kacprzak from Łódź, I could see 
what the delegates liked so much. The city centre is clean. There are lots of 
expensive retail shops. “El Fosterito”, the glass-tube metro entrances designed 
by Foster, are slick and futuristic. And the people seem disproportionately 
well-off.

Presiding over it all, like a monolith of gentrification, is the Guggenheim. 
Yet despite this icon of culture, the city seems strangely quiet. Where are the 
local galleries, the music, the graffiti, the skateboarders? Spain’s 
difficulties with youth unemployment are well-documented, but I expected more 
twentysomethings in what is regularly billed as a cultural capital. Does the 
Guggenheim actually encourage creativity in the city, as advertised, or is it a 
Disneylandish castle on the hill with a fancy name and an expensive entrance 
fee for tourists and the well-heeled? Is the Bilbao effect to spread culture, 
or just to spread money?

“The Guggenheim put our city on the map, no question. But you also can’t get 
anything support here unless it’s top-down,” says Manu Gómez-Álvarez, an 
animated man of around 40 wearing earrings and a black hoodie, who is the 
driving force behindZAWP <http://www.zawp.org/>, the Zorrozaurre Art Working 
Progress, a cultural group based on the Bilbao peninsula that Zaha Hadid 
proposes to completely redevelop.

ZAWP is precisely the kind of cultural organisation that gets praised 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VJsvZSihElI> in megacities like London and New 
York. It’s a decentralised collective of young artists, theatre-makers, 
musicians and designers, with co-making spaces in the old industrial buildings 
of Zorrozaurre and a thriving entrepreneurial atmosphere in their colourful, 
funky headquarters – which also house a bar, a cafe, a gig space and a theatre. 
Gómez-Álvarez is leading a movement he calls Meanwhile, which aims to use the 
still-derelict buildings of the peninsula as temporary sites for plays, gigs, 
artistic interventions or even just cafes. Every proposal, at every turn, gets 
the same answer back from the authorities: no.

“There’s no support for grassroots culture,” he says. “We waited 20 years 
before we got any funding from the government at all.” Last year, he says ZAWP 
finally received a grant – but they still don’t get a permanent home in the new 
Zorrozaurre, and will almost certainly have to move again. It’s hard to 
imagine: ZAWP’s premises are huge, stretching through half a dozen buildings 
and decorated in amazingly elaborate detail. And yet “we are nomads”, says 
Gómez-Álvarez.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F30%2Fbilbao-effect-gehry-guggenheim-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F28%2F1430238569270%2Fcacecc24-a6d4-4dc8-b940-f8a660c64894-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Bilbao%20Effect%3A%20is%20'starchitecture'%20all%20it%E2%80%99s%20cracked%20up%20to%20be%3F%20A%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2027&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F30%2Fbilbao-effect-gehry-guggenheim-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Bilbao%20Effect%3A%20is%20%27starchitecture%27%20all%20it%E2%80%99s%20cracked%20up%20to%20be%3F%20A%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2027&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F30%2Fbilbao-effect-gehry-guggenheim-history-cities-50-buildings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F28%2F1430238569270%2Fcacecc24-a6d4-4dc8-b940-f8a660c64894-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The inauguration ceremony of the Azkuna Zentroa cultural centre, designed by 
French architect Philippe Starck. Photograph: Rafa Rivas/AFP/Getty Images 
I asked Igor de Quadra, who runs Karraskan Bilbao – a network of more than a 
dozen theatre groups, venues and creative organisations – what he thought of 
the Guggenheim’s effect. He struggled to frame his words carefully. “It is fine 
for what it is,” he said at last, “but it gets a lot of attention from people 
who are just passing through. Events like this [UCLG forum] take up a lot of 
attention, but don’t leave much behind for Bilbao culture. Frankly, we don’t 
think about the Guggenheim.”

The Guggenheim certainly doesn’t claim to be in the business of fostering 
local culture, nor would you expect it to. The museum has some Basque art and 
occasionally runs cultural workshops, but it’s an international art museum, 
rather incongruously plonked down in northern Spain. (Extreme Basque 
nationalists didn’t take kindly to its arrival: the week before it opened, ETA 
killed a police officer in afoiled attempt to bomb the museum 
<http://www.artnet.com/magazine_pre2000/news/robinson/robinson10-14-97.asp>.) 

Which is the better way for cities – bottom-up cultural movements or 
big-ticket splashes?

There are, of course, Basque cultural organisations in the city, such as 
Harrobia Bilbao, a performing arts group established in a former church in the 
Otxarkoaga area in 2011, but their presence feels surprisingly marginal in a 
city that is supposed to be at the heart of Basque culture.

“In English Canada, culture’s nice to have – in French Canada, it’s crucial,” 
says Simon Brault, head of the Arts Council of Canada, talking about a similar 
dynamic between French-speaking Quebec and the rest of the country. Brault 
helmed what you might call an “anti-Bilbao effect” – a completely different 
type of culture-led regeneration in another struggling post-industrial city, 
Montreal.

Brault helped found an open, non-hierarchical cultural network called Culture 
Montreal, which rather than speaking only to the Guggenheims and cultural 
superstars of the city, was open to everyday Montrealers – bar owners, 
teachers, musicians. “An artist just in from Chile would be at the same table 
as the head of Cirque du Soleil,” he says. The aim wasn’t to secure funding for 
massive projects, but to put culture at the heart of the city’s regeneration.

It was controversial at first. “The cultural groups thought it was a 
distraction and that what the culture sector needed was more money,” he said. 
“But within a year, we got what cultural groups had been asking for for 20 
years: a seat at the table.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F30%2Fbilbao-effect-gehry-guggenheim-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F28%2F1430239300943%2F0f76f5df-212f-4c3e-94a7-5f6707ad5417-2060x1378.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Bilbao%20Effect%3A%20is%20'starchitecture'%20all%20it%E2%80%99s%20cracked%20up%20to%20be%3F%20A%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2027&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F30%2Fbilbao-effect-gehry-guggenheim-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Bilbao%20Effect%3A%20is%20%27starchitecture%27%20all%20it%E2%80%99s%20cracked%20up%20to%20be%3F%20A%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2027&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F30%2Fbilbao-effect-gehry-guggenheim-history-cities-50-buildings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F28%2F1430239300943%2F0f76f5df-212f-4c3e-94a7-5f6707ad5417-2060x1378.jpeg>
 The Maman, a huge spider sculpture in front of the Bilbao Guggenheim by 
sculptor Louise Bourgeois. Photograph: Alamy 
Rather than championing culture only for an elite group of professionals – and 
asking for money just for the huge institutions – Culture Montreal was better 
received by city and provincial governments, says Brault. Their goals were less 
arrogant: to increase cultural access for Montrealers, and to include culture 
as part of the solution to any civic problems. They achieved this, Brault says, 
by making everyone feel as though culture was a daily part of everyone’s life, 
not something for a sophisticated few. “There is definitely room for 
starchitects, but it’s always better to tap into local culture rather than buy 
it from outside. You can’t do culture in a city without involving citizens,” he 
said.

So, which is the better way for cities – bottom-up cultural movements or 
big-ticket splashes? “Of course, there will always be top-down decisions,” 
Brault said. “The key is to look for a middle ground.”

Hadid’s billion-pound redevelopment of Zorrozaurre will be a test for that 
middle ground in Bilbao. Will its 6,000 new houses, two new technology centres 
and park genuinely engage with local culture, or will it simply be a flashy 
area for rich Spaniards looking for a waterfront property? The Bilbao effect 
might be famous, but it’s here that it could be truly tested. Those cities 
around the globe hoping a brand-name museum will save them should be watching 
carefully.

“The Guggenheim Bilbao was a rare occurrence,” says museum consultant Maria 
Fernandez Sabau. “There was an incredible confluence of amazing, talented 
people. You had a museum that was hungry to expand, available land for cheap, a 
government with money, an architect itching to make a statement, and a city 
that desperately needed a new reason to exist. You can’t just buy that.”

Which other buildings in the world tell stories about urban history? Share 
your own pictures and descriptions with GuardianWitness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/mar/23/50-buildings-great-stories-urban-history>
, on Twitter and Instagram using #hoc50 or let us know suggestions in the 
comments below
 