
Your editorial (A German lesson for Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/26/the-guardian-view-on-the-colonial-past-a-german-lesson-for-britain>
, 27 December) raises important questions about Britain’s response to its 
imperial past. But it runs the risk of conflating some quite distinct issues. 
It is certainly true that the creation of a national museum devoted to empire 
is almost inconceivable in contemporary Britain. No one would want to lead such 
a project unless they relished the prospect of spending a good few years 
defending themselves on social media. And were the government to raise the 
idea, the Guardian would without doubt – and with good reason – be at the 
forefront of those questioning their motives. But this may be more a sign of 
fierce debate than collective amnesia.

You also bemoan the fact that Britain lacks “a shared view of history” or 
indeed “a common culture generally”. Here you enter more dangerous territory. 
Both have more to do with the top-down imposition of national mythologies than 
with a creative engagement with the past. Debates about the sort of history 
children should learn in school usually have as their unspoken subtext the 
question of what it is “good for them” to know and believe. The idea of history 
as a morally improving magic lantern show is one that many professional 
historians, myself included, would treat with extreme caution. Nevertheless, we 
all have a duty to ensure that the ever more rich and varied insights being 
generated by academic research on imperialism feed into a genuinely informed 
public discussion of empire.
Professor Philip Murphy
Director, Institute of Commonwealth Studies

• How strange to see the word “colonialism” in your headline. Words such as 
colonialism, imperialism, jingoism and empire feel awkward and discredited 
terms that belong to a significant chapter in British history. For the best 
part of two centuries, when the sun would never set on theBritish empire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/british-empire>, Britain was the superpower; 
its industrial, financial and political dominance was virtually unquestioned. 
In that sense, it can be seen as a “glorious” period of British history.

As you rightly point out, however, Britain seems unable to reflect on the 
foundations of its colonial supremacy – subjugation, oppression and 
discrimination – while Germany appears to have accepted its history, by holding 
exhibitions and negotiating with its former colonies. How sad that our attempt 
at self-examination –the British Empire and Commonwealth Museum 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/British_Empire_and_Commonwealth_Museum> in 
Bristol – was so short-lived and mired in controversy. Could not politicians, 
historians and museums work together to develop a permanent legacy that 
acknowledges the “complex and difficult truths” about our colonial past? It 
would be a fascinating history lesson for all British – and global – citizens 
to learn.
Michael Hobbins
Woking, Surrey

• The Guardian is right to bring to our attention the noble efforts being made 
in Germany to address its own savage colonial history and it is timely as a 
post-EU Britain tries to find its new place in the world. It is essential to 
state that our place in that world was forged out of the suffering of the poor 
and the British empire was built more on horror than honour. Maybe now, after 
the exposures of our relatively recent abuses of the Chagos Islanders and the 
torture of the Mau Mau rebels – likely to be the tip of the iceberg – a start 
might be for the government to release all the remaining papers relating to our 
colonies, at least those that have not been destroyed. Much of our history has 
been stolen or swept under the heavy carpet of official secrets acts. Your own 
Ian Cobain’sThe History Thieves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/06/the-history-of-thieves-by-ian-cobain-review>
 illuminates these dark places.

A Museum of the British Empire would be a harrowing place to visit, but 
perhaps if it existed it might have fostered a view of our nation more grounded 
in the reality our own grim, dependent past. Such a view would have, for 
instance, made us far warier of isolation from the EU and our view 
of immigration would be, partly at least, based on the massive debt this nation 
owes to the blood, sweat and tears of the victims of the British empire. 
A Britain removed from the European project, paying even a tiny proportion 
of our debt to our former colonies, living only off our own means, is going to 
be a very different place indeed. In the shadow of the Museum of the British 
Empire lies our future.
Dr Colin Bannon
Crapstone, Devon 

• Britain’s colonial past is indeed still with us and nowhere more so than in 
the Middle East. Next year will mark the centenary of theBalfour declaration 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Balfour_Declaration>, a colonial document whose 
consequences were disastrous for the colonised people of Mandate Palestine and 
their region. No worse calamity could have befallen the Palestinians than to 
have Britain promise their country to another people over their heads in 1917, 
and then invite the newcomers to take over, a process that led to the 
destruction of historic Palestine in 1948.

Today’s Palestinian fragmentation into a nation of refugees, exiles and 
occupied people, with no common homeland, and the intractable 
Israeli-Palestinian conflict and regional instability and all that has caused, 
are direct results of Balfour’s careless declaration. It would be only fitting 
for 2017 to be the year when Britain acknowledges what its past colonial 
decisions over Palestine led to and offers a long overdue apology and 
reparations to the victims of a particularly egregious piece of British 
colonialism.
Dr Ghada Karmi
London

• Your editorial is most instructive. The benefits of colonialism have been 
well argued in numerous historical works; even scholars from former British 
colonies show an empathetic understanding of the British imperial past. 
Nevertheless, as in Germany, it is vital for historians and teachers of history 
not to shy away from researching and teaching about the violence of both the 
official colonial state and numerous British people towards colonial subjects 
over nearly four centuries. This is particularly necessary if our young people 
are not to be seduced into the euphoria of national glorification in 
post-Brexit Britain.
Burjor Avari
Visiting research fellow, Department of History 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/historyandhistoryofart>, Manchester 
Metropolitan University

• Anglo-Saxon exceptionalism, or the Eurosceptic historians for Britain, seems 
to have infiltrated the Guardian Review on Christmas Eve. Philip Hensher tells 
us,reviewing a book on Handel’s Messiah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/24/messiah-jonathan-keates-review-handel>
, that “early 18th-century London was unusually open to European influences”. 
This left me puzzling as to when London had been closed to European influences 
in the centuries since the Romans founded it, the Flemings and Hansa 
established their trading houses, religious orders from France and Italy set up 
monasteries and friaries, and reformers from Prague, Amsterdam and Geneva 
promoted religious change. The Hanoverians were of course German kings; but the 
English (or British) royal family had rarely been entirely native in the 
centuries before then, and the court had always maintained active European 
links.

Bernard Porter, reviewing a book on Britain’s role 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/21/empire-of-booze-henry-jeffreys-review>
 in shaping production and trade in alcohol, then credits the British empire 
with introducing viticulture to South Africa. But the British only took over 
Cape Colony in the Napoleonic wars; the Constantia wine that Napoleon quaffed 
on St Helena came from vines originally planted by Dutch settlers, enhanced and 
improved by the Huguenots who joined them over a century before the British 
arrived. Daniel Hannan, Andrew Roberts and others tell us frequently in the 
rightwing press that everything worthwhile in the world – from freedom to sport 
and capitalism – came from the Anglo-Saxon imagination. The Guardian should be 
careful to offer its readers a perspective that admits that good ideas and 
products have also flowed into Britain from across the Channel.
William Wallace
House of Lords

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 