
Today’s generation are doomed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/live/2016/sep/22/is-todays-generation-of-young-people-in-crisis-live-debate>
. Or so we are told.According to reports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/22/young-people-living-in-a-suspended-adulthood-finds-research>
 this week, low pay and lack of work in today’s Britain is resulting in 
“suspended adulthood”. Then, on the less crippling end of the societal 
spectrum, there was the closureof Fabric 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/11/fabric-london-nightclub-close-weekend-deaths-teenagers>
. If you were to learn about Generation Z purely from mainstream media outlets, 
you would believe young people are financially and culturally ruined. It takes 
one episode ofFour to the Floor 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/four-to-the-floor> – the oddball, lo-fi 
music TV show which returns next week – to restore faith in the future, 
however. The positivity and creativity celebrated in this season’s show by its 
artists – most of whom are a demographic worst affected by the past decade’s 
repercussions – proves that the spirit of revolution is rife, no matter what 
the statistics say. The show’s arrival couldn’t be better timed.

Is today's generation of young people in crisis? Readers discuss
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/live/2016/sep/22/is-todays-generation-of-young-people-in-crisis-live-debate>
Now in its third series, FTTF, which began in 2014, is an anomaly for many 
reasons. While websites and broadcasters scramble to cater to a youth market, 
Four to the Floor, tucked away on late-night Channel 4, effortlessly and 
accurately represents the attitude of 16- to 24-year-olds without condescending 
or disingenuously adopting quick-fix, zeitgeist-chasing trends.

The first episode of this series begins with with spoken word poetry about 
overturning the old guard, positive activism and seizing the day, which segues 
into a session from politically chargedjazz-fusion group United Vibrations 
<http://mostlyjazz.co.uk/line-up/united-vibrations/>. It sounds like the stuff 
of squat party nightmares but here it comes alive. It is unselfconscious, 
joyous and totally sincere in an era of sneering cynicism on social media. It 
provides a space for the surreal to mix with the savage, and where punk, grime, 
jungle, jazz, R&B and the indefinable coexist. It is interspersed with strange 
animations and visceral spoken word poetry; all of which is unfiltered by PR 
approval or mainstream influence. It is a true culture clash.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F184003072&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F184003072>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F184003072&media=>
Created in 12 weeks this summer, the third series was unwittingly defined by 
Britain’s Brexit decision. James Payne, who is the executive producer of the 
show and founded its production company Lemonade Money, wanted to convey a 
“newfound confidence in what being British means”.

“It was really odd because we had already decided, when we were supposed to 
film back in spring, that we wanted to loosely ask: what does being British 
mean? Then Brexit happened and it felt even more relevant. We didn’t have to 
introduce those topics to artists, people just wanted to talk about them. It 
showed a real generation gap – younger people feel differently about things and 
there’s this sense [national identity] is almost irrelevant. They are creating 
their own economies and trading among themselves and travelling the world; 
their friendship groups are all over the planet, not just the country.”
 An animation from Four to the Floor Photograph: Four to the Floor 
As a result of its pertinent timing, the finished product is more like a piece 
of journalism than a showcase of talent: its subjects are articulate on the 
subject of identity, frustrations and how important it is to create a community 
with your art. One episode is shot in South Africa, and promotesa message of 
empowerment, that protest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/31/south-african-students-speak-out-ban-afro-hair-pretoria-school>
 can overturn government decisions, that young people should not accept defeat 
and be silenced.

That’s not to say the artist choices are simply a backdrop to the core 
message. As well as shining a light on up-and-coming grime producer and MC 
Rocks Foe and Neverland Clan – AKA “the world’s gnarliest boyband” – the show 
features veteran group King Tubby’s Sound System; alt-rock duo Cassels play 
their music to their grandparents for the first time, and grime photographer 
Vicky Grout urges anyone watching to put an end to political apathy. While 
Jools Holland often gives a platform to those who already have a voice, Four to 
the Floor is a mixtape of whatever those at Lemonade Money are listening to or 
are interested in; it is a crucial opportunity to promote creatives who do not 
have stadium headlining ambitions.

Young people living in a 'suspended adulthood', finds research
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/22/young-people-living-in-a-suspended-adulthood-finds-research>
“More so than ever, it seems to me that there’s a connection with things that 
are honest and more and more so – this younger generation are not 
bullshit-able,” says Payne of their artist choices. “I can’t speak for a whole 
generation, but we work with people from a lot of backgrounds, socially and 
economically, and there’s a desire to find the truth in things rather than get 
bullshitted.”

Making music TV so magically off-kilter is not an easy sell when broadcasters 
are keen to stick with the safe. With the absence ofTop of the Pops 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b00704hg>, CD:UK 
<http://www.tv.com/shows/cduk/> and Popworld 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6FZnUPhphyc>, there have been short-lived 
attempts to rebuild the format forartist performance and interviews on TV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/jul/24/tv-bad-at-music-shows>, 
but they’ve never been given the chance to flourish. It would be fair to 
suggest that the youth market is not interested in TV. But while Vice and 
Boiler Room both cater to a captive audience online, there’s a sense that they 
are preaching to the converted: the appeal of airing on Channel 4 allows the 
show to arrive in the homes of many people who might not have been seeking it.

In spite of Four to the Floor’s encouraging message, Payne does not think 
post-millennials are in for an easy ride. But for him and his team, it is vital 
that this show exists to inspire hope in those who are told their future is 
hopeless.

“Not everything is great, by a long shot. [These are] difficult times, but 
we’ve got to tell stories about ourselves rather than allowing other people to 
tell stories about us,” says Payne.

“It’s so easy to be influenced by negative thoughts and there’s a lot to be 
proud of – we have an incredible culture here and that’s come from immigration. 
The roots of so much of not justour culture but worldwide culture – dance 
culture, drum’n’bass, hardcore, garage, grime, jungle – these things that 
define a lot of people’s lives, is because of this mix and this mad little 
grey, cold island in the middle of the North Sea. We have created something 
brilliant and unique and we should be proud of that.”

 * Four To the Floor begins on 28 September at 12.05am on Channel 4  