
Inescapably and suddenly, Britain has been invaded by hygge. The Danish word, 
previously unknown to all but the most hardcore Scandophiles, is now the 
subject of anavalanche of books 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/11/hygge-the-danish-art-of-living-cosily-on-its-way-to-uk-bookshops>
, hundreds of Identikit newspaper features, and endless department-store winter 
displays. Every story on the subject explains that the word defies literal 
translation, before offering “cosiness” as a workable approximation – it’s not 
exactly that, but rather, a feeling of calm togetherness and the enjoyment of 
simple pleasures, perhaps illuminated by the gentle flicker of candlelight.

Not the least of the paradoxes of this craze, which you might also call a 
wildly overhyped trend, is that simply pronouncing it is almost impossible for 
British tongues. The first mention of hygge in any text – where it sits so 
invitingly on the page, with its row of curvaceous descenders – usually comes 
with a phonetic guide. This is in order to prevent readers from committing the 
faux-pas of uttering “higgy” or “huggy” – or, worse, “hig”. “Hue-gah”, 
“hoo-gah”, “heurgh” and “hhyooguh” are among the approximations offered in the 
(at least) nine books on hygge published this autumn. (The Sun, helpfully, 
suggests it should rhyme with “cougar”.)

The titles of these books, carefully calibrated for search-engine 
optimisation, are: Hygge: The Danish Art of Happiness; The Little Book of 
Hygge: The Danish Way to Live Well;Hygge: A Celebration of Simple Pleasures, 
Living the Danish Way <http://www.charlotteabrahams.com/>; The Cozy Life: 
Rediscover the Joy of Simple Things Through the Danish Concept of Hygge; Hygge: 
The Complete Guide to Embracing the Danish Concept of Cosy and Simple Living; 
The Art of Hygge: How to Bring Danish Cosiness Into Your Life; How to Hygge: 
the Secrets of Nordic Living; The Book of Hygge: The Danish Art of Living Well; 
Keep Calm and Hygge: A Guide to the Danish Art of Simple and Cosy Living.

The hygge conspiracy – podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/audio/2016/dec/09/the-hygge-conspiracy-podcast>
“It is the most striking publishing trend I can remember, in terms of the 
sheer number of titles published at the same time,” Caroline Sanderson, who 
writes about non-fiction for the Bookseller magazine, told me. And so, 
inevitably, there is also a 10th book – a parody. Its publication was announced 
only 29 days after the first of the straight books came out. Say Ja to Hygge: 
How to Find Your Special Cosy Place suggests that the crucial word be 
pronounced “huhhpg-ghuhrr”. This is not the only occasion when the parody is 
hard to distinguish from the volumes it is apparently spoofing.

Just as “chic” is the thing that everyone knows about the French, the word 
hygge must now be affixed, almost by law, to any media story about Denmark or, 
indeed, anything remotely Scandinavian, whether the subject is clothes, 
furniture, cookery, travel, or working hours. The headlines are mostly absurd. 
Get Hygge With It! Hungry For Hygge! Ten Reasons to Hygge … It Will Make You 
Happier, Fitter and Slimmer! Give Your Home a Hygge! There is even a New 
Statesman article titledThe Hygge of Oasis: Why I Find This Band Strangely 
Comforting 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/uk/2016/11/hygge-oasis-why-i-find-band-strangely-comforting>
.

According to this now vast popular literature, the creation of an atmosphere 
of hygge is aided bygløgg (mulled wine), meatballs and cardamom buns. Certain 
activities and entertainments, often involving candles, woollens, or nature, 
are also said to promote feelings of hygge. One of the less sophisticated books 
suggests projects for making “winter bunting” and a “mug cosy”, the latter to 
be fashioned from buttons, sequins and an old sock. Its advice to take up the
hyggelig activity of cycling is accompanied by a motivational quote from that 
byword of existential contentment, Sylvia Plath.

I have seen hygge used to sell cashmere cardigans, wine, wallpaper, vegan 
shepherd’s pie, sewing patterns, a skincare range, teeny-tiny festive harnesses 
for dachshunds, yoga retreats and a holiday in a “shepherd’s hut” in Kent. The 
Royal and Derngate Theatre in Northampton has even opened aBar Hygge 
<https://www.royalandderngate.co.uk/your-visit/eating-drinking/bar-hygge/> – 
craft beer and open sandwiches a speciality. “It’s hard to pinpoint a 
definition for the Danish word ‘hygge’,” proclaims the website. “It sits 
somewhere between warmth and comfort, cosiness and friendship, making the most 
of every moment, away from worries. We wanted to borrow some of that and bring 
it to Northampton.”

Hygge has been listed as a “word of the year” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/15/post-truth-named-word-of-the-year-by-oxford-dictionaries>
 by both the Collins and Oxford dictionaries – alongside Brexit and Trumpism – 
in the lexicographers’ annual public-relations exercise. Tremblings of a hygge 
backlash, seen in skits such as a Daily Mash piece titledHygge Is Byllshytte 
<http://www.thedailymash.co.uk/news/society/hygge-is-byllshytte-20161103116473>
, serve only to emphasise its ubiquity. The Eurosceptic Daily Telegraph ran an 
article suggesting that readers adopt a “bracingly British” version of the 
trend –brygge 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/women/life/forget-hygge---brits-should-be-embracing-brygge/>
.

One morning in October, I walked around John Lewis’s London flagship store 
with Philippa Prinsloo, its head of design: we ran our hands over fake-fur 
throws and hot-water bottles, felt the nub of Scottish woollen blankets, admired
hyggelig tableware that favoured sharing and simplicity. The theme of the 
homeware displays was, she said, “winter warmth. Making sure things are ready 
to cosy down.” An early adopter, the store first promoted hygge as a theme last 
autumn (“we should have done it again this year,” said Prinsloo). Will hygge 
last, I asked her? Will it be more than a flash in the plan? “Oh yes, 
definitely. People really want it and need it at the moment.”

Hygge is catnip to social media: on Instagram there are almost 1.5m #hygge 
posts of falling leaves, bowls of pumpkin soup and babies adorably wrapped in 
blankets. On Pinterest, there has been a year-on-year rise of 285% in 
hygge-themed pinning. Interest is especially strong in Britain, according to a 
spokeswoman for the site, where “it skyrocketed in September this year”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fhygge-conspiracy-denmark-cosiness-trend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf9790b6b0b454b421095fb1d3e88bc4607b4377%2F0_0_4893_3285%2F4893.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20hygge%20conspiracy%20%7C%20Charlotte%20Higgins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fhygge-conspiracy-denmark-cosiness-trend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20hygge%20conspiracy%20%7C%20Charlotte%20Higgins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fhygge-conspiracy-denmark-cosiness-trend%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf9790b6b0b454b421095fb1d3e88bc4607b4377%2F0_0_4893_3285%2F4893.jpg>
 Hygge is now the subject of an avalanche of books. Photograph: Alamy Stock 
Photo 
The author of one of the books on hygge, Meik Wiking 
<http://www.thebookseller.com/profile/meik-wiking-385781>, called it “the 
second Viking invasion”. But that’s not quite right: hygge has been 
deliberately imported – and reinvented – by eager Britons. The concept may be 
indelibly Danish, but the hype has been made in London. And amid the clamour 
and frenzy of late 2016, this sudden taste for closing the door to the world, 
for retreating back to the hearth, is selling like hotcakes.

Hygge has not arrived in our midst by accident. Its sudden presence in Britain 
is a matter of deliberate inducement and persuasion. In its most visible 
manifestation – the onslaught of books on the subject – it is a trend that has 
been carefully concocted in the laboratory of London publishing houses, and 
then disseminated through the ready collaboration of an enthusiastic neophile 
press.

It is book editors – largely young, female and bright – who created the 
formula of hygge for a mass British audience. The starting point for these 
young lifestyle alchemists was an article that appeared on the BBC website in 
the first autumnal days of October 2015. Its writer,Justin Parkinson 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-34345791>, had been casting around for 
“news features and zeitgeisty articles” from the open-plan expanses of New 
Broadcasting House, London, four glassy floors above its newsroom. He’d read 
about hygge in Helen Russell’s popular memoirThe Year of Living Danishly 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/363014/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
, and he’d heard the word on a TV cookery programme. “I wondered whether I 
could work it up into a feature,” he told me recently, so he Googled “hygge UK”.

In 2015, the word hygge appeared in 40 pieces in national papers. This year, 
that figure has shot up to more than 200

“I thought some people might think it was a slightly poncey, head-scratching 
idea,” he said. In fact, his article, published on 2 October 2015, received 
over a million hits, and was outread that day by only five stories – two pieces 
on a school shooting in Oregon, and articles on Syria, terrorism and cancer. It 
was a small island of cheer on a grim news day. The article was immediately 
followed up by others in the Express, the Independent on Sunday and the 
Telegraph, the beginning of an extraordinary spike in hygge coverage: in 2015, 
the word appeared in 40 pieces in national newspapers. This year, that figure 
has shot up to more than 200, a bump of 400% – and that’s not counting the huge 
proliferation of articles in blogs and lifestyle magazines.

One person who saw the BBC article was a publisher named Anna Valentine. She 
was starting a new imprint, Trapeze, at the publishing conglomerate Hachette, 
whose UK headquarters occupy an angular modern building on the north bank of 
the Thames. The BBC article “ticked so many boxes on so many levels,” she said. 
Denmark, with its crime drama, itsNew Nordic cuisine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/mar/14/noma-chef-rene-redzepi-noma-on-copenhagen>
, its classic design, its consistent spot at the top of national happiness 
league tables, was “hot”, for a start. Then there was the notion – 
intriguingly, in a time of Brexit – that “we are looking to other cultures for 
guidance on how to live our lives. If you look at the biggest-selling lifestyle 
books, it’s things likeMarie Kondo’s The Life-changing Magic of Tidying Up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jun/14/decluttering-a-load-of-junk-the-life-changing-magic-of-tidying>
, which is inspired by Japan. Then there was Norwegian Wood” – last year’s 
non-fiction surprise hit, a Scandinavian ode to the charms of wood-chopping.

Valentine’s aim was paradoxical: to publish books that would be bought by 
people who “aren’t book-buyers”. Hygge seemed like a perfect distillation of 
popular lifestyle obsessions – beginning with mindfulness, “which has moved 
beyond being a publishing phenomenon and into being a way of life, and has fed 
into so many trends, like healthy-eating books and adult colouring books.” She 
added: “It seemed to tie into an interest in digital detox, too.” So many 
recent fashions, she said, had been about self-discipline and self-deprivation 
– tidying up, “clean” eating. Hygge “was an antidote to all that”.

I reflected on the publishing industry offering first one trend, and then its 
remedy, as if handing out a sequence of uppers and downers. The industry loves 
repetitions and hybridisations – crossing one already popular book with 
another, so as to cook up a new, or sort-of new, book, designed to replicate 
the success of previous formulas. (In this context of test-tube book-breeding 
it is perhaps inevitable that there is a hygge-themed colouring book on the 
market this autumn. Watch out, too, for books aboutlagom – a Swedish word 
meaning lack of excess – next autumn.)

Around London last winter, other editors were thinking similar thoughts. In 
the sleek art deco headquarters of Penguin Random House, Emily Robertson and 
Fiona Crosby were working, separately, on potential titles for their respective 
imprints, Penguin Life and Michael Joseph. Each had also spotted the BBC 
article, they told me, when we met in a room off one of the building’s echoing 
marble hallways. “I spend an embarrassing amount of my time flicking around the 
internet,” said Robertson, “looking at what people are reading and sharing on 
Twitter. Pinterest is big for this. It’s a case of looking at what people are 
talking about.”

Once the idea had been hatched, it was time to find writers – but this was not 
a straightforward exercise: the notion of hygge is so taken for granted in 
Danish language and culture that there was no readymade cohort of authors or 
experts to call on. The editors had to either track down a willing Dane, or 
identify someone with tangentially related knowledge. Valentine contacted an 
agent she knew, who suggested Charlotte Abrahams, a British writer on interiors 
and expert on Scandinavian design. Robertson approached political scientist 
Meik Wiking, who runs theHappiness Research Institute 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwjd98-x-bnQAhUECcAKHc4kC9wQFggdMAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.happinessresearchinstitute.com%2F&usg=AFQjCNFYS3j6h6apTfqNCCvhRR56um7CUA&sig2=rIDi70uGr233jUW-GkMPLw>
, a Copenhagen thinktank. Hygge wasn’t exactly the kind of thing the institute 
researched, but the commission was canny, since the association suggested to 
the reader that hygge might help provide a shortcut to Danish levels of 
wellbeing. (The Happiness Research Institute has since become a ubiquitous 
presence in newspaper reports on the subject, lending the imprimatur of social 
science to the hygge industry.) Crosby found Marie Tourell Søderberg, an actor 
in the Danish historical drama 1864, which had been shown on BBC4.

For each of these authors, the idea of writing about hygge was unexpected – 
Wiking told me his friends were amazed that anyone thought he could get a whole 
book out of the concept. Abrahams was actually hoping to write a book about 
running, but she set about putting together a proposal: she had heard of hygge, 
but not given it much thought. (When I visited her at home in the Cotswolds, 
later, she confessed that candles gave her migraines.)

It was only at the end of January, through a colleague in the Penguin rights 
department, that Crosby and Robertson realised they were both publishing books 
on the same thing. That’s despite the fact that they work in the same open-plan 
office and can see each other from their desks, if they stand and look over the 
piles of Zadie Smiths and Deborah Levys and Jamie Olivers. The discovery 
necessitated a meeting over bad coffee, but it was a friendly encounter, not 
“hygge at dawn”, said Crosby.

The British have become the agents of the dissemination of Danish hygge, as if 
the idea had been invented in London

“It was actually quite reassuring,” Robertson told me – because it meant hygge 
was definitely “a thing”. (Abrahams interviewed Meik Wiking for her book while 
he was working on his, The Little Book of Hygge 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalogsearch/result/?q=Meik+Wiking&order=relevance&dir=desc>
, though he didn’t let on.) The first volume to come out, in August, wasLouisa 
Thomsen Brits’s The Book of Hygge: The Danish Art of Living Well 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/book-of-hygge.html>, published by Ebury, 
which is also part of Penguin Random House.

So far Wiking’s book has been doing best – a brisk trade at 46,000 copies in 
the UK, according to Nielsen Book Research, and it is being published in 23 
other countries. That means that the British, oddly, have become the agents of 
the dissemination of Danish hygge, as if the very idea had been invented in 
London – which, in a sense, it was.

Each book has its different flavour. Wiking takes a broadly sociological 
approach, laced with disquisitions on interior design and cooking. Søderberg’s 
is a notably pretty book, homey and intimate, scattered with reflections from 
ordinary Danes. Abrahams writes as a foreigner investigating hygge; she 
combines expertise on Danish design with a memoir-ish approach about the search 
for contentment in her own life.

But for all the earnest cultural analyses, linguistic glosses and quotations 
from Kierkegaard, it is the images, more or less common in style to each title, 
that one falls for: hands cupping warm mugs; bicycles leaning against walls; 
sheepskin rugs thrown over chairs; candles and bonfires; summer picnics; trays 
of fresh-baked buns. To look at them is to long for that life, that warmth, 
that peace, that stability – for that idealised, InstagrammableDenmark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/denmark> of the imagination.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fhygge-conspiracy-denmark-cosiness-trend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4885d925152b522270879d783bee0e5b1c486bf9%2F0_40_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20hygge%20conspiracy%20%7C%20Charlotte%20Higgins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fhygge-conspiracy-denmark-cosiness-trend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20hygge%20conspiracy%20%7C%20Charlotte%20Higgins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fhygge-conspiracy-denmark-cosiness-trend%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4885d925152b522270879d783bee0e5b1c486bf9%2F0_40_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 A family relaxing together around a candlelit table epitomises hygge. 
Photograph: Klaus Vedfelt/Getty Images 
When you arrive in Copenhagen, it quickly becomes clear that for Danes, hygge 
is so omnipresent as to be almost invisible. It is used in numerous common 
phrases – “Hyg dig!”, or “have hygge”, is a common way of saying goodbye, for 
example. It offers itself up elastically in noun, verb and adjectival forms, 
and is part of innumerable compounds: you can listen to hygge-music, have a 
hygge-Christmas, sit in hygge-corner with hygge-lighting perhaps enjoying 
hygge-chat. There is a verb,råhygge, which means, literally, to raw-hygge, that 
is, to enjoy strong, or authentic hygge; to hygge with someone might mean to 
have a certain kind of sex (and not the abandoned, up-against-the-fridge kind). 
As we walked down a street together in central Copenhagen, Mette 
Davidsen-Nielsen, chief executive of the newspaper Information, answered her 
phone to her daughter. When she finished the brief call she told me that she’d 
used used the adjectival form of hygge three times – “I kept telling her it 
would behyggelig to see her.”

Hygge’s sudden popularity abroad seemed both pleasing and bemusing to most of 
the Danes I spoke to, as if there were a sudden craze in Germany for books 
extolling the spiritual virtues of British-style apologising, complete with an 
encyclopaedic range of helpful accessories available for purchase. For others, 
its escape from national boundaries seemed a potential subject of study. “We 
should have an academic conference on the international fame of hygge,” said 
Carsten Levisen, an associate professor of linguistics at Denmark’s Roskilde 
University. He believes he is the first person to have written an entire 
academic book chapter on the word from a linguistic perspective. “I surprised 
myself by being able to do it,” he said.

For all its ubiquity, hygge is also recognised as a self-evidently positive 
and particularly Danish value. Though the word itself is actually imported from 
Norwegian, its emergence as an element of national culture is sometimes traced 
back to Denmark’s loss of territory in the 18th and 19th centuries, when it was 
forced to abandon tracts of what are now Norway, Sweden and Germany. It is 
stitched deeper into its language than equivalents in neighbouring countries 
(such as the GermanGemütlichkeit, and the Swedish mys) and is firmly entangled 
with the way that Danish society organises and projects itself.

You could almost see hygge as the private, intimate analogue of the public, 
civic Danish welfare state. Both hygge and the welfare state rely on a state of 
trust, a feeling of smallness (small nation, small circles of friends), and an 
assumption of equality. Each feeds on the other: the welfare state offers the 
conditions for hygge to prosper, for it ensures a 37-hour working week and the 
time to devote tohyggelig activities; and on the other hand hygge’s disdain of 
hierarchy and conspicuous consumption imparts values important to sustaining a 
society in which stark differences in financial means are banished. “In Denmark 
our basic needs are covered,” Marie Tourell Søderberg told me when she hosted 
breakfast for me at her apartment – candle flickering, bread straight from the 
oven. “We don’t need to fight for our survival – and so we have time to do 
things that we find meaningful.”

Everyone has their own, highly personal image of the most hyggelig hygge. One 
brisk October evening, I met up with a contributor to Søderberg’s book called 
Mikkel Vinther, who is a teacher of social media at a school that offers 
continuing education to adults. He took me to a Copenhagen community centre. It 
was hosting a cheap communal supper to be followed by a game of bingo 
(organised fun is a noticeable feature of Danish social life). There were 200 
people there; everyone seemed young, middle-class and attractive. Our 
neighbours at the big communal table leaned over curiously. “Excuse me, are you 
doing an interview?” asked one of them. He was called Simon Falk Christensen, 
and worked as a project manager for Danish State Railways. Intrigued, he 
offered his own definition. “For me it’s a lot about family. Being together. 
Candles. It’s never about being posh, about cakes from the ‘right’ place. It’s 
cake you baked yourself. It’s a feeling. It’s something that has meaning in 
itself, it’s not a means to becoming a better person, like doing exercise. I 
associate it with being a child, the smell of my mother cooking onions in the 
next room. The smell of the Christmas tree.”

Over lunch the following day, Davidsen-Nielsen and her colleague, media 
commentator Lasse Jensen, debated the meaning of hygge. “Intellectualism is not 
hygge,” said Davidsen-Nielsen. “Severe debates on philosophy and ideas – that’s 
not veryhyggelig. Alcohol, sugar and fat are the three key ingredients of 
hygge.” He added: “It used to be beer and aquavit, now it’s wine.” She said, 
“There’s something about socks and hygge.” He added, “Handknitted socks.”

While hygge had many variations, depending on whom you asked, it was always 
anti-modern, and always tinged with nostalgia. Your mobile phone is not hygge. 
In its native form, hygge is regarded as essentially uncommercial, and by 
definition modest; yet at the same time it is helped along by certain consumer 
props – especially candles or gently glowing lamps.

Davidsen-Nielsen told me that walking down the street in the dark, she could 
look into her neighbours’ windows and spot who was Danish and who was foreign, 
just by their lighting – as if hygge was not merely the essence of Danishness, 
but also a kind of cultural border that outsiders could not quite cross. 
Søderberg, too, told me a story about Syrian refugee friends of hers, who had 
searched all over Copenhagen for fluorescent tubes to light their apartment – 
the tale was told fondly, but their choice of domestic lighting was a marker of 
their otherness – no Dane would make a choice so lacking in hygge. (I had never 
encountered a cosy bicycle shop before I visited Copenhagen – but their windows 
were draped with chic, low-wattage bulbs agleam in the dusk. Davidsen-Nielsen 
gave me an artificial candle, which is the coming thing in Denmark, as everyone 
is starting to get worried about how unhealthy it is to breathe candle fumes. 
It flickers convincingly; it is made in China.)

To Danes, nothing could be less political than hygge – since talking about 
controversial subjects is by definition not hygge – and yet it is clear that 
the concept lends itself to political use. Davidsen-Nielsen and Jensen told me 
that the prime minister, Lars Løkke Rasmussen, washyggelig – the kind of guy 
you could imagine having a beer with. “He’s folksy and informal. He’s one of 
the guys. And he gets away with murder – almost,” said Davidsen-Nielsen. “Hygge 
is a useful strategy for disguising power. Politically, you can cloak quite 
aggressive or radical acts with an impression of hygge. Hygge says, let’s 
forget about everything. Let’s block out the world and have some candy.”

Almost nothing written about hygge in Britain suggests that it has a troubling 
side. Wiking’s book does mention that hygge may sometimes feel excluding to 
outsiders. “It would be considered lesshyggelig if there were too many new 
people at an event.” Foreigners, he told me, find it hard to penetrate 
tight-knit Danish social circles: hygge can only really exist within groups who 
know each other already. But he stops well short of the kind of critique that, 
for instance, Dorthe Nors brought to bear when we spoke. “Somewhere along the 
way, hygge became a form of social control,” said the Danish author, whose 
novel Mirror, Shoulder, Signal will be published in Britain in February. “It’s 
a little like ‘feel-good’ in America – the cult of the ‘feel-good’ book or the 
‘feel-good’ movie. It’s a cocoon.”

Last year Nors published a chilling short story 
<https://blog.longreads.com/2015/08/15/hygge-the-dark-side-of-danish-comfort-a-story-by-dorthe-nors/>
, inspired by an article she had read about a Danish man who had murdered his 
wife. He was quoted as saying, Nors told me, that he committed this act shortly 
after the couple had gothyggelig together on the sofa. In the story’s 
introduction, she writes, “Hygge is … used as a way to suppress feelings in a 
family or relationship. Every time someone wants to address some kind of 
unpleasant emotion, this person is in danger of spoiling the hygge and will be 
told: ‘Now, let’s just hygge – which basically just means: Let’s just stay on 
the surface and behavehyggelig … It’s a beautiful thing, the Danish hygge. And 
it’s also a little bit dangerous.” Nors happily admitted to a little 
inconsistency, for she loves to partake in a bit of hygge (she has candlesticks 
in her office, for example). But, she said, “You should see us at Christmas. It 
scares the freak out of me. You’re not allowed to be unhappy.”

The suppression of difference inherent in hygge, Nors said, was not confined 
to family life. She related the word to Denmark’s historically largely agrarian 
economy and rural society. “It’s a very small nation – and we all used to be 
farming, although that’s changing fast. In this kind of society, conformity is 
really important. Hygge provides a way of establishing consensus.” Those who 
rock the boat, who think differently, who speak out – “they are spoiling the 
hygge”, she said.

Aside from hygge, there is one other peculiarly Danish notion that visitors 
tend to encounter. This is the so-called Jante law – a set of attitudes said to 
govern Danish social life, described inAksel Sandemose’s 
<http://www.theparisreview.org/blog/2015/02/11/the-law-of-jante/> satirical 
1933 novel A Fugitive Crosses His Tracks. The first rule of the law, which 
takes its name from the fictional town of Jante, is “You’re not to think that 
you are anything special,” and the others are more or less variations on that 
theme: essentially, don’t get too big for your breeches. Don’t stand out. Don’t 
be different. Sandemose’s novel caused controversy for its unblinking vision of 
rural small-mindedness, but Danes recognise the law of Jante as containing a 
certain truth: that conformity, and an almost aggressive modesty, are central 
to Danish culture.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fhygge-conspiracy-denmark-cosiness-trend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ef945f6d5ed52b437ac9283da08a2fca80283df%2F0_127_1365_1705%2F1365.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20hygge%20conspiracy%20%7C%20Charlotte%20Higgins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fhygge-conspiracy-denmark-cosiness-trend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20hygge%20conspiracy%20%7C%20Charlotte%20Higgins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fhygge-conspiracy-denmark-cosiness-trend%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ef945f6d5ed52b437ac9283da08a2fca80283df%2F0_127_1365_1705%2F1365.jpg>
 The founder of the far-right Danish People’s Party, Pia Kjærsgaard. 
Photograph: Keld Navntoft/EPA 
These qualities may promote unity and solidarity of a sort useful in 
maintaining an egalitarian society, but it’s not hard to see the drawbacks of 
cultural norms that suppress individuality or dissent. In the chapter on hygge 
inLevisen’s book Cultural Semantics and Social Cognition 
<https://www.academia.edu/28237977/Roots_of_Danish_sociality_Hygge_as_a_cultural_keyword_and_core_cultural_value>
: A Case Study on the Danish Universe of Meaning, he recounts a story about 
Sepp Piontek, the German football manager who took the Danish national team to 
their first World Cup in 1986 – and quickly discovered that hygge was an 
obstacle to the team’s success. “In order to achieve any results in Denmark, 
the national team had to go through a minor cultural revolution,” Piontek wrote 
in his memoir. “The general attitude was that it should be fun andhyggelig to 
be a part of the national team.”

A common critique of hygge, according to Mikkel Vinther, is that it “makes the 
democratic process weak because to discuss difficult things is nothyggelig”. 
Vinther, himself, is more positive: it has the potential, he argues, to provide 
a powerful, non-confrontational way for people to come together. But first it 
needs to be reinvented: he wants to develop what he calls hygge 2.0. The 
culture minister, Bertel Haarder is in the process of establishing a “cultural 
canon” for Denmark, inviting Danes to submit ideas about what they find most 
valuable in their national life. But Haarder himself has sounded a note of 
caution about placing hygge in such a list – it should be done “only if it is 
something that includes rather than, as is often the case, excludes. On second 
thoughts, I don’t want to take hygge with us into the future”, he said in an 
interview earlier this year.

Hygge is, itself, “the place where politics are set aside”, Levisen told me. 
But it is precisely this sense that it is beyond politics – as well as its 
ubiquitous, irreducible Danishness (and thus not-foreignness) – that allows it 
to be mobilised by politicians, particularly those of the xenophobic far right, 
who have become a rising force in Danish politics over the past decade. (For 
those who idealise Danish society, it came as an unpleasant shock when it was 
reported earlier this year that parliament had approved a plan to strip 
refugees of their valuables, including jewellery and watches, with an apparent 
unconcern for any troubling historical resonances.)

Of course hygge excludes. The problem with Scandinavia is that these countries 
can only work if you shut the borders
Lotte Folke Kaarsholm 
A case in point is Pia Kjærsgaard, the founder of the anti-immigration, 
anti-Brussels Danish People’s Party, which is currently the second-largest 
party in parliament. Kjærsgaard has subtly projected herself as the protector 
of Danish hygge against the unknown forces of the globalised world. According 
to Nors: “Hygge is part of the whole set-up of the radical right wing in 
Denmark. Their commercials will have all the emblematic hygge symbols.”

Kjærsgaard, who is now the speaker in Denmark’s parliament, gave an interview 
last year in which she described, in detail, the importance of making her office
hyggelig – with family photos, lamps, porcelain and knick-knacks. “I cannot 
thrive and work in offices that aren’thyggelig,” she said.

Creating a hyggelig work environment is completely ordinary in Denmark – when 
I visited the ambassador to Britain, Claus Grube, he lit candles, switched off 
overhead lighting and put a cushion behind my back. But Kjærsgaard and her 
allies use hygge with particular, and deliberate, force, according to Nors, 
“promoting a popular image in which being Danish is about sitting round a table 
and eating cake – or pork. And, they imply, everyone outside that is not Danish 
– and it taps into a fear that globalisation and refugees will destroy 
everything.” The Danish People’s Party’s perspective is that Denmark is an 
almost perfect country, with its long history, its generous welfare state, and 
its cultural distinctiveness. But anything that threatens that safe community, 
including alien values and ideologies, cannot be tolerated.

The lightly encoded thought process, then, is that if hygge is uniquely 
Danish, and hygge can only be enjoyed by insiders, then migrants and outsiders 
will destroy the nation’shyggelig atmosphere, and therefore effectively destroy 
Denmark. Lotte Folke Kaarsholm, an editor on the newspaper Information, said, 
“Of course hygge excludes. The whole problem with Scandinavia is that these 
countries can only really work if you shut the borders. You have all these 
ideals of kindness on the inside, but for our solidarity to function, you need 
pretty tall walls.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fhygge-conspiracy-denmark-cosiness-trend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1222cec7a94f987bf31729e3007598ef01ec9123%2F0_10_640_467%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20hygge%20conspiracy%20%7C%20Charlotte%20Higgins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fhygge-conspiracy-denmark-cosiness-trend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20hygge%20conspiracy%20%7C%20Charlotte%20Higgins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fhygge-conspiracy-denmark-cosiness-trend%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1222cec7a94f987bf31729e3007598ef01ec9123%2F0_10_640_467%2F640.jpg>
 Handknitted socks are quintessentially hygge. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
The year in which hygge has exploded as a British lifestyle trend has been 
extraordinarily turbulent. If 23 June was like an earthquake, 8 November was 
its answering tsunami – a phenomenon yet more tremendous than the original 
shock. For all those who mourned and worried about the victories of Brexit and 
Trump, there were others who rejoiced. These disturbances revealed societies, 
on both sides of the Atlantic, that are utterly divided. Young vs old, educated 
vs uneducated, rural vs urban, women vs men, black vs white – society’s cracks 
became gaping and obvious. If years can have moods, 2016 was savage in its 
anger and abject in its fear.

In fact, the mood of 2016 could even be described as uhygge. The word does 
not, precisely, mean uncosy – it does not summon up sharp-angled open-plan 
offices with severe furniture. It means frightening; it means sinister. If 
hygge is sitting round the campfire, all differences forgotten, warmed by the 
dancing flames,uhygge is the darkness beyond that enchanted circle. Uhygge, in 
fact, threatens to engulf the warmth, the solidarity, the kindness. In the 
unfathomable bleakness ofuhygge exist those terrible things from the outside 
that could destroy you. On some atavistic, deep-buried level, migrants, 
refugees, and those with starkly different values, bring with them the fearful 
perfume ofuhygge.

In the tension between hygge and uhygge, the warmth of the hearth and the 
family, and the terror of the lonely world outside, are linguistically bound 
together. You can see this reflected in Danish culture – most obviously, for 
those of us in Britain, through its crime drama. Dorthe Nors joked to me that 
she thought Nordic noir was a kind of pressure release from all the hygge – 
“all the dark stuff has to come out somewhere, right?” Watching such programmes 
is a way of keepinguhygge things at bay, safely confined in a corner of the 
room, on a screen. The hero of the TV series The Killing, police officer Sarah 
Lund, operates in a Denmark that is dank and grey, cold and unforgiving – the 
chill grey weather and long winters from which hygge is particularly adept at 
affording protection. She herself is far from the campfire. She is alone. She 
is terrible at intimate relationships; she backs out of rooms where hyggelig 
family activities are taking place.

The series, with its darkness and violence, exemplifies uhygge – and yet the 
viewer will, most likely, experience it from the safety and warmth of the 
family home, bottle of wine open, heating turned up. A detective story is a way 
of dealing with the dark: it is about gathering and containing death and horror 
within a safe and predictable narrative structure. Hygge does the same work 
through different means: it draws us in towards warmth and togetherness and 
forgetting. But it also somehow depends on the existence of the dark, too. In 
Wiking’s book there’s a remark to the effect that an especiallyhyggelig 
situation he remembered (the scent of a stew simmering on the stove, an open 
fire, a group of friends) could have become more hyggelig with the addition of 
just one thing: a raging storm outside.

Hygge is, then, a retreat, an escape, a turning-inwards. If its emergence as 
an element of national culture is often traced back to Denmark’s loss of 
territory – an embrace of the intimate smallness of newly sharp national 
borders – perhaps its distinctly British avatar disguises a similar national 
turning-inward, a pulling-up of the drawbridge against the terror of the world.

The editors who coaxed the British hygge trend into existence were not weirdly 
accurate weather forecasters, predicting the full bleakness of the conditions 
to come when they commissioned their books back in February. But they had put 
their fingers in the wind and, consciously or otherwise, found in hygge much 
that chimed with the times.

If this is the year in which globalisation has been found wanting by millions, 
hygge appeals to an earlier age, an imagined past, where one could take back 
control or make a country great again. The consumerist trappings of hygge, the 
books and throws and cushions and candles and holidays and recipes, are not 
just sold as products with a particular and practical use, but rather as 
magical objects that might summon up feelings and emotions: of safety and 
solace, of comfort and calm, of a being-in-a-time-before. Hygge appeals to both 
sides of our great political divides: on the one hand it nostalgically hints at 
a better past (of community, of family, of simple pleasures) and on the other 
it offers a refuge from the great, unleashed tempests of the times.

Carsten Levisen asked me if I thought the appetite for hygge in Britain was 
partly about a fantasy of what Britain might have become, if it had had the 
chance: Denmark as a kind of alternative, but squandered, possible future. 
Perhaps, but if he is right, it would be a wonderful contradiction. When 
Britons are asked whether they want a stronger welfare state and more equality 
– the basics of a morehyggelig life – they tend to vote “no” pretty hard. 
Britain is hungry for the accoutrements of hygge, but not the costs – such as 
high taxation – that come with it.

If, for Danes themselves, hygge has an element of fantasy – through the way it 
draws back from difficulties, difference and debate – then the British import 
is a fantasy of a fantasy. Hygge may be quintessentially Danish, but there is 
something utterly British about the nostalgic longing for the simple 
accoutrements of an earlier time – especially if it can be bought. At the same 
time, it is hard to deny that just at the moment, the most natural thing in the 
world is to want to huddle round the fire and wish the outside away. Settle in: 
it’s going to be a long winter.

• Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread 
<https://twitter.com/@gdnlongread>, or sign up to the long read weekly email 
here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/jul/20/sign-up-to-the-long-read-email>.
 