december rainfall chart 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/jan/2017-01-06T10:48:30/embed.html>
December was a mild and changeable month with winds often blowing from between 
south and west. High pressure was often present over the near continent and 
this influenced the weather over South East England and rainfall here was often 
very slight. Indeed, London had one of its driest Decembers on record. Despite 
this, it was a month of high humidity, often misty and rather dismal. By 
contrast, north-west Scotland was very wet in the last week and was therefore 
wetter than average for the month as a whole.

Temperatures

The average Central England temperature was 6.2C, 1.6C above the 1981-2010 
average and also higher than Novemberâ€™s temperature. In Scotland, the anomaly 
was 3.0C above average. The warmth was more noticeable at night than during the 
day. The lowest temperature was -9.0C at Aviemore on the night of the 5th. 
Scotland then warmed up over the next two days, reaching a maximum of 16.2C on 
the 7th at Lossiemouth. The same day had the highest temperature of the month 
with 17.0C recorded at Hawarden, Flintshire. Christmas Day was also very mild 
with 15C recorded in Aberdeenshire.

Rainfall

The rainfall data shows a north-west to south-east gradient of rainfall 
percentages, with the driest conditions being in the south-east. However, the 
above average rainfall in the north-west of Scotland was due to a very wet 
final week. A slow-moving cold front gave 110mm of rain at Kinlochewe, Wester 
Ross, in the 24 hours to 09.00 on 31st. By contrast, parts of London recorded 
less than 10mm in the whole month and had the driest December since 1926. The 
England and Wales rainfall total was just 56mm, 65% of average.

Sunshine

The average sunshine duration across England and Wales amounted to 59 hours, 
or 117% of the average. South East England recorded as much as 136% of the 
average. By contrast, Scotland experienced a very dull month with only 64% of 
the average across Western Scotland. Most areas had a large number of overcast, 
misty days. However, the South East of England had a few very sunny days, 
especially during the second half of the month.

Winds

December as a whole was unusually calm, although there were two named storms, 
Barbara on the 23rd and Conor over Christmas. The latter storm gave the highest 
gust of the month when 94mph was recorded in Shetland on Boxing Day.
 