
'We've been doing this for 20 years," says Mikaiah Leh, one half of the Los 
Angeles duothe Bots <http://www.thebotsband.com/>. "So it kinda got serious 20 
years ago." He laughs and the other half of the Bots, his brother, Anaiah, asks 
what on earth he's talking about. That's because Mikaiah is lying through his 
teeth. The Bots have not been a serious concern for 20 years. How could they 
be, when Mikaiah is only 19 and Anaiah didn't celebrate his 16th birthday until 
last Thursday?

Seriousness isn't the defining feature of the Bots anyway. On stage, they 
interrupt each other, the extravagantly Afro'd Anaiah cutting into his older 
brother's monologues; they flail around; Mikaiah apologises for the keyboard 
he's set off at the beginning of one song going horrendously out of tune, then 
corpses. And, most of all, they throw out thrilling, brief, violent bursts of 
noise, veering from snotty hardcore to yelping blues to the occasional ballad, 
including one about Anaiah that Mikaiah worries might sound like a love song to 
his brother: here's that rarity, the garage rock duo comprised not of po-faced 
rock historians but two kids having fun.

The Bots's love of music came from their dad, a computer technician, although 
both refer to him performing "surveillance" work. "He knows good music," 
Mikaiah says. "He used to work for [concert promoters] Golden Voice and he saw 
proper rock bands back in the day. We kinda learned everything from him, every 
genre of music really. He's got great taste in everything. He's a big hipster 
now – he's really into indie music."

The recordings on their website 
<http://www.thebotsband.com/audio_player?notheme=1> offer the faintly unnerving 
experience of hearing Mikaiah's voice get deeper and deeper as the tracks get 
newer and newer – the Bots were recording and gigging before his voice broke. 
Their first gig was to a handful of people at a house in LA. "We sucked," 
Anaiah says. "It was very garage," Mikaiah says. "One amp. No distortion – I 
didn't have any pedals. One guitar. A Tama starter drum kit – one cymbal. We 
weren't loud at all. Just this muddy sound."

This summer, they were being invited to support Blur.  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/jul/27/new-band-bots>The key in the 
transition, Mikaiah says, was hearing theWhite Stripes 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/thewhitestripes?INTCMP=SRCH> and realising two 
people could form a real band. "We turned our bedroom into a crappy studio. As 
we grew older we put our life savings into it."
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fwb5P4cqsLj0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fwb5P4cqsLj0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fwb5P4cqsLj0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
There are frequent reminders of how young the Bots are. A question about what 
drew two young African-American kids to a genre beloved of white men ("May I 
correct you at first?" Mikaiah responds politely. "We're half-Asian") leads to 
an answer that rambles through a theory that people who live in the same place 
are likely to like the same things; before Mikaiah concludes, innocently: "If 
you grew up in Africa, you'll probably learn bongos and make your own drums or 
whatever." Which may come as news to rather a lot of people in Africa.

Their giddy enthusiasm is best seen when they're on stage, larking about at 
enormous volume. "I've watched quite a few bands that are just perfect on the 
record," Mikaiah says with a hint of disapproval. "But you go to a show to see 
a live performance. The act of performance is to make it interesting and 
visually spectacular, and to have fun with it." He ponders some more about 
playing live: "It's a bit of a childish mentality."

The Bots are still accompanied on tour by their mother. And for Anaiah at 
least, touring has to fit around school. He finished the last school year early 
to spend the summer touring and reflects glumly that he's "just going to have 
to make all that up when I go back to school. Or have home schooling". Mikaiah 
never felt a conflict between his music and his education. "The timing was 
perfect for me because once we started getting shows I'd already graduated high 
school."

Anaiah doesn't try to keep up with his studies on the road then? "Not right 
now," he says. "I'm doing that!" Mikaiah says. "I like learning! I didn't get 
to go to college; immediately out of high school I started touring. When I get 
the time back home I'll look into some kind of college. Knowledge is power!" 
But for now, amped-up guitars, frantically thrashed drums – that's all the 
power the Bots need.

Download Northern Lights by the Bots for free from here 
<http://soundcloud.com/edsellers7/the-bots-northern-lights>
 