
This year was good to Americana music. More mainstream recognition was helped 
by a broadened Billboard chart announced in May that is dedicated to 
specifically tracking Americana music sales. That new development, along with 
the decision last year to include new Grammy categories to honor the best in 
American roots music, serves to recognizeAmericana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/americana> artists who fall outside the 
constraints of country radio.


Robbie Fulks: one of country music's true 'outsiders' comes back around
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/06/robbie-fulks-interview-alt-country-upland-stories>
You can thank the advocacy of Nashville’s Americana Music Association for 
those results. The exposure also brings industry legitimacy to thousands of 
artists who previously have been shunted due to narrow airplay lists and an 
industry mindset that generally forsakes qualities that greater country music 
has long abandoned: acoustic string instruments, poetry and storytelling.

The finest example of that combination is this year’s Upland Stories 
(Bloodshot) byRobbie Fulks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/06/robbie-fulks-interview-alt-country-upland-stories>
, the Chicago country singer and songwriter whose music has been championed by 
the underground for two decades but thanks to the new categories, was nominated 
for two Grammys this week. The album joins a strong class of Americana fare 
that spans from a debut (Midwest Farmer’s Daughter byMargo Price 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/12/margo-price-country-music-is-about-divorce-drinking-and-jail>
), a collaboration (Blue Mountain byBob Weir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/18/grateful-dead-bob-weir-im-nowhere-near-done>
 with The National), a veteran’s comeback (Full Circle byLoretta Lynn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/06/loretta-lynn-full-circle-review>
), and an affirmation of a classic band’s core strengths (American Band by
Drive-By Truckers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/06/drive-by-truckers-black-lives-matter-alabama-southern-rock>
).


Further underground were several albums this year by traditionalists like Luke 
Bell 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/lists/10-new-country-artists-you-need-to-know-may-2016-20160504/luke-bell-20160504>
 and Cody Jinks, which shows their greatest years are ahead and not in the 
past. But maybe the greatest surprise this year were new albums by stadium stars
Dierks Bentley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/24/dierks-bentley-interview-black-country-music>
,Kenny Chesney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/31/kenny-chesney-entertainers-hate-audiences-watching-through-cellphones>
 andMiranda Lambert <https://www.theguardian.com/music/miranda-lambert> that 
featured courageous new songs, which tackle serious themes from media overload 
to sexual despondency. If country radio is destined to broaden, it is now 
obvious it’ll be from the inside out.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fbeyonce-surprise-country-music-awards-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Surprise%20Beyonc%C3%A9%20appearance%20at%20Country%20Music%20Awards%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fbeyonce-surprise-country-music-awards-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Surprise%20Beyonc%C3%A9%20appearance%20at%20Country%20Music%20Awards%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fbeyonce-surprise-country-music-awards-video&media=>
Surprise Beyoncé appearance at Country Music Awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2016/nov/03/beyonce-surprise-country-music-awards-video>
The lowest of the lowlights this year is the mash-up no one asked for between 
Cheap Trick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/21/cheap-trick-we-got-asked-to-play-for-the-republicans-we-would-have-got-swastika-guitars-made>
 andBilly Ray Cyrus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/may/08/billy-ray-cyrus> in downtown 
Nashville during the CMT Awards. Cyrus, for decades irrelevant, sang Elvis and 
Surrender while Cheap Trick’s Robin Zander fed him lyrics. If nothing else the 
performance validated the perception that mainstream country gatekeepers are 
out of touch.

Merle Haggard: the country music legend's 10 greatest hits
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/06/merle-haggard-country-music-legend-greatest-hits>
Yet the single crossover that did feel timely was scorned. Beyoncé’s Daddy 
Lessons was the cover of choice for the Dixie Chicks over the summer;then at 
the CMA Awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/09/cmt-awards-country-music-without-the-country>
 in November they and she performed it together, along with Long Time Gone by 
the Chicks. In terms of country funk, the performance delivered, yet was 
attacked by Travis Tritt and others who said it betrayed country traditionalism.


Another letdown this year was the follow-up album by Sturgill Simpson. After a 
critically hailed second album suggested he was an heir toMerle Haggard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/06/merle-haggard-dead-country-music-icon>
, he released A Sailor’s Guide to Earth, a self-produced set of overwrought new 
songs that suggested he might be closer to a modern day Tom Jones.

The biggest lows of the year were the deaths, most notably Haggard in April 
and Ralph Stanley in June. Stanley, who started his career popularizing 
bluegrass with his brother Carter, was one of the last living links to 
traditional mountain music. His voice, now silenced, will be impossible to 
replace.
 