
2016 was the year the mixtape nearly became obsolete, with releases growing 
more and more polished and less and less like mixtapes. They also fell prey to 
streaming service subscriptions that value all music equally, blurring the 
distinction between “mixtape” and “album” and making the distinction itself 
meaningless. Yet it was somehow also the year the mixtape was a huge 
cornerstone of the rap marketplace – the year of the blockbuster mixtape, as 
well as the breakout mixtape.

Best track of 2016: Work by Rihanna
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/dec/19/best-track-of-2016-work-by-rihanna>
Artists such as Chance the Rapper, Young Thug and 2 Chainz used them to 
project grand, brand-new visions, while newer faces such as Noname, Lil Yachty, 
Kamaiyah, 21 Savage and Lil Uzi Vert used them to break through to the next 
level of web-driven fandom. And that doesn’t even include artists such as 
Desiigner, Zay Hilfigerrr and Zayion McCall, who charted big on Billboard with 
mixtape hits. In some ways, it is outmoded; in others, it is more vital than 
ever before.

With that in mind, these are the best mixtapes of year, projects that both 
proudly carried the distinction and produced much of the best, most nuanced rap 
music of 2016.

Young Thug – Jeffery

Since 2013, only the prodigious Kendrick Lamar can sincerely claim to be more 
dynamic than Young Thug, the premier rap polymath and iconoclast. A polarizing 
figure, he is the heir apparent to Lil Wayne’s weirdo-rap empire. Thug 
sometimes seems to use sound the way some bats use sonar, bouncing it off synth 
walls to get his bearings before venturing forward or in zigzags. Other times, 
he seems as keen on song construction as pop hitmakers like Max Martin, 
crafting pristine earworms that nestle in the brain. He does both of those 
things and more on Jeffery, the complete realization of his sonic repertoire. 
It is as eclectic and daring a release you’ll hear, pivoting from impish yips 
to bloodhound-ish yowls to Louis Armstrong impersonations in a blink.

Kamaiyah – A Good Night in the Ghetto

One of the year’s most refreshing new voices is Kamaiyah, a fun-loving, 
easy-on-the-ears singsongy Oakland rap artist subtly influenced by the energy 
of the Hyphy movement, the swagger of TLC and the flair of Missy Elliott. She 
makes feelgood songs about escapism, and they are infectious, none more so than 
her breakout single How Does It Feel, which openly wonders what it’s like to be 
rich. Her debut mixtape, A Good Night in the Ghetto (as the title suggests), is 
about being young and having fun, spending carefree drunken nights cruising 
around town and dreaming of fame and fortune, of getting out of the ghetto. In 
these moments, anything’s possible.

Chance the Rapper – Coloring Book

The best Coloring Book song is Kanye West’s Ultralight Beam. Though it appears 
on Kanye West’s album The Life of Pablo, it is distinctly Chance the Rapper’s, 
imbued with his warmth, a clear precursor to his mixtape in all its black joy 
and righteous glory. Like Ultralight Beam, the mixtape is explicitly spiritual 
with the bellowing accents of a gospel record, but through carefully 
articulated snapshots, Chance takes listeners through teenage summers in 
Chicago: experimenting with drugs, going to the rink, passing the time, 
surviving. It’s about growing apart and yet also about coming together. It’s 
aglow in unrelenting positivity, refusing to be ensnared by the city’s 
pitfalls, seeking refuge in friends, and in faith. It’s a God dream brought 
down to Earth.

Tink – Winter’s Diary 4
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DL4PQWIQyjx8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DL4PQWIQyjx8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DL4PQWIQyjx8&media=>
At one point, superproducer Timbaland risked ruining Chicago rapper and singer 
Tink by attempting to fashion her into an Aaliyah puppet for his own gain. But 
he loosened the strings this year and on her latest mixtape, Winter’s Diary 4, 
she settles back into the habits that make her a dynamic talent: soul-baring 
honesty, confessional, brutally pointed songwriting. The tape carries with it 
Tink’s long tradition of treating rapping as journaling, and she seamlessly 
details the most personal aspects of her journey to budding rap prodigy. This 
is the most versatile, and the most compelling, she’s ever been – standing 
again, not as the facsimile of a ghost but as a singularity.

Noname – Telefone

Noname made her presence felt in recent years in limited at-bats on projects 
from Chance the Rapper and Donnie Trumpet and the Social Experiment, but her 
grandest statement was made on her proper debut, the long-awaited Telefone 
mixtape. The tape showcases Noname’s unique way with words – stories told in 
snippets. It is a nuanced looked into the life of one of rap’s most exceptional 
writers, balancing joy and despair with a poet’s subtlety. She conveys this 
perpetual struggle simply, and eloquently in verse: “She dream in Technicolor / 
Live black and white.”

Allan Kingdom – Northern Lights

The most chameleonic Kanye West progeny, and perhaps the only one truly formed 
in his image, is the Canadian-born, Minnesota-raised Allan Kingdom, a 
polymorphic artist who can be several different things at once: truth-seer, 
off-kilter singsong rap artist, genre-bender and culture distiller, among 
others. He is as comfortable working with reggae revivalist Chronixx as he is 
neo-soul wunderkind D.R.A.M. His sounds and stylings are most difficult to pin 
down on his latest mixtape, Northern Lights, but it’s his most fascinating 
release yet, exploring imitation, connection, disruption and evolution with a 
sprawling array of sounds and a sidewinding flow.

Nef the Pharaoh – Neffy Got Wings

Following the release of one of 2015’s sleeper hits, Big Tymin’, Nef the 
Pharaoh returned – this time alongside underrated producer Cardo (Drake, Nicki 
Minaj, ScHoolboy Q) – for Neffy Got Wings, a masterclass in rap songcraft. The 
Vallejo MC has some incredible instincts, in timing, wordplay and melody, that 
continue to elude many of his contemporaries. He can be a remarkable 
storyteller, but as Big Tymin’ suggested, he’s most effective when utilizing 
the bounce in his voice. Among the most stunning moments is Michael Jackson, a 
song that spins a childhood yarn into a realized dream, simulating a moonwalk 
with its effortlessness.

Dej Loaf – All Jokes Aside
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8PYWroyqfrA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8PYWroyqfrA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8PYWroyqfrA&media=>
As Dej Loaf has ventured from backpacker to shoulder-checker, she settled into 
the style that best suits her, falling somewhere between the two identities. 
She’s starting to peak at just the right time, as her debut album approaches. 
All Jokes Aside, the latest in a string of strong releases, continues her 
ascent with even-keel performances. She’s always laid-back and remarkably cool, 
relying on her compact raps and her sweet and sour demeanor to appear unmoved 
by her success. Dej has a strong working relationship with producer DDS, and it 
continues to produce great results – his hollowed-out compositions leave space 
for her brags. She’s so unimpressed by everything around her and that, in turn, 
makes her seem all the more impressive.

2 Chainz – Daniel Son ; Necklace Don

2 Chainz quietly had the best year in rap, smashing guest spots on Chance’s No 
Problems, Kanye’s Champions and Jeezy’s Magic City Monday, freeing Weezy from 
his contractual purgatory long enough to record a dedication album, and taking 
his game next level. In recent months, he has become the most efficient 
punchline rapper of his era, taking his already heavy swinging verses and 
cutting the filler for maximum impact, and he’s learned that shorter projects 
suit his raps. To that end, the 10-track offering Daniel Son ; Necklace Don is 
his strongest work to date, creating a flood of powerful – and often comical – 
imagery like on Get Out the Bed: “Bought a room just to shoot dice in / Whip 
same color Cicely Tyson ... Made a mil’ off my phone devices.”

21 Savage – Savage Mode

21 Savage was born in the darkness, molded by it. His breakout tape Savage 
Mode is his manifesto, unmasking him as a Glock-firing, heartless villain 
looking for marks. His isn’t the first to rap about violence, but he’s among 
the few who sound numbed to it, hardened by it. His deadpan flows, stretched 
across the ominous soundscapes of Metro Boomin, reveal a young gunman still in 
the trenches, fearless and without feeling. But then there’s the subdued 
closer, Ocean Drive, where he remembers all the times shots made his mother 
cry, all the friends he’s seen laid to rest in caskets, and it becomes clear 
poverty birthed the savage in him.

Boogie – Thirst 48 Pt II

The second installment in Compton rapper Boogie’s Thirst 48 series picks up 
right where the last left off, penning good kid, mad city narratives from a 
clear-eyed observationalist. “I ain’t scared of shit but my baby mama / No I 
ain’t a punk, I just hate the drama,” he raps, and that’s a working thesis for 
his outlook. He keeps a close eye on what’s happening around him, often 
avoiding confrontation in favor of documenting it, but he keeps an even closer 
eye on his own family, showing the value of love when surrounded by darkness. 
He’s always cautiously optimistic, and even as his rapping gets better he 
remains just as self-conscious as ever. It’s endearing.

Kap G – El Southside
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJ-rBWE7Co3s&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJ-rBWE7Co3s>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJ-rBWE7Co3s&media=>
Kap G is Atlanta’s most underrated talent, a stunt rapper repping College Park 
who at times raps like the fourth Migo. After the release of his spotty Real 
Migo Shit mixtape series, he finally put it all together on El Southside, a 
hometown homage that boasts a Pharrell beat, an exceptional Young Thug guest 
spot and the most infectious song of his young career: Girlfriend, a strobing 
synth delight that turns a casual boast into a full-on flex jam. It’s the 
stunning centerpiece of a well-rounded 10-track offering that displays a rapper 
on the rise finding his range.

Lil Uzi Vert – Lil Uzi Vert vs the World

Philly’s Lil Uzi Vert is a rascally alternative to the bubblegum rap prince 
Lil Yachty, presenting a manicured teen heartthrob persona through a scamp-y, 
almost nasally singsong. The best of his recent trio of mixtapes, Lil Uzi Vert 
vs the World, is a loose play on the Michael Cera-starring action comedy (and 
graphic novel) Scott Pilgrim vs the World, using its characters to sketch out a 
somewhat incoherent love story. But the magic is in the hooks – the way he 
drags them and stretches them out. They’re pure energy and animation. He 
understands song structure in a way Yachty does not (or doesn’t care to), 
making full-fledged tunes that paint in watercolors.

Payroll Giovanni – Big Bossin, Vol 1
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzMj9nAdgUTE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzMj9nAdgUTE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzMj9nAdgUTE&media=>
Detroit supergroup Doughboyz Cashout has been consistently churning out music 
on one of rap’s more under-recognized scenes. One of the crew’s standouts, 
Payroll Giovanni, released a sun-drenched collaboration with Cardo called Big 
Bossin, Vol 1. Over productions that harken back to classic west coast gangsta 
rap, Giovanni lays his mack down with parading verses that replicate cruising 
with the top down. There are shades of Too Short, but the swag is Bylug.

Future – Purple Reign

A year after his great mixtape trilogy (Monster, Beast Mode and 56 Nights) and 
a Billboard chart-topping collaborative mixtape with Drake, Future released a 
mostly underappreciated slew of mixtapes, causing him to vanish from the 
musical sphere for several months – an eternity for an artist as prolific as he 
is. At the top of the year, he released one of his most understated tapes, 
Purple Reign, which resurrects some of his most potent Auto-Tuned croaks and 
reunites him with some of his greatest collaborators, particularly Nard & B on 
the evocative Inside the Mattress. It isn’t his strongest or even his most 
interesting work, but it is packed with his affecting croons.
 