
'I can claim the credit for this one," says Peter Rees, chief planning officer 
of the City of London, with a laugh. "When I first saw a model of the building, 
I toldRichard Rogers <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/richard-rogers> 
I could imagine his wife, Ruthie, using it to grate parmesan. I don't think he 
was too happy, but it stuck."

Rees is talking about the Leadenhall Building 
<http://www.richardrogers.co.uk/render.aspx?siteID=1&navIDs=1,4,25,361,366>, a 
225m-tall skeletal glass-and-steel wedge that soars up from the streets of the 
City, the latest arrival in an ever-growing menagerie of novelty silhouettes 
that he has ushered in during his 28 years as choreographer of this coveted 
stretch of skyline. Designed by Rogers Stirk Harbour and Partners, the new 
colossus's nickname has already caught on: the Cheesegrater.

Buildings with curious monikers are, however, nothing new to the Square Mile. 
Centuries ago, the Church of St Andrew on Leadenhall Street was given the 
nickname Undershaft, as it stood in the shadow of a giant maypole that was 
eventually destroyed by Puritans in the 1540s. Today, with a shaft of a very 
different kind now looming over the church, buildings in the City no longer 
draw their names from centuries-old rituals, but from what they look like if 
you squint a bit.

The steep, triangular mass of the Cheesegrater has now reached its full 
height, an event that will be celebrated in a topping-out ceremony tomorrow, 
even if the building won't be fully finished until next year. Alongside it 
stands the curvaceous Gherkin and, to the south and bulging like a bouncer,the 
Walkie-Talkie 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2012/dec/12/walkie-talkie-fenchurch-street-architecture>
. In addition to these towers, there are plans for a building shaped likea can 
of ham 
<http://metro.co.uk/2008/08/11/quot-can-of-ham-quot-skyscraper-to-join-gherkin-360118/>
, anotherlike a knife <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-london-21027791>, 
and yet another likea rolled-up napkin <http://www.londonpinnacle.com/slideshow>
. The City of London is becoming a bizarre dinner party in the sky.

"Nicknaming is important," says Rees. "The fact that the public warmed to tall 
buildings after the Gherkin is indicated by the fact that they wanted names for 
them: they wanted distinctive buildings they could relate to."

While its name is the product of a planning-meeting quip, the Cheesegrater's 
form is dictated by a building that has been the most powerful force in shaping 
London for the last three centuries. The dome of St Paul's Cathedral, almost a 
mile to the west, is protected bya convoluted array of height limits and 
viewing corridor 
<http://www.cityoflondon.gov.uk/services/environment-and-planning/planning/heritage-and-design/protected-views/Pages/default.aspx>
 rules. All buildings must bow to these. This perverse favouritism has produced 
some disasters – such asJean Nouvel's One New Change shopping centre 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2010/oct/20/one-new-change-st-pauls>. 
Its attempt to limbo under the radar resulted in a clumsy hulk. But with the 
Cheesegrater, Rogers and his team have used this strange doctrine of deference 
to great effect, crafting a slender tapering form of rare elegance. The fact 
that the tower tilts back to the north isn't just to add some visual dynamism – 
it's also, like an awkward relative leaning out of a wedding photograph, making 
sure it doesn't spoil the backdrop of the hallowed dome when seen from Fleet 
Street.

This constraint has also had a beneficial commercial side effect. As the tower 
rises, the floors diminish, from a rambling 20,000 sq ft at the lower levels to 
boutique 6,000 sq ft penthouses, aimed at the cream of asset management firms. 
While the Walkie-Talkie swells out to maximise profits at the higher levels, 
Leadenhall offers a more diverse range of spaces. This has proved irresistible 
to insurance giants Aon and Amlin: half the building will be let to them.

Reading this on mobile? Click here to view video <http://vimeo.com/67882670>

At ground level, the sloping form is also a piece of deference, a way for the 
building to respect its neighbours' space. And these are no ordinary 
neighbours: directly across the street standsRogers' Grade I-listed Lloyd's 
building 
<http://www.richardrogers.co.uk/work/buildings/lloyd_s_of_london/design>, a 
symphony of ducts and pipes that partner Graham Stirk worked on 30 years ago 
when he first joined the practice, fresh out of college. "Let's say it's been 
quite an intimidating context to work in," he grins, pointing out how the new 
tower is also sandwiched between a listed Edwin Lutyens building and two 
ancient churches.

The radical response to this precious, tightly packed spot, so typical of the 
narrow City streets, has been to do away with the lower floors altogether. The 
entire 48-storey pile has been jacked up a whopping 30 metres into the air, 
improbably supported by zig-zagging steel legs that stride around the 
perimeter. The cavernous void beneath, conceived of as an extension of the 
adjacent square, will be planted with all the trappings of a public space: 
lawns, trees, cafes, benches and paved areas that will be "activated" by a 
programme of events. The space will be controlled by Broadgate Estates, the 
company that blocked the Occupy protesters from Paternoster Square, by St 
Paul's, in October 2011. It joins the many pseudo-public spaces (ie, actually 
private) that the firm runs, from Liverpool One to More London.

While the nature of any contemporary public space is becoming increasingly 
questionable 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2012/jun/11/granary-square-privately-owned-public-space>
, this is by far the most generous contribution made by any recent building in 
the Square Mile. It promises to be a dramatic place, boasting a vertical ballet 
of vast escalators shuttling people up to a suspended lobby and cantilevered 
restaurants beyond. This seven-storey space was made possible by the tower's 
unusual structure, laid out on the facade in typical Rogers fashion. A 
super-sized steel lattice wraps around the building, creating a "diagrid" of 
flying beams that intersect at star-shaped joints six metres tall – each 
weighing 30 tonnes and fixed with chunky "mega-bolts". It's a bit like standing 
in the middle of some giant Meccano creation, right down to the vibrant colour 
palette. "This is like bridge engineering," says project architect Andy Young, 
explaining how the entire building was built off-site, then craned into place 
bit by bit. As a result, only 150–200 workers were needed, compared with the 
500–600 usually required for a project of this scale.

Recalling Lloyd's and the Pompidou 
<http://www.richardrogers.co.uk/work/buildings/centre_pompidou/design> before 
it, the Cheesegrater's building-as-machine ethos is celebrated everywhere you 
look, with each component exposed and painted in jovial colours – just like the 
cogs of Stirk's transparent watch. On its north side, 22 glass lifts, strapped 
into orange frames, will hurtle passengers up the yellow shafts at eight metres 
per second, driven by bright green motors at the summit. Even the building's 
shock-absorbing springs have been exposed. "People sit and watch the lifts run 
up our other buildings," says Stirk, barely able to contain his excitement at 
these new capsules. "But this will be something else." Naturally, the toilets 
will be visible, too, or partly, their red-and-blue glazing forming part of the 
outer wall. It all adds up to a giddying urban cliff of lifts and loos. From 
the top, I had to crane my neck to make out the Lloyd's building, a mere speck 
way below.

The Cheesegrater seems to have already caught the popular imagination as a 
spirited building, a cheerful echo of the tapering Shard. After such recent 
RSH+P projects as London'sNeo Bankside 
<http://www.richardrogers.co.uk/work/buildings/neo_bankside/design> and One 
Hyde Park 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2012/nov/26/one-hyde-park-british-virgin-islands> 
– that vacant silo for sheiks in Kensington where "public gardens" cower behind 
metal bars and bulletproof glazing – it has been easy to lose faith in the 
public-minded rhetoric of Rogers's earlier career. While the Leadenhall is of 
course a silo for another kind of City elite, it is an intelligent response to 
the necessities of its site, one that attempts to give as much back to the City 
as it can. Let's just hope it's not upstaged by all the dinner-party guests 
still to come.
 