
“Latin America’s tallest, largest hotel” was the Habana Hilton’s slogan when 
it opened in Cuba’s capital in 1958. Eight months later,Fidel Castro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/fidel-castro> and his revolutionaries 
marched into this unapologetic icon of capitalism to begin their socialist rule 
of Cuba. Soon, the hotel was nationalised and renamed Habana Libre (Free 
Havana); throughout its existence, Habana Libre has charted the turbulent 
relationship between Cuba and the US.

The US fought on Cuba’s side in its war of independence from Spain, ending 
with victory in 1898. Following the conflict, the US helped revive the ravaged 
island’s infrastructure and economy – though not without considerable 
self-interest. The next decades saw a glut of sugar money fuel the flamboyant 
expansion of Havana. The baroque and neo-classical styles of colonialCuba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cuba> were left behind, and an eclectic 
modern style took over in the form of mansions and edifices built in the newer 
quarters of the city.

Havana turned into a convenient backyard playground for US tourists, partly 
thanks to prohibition in the 1920s. But with casinos and nightclubs came the US 
mafia, and with increasing investments came US-backed dictators such as 
Fulgencio Batista.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F12%2Fhavana-habana-libre-castro-cuba-us-history-cities-50-buildings-day-34%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F5%2F1430841191998%2F5234fec3-a5b2-4ecd-a3fc-747131fa581e-2060x1565.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Havana's%20Habana%20Libre%2C%20pawn%20in%20Castro's%20battle%20against%20the%20US%20-%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2034&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F12%2Fhavana-habana-libre-castro-cuba-us-history-cities-50-buildings-day-34%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Havana%27s%20Habana%20Libre%2C%20pawn%20in%20Castro%27s%20battle%20against%20the%20US%20-%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2034&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F12%2Fhavana-habana-libre-castro-cuba-us-history-cities-50-buildings-day-34%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F5%2F1430841191998%2F5234fec3-a5b2-4ecd-a3fc-747131fa581e-2060x1565.jpeg>
 Cuban rebel soldiers in the Habana Hilton foyer, January 1959. Photograph: 
Lester Cole/Corbis 
For Batista, the hotel was a project of considerable symbolic value. Built in 
a strikingly prominent location at the top of La Rampa, a street sloping up 
from the sea in the downtown district of Vedado, the project was funded through 
the pension plan of the Cuban Catering Workers’ Union, to be run by Hilton 
Hotels International, and designed by the Los Angeles firm of Welton Becket & 
Associates along with a Cuban firm, Arroyo and Menéndez.

Castro set up the new regime’s command post in room 2324 of the hotel: the 
Continental Suite

When complete, an advertisement for the new hotel noted that the 30-storey 
block had 630 “lavishly appointed rooms and suites”, a casino, a Trader Vic’s 
and a terrace bar. The opening in March 1958 was by all accounts a spectacular 
affair, with Becket and Conrad Hilton playing host to officials, celebrities 
and journalists, many flown in from the US.

Architectural historian Peter Moruzzi, author of Havana Before Castro 
<http://www.havanabeforecastro.com>, explains what the hotel meant to Cuba’s 
then ruler: “Batista considered the Habana Hilton among his proudest 
achievements, its huge blue-lit rooftop ‘Hilton’ name announcing to the world 
that the eminent Conrad Hilton had confidence in Cuba’s future – that the 
country was a safe place in which to invest – and that tourists could now find 
in Havana the modern comforts they expected in a top international resort.”

Batista could not take comfort in the Hilton for long, however. With the 
revolution making rapid advances, he fled Cuba in the early hours of 1 January 
1959, while some of his associates welcomed in the new year in the Hilton 
ballroom. The revolutionaries entered Havana in a jubilant motorcade on 8 
January, and Castro made for the Hilton. According to Moruzzi, “The Hilton was 
located at the highest point in Havana and visible throughout the city; it was 
the most prominent symbol of American influence in Cuba. That’s why Castro made 
it his provisional headquarters when he took Havana in January 1959.”

Photographs from the time show scruffy soldiers lounging with guns in a plush 
lobby, sitting on the floor eating, machetes still attached to their belts. 
Castro set up the new regime’s command post in room 2324 of the hotel: the 
Continental Suite. Press conferences and announcements were held here, as were 
meetings with visiting leaders from other countries.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F12%2Fhavana-habana-libre-castro-cuba-us-history-cities-50-buildings-day-34%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F5%2F1430843919972%2F01c1e95e-f0cc-43dc-b89f-0abdb8171f31-2034x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Havana's%20Habana%20Libre%2C%20pawn%20in%20Castro's%20battle%20against%20the%20US%20-%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2034&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F12%2Fhavana-habana-libre-castro-cuba-us-history-cities-50-buildings-day-34%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Havana%27s%20Habana%20Libre%2C%20pawn%20in%20Castro%27s%20battle%20against%20the%20US%20-%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2034&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F12%2Fhavana-habana-libre-castro-cuba-us-history-cities-50-buildings-day-34%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F5%2F1430843919972%2F01c1e95e-f0cc-43dc-b89f-0abdb8171f31-2034x2040.jpeg>
 The Habana Hilton was taken over by the state and renamed in 1960. Photograph: 
Bettmann/Corbis 
It was also in the lobby of the Hilton that Castro told a gathered crowd: “If 
the Americans don’t like what is happening in Cuba, they can land the marines, 
and then there will be 200,000 gringos dead.” With two floors of the hotel 
given to the incipient Soviet embassy, changing allegiances were evident. In 
1960, the hotel was taken over by the state and its name changed to Habana 
Libre.

Architecture in Havana changed after the revolution. The multi-centred city 
was – and still is – a museum of sorts for every European style of building 
seen in the last few centuries, many with local interpretations. The new 
regime’s attempt at revolutionary architecture came with Castro commissioning a 
set ofnational art schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2003/sep/08/architecture.cuba>. Two 
out of five, designed by the architect Ricardo Porro, were completed. These 
were exuberant, expressive, curvy brick structures, soon criticised for being 
expensive and idiosyncratic. But they were true products of the revolution for 
another reason – their design, using brick arches, was directly influenced by 
the US embargo that caused a shortage of steel.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F12%2Fhavana-habana-libre-castro-cuba-us-history-cities-50-buildings-day-34%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F5%2F1430842794517%2F8bdd3d61-8816-459d-b9ed-c4eb5c5c1a14-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Havana's%20Habana%20Libre%2C%20pawn%20in%20Castro's%20battle%20against%20the%20US%20-%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2034&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F12%2Fhavana-habana-libre-castro-cuba-us-history-cities-50-buildings-day-34%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Havana%27s%20Habana%20Libre%2C%20pawn%20in%20Castro%27s%20battle%20against%20the%20US%20-%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2034&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F12%2Fhavana-habana-libre-castro-cuba-us-history-cities-50-buildings-day-34%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F5%2F1430842794517%2F8bdd3d61-8816-459d-b9ed-c4eb5c5c1a14-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Foyer of the Habana Libre in 2014. Photograph: Villorejo/Alamy 
From the 1960s, Soviet influence is held to have steered post-revolutionary 
Cuban architecture towards more plain and functional designs – whereas the 
pre-revolution 1950s had witnessed the construction of several tall buildings 
in Havana including theFOCSA building <http://www.havanatimes.org/?p=102833>, 
still the tallest in Cuba. The last of those buildings, opened months before 
the revolution, was the Habana Hilton.


The Habana Libre continues to function as one of the city’s leading hotels. In 
1996 its management was shared by the Cuban government with the Spanish Sol 
Meliá group and the hotel was subsequently restored, the highlight being the 
re-emergence of an enormous ceramic mural by Cuban avant-garde painter Amelia 
Peláez.

Up until 1959, Cuba’s legislature had assembled in El Capitolio – a replica of 
the US Capitol building built in 1929. Castro’s regime shifted it from this 
too-obvious reminder of the past – but it is perhaps a sign of time elapsed 
that, as US-Cuba relations ease, the National Assembly is due to meet in a 
restored Capitolio this year for the first time since the revolution. 
Meanwhile, in February this year, Paris Hilton visited Havana and the hotel her 
great-grandfather Conrad inaugurated in 1958. From theselfie 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/centralamericaandthecaribbean/cuba/11443590/Cubas-revolution-comes-full-circle-with-a-Hilton-in-Havana.html>
 she took with Fidel Castro’s son, it would appear all is forgiven.

 * Which other buildings in the world tell stories about urban history? Share 
your own pictures and descriptions with GuardianWitness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/mar/23/50-buildings-great-stories-urban-history>
, on Twitter and Instagram using #hoc50 or let us know suggestions in the 
comments below  