
Britain’s referendum decision to leave the EU was seen in some quarters as a 
damning verdict on immigration. But while some see incomers as a threat and a 
drain, others recognise that many refugees come with skills, ambitions and 
ideas that should not be wasted.

Getting refugees working in the NHS

When Aster Yehayes first arrived in Leeds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/leeds> in the back of a lorry crammed with 
chemicals and seven other people, she didn’t know what country she was in, let 
alone what the future held for her.

She was alone and destitute, with only the clothes on her back and no grasp of 
the English language. A month before, she had escaped wrongful imprisonment in 
Eritrea and walked day and night through the Sahara desert to reach Sudan, 
where her uncle lived. He told her she couldn’t stay and found a man who 
trafficked her to England.

She was taken to the police station in Leeds where she was put in detention. 
“I knew I was illegal, but I couldn’t believe I had escaped prison just to be 
put in prison again,” says Yehayes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fbrits-helping-refugees-help-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6fdb38a63e666c754d27352a2b196833a6595588%2F0_364_3754_2252%2F3754.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Brits%20helping%20refugees%20help%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fbrits-helping-refugees-help-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Brits%20helping%20refugees%20help%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fbrits-helping-refugees-help-britain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6fdb38a63e666c754d27352a2b196833a6595588%2F0_364_3754_2252%2F3754.jpg>
 Aster Yehayes. Photograph: Leeds NHS Trust 
It was while she was locked in a police cell that she prayed: if God kept her 
safe and alive, she would dedicate her life to helping others. She could never 
have imagined while sitting on a plastic mattress, afraid to drink a cup of tea 
for fear that it was dirty water, that nine years later she would be working 
for the NHS – an institution regarded as a national treasure in her adopted 
home.

Yehayes, 35, is one of eight women who have got jobs as apprentice or 
qualified healthcare assistants at Leeds teaching hospitals NHS trust with the 
help of the Hidden Talents programme, which aims to open doors for people who 
might not know how to apply and interview for roles in the health service.

All of those on the programme are refugees or women who have come to the UK on 
a spousal visa to join their husband, who is often himself an asylum seeker. 
Despite being enthusiastic and experienced, these women often find it difficult 
to get work because of barriers such as a lack of confidence and knowledge 
around how to fill in application forms.

Gill Chapman, lead nurse for nursing and midwifery workforce, who heads the 
project at the trust, says: “Within our community, there are a number of people 
who are finding it difficult to access employment. They want to work within the 
trust but through the normal processes they’ve not been successful.” 
Nationwide, there is a high vacancy rate in nursing; Leeds is no exception and 
this scheme also helps the trust meets its staffing requirements. Chapman adds: 
“It’s a win-win.”

 Chapman insists that entry requirements for roles have not been compromised. 
The trust held a workshop to talk the women through the application process, 
and guaranteed them an interview or a place at the assessment centre. The rest 
was up to them and their mentors.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fbrits-helping-refugees-help-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F38ac2303be1bdde9e87383b2baf0984b73b152a2%2F0_516_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Brits%20helping%20refugees%20help%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fbrits-helping-refugees-help-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Brits%20helping%20refugees%20help%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fbrits-helping-refugees-help-britain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F38ac2303be1bdde9e87383b2baf0984b73b152a2%2F0_516_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 Nadege Demgne. Photograph: Leeds NHS Trust 
 That was all that was needed for Nadege Demgne, 37, from Cameroon, who had 
applied for jobs at the trust several times without success. With a little 
support she is now a qualified healthcare assistant on a midwifery ward. Her 
life now is a far cry from when she fled Cameroon as a 17-year-old because she 
faced forced marriage to a 75-year-old man. She says with a beaming smile: 
“It’s a great opportunity for me. I never dreamed about doing this. Since I 
started, I’m thinking about going forward, becoming a midwife – why not?”

Diako Lebakeng, 39, first came to the UK 17 years ago, from Johannesburg to 
join her Nigerian husband, who was seeking asylum. Her life has been filled 
with trials and because of stress she has lost most of her hair. She was 
recently granted leave to remain for two and a half years; the judge looked 
favourably on the fact that she had this apprenticeship open for her.

“To be honest with you, it’s hard to explain the feeling,” says Lebakeng. 
“Wow. I can’t wait. Before, it was just darkness. With this opportunity we’ve 
been given, it’s like opening the road for us and there’s a light of promise 
there coming through.”Sarah Johnson

The volunteer chefs

In a cafe kitchen, a young woman arranges pieces of chicken on a bed of rice 
and stirs yoghurt into a salad of tomatoes, chickpeas and garlic. Her mother 
takes a tray of rich, oily aubergine slices from the oven. They are rustling up 
their version of the Middle Eastern dishmaklouba.

On the other side of the hatch, anticipation is growing as lunchtime 
approaches. “I’ve been here since 10am,” says a woman sitting at one of half a 
dozen round tables. “I’m starving.”


This is one of a growing number of volunteer-run cafes across the UK using 
food that would otherwise be thrown away to create nutritious meals for people 
who are hungry, lonely or marginalised.


But the remarkable difference at All Hallows <http://allhallowsleeds.org>, an 
Anglican church in Leeds, is that the food is being cooked by recently arrived 
Syrian Muslim refugees, many of whom have gone through traumatic experiences 
but who now want to make a contribution in their new and unfamiliar home.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fbrits-helping-refugees-help-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a84b69e020f914dadce3c24a718a51e8c6bb526%2F0_9_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Brits%20helping%20refugees%20help%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fbrits-helping-refugees-help-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Brits%20helping%20refugees%20help%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fbrits-helping-refugees-help-britain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a84b69e020f914dadce3c24a718a51e8c6bb526%2F0_9_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 The Real Junk Food Project helps local people get to know each other. 
Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
Salam al-Khatib, 22, who practises saying the word garlic as she crushes 
cloves, has been in the UK for two months following four years in Lebanon after 
her family left their home in Homs in 2011. She came to Leeds with her parents, 
two brothers and a sister under the UK’s resettlement programme.


“Everyone has welcomed us here, everyone has been very friendly,” she says in 
Arabic, translated by Hala Wadi, a Palestinian English teacher who has been in 
the UK for 10 months. “My mum and I volunteered to cook at the cafe. I loved 
the idea of sharing our food with others.”


Over the course of several hours, some 60 people are fed the Khatibs’ 
signature dishes. Dashing between the tables to refill water jugs and clear 
plates is Heston Groenewald, the vicar of All Hallows for the past 18 months – 
his “first proper grown-up vicar job” since being ordained five years ago, he 
says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fbrits-helping-refugees-help-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3d774dfaa2600ca35f419a94519ae7364bf8ae0%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Brits%20helping%20refugees%20help%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fbrits-helping-refugees-help-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Brits%20helping%20refugees%20help%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fbrits-helping-refugees-help-britain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3d774dfaa2600ca35f419a94519ae7364bf8ae0%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Heston Groenewald, vicar of the ‘very inclusive, open’ church of All Hallows. 
Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
The church has run  <http://cafe.allhallowsleeds.org> The Real Junk Food 
Project <http://therealjunkfoodproject.org/about/> – where people pay what they 
can, or in kind by washing up or weeding the garden – for the past two years, 
building up from one day a week to four or five. The idea to hand over the 
kitchen to Syrian refugees one day a week came out of discussions with members 
of the local mosque.

“All Hallows is a very inclusive, open church,” says Groenewald, who says he 
thinks the government response to the refugee crisis has been inadequate.

“We should have a mindset of generosity rather than austerity. If only we 
could think in terms of brothers and sisters, of friendships which sprout and 
flourish, rather than foreigners.”


Alaa Abdul Jaleel, 28, came to All Hallows by accident. “I was looking for a 
conversation club [to help learn English], but my feet brought me here,” she 
says while feeding her 18-month old daughter, Sarah, who was born in Turkey a 
few months after Abdul Jaleel and her husband fled Deraa in southernSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fbrits-helping-refugees-help-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcf73c43c3f52eafe0e0734338d620b46419bc3f0%2F0_107_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Brits%20helping%20refugees%20help%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fbrits-helping-refugees-help-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Brits%20helping%20refugees%20help%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fbrits-helping-refugees-help-britain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcf73c43c3f52eafe0e0734338d620b46419bc3f0%2F0_107_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Syrian kitchen: the menu board at the cafe. Photograph: Christopher Thomond 
for the Guardian 
The couple were both surgeons in Deraa, but cannot practise in the UK until 
they have passed three exams. “We get benefits, but we want to work. I’ve met 
five other Syrian families here who are all frustrated because we can’t work,” 
she says.

Back in the kitchen, Muslim and Christian volunteers are working side by side. 
The cafe receives halal chicken from the Nando’s restaurant chain, dried herbs 
and spices abandoned at the end of term by Leeds University halls of residence 
occupants, and groceries, vegetables and other items from supermarkets and food 
outlets. Only aubergines, tomatoes and lemons had to be purchased for the 
Khatibs to create their Syrian lunch.

Groenewald has been awarded a grant from the Church of England’s Near 
Neighbours programme <http://www.cuf.org.uk/near-neighbours> to pay for extras 
and to ensure the cafe has a secure future. “This feels like a good, effective 
way to love our neighbours,” he says.Harriet Sherwood

Giving refugee journalists a voice

Temesghen Debesai was a familiar face on Eritrean television. So familiar in 
fact, that the television news presenter knew he would never be able to flee 
the east African country without being recognised at the border.

Until 2006, when he absconded from a work trip in Bahrain and was granted 
asylum in Britain, Debesai worked for the government’s public broadcaster, as 
the head director of the English-language television department, interviewing 
prominent figures such Kofi Annan and Muammar Gaddafi.

Debesai was optimistic at the direction Eritrea was going in until 2001, when 
the country’s leaders rounded up government ministers who were calling for 
reform and a number of journalists. Many of this group are still imprisoned and 
in some cases, their whereabouts – and even whether they are alive – is 
unknown. “As soon as you see these sorts of things happening you realise 
nothing is safe,” says Debesai.
 Temesghen Debesai on the set of Sports News Africa, where he worked as a 
presenter for a year in London. Photograph: Temesghen Debesai 
Debesai, now 40 and living in London, has worked in many fields over the years 
to get by, but his dream is to get back to journalism and he has found a new 
source of support in this goal. The Refugee Journalism Project 
<http://migrantjournalism.org/>, run by the Migrant Resource Centre and the 
London College of Communication, is helping him.

“Coming here, I knew I’d have to start from scratch,” says Debesai. “One of 
the biggest problems when you come from another country is networking with 
people, people on the inside who can tell you who to contact.”

Debesai says even simple things such as how to prepare a CV or pitch a story 
idea differ from country to country. “You need someone to show you the ropes,” 
he adds.

Vivienne Francis, one of the founders of the project, was doing voluntary work 
with refugees and noticed there were a number of experienced journalists living 
in the UK as refugees who were finding it difficult to restart their careers.

Since starting in May, the people running the project have been contacted by 
more than 30 refugees from countries including Syria, Eritrea, Sudan, 
Afghanistan, Iraq, Iran, Cuba, Bangladesh and the Yemen – many of whom, like 
Debesai, were prominent journalists at home and now live across the UK.

The scheme partners refugee journalists with a local journalist, who acts as 
their mentor. They are also invited to attend regular workshops on subjects 
such as UK media law and ethics, and on pitching to editors.

Debesai has just secured a paid internship at Thomson Reuters through the 
project. “If this project had come 10 years ago, imagine where I’d be now,” he 
says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fbrits-helping-refugees-help-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60f14609f6cdac9deb38d70ae3c596b6048e736e%2F0_29_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Brits%20helping%20refugees%20help%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fbrits-helping-refugees-help-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Brits%20helping%20refugees%20help%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fbrits-helping-refugees-help-britain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60f14609f6cdac9deb38d70ae3c596b6048e736e%2F0_29_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
 Fardous Bahbouh. Photograph: Martin Twomey/Fardous Bahbouh 
Another participant in the scheme, Fardous Bahbouh, a refugee from Syria who 
has lived in the UK for almost six years, works as a translator, teacher, and 
voiceover artist. She wanted to become a journalist after becoming increasingly 
frustrated with the way the Syrian conflict and the refugee crisis are 
portrayed in the media.

“So many people pretend to be the experts about Syria, but they are often 
misinformed,” she says. “When people are talking about our country they should 
at least listen to Syrians. And then the refugee crisis was more publicised in 
the west and all these people are talking about refugees but not listening to 
refugees and I was like, fine I’m going to be the journalist myself.”

Bahbouh has just had her first paid article accepted for publication and sees 
the difference the project is making for other refugees on the course. “It’s 
very hard to get into the job market – they have the qualifications, they have 
the skills, but they will regain their self-confidence by being able to 
contribute,” she says.Kate Lyons

The bike fixers

Every Thursday night the Bike Project <http://thebikeproject.co.uk/> in 
Denmark Hill, south London donates refurbished bikes to refugees and asylum 
seekers. One of them is Johannes, a 24-year-old Eritrean, who arrived in the UK 
earlier this year, alone and with nothing, after a gruelling six-month journey 
across east Africa and continental Europe. He lives on a support payment of £36 
a week, almost half of which is spent on bus fares.

He is one of a dozen or so people queuing patiently outside the buzzing 
workshop, situated on a quiet residential street, to see if he can save more of 
his money by swapping bus fares for bike rides. It’s also a welcome opportunity 
to talk to supportive, friendly people.

“It will be very helpful for college where I am learning English and for when 
I have appointments for my asylum application,” says Johannes, who used to 
cycle in his home country and heard about the project from another asylum 
seeker.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fbrits-helping-refugees-help-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcf6309c5e2f76aa8aad476faf180c2f6c2e78ca7%2F0_67_4846_2908%2F4846.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Brits%20helping%20refugees%20help%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fbrits-helping-refugees-help-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Brits%20helping%20refugees%20help%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fbrits-helping-refugees-help-britain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcf6309c5e2f76aa8aad476faf180c2f6c2e78ca7%2F0_67_4846_2908%2F4846.jpg>
 A visitor to the Bike Project works on his bike. Photograph: The Bike Project 
Since launching in 2013, the Bike Project has given away 1,800 bikes. Today 
it’s very busy. Volunteers and staff mill around, introducing visitors to their 
bikes and kitting them out with helmets, bike locks, reflective jackets and 
maps of London. Then they’re taken out for a spin around the neighbourhood to 
get acquainted with their new wheels and learn about road safety.
“We aim to pair some of the 27,500 bikes abandoned in London each year 
<http://content.tfl.gov.uk/bicycle-recycling-schemes-London-scoping-study-april-2007.pdf>
 with the 13,500 asylum seekers and refugees who arrive in the city,” says Jem 
Stein, the initiative’s founder. Discarded bikes are donated by local councils, 
the police, property developers and housing associations, as well as by members 
of the public.

The project began with Adam, a teenage genocide survivor from Darfur, whom 
Stein met through a mentoring programme at university. “I gave him my brother’s 
old bike and it made his life that little bit easier,” says Stein. “Something 
as simple as having a bike can put people on the road to starting a normal life 
in a new city. It offers a free and sustainable way to reach important places, 
for people who could wait years until they’re allowed to earn any money.”

Maizer, a Sudanese genocide survivor, says his bike has restored some dignity 
and independence to his life. “It’s like I have new wings.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fbrits-helping-refugees-help-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F420ccb8ea227c737c99bfef44a24fa374c7d8bfa%2F0_274_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Brits%20helping%20refugees%20help%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fbrits-helping-refugees-help-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Brits%20helping%20refugees%20help%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fbrits-helping-refugees-help-britain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F420ccb8ea227c737c99bfef44a24fa374c7d8bfa%2F0_274_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
 An asylum seeker works on her bike. Photograph: The Bike Project 
On Wednesdays the project runs a women’s cycling group in Poplar, east London, 
dedicated to giving female refugees and asylum seekers more confidence and 
independence through cycling.

Nadia came to this country from India as an asylum seeker in 2009 and has 
spent the summer learning how to cycle and making new friends. “It makes you 
happy, I feel more fresh and energetic after cycling. And it saves travel 
fares, which are always so difficult if you are on benefits and have to buy 
groceries as well.”

Stein has noticed an increase in demand for bikes and there is now a waiting 
list of 200 people.

Turning the tables: the ping pong sanctuary for young refugees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/26/turning-the-tables-the-ping-pong-sanctuary-for-young-refugees>
To keep up, the Bike Project runs on grants and donations, and is refurbishing 
and selling <http://shop.thebikeproject.co.uk/?gclid=CO7kh7G-yM8CFeQy0wodcJ4Fkw>
 its most high-end bikes online. Volunteers are vital, and about half the 
people who volunteer are refugees or asylum seekers who have benefited from the 
project and are now using their bikes to come back every week to help out.
Kirstie Brewer
 