
1 Lucky You <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JK-bZh9gkIc>

The National’s first two albums are their “lost” albums. But, as guitarist 
Aaron Dessner noted 
<http://diymag.com/archive/the-national-funny-songs-about-death>, they served a 
purpose “We made those records ourselves, started a label, put them out and 
fell on our face for a couple of years and it taught us a lot. Without those 
first two records we would never have got to Alligator.” He’s right: among the 
sonic debris of Americana and experimental rock there are certainly gems to be 
found and the musical ancestry of traits the band would perfect on Alligator and
Boxer can be found. Not least Lucky You, the gorgeously swelling closing track 
on their second album Sad Songs for Dirty Lovers, which contains many of the 
hallmarks of the National’s heartbreaking music. It’s a track that can be seen 
as a precursor to songs like Boxer’sGreen Gloves 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OBhGFu84u90> or Slow Show. There’s Matt 
Berninger’s rich, whiskey-soaked baritone as he croons “You own me/ There’s 
nothing you can do,” turning the traditional message of a love song on its 
head. Underneath, delicate piano softly builds to help create a resigned moment 
of sublime beauty. A “gorgeous train wreck 
<http://www.brassland.org/album.php?catno=003>”, as it’s been called. And there 
we have the National.

2 About Today <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ne43u8suEAg>

There are just 87 words in About Today, and not a single one is wasted. Its 
sparse yet tender minimalism and suffocating build-up so perfectly capture how 
it feels to be in a relationship teetering on the brink of collapse that it’s 
devastating. It makes About Today the centrepiece of the Cherry Tree EP. In 
retrospect it feels like Cherry Tree was a crucial landmark for the National. 
It features a version of All The Wine, which would be one of the highlights on 
Alligator, and seems to signpost where the National were going rather than 
point to where they had been. “I think for us Cherry Tree was when we started 
to figure out ‘Ok, this is what we can do’”, bassist Scott Devendorf has told 
me.About Today is a work of despair, capturing that clawing late-night feeling 
of intense loneliness, and the fear of broaching the subject. “How close am I 
to losing you?” asks Berninger as a bed of gentle guitar and violins 
interweaves between his vulnerable pleading. But there are no answers, no real 
sense of relief. Now when they play it live it climaxes as a beautiful wash of 
sound, but on record it’s all tension and little release. And it’s this 
unresolved tension in the music thatunderpins so many of their songs.

3 The Geese of Beverly Road <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=02tWZNQ6n38>

Alligator is the album that made the National. (It’s probably my favourite 
record of all time: a companion in helping to define the struggles of youth and 
growing up.) It also saw them make the leap to a bigger label: Beggars Banquet, 
and subsequently 4AD. Perhaps the album’s greatest strength is in its 
nocturnal, claustrophobic mood . The sound is more focused, the Dessner twins’ 
guitars coming to the forefront, Bryan Devendorf’s drums higher in the mix, 
helping the band fashion their own shadowy world full of tensions and 
anxieties. It paints in deeper shades than they had before and Berninger’s 
intricately thought out character vignettes hit home more sharply. Most 
importantly, it gets the balance right: it’s a record that ebbs and flows 
magnificently. The Geese of Beverly Road is a perfect example, a moment of 
tender optimism in an album of shade, as Berninger sings: “We’re the heirs to 
the glimmering world.” As he does so, he captures those fleeting moments of 
being totally happy and free of worry. “I was sitting outside one night 
watching a bunch of kids running up and down Beverly setting off car alarms. 
The song is theirs,”he has said 
<http://www.neumu.net/datastream/2005/2005-00022/2005-00022_datastream.shtml>. 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwLzChxmkH6s&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwLzChxmkH6s>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwLzChxmkH6s&media=>
4 Mr November <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wLzChxmkH6s>

Alligator’s closing track, Mr November, is the moment the album’s suppressed 
worry and frustrations are released in an explosion of serrated guitar and 
propulsive drums. “I WON’T FUCK US OVER! I’M MR. NOVEMBER!” Berninger screams. 
“I used to be carried in the arms of cheerleaders!” he declares. By the time it 
has finished you feel like the band has given everything, strained every sinew 
and torn themselves apart. Which was partially true. “Frankly it was a very 
difficult time,” Aaron Dessner said 
<http://www.musicomh.com/features/interviews/interview-the-national>. “Mr 
November is partly about John Kerry, part Matt – the anxiety and pressure 
leading up to the [2004 presidential] election and also the end of the album.” 
And just to underline the political context, in 2008 the band also printed 
T-shirts withBarack Obama’s face above the words “Mr November” 
<http://allthingsobama.blogspot.co.uk/2008/07/mr-november-national-design-obama-shirt.html>
. When performed live, the song is even more frenetic, Berninger marching 
dramatically through the crowd, screaming the refrain. Thoughhe admitted to me 
he may have to stop it 
<http://diymag.com/archive/the-national-funny-songs-about-death>: “Especially 
in the UK, there have been some attempts to take my pants off. It’s hard to 
sing a song when you’re desperately trying to keep from having your belt undone 
by some drunk dudes.”

5 Fake Empire <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rzpC1AzO84Q>

With Mr November bookending Alligator, then the opening song of Boxer, Fake 
Empire, becomes its immediate successor. It makes sense – it’s another song 
with a distinctly political slant. From its first plaintive piano chords and 
Berninger’s lyrics about “picking apples, making pies” it’s clear that there is 
a focus on characters attempting to forget about the problems and politics of 
the outside world and focus on domesticity. The song would later beused in an 
Obama campaign video 
<http://allthingsobama.blogspot.co.uk/2008/09/national-fake-empire-obama-video-ad.html>
 – but it’s just as much about apathy under George Bush. Coincidentally, an 
Ohio University student group ended up using the track in a pro-Mitt Romney 
video and were forced to apologise to the band after being reprimanded by 
Berninger <http://www.nme.com/news/the-national/66888>. “Our music was used 
without our permission in this ad. The song you’re using was written about the 
same backward, con game policies Romney is proposing.” Fake Empire’s 
arrangement and melody are notable for the use of polyrhythms, and for the lush 
fanfare, written by longtime friend and collaborator Padma Newsome, that lifts 
the song up to its shimmering dreamlike crescendo.

6 Slow Show <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8YXVM252h-k>

Despite the band’s misgivings – Berninger memorably said onstage “This is 
called Slow Show, don’t play it at your wedding ’cos … it references my dick” – 
this is the National song many couples have chosen for their first dance. The 
closing coda of “You know, I dreamed about you for 29 years before I saw you,” 
(which sees Berninger plagiarise himself, borrowing from the song29 Years 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Cky2UDr8PYA> on their debut) makes it the 
choice for newlyweds. It’s classic National, centred on the intimate feelings 
of a man falling in love with the woman of his dreams while simultaneously 
worrying that his responsibilities will cause him to lose her. Over guitar, 
dream-like drones and a twinkling piano, Berninger wonders aloud, “I want to 
hurry home to you/ Put on a slow dumb show for you/ Crack you up.” Again, it’s 
about escape, the search for contentment that permeates Boxer:Berninger has 
described the lyrics 
<http://www.pastemagazine.com/articles/2008/09/matt-berninger-of-the-national-explains-boxer-lyri.html>
“as wanting to get out of some anxiety-filled public situation, where there’s a 
party or something and you just want to escape and be home, close the doors 
with someone that you really care about and just be stupid and laugh”. And 
never have the band captured that sentiment so stunningly.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTITj3mZfvSQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTITj3mZfvSQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTITj3mZfvSQ&media=>
7 Blank Slate <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TITj3mZfvSQ>

There have been some great National B-sides, but Blank Slate stands out. 
Indeed, the first three songs on The Virginia EP – a collection of covers, 
B-sides and demos to accompany the admittedly pretty ropy documentary A Skin, A 
Night – could easily have been singles themselves, with longtime collaborator 
Sufjan Stevens featuring onYou’ve Done It Again, Virginia 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MW-1oeBMdM0>. Yet it pales in comparison to 
the brooding Blank Slate with its bizarre lyrical allusions (Berninger’s head 
is like a “buzzing three-star hotel”) and spidery guitar. The track was the 
B-side toMistaken for Strangers <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cgRsYkKb1eI> 
and reworks the lyrics fromKeep It Upstairs 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2ZedlvJzugQ> from the Abel EP. Its whirring, 
angular guitars and Bryan Devendorf’s typically stellar drumming soundtrack 
Berninger’s droll tale of finding love by kidnapping someone famous, fighting 
off armies with tennis rackets, and tackling young girls off bicycles.

8 Terrible Love (alternate version) 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=330UqSBEXaU>

While Alligator and Boxer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2011/sep/23/boxer-national> saw 
the dripfeed of adoration for the band grow, High Violet saw the National go 
stratospheric. Its opening track, Terrible Love, is one of the heaviest things 
the National have recorded, dense and knotty, a layered, muted beast that 
threatens to climax but never quite delivers – falling into itself in a cloudy 
concoction of echo and guitar. It’s a song of paranoia and pathos: Berninger 
sings of “walking with spiders” and not being able to get to sleep without a 
little help. Again it focuses on a topic Berninger constantly returns to, 
capturing that apprehension at the start of a relationship. The idea of oceans 
and water introduced here would also recur throughout the album. This alternate 
version, however – found on the expanded version of High Violet – is altogether 
cleaner and more triumphant, toning down the guitar distortion and instead 
ending in a rush of horns and chiming guitars. It means it looks outwards 
rather inwards and, as a result, feels more exultant and optimistic than the 
album’s vision.

9 Lemonworld <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=prpw4nfSpxE>

If there’s one song that demonstrates the taxing process of the National’s 
album-making – the lengths (and arguments) they go to create the exact sound 
they want – it’s Lemonworld. The song was rewritten 80 times before they 
settled on the original version. In factNicholas Dawidoff’s New York Times 
profile of the group <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=prpw4nfSpxE> equates the 
troubled history of Lemonworld with their slow ascent to success. And as that 
article put it, it’s easy to see the band “as a group of skilled chefs mak[ing] 
a sandwich together; even in a BLT, they can foresee endless possibilities”. 
The tortuous process of attempting to get the song precisely right meant it 
almost never happened. It was called Wrath, it was called You and Your Sister, 
and even when they finally decided on the original version, Berninger 
complained, “Now it’s the ugliest, worst-mixed, least-polished song on the 
record, and it took the longest to get there.” The result is that Lemonworld 
(“an invented, sexy, weird place where you can escape from New York,”Berninger 
said 
<http://thequietus.com/articles/04024-the-national-interview-high-violet-bon-iver-sufjan-stevens>
, if you were unsure) does almost sound like a demo, but therein lies its 
beauty. It’s laidback almost to the point of being horizontal, Berninger 
crooning, “Put flowers in my mouth and we can say we invented a summer lovin’ 
torture party.” It returns to the idea of pretence: “You can’t deal with the 
reality of what’s really going on, so let’s just pretend that the world’s full 
of bluebirds and ice skating.” And this is mirrored sonically: from the first 
murky guitar strum it slowly swells and mesmerises but there’s nowhere to hide 
in the bright sunshine.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoVtkxrxilZo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoVtkxrxilZo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoVtkxrxilZo&media=>
10 Pink Rabbits <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oVtkxrxilZo> 

With their popularity at an all-time high after the success of High Violet (it 
went top five in both the UK and the US) it would have been easy for the band 
to have hidden behind abstractions and metaphor. Yet their most recent album,
Trouble Will Find Me 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/may/16/national-trouble-will-find-me-review>
, is not only theirmost open album, but also a refinement of everything that 
had come before. It’s the glowing Pink Rabbits – a love song about a 
relationship that has fallen apart and come back together, and one of the most 
heartswelling moments in a career punctuated by them – that guides Trouble Will 
Find Me towards its shimmering conclusion. While touring High Violet, Berninger 
had become obsessed with Roy Orbison and you can hear it here, his vocals more 
prominent. The song has six or seven melodies within it, and Berninger notes 
that he wrote eight different songs to the music. Over brooding but warm piano, 
strings and muffled drums, he sings “I’m so surprised you want dance with me 
now/ I was just getting used to living life without you around.”
 