
This is what happens to my skin in the sun. After a few minutes, it goes a 
mottled pink. Give it an hour or so, and it goes the colour of a ripe tomato. 
Shortly after that, it burns really badly, and the next day I develop full-body 
dandruff. Not a good look.

So I go to the beach well equipped. I wear sunscreen, of course. But also a 
hat, a scarf to cover my neck and my head as well if it’s too windy for the 
hat, a long-sleeved tunic, and light trousers to pull on somewhere between the 
mottled pink and tomato stage. I long ago accepted that I am never going to go 
brown, so I cover up, and I’m comfortable that way. But on a growing number of 
French beaches, it seems that covering up is now against the law.
 Why ban burkinis? 
On Tuesday, we saw photographs showing four armed policemen on a beach in Nice 
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/24/french-police-make-woman-remove-burkini-on-nice-beach>
bullying a woman by forcing her to strip off layers. Another woman – a mum of 
two, identified only as Siam, aged 34 – was also fined on a Cannes beach for 
dressing in a similar way, and so apparently not wearing “an outfit respecting 
good morals and secularism”.

My current beach trousers and tunic are remarkably like those the woman was 
wearing on the beach in Nice, but we all know how unlikely it would be for me 
to attract police attention. This legislation is aimed at the burkini, clothing 
that apparently “overtly manifests adherence to a religion at a time whenFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> and places of worship are the target 
of terrorist attacks”. Nor am I likely to get into trouble for wearing a 
T-shirt with an image of the Buddha, another of my favourite coverups: the only 
religion being targeted here is Islam.

A woman’s right to choose her own beach outfit has long been an area of 
controversy. In 1907, record-breaking Australian swimmerAnnette Kellerman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/the-swimming-blog/2013/nov/08/heroes-swimming-annette-kellerman>
 was arrested on Revere beach in Boston for wearing a sleeveless one-piece 
swimming outfit remarkably similar to the burkini. It was then considered to be 
so revealing it was obscene, though a judge later allowed a compromise whereby 
she could go into the water wearing her revolutionary suit, as long as she was 
covered by a cape until submerged.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Fthe-burkini-ban-what-it-really-means-when-we-criminalise-clothes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc74d9f8c69f44f4eb464887d707c5a957231f00%2F0_0_3044_4798%2F3044.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20burkini%20ban%3A%20what%20it%20really%20means%20when%20we%20criminalise%20clothes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Fthe-burkini-ban-what-it-really-means-when-we-criminalise-clothes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20burkini%20ban%3A%20what%20it%20really%20means%20when%20we%20criminalise%20clothes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Fthe-burkini-ban-what-it-really-means-when-we-criminalise-clothes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc74d9f8c69f44f4eb464887d707c5a957231f00%2F0_0_3044_4798%2F3044.jpg>
 Australian swimmer Annette Kellerman was arrested in 1907 for wearing a 
sleeveless swimming outfit, seen to be so revealing that it was obscene 
Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
Still, when the bikini was introduced in the 1950s, Kellerman declared it was 
a mistake. “Only two women in a million can wear it,” she said. “And it’s a 
very big mistake to try. The bikini shows too much. It shows a line that makes 
the leg look ugly, even with the best of figures. A body is at its most 
beautiful when there is one beautiful, unbroken line.”

The Pope also condemned the two-piece, although for rather different reasons. 
It was banned in Italy, Spain and Portugal and, despite Brigitte Bardot posing 
on a Cannes beach in a bikini in 1953 and Ursula Andress emerging from the sea 
in an iconic white bikini in Dr No in 1962, it took a surprising amount of time 
to catch on. But now, it seems, it is our civic and moral duty to display as 
much bare flesh as possible while sunbathing, and it is hard to find a women’s 
magazine in spring that isn’t hectoring us to get “bikini-ready”, to starve, 
wax, salon tan and exercise our bodies into the desired condition.

To the French minister for women’s rights, Laurence Rossignol, wearing as 
little as possible on the beach has now somehow become a feminist issue. “[The 
burkini] hasthe same logic as the burqa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/16/burkini-ban-defended-as-french-mayors-urged-to-cool-local-tensions>
: hide women’s bodies in order to control them,” she has said, seemingly 
unaware of the contradiction of forcing women to show their bodies instead. “It 
is not just the business of those women who wear it, because it is the symbol 
of a political project that is hostile to diversity and women’s emancipation.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Fthe-burkini-ban-what-it-really-means-when-we-criminalise-clothes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F66fecd7672513d57dbc3d5621fc26d60eb205876%2F0_0_2391_2576%2F2391.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20burkini%20ban%3A%20what%20it%20really%20means%20when%20we%20criminalise%20clothes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Fthe-burkini-ban-what-it-really-means-when-we-criminalise-clothes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20burkini%20ban%3A%20what%20it%20really%20means%20when%20we%20criminalise%20clothes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Fthe-burkini-ban-what-it-really-means-when-we-criminalise-clothes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F66fecd7672513d57dbc3d5621fc26d60eb205876%2F0_0_2391_2576%2F2391.jpg>
 Brigitte Bardot is photographed in a bikini at Cannes in 1953. Photograph: 
Sipa Press/Rex/Shutterstock 
Yet, if we go back 170 years or so, what was then known as “Turkish dress” was 
controversial for exactly the opposite reason. Inspired by Muslim dress and 
pioneered by the British actor, writer and anti-slavery campaignerFanny Kemble 
<https://www.univie.ac.at/Anglistik/easyrider/data/kemble.htm>, the wearing of 
long, loose pantaloons under a relatively light, short dress was hugely 
liberating for European women previously restricted by long, heavy dresses, 
layers of equally heavy petticoats and body-distorting corsets. After US 
sufferage and temperance activist Amelia Bloomer espoused the look in her 
magazine, the Lily, in 1851, it turned into a craze on both sides of the 
Atlantic, and became known as “Bloomer dress”, then simply “bloomers”. The 
backlash from church, media and state was predictable, but their complaint was 
not that this “oriental dress” style was too modest, but that it was too racy, 
a sign that women were encroaching dangerously on male territory.

This comes as no surprise. Fashion has always been a reliable barometer of 
social change, and almost every attempt to prohibit a trend hides a far deeper 
fear. To pull on the shifting threads of gender, race and class, all we have to 
do is follow the popular anxieties about what we wear. Or rather, what other 
people are wearing to upset us.

In his brilliant book Hooligan: A History of Respectable Fears, Geoffrey 
Pearson looks back over more than a century of media fears, examining our 
tendency to always believe there was a golden age of safety and peace, usually 
about 20 years before our own age. It wasn’t until the 1890s, when 
mass-produced clothes were becoming more affordable and working-class youths 
were starting to earn money of their own, that these fears got tangled up with 
fashion.

The fear then was hooligans, violent gangs of young men with seemingly no 
respect for authority or the police. They had different names around the 
country – Peaky Blinders or Sloggers in Birmingham, Scuttlers, or later Ikeys, 
in Manchester – but they dressed in a remarkably similar fashion.

“The boys affect a kind of uniform,” claimed the Daily Graphic newspaper in a 
November 1900 article titled Real Hooligans. “No hat, collar, or tie is to be 
seen. All of them have a peculiar muffler twisted round the neck, a cap set 
rakishly forward, well over the eyes, and trousers very tight at the knee and 
loose at the foot. The most characteristic part of their uniform is the 
substantial leather belt heavily mounted with metal. It is not ornamental, but 
then it is not intended for ornament.”

In Manchester, one gang fight in 1890 apparently involved a pitched battle of 
500-600 youths, with shopkeepers barricading themselves into their stores to 
prevent damage and looting, and police powerless to intervene. Accounts of this 
incident even include an enticing mention of female scuttlers, dressed in 
“clogs and shawl and a skirt with vertical stripes”, but in the main, 
newspapers of the time were obsessed with the dress style of male gang members, 
which they found absurdly troubling.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Fthe-burkini-ban-what-it-really-means-when-we-criminalise-clothes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a8aa9e617ad6df0e757b8d9e67f5b8e86c6f6bd%2F0_0_4110_4260%2F4110.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20burkini%20ban%3A%20what%20it%20really%20means%20when%20we%20criminalise%20clothes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Fthe-burkini-ban-what-it-really-means-when-we-criminalise-clothes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20burkini%20ban%3A%20what%20it%20really%20means%20when%20we%20criminalise%20clothes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Fthe-burkini-ban-what-it-really-means-when-we-criminalise-clothes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a8aa9e617ad6df0e757b8d9e67f5b8e86c6f6bd%2F0_0_4110_4260%2F4110.jpg>
 Flappers, with their girlish skirts, bobbed hair and heavy makeup, appeared 
after the first world war. Photograph: Jonathan Kirn/Corbis via Getty Images 
In the turbulent, heady period of change following the first world war, the 
short, girlish skirts of the flappers, their bobbed hair, heavy makeup, love of 
jazz music and freer attitudes towards sex were terrifying, a sign of a world 
that was changing rapidly, and becoming more connected. There was little that 
could be done about the import of American music or shifting morals, but many 
workplaces began imposing strict dress codes for women, banning patterned 
fabrics, short sleeves and excessive makeup, as well as imposing longer 
hemlines.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Fthe-burkini-ban-what-it-really-means-when-we-criminalise-clothes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F96a3e67782f4374c142e0d3f2641896d255c5336%2F0_361_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20burkini%20ban%3A%20what%20it%20really%20means%20when%20we%20criminalise%20clothes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Fthe-burkini-ban-what-it-really-means-when-we-criminalise-clothes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20burkini%20ban%3A%20what%20it%20really%20means%20when%20we%20criminalise%20clothes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Fthe-burkini-ban-what-it-really-means-when-we-criminalise-clothes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F96a3e67782f4374c142e0d3f2641896d255c5336%2F0_361_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
 Men under arrest en route to court during the Los Angeles “zoot suit riots” in 
June 1943. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
Those hemlines rose again during the second world war because of cloth 
shortages, and, of course, women wore trousers to work on farms and factories. 
In the US, the fashion for baggy zoot suits among black and Hispanic men 
especially was deemed wasteful in wartime, and led to the “zoot suit riots”, in 
which white servicemen beat up men wearing oversized suits in Los Angeles. No 
one now reading accounts of the brutal and humiliating beatings of the men, or 
the crowing media praise of the “cleansing effect” of the riots, could doubt 
that the main issue here was not fashion choice, but race, fear and power.

After the war, it was deemed important to force women back into the home and 
Christian Dior’s New Look epitomised the mood: longer, full skirts celebrated 
the end of cloth rationing, but the new hourglass silhouette with its clinched, 
corsetted waist also signalled a more traditionally feminine and restricted 
role for women. The zoot suit travelled to Britain, too, modified into Teddy 
Boy outfits, and the anxieties about race – and about the growing economic 
power of the young – can be clearly seen in the press coverage of the new 
rock’n’roll music that the Teddy Boys loved.

“It is deplorable. It is tribal. And it is from America,” thundered the Daily 
Mail in September 1956. “It follows ragtime, blues, Dixie, jazz, hot cha-cha 
and the boogie-woogie, which surely originated in the jungle.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Fthe-burkini-ban-what-it-really-means-when-we-criminalise-clothes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F649f68adf82826598aa21e0dccb4051188dfc244%2F0_0_1744_1252%2F1744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20burkini%20ban%3A%20what%20it%20really%20means%20when%20we%20criminalise%20clothes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Fthe-burkini-ban-what-it-really-means-when-we-criminalise-clothes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20burkini%20ban%3A%20what%20it%20really%20means%20when%20we%20criminalise%20clothes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Fthe-burkini-ban-what-it-really-means-when-we-criminalise-clothes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F649f68adf82826598aa21e0dccb4051188dfc244%2F0_0_1744_1252%2F1744.jpg>
 A group of Teddy Boys on the front at Lowestoft in 1962. Photograph: 
Popperfoto/Getty Images 
But teenagers were here to stay, along with their music and fashions. By the 
1960s, the economy was booming, young women were back in the workplace with 
money of their own, and hemlines began rising dramatically. Mary Quant was the 
first to show the miniskirt on the catwalk, in 1964, but she has often said 
that she didn’t invent it: credit for that goes to young Londoners who didn’t 
want to wear the same styles as their mothers. “It all started in Chelsea, 
really. There was this sort of mood; rules were there to be broken.”

She recalls businessmen banging on the windows of her shop, shouting at how 
obscene and disgusting her dresses were, and in 1967, four young French women 
wearing miniskirts were apparently stripped by a mob while walking through 
Paris. Le Parisien newspaper was in no doubt who was to blame: “They provoked 
the butchers of Les Halles,” screamed the headline (accompanied, of course, by 
a photograph of four women in short skirts, presumably to provoke male readers 
into further attacks).

But young women refused to be deterred. When Christian Dior tried to assert 
the status quo by showing below-the-knee designs in his 1966 autumn/winter 
collection, a small group calling themselves the British Society for the 
Advancement of the Miniskirt protested outside his London HQ, holding placards 
defending their right to show a leg.

Ever since, anxieties about clothing tend to be about what is being concealed, 
rather than shown. From the burkini on the beach to the banning of hoodies in 
shopping centres, our fear now is what lurks beneath. Mostly, it is just a 
woman taking her kids to the seaside, or a teenage boy out to meet his mates in 
baggy hip-hop clothing, and nothing more. It may not feel that way, but we are 
safer than we have ever been as we go about our daily lives, and appalling 
though every act of terrorism is – and, indeed, every violent crime – the odds 
of any of us experiencing either is very low. But we feel scared. And we feel 
powerless. So we blame the EU, refugees, the burkini. And we look back to what 
now seems a safer, happier time, when all we had to worry about was hemlines.
 