
Richard Hell – Blank Generation <https://youtu.be/TP3x-VdOb44>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTP3x-VdOb44&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTP3x-VdOb44>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTP3x-VdOb44&media=>
Richard Hell was the template for Malcolm McLaren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/apr/08/malcolm-mclaren-dies-sex-pistols>
’s appropriation of US punk that filtered through to us in Bristol. Richard’s 
ripped T-shirt was one of the ultimate acts of 20th century art vandalism. I 
belong to the Blank Generation. Robert Quinn’s guitar was like some crazed 
Miles Davis solo. This track summed up our punk attitude more than anything I 
know. The NY scene was a portal into another world; I wanted to live in the 
Chelsea hotel, and go to Max’s Kansas City. By a stroke of luck, straight out 
of school, we were in the no wave New York, playing the same venues that Hell 
had been playing a couple of years later, standing on the same stages. We were 
very honoured.

Elisabeth Archer & the Equators – Feel Like Making Love 
<https://youtu.be/XH8Joxp88QA> (Dub Version)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXH8Joxp88QA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXH8Joxp88QA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXH8Joxp88QA&media=>
One of the pleasures of this business is getting to work with people whose 
music you really love and people that have inspired you. When I first heard 
this track by Dennis Bovell back in 1976, it completely and utterly dubbed my 
mind, it blew my brain into little dub splinters. The guy’s an aural alchemist. 
Dennis producedour first album Y 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/feb/18/pop-group-sounds-magazine-1979-interview-rocks-backpages>
 and after all these years, we’ve just got him to weave his magic spell on the 
new album Honeymoon on Mars.

Massive Attack and Ghostpoet – Come Near Me <https://youtu.be/KY0TZQTwwbk>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKY0TZQTwwbk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKY0TZQTwwbk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKY0TZQTwwbk&media=>
Big up Daddy G and Stew Jackson’s truly immersive production, this shows once 
again thatMassive Attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/29/massive-attack-someone-ready-to-bash-head-in-tour>
 are at the bleeding edge. Their work with incredible film-makers like Adam 
Curtis make them real multimedia cross platform activists, proving like fellow 
West Country boyBanksy <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/banksy> (who 3D
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/gallery/2015/aug/07/3d-and-the-art-of-massive-attack-in-pictures>
 worked with on the Peace wall in Palestine) that art can be a weapon. The 
Bristol bass bloodline runs deep and I think Massive Attack are truly the 
epitome of post-punk ideals come true. Eclectic to the max.

Public Enemy – Bring the Noise <https://youtu.be/l_Jeyif7bB4>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dl_Jeyif7bB4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dl_Jeyif7bB4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dl_Jeyif7bB4&media=>
Hank Shocklee’s screaming, sonic Bomb Squad productions changed the face of 
music. An old friend, Dave Allen, the bass player fromGang of Four 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/gangoffour>, brought Hank along to a gig we 
did in Texas recently and Hank ended up jumping up on the stage pogoing with 
us. Getting to work with this absolute legend on our new stuff was amazing. 
He’s a sonic assassin; in my opinionPhil Spector 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/nov/17/how-we-made-the-ronettes-be-my-baby-ronnie-spector-phil>
’s true heir, bringing walls of noise.


Douglas Hart – X Film Plus Ultra <https://youtu.be/KGD-C3k1C74>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKGD-C3k1C74&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKGD-C3k1C74>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKGD-C3k1C74&media=>
I believe that Douglas Hart and Public Image’s Keith Levene 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/feb/13/jah-wobble-keith-levene-metal-box>
 are two of the unsung giants of our generation. Hart’s work withthe Jesus and 
Mary Chain <https://www.theguardian.com/music/jesus-and-mary-chain> tore up the 
rulebooks. Again, real noise aficionados. Today at last he is returning to 
music after establishing himself as a brilliant auteur director. The glacially 
instrumental nature of this track is pure heaven to me, a modern day Link Wray. 
I love all his work, top man.

 * The Pop Group’s album Honeymoon on Mars is out on 2 
<https://thepopgroup.lnk.to/HoneymoonOnMars>8 October  