
No one has taken as much blame for Detroit’s woes as the major American car 
companies who, through the early 20th century, concentrated themselves there to 
such an extent that the city’s name became a byword for the industry.


Despite the contradiction of an urban metropolis owing so much to an explosion 
in car ownership, for decades the arrangement worked reasonably well. But 
eventually, as the likes of Ford, Chrysler, and General Motors faltered – 
especially during theoil crises of the 1970s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2011/mar/03/1970s-oil-price-shock>, 
when Japanese and European manufacturers gained the upper hand while homegrown 
ones responded with plant closures and massive layoffs – so the fortunes of the 
Motor City flagged.

Watching in dismay as his hometown turned hollower by the day, Ford chairman 
Henry Ford II <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Henry_Ford_II> had an idea: surely 
if all the car manufacturers – indeed, all the city’s industrial companies – 
got together, they could pool their resources and build Detroit out of its 
spiral? And so, in 1970, arose the non-profit organisation Detroit Renaissance, 
the city’s newest advocate for downtown – and, with its plan to kickstart the 
local economy by putting up theworld’s largest private development 
<http://criticaldetroit.org/buildings/gm-renaissance-center/>, its most 
ambitious.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F22%2Fdetroit-renaissance-center-henry-ford-ii-grand-design-history-cities-50-buildings-day-42%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F21%2F1432218653384%2F9a10f161-2509-4232-8855-6932d9088dfa-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Renaissance%20Center%3A%20Henry%20Ford%20II's%20grand%20design%20to%20revive%20Detroit%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2042&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F22%2Fdetroit-renaissance-center-henry-ford-ii-grand-design-history-cities-50-buildings-day-42%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Renaissance%20Center%3A%20Henry%20Ford%20II%27s%20grand%20design%20to%20revive%20Detroit%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2042&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F22%2Fdetroit-renaissance-center-henry-ford-ii-grand-design-history-cities-50-buildings-day-42%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F21%2F1432218653384%2F9a10f161-2509-4232-8855-6932d9088dfa-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Architect John C Portman Jr was dubbed a ‘one-man urban renewal program’. 
Photograph: Bill Pugliano/Getty Images 
Having picked out a choice site on the underdeveloped International Riverfront 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Detroit_International_Riverfront>, Detroit 
Renaissance was left to figure out what sort of project it wanted to build – 
and, more importantly, who should design it. But Ford had a man in mind: 
impressed on a visit to Atlanta by the city’sPeachtree Center 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peachtree_Center> – a high-rise district of 
offices, hotels, convention spaces and shopping galleries all connected by 
skybridges – he called on its mastermind, the architect and developerJohn C 
Portman Jr 
<http://www.georgiaencyclopedia.org/articles/arts-culture/john-portman-b-1924>, 
to envision the similarly multipurpose piece of urban space that would become 
Detroit’s Renaissance Center.

For his work in Atlanta, Architectural Record 
<http://archrecord.construction.com/> dubbed Portman a “one-man urban renewal 
program”. Up until the 1990s, he specialised in futuristically recreating 
swathes of old American downtowns, either with multi-block complexes, such as 
the Peachtree Center andSan Francisco’s Embarcadero Center 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Embarcadero_Center>, or with large, detached 
structures – usually hotels – such as New York’s Marriott Marquis and the 
Westin Bonaventure in Los Angeles. The Renaissance Center, however, offered 
Portman the opportunity to do a bit of both.

A 73-storey Detroit Marriott hotel 
<http://www.marriott.co.uk/hotels/travel/dtwdt-detroit-marriott-at-the-renaissance-center/>
 rose as the cylindrical glass centrepiece of an interconnected complex that 
also featured four shorter, more traditional (but equally shiny) office towers 
– all placed on top of a three-storey cement podium. Boosters of the 
Renaissance Center, accommodating everything from bars and restaurants to banks 
and theaters, described it as a “city within a city”.

Ford had even grander words for the fruit of his own organisational labours: 
“Detroit has reached the bottom and is on its way back up,” he declared when 
the centre opened in 1977. And for a while, a renaissance did indeed appear on 
its way: two years later, adjacent buildings had increased in value by 50%, 
downtown dining had risen by 40%, and the office occupancy rate (the 
Renaissance Center’s 2.2m sq ft included) reached 84%.

But the unignorable structure also drew its critics – even before its 
construction. Charles Blessing, then director of theDetroit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/detroit> City Planning Commission, 
disapproved of it early on, objecting to the very elements of the design that 
observers lament to this day: its isolation from the rest of downtown, its 
failure to integrate with other planned riverfront projects, and its stark 
contrast with the existing texture of the city. “It wants to stand alone,” 
wrote architecture critic Paul Goldberger, “and fails to do the crucial thing 
that all good urban buildings must do – relate carefully to what is around 
them.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F22%2Fdetroit-renaissance-center-henry-ford-ii-grand-design-history-cities-50-buildings-day-42%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F21%2F1432218422112%2F1cf5aa7b-1cff-4ccf-a887-87ad974dccf2-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Renaissance%20Center%3A%20Henry%20Ford%20II's%20grand%20design%20to%20revive%20Detroit%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2042&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F22%2Fdetroit-renaissance-center-henry-ford-ii-grand-design-history-cities-50-buildings-day-42%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Renaissance%20Center%3A%20Henry%20Ford%20II%27s%20grand%20design%20to%20revive%20Detroit%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2042&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F22%2Fdetroit-renaissance-center-henry-ford-ii-grand-design-history-cities-50-buildings-day-42%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F21%2F1432218422112%2F1cf5aa7b-1cff-4ccf-a887-87ad974dccf2-2060x1236.jpeg>
 ‘The Renaissance Center fails to do the crucial thing that all good urban 
buildings must do – relate carefully to what is around them.’ Photograph: Jason 
Reed/Reuters 
Sociologist and urban scholar William H Whyte 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_H._Whyte> used the term “megastructure” 
to describe then-fashionable projects such as the Renaissance Center; where “in 
spirit as well as form, the suburban shopping mall is transplanted to downtown, 
and security is raised to the nth degree” ... employing “guards and elaborate 
warning systems” and “manifestly defensive” entry designs. He added: “Where the 
Renaissance Center faces Detroit, there is a large concrete berm athwart the 
entrance. It’s a wonder there isn’t a portcullis. But the message is clear. 
Afraid of Detroit? Come in and be safe.”

It speaks to the state of American cities in the 1970s that any development 
meant to entice people back in had first to guarantee their protection; hence 
the number of downtown buildings of that era, especially Portman’s, that were 
accused of “turning their backs” on the streets, if not actively sucking life 
out of them. “Cities, and certainly Detroit, have at least the image of being 
unsafe places,” said Portman. “To reverse that, we have to give people city 
environments where they feel safe.”

But even Portman, who has chosen to leave the Renaissance Center off the long 
list of buildings on his website 
<http://www.portmanusa.com/projectfilter.php?location=NULL>, clearly had his 
reservations about the final product. “To understand the Renaissance Center, 
you have to understand the basic situation of Detroit when we started the 
project,” he later explained. “The first time I went, as I was checking in [to 
my hotel], I was told to not walk on the streets. If I left the hotel, I had to 
take a taxi to go to a restaurant, and when I came out of the restaurant I had 
to take a taxi back. This was the circumstance in which we found ourselves.”

One school of thought holds that Portman’s security-obsessed fortresses tear 
irreparable holes into the urban fabric; another, that he did his best to 
create safe, awe-inspiring environments in American city centres at a time when 
most developers and architects had washed their hands of them. He must, though, 
take the blame for some of the Renaissance Center’s most notoriously bothersome 
features, such as the “disorienting array of ramps, escalators and elevators” 
and “repetitive circular geometry” cited in 1978 byProgressive Architecture 
magazine <http://www.worldcat.org/title/progressive-architecture/oclc/4967033>. 


Yet Portman’s original 15-tower design also included elements that were never 
built, such as a series of residential buildings on the water which might have 
played a part in energising the depleted downtown.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F22%2Fdetroit-renaissance-center-henry-ford-ii-grand-design-history-cities-50-buildings-day-42%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F21%2F1432218277952%2F79b6fbcb-bd96-4d3a-87a2-c322111c7d48-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Renaissance%20Center%3A%20Henry%20Ford%20II's%20grand%20design%20to%20revive%20Detroit%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2042&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F22%2Fdetroit-renaissance-center-henry-ford-ii-grand-design-history-cities-50-buildings-day-42%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Renaissance%20Center%3A%20Henry%20Ford%20II%27s%20grand%20design%20to%20revive%20Detroit%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2042&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F22%2Fdetroit-renaissance-center-henry-ford-ii-grand-design-history-cities-50-buildings-day-42%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F21%2F1432218277952%2F79b6fbcb-bd96-4d3a-87a2-c322111c7d48-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Renaissance Center shines behind a dilapidated Detroit warehouse in 2009. 
Photograph: Rebecca Cook/Reuters 
Since it first opened, the Renaissance Center has undergone several rounds of 
renovation – one of them by the well-regarded firm ofSkidmore, Owings and 
Merrill 
<http://www.som.com/projects/general_motors_renaissance_center__interiors>, who 
worked to open up the “confusing, inward-focused complex” to the city around 
it. That happened in the 1990s, after the development had changed hands several 
times: already haemorrhaging money in the early 1980s, the Ford-owned centre 
went on the market and, by 1996, ended up in the hands of General Motors, a 
company with problems of its own, which paid just $72m for a building that had 
cost $350m to construct.

For all its spectacle, the Renaissance Center appears to have done essentially 
nothing to reduce Detroit’s loss of industry, investment and appeal – which saw 
the 1950 population high of 1,850,000 fall to 701,000 in 2013, when the city 
declared bankruptcy.

What are cities doing so right – and so wrong? Edward Glaeser talks to Simon 
Jenkins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/may/21/what-are-cities-doing-so-right-and-so-wrong-the-experts-go-head-to-head>
In the past couple of years, however, while the outskirts have continued their 
return to the state of nature apace, downtown Detroit has seen a consolidation. 
Young professionals and the businesses that cater to them have arrived, a 
number of development projects have set about rehabilitating the city’s proud 
19th- and early-20th-century architectural heritage, and work has begun on anew 
rail line down Woodward Avenue 
<http://nextcity.org/daily/entry/detroit-m1-construction-starts-m1-streetcar-guide>
, the main commercial strip.

“We hope for better things; it shall rise from the ashes,” goes the city’s 
motto 
<http://blogs.wsj.com/corporate-intelligence/2013/07/19/rising-from-the-ashes-the-origins-of-detroits-motto/>
, written in 1805. Whether this latest, more dispersed attempt at urban revival 
will prevail remains to be seen – but, sooner or later, Detroit will find out 
what works. Thanks to the Renaissance Center, it already knows what doesn’t.

 * Which other buildings in the world tell stories about urban history? Share 
your own pictures and descriptions with GuardianWitness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/mar/23/50-buildings-great-stories-urban-history>
, on Twitter and Instagram using #hoc50 or let us know suggestions in the 
comments below
 