
Sometimes in the fog of war, the mist lifts temporarily and it is possible to 
see the shape of the assembled battalions before the fog descends once more. 
This week was one of those moments and three things became apparent.

First, the British government has admitted it is a long way from an agreement 
on how to proceed with Brexit. The complexities and trade-offs are mounting, 
and not diminishing, as a result of lobbying by interest groups, internal 
discussions and the united front being presented by Brussels.

A few pennies are dropping all over Whitehall, as the civil service consumes 
the scale of what has been taken on.The length of time it might take to secure 
an EU trade deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/15/reality-check-will-it-take-10-years-to-do-a-uk-eu-trade-deal-post-brexit>
 – five to 10 years according to the mandarin chosen – is the least of its 
problems. Other government business, unsurprisingly, is struggling for 
ministerial attention.

As a result, no set of government proposals on leaving the EU will be 
published until February 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/14/brexit-plan-will-not-be-published-until-february-says-davis>
 at the earliest. Even then, the paper, or the letter, that the UK will send to 
the EU may contain options. A recourse to options only weeks before the UK 
starts the serious negotiating may be a bargaining tactic, or an admission that 
even at the eleventh hour the government has not reached a consensus.

In the words of Lord Kerr, the UK’s wiliest former European diplomat, it is 
always a good idea when arriving at an airport to know where you are planning 
to fly to. At present there is no agreed destination. The preference of half 
the Conservative party is a vertiginous descent into Singapore, while the other 
half would not mind a gentle plane ride to Oslo or Zurich, adjacent toEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, but not inside. British 
capital, and we live in a capitalist society, would prefer the former.

Second, it is apparent – partly due to this lack of an agreed destination – 
that there will have to be a transition agreement. But there are different 
versions of a transition agreement. Some see the transition agreement as a 
necessity forced on the UK due to the complexities of the talks ahead. Across 
the gamut of politics, there is simply too much to resolve within the timetable 
of two years.

In the past fortnight that has become a commonplace, but it makes some 
sceptics uneasy. In fact, they smell a rat. Lord Kerr is fond of quoting the 
French diplomatic view that there is nothing more permanent than a provisional 
agreement. The transition – a place half-in and half-out of the EU – risks 
becoming the UK’s final resting place.

But some sceptics do not balk at a transition, so long as it is clearly only 
an implementation timetable to reach a clear destination outside the EU.

Giving select committee evidence, David Davis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/daviddavis>, the Brexit minister, 
appeared to lean towards the latter camp, saying: “Whatever the transitional 
arrangement is, we need to know where we are going before we decide on the 
transition. If you build a bridge you need to have both sides established 
before you build the bridge. So we need to know where we are going: it seems to 
me to be perfectly possible to know what the endgame is within two years.”

Brexit transitional deal is an obvious inevitability, says Nick Clegg
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/15/brexit-transitional-deal-is-an-obvious-inevitability-says-nick-clegg>
But the drawback is that if the destination has to be agreed as part of the 
transition, the chief value of transition, deferment, is lost. Even a two-year 
timetable may be complacent.Insurance houses and banks need to know their 
future regulatory environment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/15/brexit-migration-rules-could-harm-citys-lead-in-financial-services-technology>
 as early as next year not in 2019.

The third hint of clarity is about politics. Philip Hammond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/12/philip-hammond-calls-for-post-brexit-transitional-deal>
, the chancellor, has emerged alongside David Davis as the power broker. That 
is not surprising. Hammond may not be box office, but he has an analytical mind 
that impresses civil servants. He quickly crystallises issues and is also one 
of those politicians that is unconcerned with his popularity, and so just 
speaks his mind. He has determined to become the voice of the business interest 
inside cabinet. The monotone should not be mistaken for a lack of political 
courage.

It cannot be assumed that Davis has formed an axis with Hammond but, if he did,
Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> would struggle to 
resist.

It is not in the new prime minister’s nature to lead from the front – indeed 
she campaigned in prose and largely governs in silence. Her instinct is to give 
as little away as possible until absolutely necessary. As a form of internal 
party management, inscrutability has its advantages, but unless she is careful, 
foreign leaders will start viewing her as a figure being shaped by events, 
rather than shaping them.
 