
On Sunday, the capital city of one of the world’s fastest growing economies 
was effectively shut down in an emergency act. The reason was not terrorism, 
but air pollution. Thethreat to citizens from smog in Delhi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/06/delhi-air-pollution-closes-schools-for-three-days>
 was judged so great that traffic was ratioined, coal-fired power stations 
closed and diesel generators suspended. This was a brave and sane decision in 
the world’s largest democracy.

Right now Delhi is the world’s most polluted city. But air quality is at 
crisis levels in cities around the world. More than300 million children live at 
the severest risk, Unicef declared last week 
<http://www.unicef.org/media/media_92979.html>, and 2 billion in areas where 
outdoor pollution exceeds health guidelines. Half of Delhi’s schoolchildren 
have permanently impaired lung capacity, thanks to the air they breathe.

India’s capital city is telling people to stay away or work from home, but 
offering no compensation to those who cannot, or whose livelihood suffers. This 
can only be a short-term solution; it hurts those who can least bear it. 
Although the prime minister Theresa May will have been sheltered from the worst 
of the choking smogduring her trip to India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/07/theresa-may-visa-offer-india-citizens-uk>
, arriving in Delhi should have been a powerful warning about the effects of 
privileging growth over environmental concerns. Citizens of rich countries are 
sometimes too relaxed about such things when air pollution afflicts the richest 
cities as well as the poorest. That London has not yet been closed down 
in similar fashion to Delhi is only through lack of courage on the part of the 
government.

Air quality in London has hit levels worse than those in Delhi and Beijing. 
Earlier this year, annual air pollution limits were breached in just a week.
Earlier this month, in what may be one of the last chances to bring EU law to 
bear on the issue, the high court ruled that the government had knowingly 
failed to draw up plans to bring it within legal limits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/02/high-court-rules-uk-government-plans-to-tackle-air-pollution-are-illegal>
 and there must be immediate action, even if that means drastic measures to 
curtail traffic.

The causes of air pollution differ around the world, from coal-fired power 
plants to agricultural burning. One constant is traffic. Older cars and diesel 
engines produce particulates that clog up the lungs and may enter brain tissue, 
and nitrogen oxides that affect breathing. Car manufacturers were forced to 
admit last year that they had flouted tests on their diesel emissions. But the 
bigger question is why in a shortsighted attempt to reduce greenhouse gases by 
a tiny amount (diesel cars do more miles to the gallon) the risks were ignored, 
and customers persuaded that diesel cars were actually greener.

Now that the consequences for air quality are clear, it is time to rebalance 
taxation and regulation in favour of petrol, which is cleaner though producing 
more carbon, and urgently incentivise electric cars. In LondonSadiq Khan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sadiq-khan>, the new mayor, to his credit 
has taken a strong line on air pollution, in contrast to Boris Johnson’s 
tactics which amounted to unconvincing denial and attempts to silence 
scientists. Mr Khan should move faster still on banning the most polluting 
vehicles – he would find public support in inner London.

Air pollution shames us all. From Beijing to Los Angeles, Marseille 
<http://www.thelocal.fr/20160621/pollution-in-france-kills-48000-people-each-year>
 to Manila, the air we breathe in cities has deteriorated so much that it is no 
longer safe for children. Adults who grew up breathing cleaner air are more 
resilient in the face of polution. But when a child’s lungs are damaged, they 
are damaged for life. The next generation already carries the burden of our 
inaction. This is a problem we know how to solve. Cut down coal-fired power, 
cut out diesel in cities, encourage electric cars and public transport. India 
should follow the declaration of emergency with long-term action, not just this 
short-term fix. Richer cities, London foremost among them, should be ashamed 
that they, with all their resources, have failed their children for so long. 
The high court judges were right. The government can and must act now.
 