
Just as doctors have a duty of care and respect to their patients, so the rest 
of us have an obligation to doctors. It is a basic tenet of civilised societies 
that medics should be allowed to care for the sick and wounded in wartime as 
well as in peace. The concept of medical neutrality was enshrined in the first 
Geneva convention more than a century and a half ago, and over those years it 
has offered countless doctors, nurses and their patients a degree of protection 
in the cruellest times. Attacking medical facilities, transport and personnel 
intentionally is outlawed.

No one should need to be reminded of that; yet it appears that we must be – 
repeatedly. In May, the security counciladopted a resolution 
<http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=53844#.V-0iMtfd5Rk> to strengthen 
protection for healthcare workers, the sick and wounded, and hospitals and 
clinics in war zones. The measure was prompted by increasing assaults on such 
facilities; according to the International Committee of the Red Cross, 959 
people were killed in 600 such attacks in 2014 and 2015 alone. It has proved 
fruitless. The strikes are now so frequent they are in danger of being 
normalised. On Wednesday the United Nations secretary general was forced, for 
the second time in four months, to spell out international law’s protection of 
medical services and its demand that the wounded and sick, whether civilians or 
fighters, be spared: “Deliberate attacks on hospitals are war crimes. Denying 
people access to essential healthcare violates international humanitarian law.”

Ban Ki-moon spoke hours after the two largest hospitals left in rebel-held 
areas of Aleppowere bombed out of service. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/28/aleppo-two-hospitals-bombed-out-of-service-syria-airstrikes>
Physicians for Human Rights <http://physiciansforhumanrights.org/> says there 
were 382 attacks on 259 health facilities in the country between March 2011 and 
June this year, killing 757 medical personnel. There can be no doubt that many 
of those have been targeted. The bald numbers fail to capture the true impact: 
murdering a dozen doctors may cause the deaths of hundreds or even thousands of 
civilians, who are either too frightened to access healthcare or are simply 
left without services at all. Those who attack facilities intentionally know 
that they are destroying the morale of the communities they serve. Such 
assaults are intended to exacerbate suffering and drive people from contested 
territory.

Syria is far from an isolated case. In South Sudan, the Central African 
Republic, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Libya and many more places, 
healthcare workers are suffering. Médecins Sans Frontières has been forced to 
withdraw from the north of Yemen following the fourth attack against its 
facilities by the Saudi-led coalition in less than a year, killing 32 and 
injuring 51. The US and UK are not only failing to rein in Saudi Arabia, but
continue to sell it arms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/17/the-guardian-view-on-yemen-stop-arms-sales-to-saudi-arabia>
.

And though Monday will mark the first anniversary of the US bombing which 
killed 42 at an MSF hospital at Kunduz in Afghanistan – including patients who 
burned in their beds and medics attacked as they fled the building – the 
organisationstill awaits an independent investigation 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2016/05/04/pentagon-hospital-attack-report-falls-short>
. In that case, as in Yemen’s, the facility was targeted despite the fact that 
MSF had repeatedly given its location; and the strike continued despite MSF 
alerting US forces that they were hitting a medical facility. As the 
organisation’s president observed earlier this year,four of the five permanent 
members <http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=53844#.V-0iMtfd5Rk> of 
the security council have, to varying degrees, been associated with coalitions 
responsible for attacks on health structures.

It is important to acknowledge profound differences between cases. In Syria, 
attacks are routine and clearly intentional; there is little doubt that the 
Assad regime and its allies are calculatedly hitting the healthcare system. 
Reckless as well as deliberate actions can be war crimes. But it is significant 
that MSF continues to share the coordinates of its facilities in Afghanistan and
Yemen <https://www.theguardian.com/world/yemen>, to protect them. In Syria, it 
keeps them secret.

In all instances, however, medics not only deserve to work safely; they have a 
right to do so. States must adopt clear policies for their militaries and train 
personnel accordingly. Attacks upon health workers and their workplaces should 
be investigated and documented thoroughly. Where countries fail to hold 
fighters to account for human rights violations, they should be pursued
internationally 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/20/the-guardian-view-on-syria-the-ceasefire-and-the-aid-convoy-attack-a-new-low>
. A dedicated UN high representative, as suggested by MSF, would help to keep 
the issue on the agenda. We must refuse to accept strikes on facilities and 
staff as aberrations or – worse – as a new rule of war, if doctors and the 
patients they so courageously serve are to be protected.
 