
James Ward was convicted of arson in 2006. He was given an indeterminate 
sentence for public protection (IPP) 
<http://www.warringtonguardian.co.uk/news/national/14524359.Ken_Clarke_blasts__ridiculous__prison_sentencing_rules/>
 for the protection of the public with a tariff – the minimum sentence he had 
to serve before he could be considered for parole – of 10 months. Back then, 
Charles Clarke was home secretary in a Labour government with a mission to be 
tough on crime. That was a decade ago. Soon afterwards sentencing became a 
matter for the new justice department. Liz Truss is currently its sixth 
secretary of state. James Ward is still in prison. David Blunkett, the Labour 
home secretary who introduced the IPP policy in 2005, long ago recognised that 
it was a mistake.

Within months of the power coming into force it was clear that nervous courts 
were using it too often for fear of public shaming at the hands of the media. 
In 2008, another justice secretary, Jack Straw, introduced a “threshold of 
seriousness”, restricting IPPs to serious offences that carried a tariff of 
more than two years. But it was not retrospective: those already in prison 
stayed there. In 2012, Mr Straw’s successor,Kenneth Clarke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/kenneth-clarke> – who had inherited 6,000 
prisoners on IPPs, of whom nearly a third had already served more than their 
tariff – finally changed the law, but only after he had been widely vilified 
for calling them “absurd”. Once again, the change did not apply retrospectively.

And that is why James Ward, a man with a low IQ 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-36410539> and mental health problems, who has 
told the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/30/absurd-defunct-prison-scheme-ken-clarke-james-ward-jail-mental-health>
 that he feels trapped in a box, is still locked up. So are another 3,859 
prisoners sentenced to an IPP, 3,200 of whom are beyond their tariff expiry 
date. Many have served more than five years above their original tariff. 
Undoubtedly, some remain a risk. But it is hard to say how many because, as 
Peter Clarke, the chief inspector of prisons says inhis latest annual report 
<https://www.justiceinspectorates.gov.uk/hmiprisons/inspections/annual-report-2015-2016/>
, many are still denied access to the behaviour amendment courses they need to 
complete in order even to apply for parole. This, as a court has said, is 
“deplorable”. It’s a system that wrongs individuals while wasting scarce 
resources in a prison service so short of cash that many prisoners are locked 
up for 23 hours a day.

On Thursday Michael Gove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/17/justice-secretary-under-pressure-from-gove-to-cut-prison-population>
 became the latest former justice secretary to recant. Delivering the Longford 
Trust lecture in memory of the great 20th-century prison reformer, he listed 
the things he might have done had he not embarked on a course of 
auto-defenestration after the referendum. Among them, he included releasing 
those 500 or so prisoners serving indeterminate sentences who have served more 
than the maximum sentence for the offence. Of course, it is a shame he did not 
consider executive clemency while he was in charge. But crime and punishment 
have been politically neuralgic ever since Michael Howard first claimed that 
prison works. That is why IPPs were first introduced, and that is why it is now 
so hard to get rid of them. It will need a consensus; Mr Gove’s defenders will 
argue that is what he was trying to build.

Meanwhile this government, so determined to take back control, is visibly not 
in control of prisons like Guys Marsh in Dorset, where pictures of inmates 
apparently enjoying a party escaped from social media tothe front of the Daily 
Mail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3942056/Ordering-takeaways-taking-drugs-brewing-hooch-Prisoners-relaxed-life-living-like-students-revealed-builder-accidentally-added-Facebook-friend-inmate.html>
. The government is at a fork in the road on prisons policy. It could take the 
expensive course of building more prisons and recruiting more officers. Or it 
could take up the Gove challenge of sending fewer to prison and giving them a 
more constructive prison experience. Releasing those who have already served 
far too long is one of those rare policy objectives: it is the right thing to 
do to save money. And it is the right thing to do for the sake of justice.
 