
Something odd emerged as a Cambridge student began to research the work of a 
Renaissance garden designer: although the 16th century Italian artist, sculptor 
and designer Costantino de’ Servi travelled constantly and never seemed to be 
short of a bob, he seemed to have completed very few gardens - or any other 
kind of work.

Wherever there was trouble in Europe, however, be it wars rumbling, alliances 
being forged, or regime change threatened, de’ Servi seemed to pop up. Then the 
historian discovered that wherever the supposed gardener travelled and whoever 
he was nominally working for – and he got as far west as the court of James I 
in London, and as far east as Persia – he remained on the payroll of one of the 
richest and most powerful families in Europe, the Medici of Florence. Like any 
good modern spy who keeps a low profile, there is no known portrait of him.

“In the beginning as I trawled through his correspondence in the archives in 
Florence, expecting to find evidence of many wonderful Renaissance gardens he 
had worked on, and found nothing, I was very disappointed. Then as I followed 
the paper trail, I began to wonder if there was something more interesting 
going on,” said Davide Martino, a history student at St John’s College, 
Cambridge.

“I’m not sure you could precisely call him a spy in modern terms,” Martino 
said. “But his role meant that he could go anywhere and gain intimate access in 
any court in Europe, and I think it’s reasonable to assume that he was 
constantly feeding useful information back to his paymasters in Florence.”

Great dynasties of the world: The Medici family
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/may/08/great-dynasties-medici-family>
One of the few pieces of work that de’ Servi definitely completed was a garden 
design for Henry, Prince of Wales, son and heir of James I – and far more 
popular than his father. The project came, as so often in de’ Servi’s career, 
at a politically sensitive time: the Medici were trying to arrange a marriage 
between the prince and one of their family, Caterina.

According to de’ Servi’s letters, the marriage plans hit a bump when the 
teenage prince demanded to see a portrait of his potential intended, and the 
ambassador from Florence refused to provide one.


De’ Servi left a sketch of a beautiful young woman in the prince’s quarters, 
and when Henry asked who she was, claimed that it was Caterina. Henry became 
much more enthusiastic, but died of typhoid in November 1612, aged just 18. His 
death, widely regarded as a disaster, had profound consequences for English 
history: his frail younger brother Charles would become king, spark the English 
civil war, and die on the scaffold in Whitehall.

Martino suspects that the sketch which almost made the match may survive, 
subject and artist unrecognised, somewhere in the vast drawings collection kept 
at Windsor Castle – but the period is one of the few where he has also traced a 
finished piece of work on a garden design.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fcambridge-student-discovers-hidden-life-renaissance-spy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F08756cbee65549e7b44568ef58de2e818f6a4296%2F0_302_3189_1913%2F3189.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20pretend%20gardener%3A%20student%20discovers%20hidden%20life%20of%20Renaissance%20spy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fcambridge-student-discovers-hidden-life-renaissance-spy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20pretend%20gardener%3A%20student%20discovers%20hidden%20life%20of%20Renaissance%20spy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fcambridge-student-discovers-hidden-life-renaissance-spy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F08756cbee65549e7b44568ef58de2e818f6a4296%2F0_302_3189_1913%2F3189.jpg>
 It is suspected that some of de’ Servi’s designs and drawings lie somewhere 
within Windsor Castle’s archives. Photograph: Peter Packer/Royal Collection 
Tr/Press Association 
King James preferred his palace at Westminster, but Henry liked the old palace 
west of the capital at Richmond upon Thames, where his father’s second cousin, 
Elizabeth I, lived out her last months.

De’ Servi created for Henry a plan for a sophisticated Renaissance garden at 
Richmond, with elaborate planting, formal walks and water features, but the 
prince’s death meant it was never completeted. So little of de’ Servi’s work 
survives – one portrait of a very cross looking Medici princess in the Ufizzi 
Gallery, one painting in an American museum – that the surviving garden design 
his papers in the state archives in Florence is precious.

Martino’s work in the archives, made possible through a research grant from St 
John’s, was a true labour of love: the gardener’s files are only partly 
catalogued, so working on them was a question of asking for all the letters 
from a particular year, and toiling through them one by one. There were some 
surprising omissions: despite Europe lying on the brink of the thirty years’ 
war, a conflict started by divides within Christianity, de’ Servi made almost 
no mention of his Roman Catholic faith.

De’ Servi was the son of a diplomat, but his role as travelling artist and 
garden designer was far more useful cover, evading the espionage claustrophobia 
of the diplomatic circuit. He ended up quietly back in Italy, wealthy, in a 
grand house and garden of his own design.


“There is much more to find out about this man – I’m certain of it,” Martino 
said.
 