
Anyone who wants to understand the social fissures still visible in Britain 
six months after the Brexit vote could do worse than travel to Lincolnshire.

Here, yes, you will hear about immigration, low wages and job security. But 
you will also be aware of something deeper, a shared longing for a sense of 
community and neighbourliness that locals say has dwindled to almost nothing.

On an eerily silent cul-de-sac in the middle of a new-looking housing 
development, a retired woman who voted leave tells of how her town and the 
wider world have changed over the past 30 years. “Not for the best,” she says. 
“On the news today, it was about older people feeling lonely. I’ve got my 
family here, but I still feel lonely. The neighbours – they’re nice, but they 
shut themselves away. Sometimes you never see a soul.”

This much we know: since the start of the neoliberal era in the early 1980s, 
the great economic changes that have ripped through western economies have led 
to an erosion of traditional communities. The factory towns and secure mass 
employment of yesteryear are long gone; institutions such as trade unions and 
the church – even the local pub – are locked into long-term decline. In the 
place of the collective spirit they underpinned has come a quicksilver 
individualism that just about benefits those who manage to keep up, but renders 
millions of lives unpredictable at best, untenable at worst.

The liberal left likes to think that it understands all this: “community” 
remains as much a part of its vernacular as “equality”, “opportunity” and the 
rest. But does it really understand what globalisation has done to the idea of 
community? The fact that millions of working-class voters who once formed the 
core constituency of progressive politics are shifting towards the populist 
right suggests not.

In retrospect, the roots of all this arguably lie in the ways that progressive 
politics began to change in the 1990s. When Tony Blairwarned of the kind of 
capitalism that was “indifferent to tradition” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2005/sep/27/labourconference.speeches> and 
rewarded only people “swift to adapt, slow to complain, open, willing and able 
to change” – something he said Britain had to be ready to compete with – it was 
a sign that his quest to drastically reinvent the UK Labour party was now 
manifesting itself in veiled attacks on many of its supporters and their most 
basic beliefs.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fthe-uks-left-liberal-fightback-must-start-with-communities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbfbd458a71ee4a0843ba506958bd601887a91c52%2F15_0_3529_2118%2F3529.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20UK's%20left-liberal%20fightback%20must%20start%20with%20communities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fthe-uks-left-liberal-fightback-must-start-with-communities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20UK%27s%20left-liberal%20fightback%20must%20start%20with%20communities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fthe-uks-left-liberal-fightback-must-start-with-communities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbfbd458a71ee4a0843ba506958bd601887a91c52%2F15_0_3529_2118%2F3529.jpg>
 Protesters at the Lindsey oil refinery in north Lincolnshire in 2009. 
Photograph: Anna Gowthorpe/PA 
In 1999, the writer and Blair adviser Charles Leadbeater 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/charles-leadbeater> provocatively exposed 
the clash between Blair’s modernity and notions of community. “Strong 
communities can be pockets of intolerance and prejudice,” he wrote. “Settled, 
stable communities are the enemies of innovation, talent, creativity, diversity 
and experimentation. They are often hostile to outsiders, dissenters, young 
upstarts and immigrants. Community can be too quickly become a rallying cry for 
nostalgia; that kind of community is the enemy of knowledge creation, which is 
the wellspring of economic growth.” Here was a theoretical division waiting to 
be made real; nearly two decades on, that is precisely what has happened.

But what to do about it? To say that none of this is easy is a risible 
understatement. Both the unreconstructed left and populist right offer visions 
of re-industrialisation – all newly opened coal mines and revived steel works – 
that are hardly realistic. More generally, going against the grain of the 
individualism that has been embedded in advanced economies for nearly 40 years 
will be an uphill task.

The left ought to rediscover its faith in some of the things that once 
embodied its collectivism – social housing, schools that serve communities 
rather than a specious idea of “choice” – while belatedly realising that they 
ought to be pulled away from the big, distant state, and returned to the 
grassroots.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fthe-uks-left-liberal-fightback-must-start-with-communities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd699c8b140429cb165e86f31195ed931b0fcd509%2F955_648_3262_1957%2F3262.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20UK's%20left-liberal%20fightback%20must%20start%20with%20communities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fthe-uks-left-liberal-fightback-must-start-with-communities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20UK%27s%20left-liberal%20fightback%20must%20start%20with%20communities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fthe-uks-left-liberal-fightback-must-start-with-communities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd699c8b140429cb165e86f31195ed931b0fcd509%2F955_648_3262_1957%2F3262.jpg>
 Lincoln city centre. Photograph: Charlotte Graham/Guzelian 
And while understanding that old-fashioned job security will increasingly be a 
thing of the past, progressive politics should also fight the things that 
threaten to reduce it to nothing: the worst aspects of the so-called “gig” 
economy, the kind of self-employment that sets people against each other, and 
transfers risk from capital – which can bear it – to labour, which can’t.

Liberal-left politics, then, needs a drastic rethink. It could start with 
practical examples of the kind that begin at the base of society, and learn 
lessons that can then be applied at the summit of power. There is much to learn 
from Spain’sPodemos <https://www.theguardian.com/world/podemos> party, and the 
notion that without collective participation, the politics of equality and 
opportunity will not count for very much.

There is also much to learn from England’s burgeoning “flatpack democracy” 
movement, which aims to keep party politics out of the most local layers of 
government – town and parish councils – and to create a 21st-century version of 
an active citizenry, while focusing on such crucial local institutions as food 
banks and credit unions.

Other models abound: outside formal politics, there are myriad social 
projects, from local energy generation to peer-to-peer food networks, that have 
taken shape online and point to how the mixing of a social conscience and a 
sense of place can strengthen people’s attachment to their communities. The 
challenge for all of them, though, is to push beyond the usual middle-class 
suspects and begin to take what they do to the largely working-class places 
that most vividly embody the current political crisis.

In that sense, the biggest political task facing the left – politicians, 
activists and the thousands of bystanders who create that ongoing cacophony on 
social media – is attitudinal. Whenever people mourn the loss of community, it 
triggers the same thought: that after more than a century of styling itself as 
radical and iconoclastic, it is high time that progressives realise there is 
often nothing wrong with conservatism, albeit with a small C.

With the obvious caveats about racism and xenophobia, if people want to 
protect the most basic cornerstones of where they live, hang on to their sense 
of home and belonging, and have a dependable sense of the future, the political 
left ought to be their ally. Here, perhaps, lies the key to at least the 
beginnings of its revival. But as the two social partners in the left’s 
traditional marriage get ever closer to divorce, is it already too late?
 