
As always in matters of military aggression, the humane perspective has to 
start with the victims. Since the US-led, UK-backed invasion of Iraq in 2003, 
estimates of the lives lost to violence vary froma quarter of a million 
<https://www.iraqbodycount.org/> to 600,000. The number of injured will surely 
be several times that, and the number of men, women and childrendisplaced from 
their homes <http://web.mit.edu/humancostiraq/> is put at between 3.5 and 5 
million, somewhere between one in 10 and one in six of the population.

There is no disputing the vicious brutality of the regime that ran the country 
before, but there is no serious disputing, either, that the suffering captured 
in these statistics of war are of another order to anything that would be 
endured in even tyrannical times of peace. Thirteen years on, as thedeadly 
blast in Baghdad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/04/baghdad-blast-death-toll-rises-to-142-pm-orders-tighter-security-checks>
 last weekend illustrated afresh, the predicament of the Iraqi people remains 
misery without end. The topsy-turvy post-9/11 rationalisation for regime change 
from the chauvinist, parochial and sometimes proudly ignorant George W Bush 
White House produced predictably topsy-turvy results. Jihadi forces that Saddam 
Hussein had contained were not discouraged by his ousting, but greatly 
emboldened. In sum, failures do not come any more abject than Iraq, nor 
catastrophes any more pure.

Appalling mistake

This broad picture was clear remarkably soon after the battleship banner 
boast: “Mission Accomplished 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2015/05/01/iraq-war-mission-accomplished_n_7191382.html>
”. It certainly did not takethe Chilcot inquiry <http://www.iraqinquiry.org.uk> 
– which began six years later, and went on to publish only today after another 
seven years of work – to dispel the early hallucination of success. The sheer 
scale of the disaster, however, is why – after multiple select committees, the 
Hutton and Butler inquiries – this additional probe was impossible to avoid. 
None of the other investigations provided an official answer to the burning, 
central question, of how on earth the UK had got embroiled in this great 
misadventure in the first place.

After Lord Hutton’s 
<http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20090128221546/http://www.the-hutton-inquiry.org.uk/>
 very narrow reading of his remit, andLord Butler’s attack 
<http://image.guardian.co.uk/sys-files/Politics/documents/2004/07/14/butler.pdf>
 on systems and processes went so far and wide as to exempt individuals from 
blame, there were understandable fears that the career mandarin, Sir John 
Chilcot, would likewise pull punches, or else lapse into evasive establishment 
prose. As it was, however, Sir John gave a brisk half-hour statement, in which 
the name “Blair” featured roughly once a minute. The 2.6m words of his report 
will necessarily take much longer to digest, but the defining sting was 
conveyed in just six words penned by Tony Blair himself, ina letter to Mr Bush 
in July 2002 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/06/with-you-whatever-tony-blair-letters-george-w-bush-chilcot>
 – “I will be with you, whatever”.

Here, in essence, we have the private promise from which every abuse of public 
process would flow, as well as that pervasive, poisonous sense that the 
government was not playing it straight. The prime minister was not bone-headed, 
his letters to the president warned of deep doubts on the part of both MPs and 
the public, and shrewdly anticipated great difficulty in whipping Europe into 
line. But he negated the value of all this insight, and fatally compromised his 
own preference for constructing a UN-blessed route to war, by preceding it all 
with the bald vow that Washington could count on him.

Regime change was the unabashed objective of the White House, and by hitching 
himself to Washington with no get-out clause, Mr Blair effectively made that 
his policy too. It was an appalling mistake, first of all, because it involved 
committing the country to a war of choice, for which there was no real 
rationale, only an angry impulse to lash out to avenge the twin towers without 
paying heed to the distinction between militant Islamism and secular Ba’athism. 
Once committed, Mr Blair switched off the ordinary critical faculties that he 
applied to other affairs, and closed his ears to the warnings of the experts 
about the difficulties that could follow an invasion, and the grave doubts about
Iraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> being an imminent threat.

Entirely out of character, the great election winner who always insisted that 
“the British people are the boss”, closed his ears to great swaths of the 
country. From radical leftists to commonsensical Tories of a that’ll-never-work 
disposition, thinking Britain – the Guardian included – smelt a rat. Ittook to 
the streets <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2003/feb/15/politics.politicalnews> 
to protest in numbers not seen before. But in this case Mr Blair did not regard 
the British people but the US president as the boss. He would occasionally let 
slip to his voters “I’m afraid I believe in it”, as if that assertion was a 
substitute for argument.

A rightwing practitioner of realpolitik could have been straight about the 
calculation to hold fast to an American alliance that served Britain well, come 
what may. That would have been unsavoury to idealists, but would have been a 
cogent – hard-headed, if also hard-hearted – point of view. That, however, is 
not the tradition in which Mr Blair has ever placed himself. As the high 
emotion of his protracted and schmaltzy press conference today exposed once 
again – complete with a refusal to admit to having made the wrong call, and the 
bizarre insistence that the war had made the world safer – it is always 
important to him not only to be serving the national interest, but a greater 
good too. He knew he was right.

Seeing as he was in reality monstrously wrong, this certitude had dire 
consequences. The faith-based failure to plan for the invasion’s aftermath, 
rightly damned in trenchant terms by Sir John, was the most catastrophic for 
the Iraqi people, and indeed for the British service personnel in harm’s way. 
The grieving families have every right to question whether their sons and 
daughters died in vain, and to wince at the stock phrases about every prime 
minister regarding the commitment of troops as the weightiest decision they 
will ever make.

But for the processes of governance, the political discourse, and the UK’s 
place in the world, greater damage was done by the political – and perhaps 
psychological – need to wrap up a crude decision to stick with the US in 
righteousness. This was the context in which a press officer couldpen the first 
draft <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2008/feb/19/iraq.iraq> of an 
intelligence dossier, later carefully spun to give the more excitable papers 
just enough to be able to run with the hysterical claim that London was45 
minutes from attack 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-139703/Just-45-minutes-attack.html>. 
It was the context, too, in which Mr Blair’s team could deem it appropriate to 
rip off the internet old material about Saddam’s former arsenal, long since 
mostly destroyed, and hand it to journalistsas a second dossier 
<http://www.channel4.com/news/articles/politics/domestic_politics/downing+st+apologises+for+dodgy+dossier/257243.html>
. At this time, Whitehall minutes recorded discussion of the US “fixing the 
facts”, when the line in public had always to be that American motives were 
pure. And the initial insistence of the attorney general that the war would not 
be legal, gave way first to the concession that there was room for argument, 
and then – after a brutal edit ofhis full advice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2005/apr/28/election2005.uk> – an 
outright green light.

Politics demeaned

Meanwhile, as Jack Straw <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jackstraw> and 
top officials would plot in private for how to secure a UN seal of approval for 
a course that was already set, Mr Blair protested in public that he was 
pursuing a “diplomatic solution”. There was diplomacy, all right, but it was 
diplomacy aimed at licensing war. When even this failed, the final cabinet 
discussions were less concerned with the real looming battle, than about the PR 
war with the French. For any progressive internationalist, and Mr Blair was 
once one, the most damning of all Sir John’s verdicts is that the result of the 
invasion was not – as was claimed – to uphold the authority of the UN, but 
instead to undermine it.

The gap between the public and the private rationale fed the mistrust which 
has since – amplified by the banking and MPs’ expenses crises – fuelled the 
Brexit vote. The whole conduct of politics in Britain was demeaned, but the 
highest price was paid on the left. The otherwise unthinkable ascent of Jeremy 
Corbyn occurred, prompting Labour’s lapse into civil war. Many Labour MPs are 
still struggling to understand it. As they do so, they should reflect on the 
cool rage of Mr Corbyn, who always opposed the war, in the chamber on 
Wednesday, and contrast it with the complacent tone adopted byDavid Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron>, who originally voted in 
favour.

Mr Blair’s impulse to trot alongside a know-nothing cowboy might reflect a 
deep need to bury the CND badge of his youth and earn some muscular 
respectability. Mr Corbyn’s ascent is the most ironic of the consequences of 
his historic mistake. But by far the most serious are still being played out 
far away – on the streets of Iraq.
 