
At the end of Granby Street in Liverpool’s Toxteth, past relentless rows of 
tinned-up houses punctuated by half-demolished corner shops, the mood is 
unusually festive. Television crews have been here for the past few days, 
camping out amid the jungle of pavement plant pots and poking their cameras 
into tumble-down terraces. But for once they haven’t come to report on the 
sorry story of urban dereliction that has plagued these streets for the past 30 
years. It’s not the usual social affairs correspondents, but packs of 
bewildered cultural critics –because this is the street that’s been shortlisted 
for the Turner prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/may/12/turner-prize-2015-shortlist-nominations-assemble-bonnie-camplin-janice-kerbel-nicole-wermers>
.

Turner prize 2015 shortlist: three women – and a housing estate
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/may/12/turner-prize-2015-shortlist-nominations-assemble-bonnie-camplin-janice-kerbel-nicole-wermers>
“Our first reaction was a sort of surreal amazement,” says Ronnie Hughes, a 
member of the Granby Four Streets community land trust, which is now at the 
centre of the art world’s attention for the way residents have been taking the 
future of their streets into their own hands. “But then again, the community 
has had practice at this. It’s the same way thatLiverpool reacted to becoming 
Capital of Culture in 2008 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2003/jun/04/communities.politicsandthearts1>
: there was dancing in the streets because we’d won something, rather than 
particularly knowing or caring what it was we’d won.”

Most locals might still be in a state of baffled amusement that the DIY 
handiwork of a young London-basedarchitecture collective, Assemble, in doing up 
some of the area’s empty homes <http://assemblestudio.co.uk/> has been 
shortlisted for the country’s most prestigious art award. But the members of 
Assemble are at an equal loss for words – mainly because they’re far too busy 
for the news to have sunken in. There is work to be done.

In the back yard of one of the houses, a couple of the group are pouring 
pigmented concrete to make a series of fireplace surrounds, beautifully cast in 
moulds made of debris collected from one of the derelict properties. Indoors, 
others are convening a meeting with future residents to present options for 
their new floors and front doors, around a group of intricately crafted doll’s 
house-sized models.

“Assemble are the only ones who have ever sat and listened to the residents, 
and then translated their vision into drawings and models, and now into 
reality,” says Erika Rushton, chair of the community land trust that has been 
working with the designers during the last couple of years to bring these 
neglected houses back to life.

It is a moment that has been sorely awaited. Since the 1981 riots, which saw 
buildings torched and 500 people arrested, Toxteth has suffered from decades of 
“managed decline”, with life inexorably drained from its streets. Eleanor Lee 
has lived here since 1976 and seen most of her neighbours leave.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F12%2Fassemble-turner-prize-2015-wildcard-how-the-young-architecture-crew-assemble-rocked-the-art-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F15%2F1431705934209%2Fcd2ba2ab-3736-4f0d-b4a5-09d3b7adfcbe-2060x1100.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20street%20that%20might%20win%20the%20Turner%20prize%3A%20how%20Assemble%20are%20transforming%20Toxteth&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F12%2Fassemble-turner-prize-2015-wildcard-how-the-young-architecture-crew-assemble-rocked-the-art-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20street%20that%20might%20win%20the%20Turner%20prize%3A%20how%20Assemble%20are%20transforming%20Toxteth&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F12%2Fassemble-turner-prize-2015-wildcard-how-the-young-architecture-crew-assemble-rocked-the-art-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F15%2F1431705934209%2Fcd2ba2ab-3736-4f0d-b4a5-09d3b7adfcbe-2060x1100.jpeg>
 Plans for Assemble’s renovation of the Granby Four Streets area of Toxteth in 
Liverpool 
“After the riots, an invisible red line was drawn around the area,” she told 
me when I first visited the area in November last year. “It was an unspoken 
policy of no maintenance and no investment. Once houses are boarded up, it 
sends a signal.” Bins weren’t collected, streets weren’t swept, and Granby 
became a no-go area.

There are now just 70 residents clinging on in an area of 200 homes, a 
post-apocalyptic statistic that is the result not of some great environmental 
disaster or mass industrial collapse, but of a series of failed regeneration 
plans. New Labour’s Housing Market Renewal Pathfinders is one of the most 
recent of such schemes that have systematically eviscerated the communities 
here to make way for promised visions that never arrive.

“Everyone just offered a total solution,” says Rushton. “Every house would be 
done, with no recognition of what people have crafted into their individual 
homes, or the value that people had invested in the street with planting and 
building furniture.

“Regeneration is always this blunt, abstract, over-professionalised thing,” 
she adds. “But Assemble have shown how it can be done differently, by making 
things that people can see, touch, understand and put together for themselves.”

After attracting funding from a Jersey-based social investor, Steinbeck 
Studio, which also brought Assemble on board, the community land trust 
formalised its plans and took control of 10 empty properties from the council 
last year. They aremidway through being refurbished to Assemble’s designs 
<http://assemblestudio.co.uk/?page_id=862>, with the help of local apprentices, 
in a strategy that makes the most of what is already there, celebrating the 
generous ceiling heights and big windows of the existing structures, in 
comparison to the mean-minded hutches that have been built in thetabula rasa 
approach nearby.

“We want to celebrate the idiosyncrasies of the existing derelict buildings,” 
says Assemble’s Lewis Jones. “If a floor is missing, why not leave it out and 
have a double-height space? There isn’t the usual pressure to extract the 
maximum possible value from the site and put profit before people.”

As part of a second phase of work, Assemble has imagined a spectacular winter 
garden within the empty brick shell of a gutted house – an idea that might form 
part of their installation for the Turner show at the Tramway in Glasgow later 
this year.

“I just love their attitude,” says Lee. “They are so bold and fearless in 
their designs, and their vision for housing isn’t limited to the usual 
cream-coloured boxes. They are architects working truly as artists.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F12%2Fassemble-turner-prize-2015-wildcard-how-the-young-architecture-crew-assemble-rocked-the-art-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F12%2F1431422760655%2F28abc345-65d7-4ad0-8e08-cdca1d51f9ec-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20street%20that%20might%20win%20the%20Turner%20prize%3A%20how%20Assemble%20are%20transforming%20Toxteth&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F12%2Fassemble-turner-prize-2015-wildcard-how-the-young-architecture-crew-assemble-rocked-the-art-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20street%20that%20might%20win%20the%20Turner%20prize%3A%20how%20Assemble%20are%20transforming%20Toxteth&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F12%2Fassemble-turner-prize-2015-wildcard-how-the-young-architecture-crew-assemble-rocked-the-art-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F12%2F1431422760655%2F28abc345-65d7-4ad0-8e08-cdca1d51f9ec-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Cineroleum … Assemble’s first project converted an abandoned petrol 
station into a temporary cinema. 
For Assemble themselves – all still in their mid-20s, and not one of them even 
yet qualified as an architect – the nomination has come as a bit of a shock. 
When they first got together as a group of recent graduates to build a 
temporary cinema in an abandoned petrol station in Clerkenwell in 2010, they 
can have had little idea that, just five years later, they would be shortlisted 
for theTurner prize <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/turnerprize>. But 
not much about the dazzling trajectory of this loosely assembled collective of 
designers and makers was ever really planned.

The 18-strong group has since gone on to build a portfolio spanning everything 
from temporary theatre structures and artists’ studio spaces to community 
housing strategies and new town squares – as well as staging a mysterious 
ritual happening at the Serpentine Pavilion last summer. They might not be 
qualified architects, but that wasn’t much of an obstacleto them landing a £2m 
competition to build a new art gallery for Goldsmiths College 
<http://assemblestudio.co.uk/?page_id=944> last year, or to building an 
adventure playground in Glasgow <http://assemblestudio.co.uk/?page_id=776>, or 
to proposing a revolutionary new housing strategy for Liverpool.

The diversity of Assemble’s work is matched only by their ability to make 
things happen in unlikely circumstances, where the usual necessities of a 
client, site or budget might not be in ready supply. TheCineroleum in 
Clerkenwell came about, they said, from a collective desire to build something 
<http://assemblestudio.co.uk/?page_id=2>; the result exuded their pleasure in 
the process of making, a feeling that has infused their work ever since. Sheets 
of Tyvek, the foil-like waterproof building material, were turned into walls of 
sumptuous, silvery swagged curtains, hoisted in a dramatic reveal at the end of 
each screening to leave the audience exposed on the edge of a busy main road. 
Formica was used to make intricate marquetry tops for tables and stools, while 
plastic tiles were vacuum-formed on site (using a jury-rigged hot air gun and a 
vacuum cleaner) to transform the ceiling of the former garage shop into 
something special. The building process was as much a performance as the final 
event itself.

Assemble have never claimed to be artists – and their shortlisting has no 
doubt raised some eyebrows in the rarified realms of the gallery world – but in 
both their approach to materials and the collaborative process by which their 
projects are made, their work transcends the norms of conventional 
architectural practice.
 Folly for a Flyover … their second temporary events space was conceived as a 
little house trapped beneath a motorway. 
A year after the Cineroleum, they built a second temporary events space under a
motorway flyover in east London, commissioned by arts organisation Create 
<http://createlondon.org/event/2011-create-art-award/>, its pitched roof poking 
up between the roaring lanes of traffic like a fairytale cottage that had lost 
its way. Made of wooden bricks sawn from railway sleepers and hung like drapery 
over a scaffolding frame, it was built by an army of 200 volunteers and 
provided a surreal theatrical setting for films, talks and children’s play 
sessions. Its bricks went on to be reused to make planters for a local primary 
school.

The more interest they received in their talents, the more the group began to 
coalesce as a formalised practice. These initial projects caught the eye of the 
London Legacy Development Corporation, the agency charged with co-ordinating 
the spoils of the Olympics, who offered them a warehouse space in Stratford on 
a peppercorn rent, while it awaits development by Ikea’s property arm. With a 
fully equipped wood shop, welding facilities, ping-pong table – and a kitchen 
where they take turns to cook lunch each day – it is a lively laboratory for 
testing their ideas at full scale, and developing new hybrid materials with an 
almost alchemical sensibility. There are chunks of“papercrete”, which they used 
to make tables for a British Council exhibition 
<http://assemblestudio.co.uk/?page_id=13>, samples of “rubble-dash” render for 
a little performance temple forOTO Projects 
<http://assemblestudio.co.uk/?page_id=258>, along with sliced tree-trunk 
furniture and sheets of pummelled metal that look like battered steel drums – a 
cladding test for another forthcoming project.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F12%2Fassemble-turner-prize-2015-wildcard-how-the-young-architecture-crew-assemble-rocked-the-art-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F12%2F1431422981455%2Fd6155bae-7e97-4f6c-91d3-b904b39425cd-718x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20street%20that%20might%20win%20the%20Turner%20prize%3A%20how%20Assemble%20are%20transforming%20Toxteth&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F12%2Fassemble-turner-prize-2015-wildcard-how-the-young-architecture-crew-assemble-rocked-the-art-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20street%20that%20might%20win%20the%20Turner%20prize%3A%20how%20Assemble%20are%20transforming%20Toxteth&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F12%2Fassemble-turner-prize-2015-wildcard-how-the-young-architecture-crew-assemble-rocked-the-art-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F12%2F1431422981455%2Fd6155bae-7e97-4f6c-91d3-b904b39425cd-718x1020.jpeg>
 Yardhouse under construction … erected with the collective spirit of an Amish 
barn-raising. 
Across the yard, the LLDC has since commissioned Assemble to build an 
affordable workspace building, the Yardhouse 
<http://assemblestudio.co.uk/?page_id=212>, which exhibits a similar level of 
care and fun as their temporary venues, elevating cheap materials into 
something refined. It is a basic timber-framed shed – once again erected with 
the collective spirit of an Amish barn-raising – full of spaces for like-minded 
makers, arranged around a processional staircase, with elegantly welded 
chandelier light-fittings. It is wrapped with a candy-coloured facade of 
hand-made concrete shingles, which hasbecome an accidental Instagram sensation 
<https://twitter.com/ollywainwright/status/589134331723042816>, turning this 
East End industrial estate into an unlikely place of pilgrimage for the selfie 
brigade.

Such things might make their projects sound like fleeting designer stage-sets 
or marketing-friendly “pop-ups” produced by agents of gentrification. But that 
would miss the point that Assemble’s work is founded in an interest in issues, 
and sites that go way beyond constructing pretty scenography in gritty 
industrial locations. It is about engaging with people on their own terms, 
driven, as they put it, by “a belief in the importance of addressing the 
typical disconnection between the public and the process by which spaces are 
made”.

Theirs is a down-to-earth, no-nonsense attitude that comes in part from the 
mix of disciplines involved. While many of them studied architecture at 
Cambridge, others came from backgrounds in English, history and philosophy, or 
had worked as builders or technicians. Asone member said of his non-architect 
colleagues in a recent interview 
<http://www.ribaj.com/culture/assemble-built-to-last>: “They can be so much 
more astute and direct than the rest of us, who are loaded with the language of 
obfuscation and meaning with which architectural education indoctrinates you.”

Their plain-speaking approach seems to go down well with their clients, too. 
Countless are the architects who talk of engaging with communities, wielding 
Post-it notes and collaborative board games, but Assemble do it for real, often 
embedding themselves in places for months at a time.
 New Addington town square … the result of weeks of testing uses with 
temporary structures and events. 
I saw them in action in New Addington, the Croydon council estate long damned 
as a “benighted ghetto”, where they took up residence in an old kiosk on the 
town square and staged community events during a number of weeks, as full-scale 
tests for how the public realm might be improved. After orchestrating such 
things as a stage for pensioners’ tea dances and ramps for young skateboarders, 
and reorganising the market,they proposed permanent improvements along similar 
lines <http://assemblestudio.co.uk/?page_id=7>. The result is a low-key collage 
of pieces that have since taken on a life of their own.

I’ve seen them at work in Dalmarnock in the east end of Glasgow too, where the 
regenerative juggernaut of theCommonwealth Games razed the local high street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/mar/03/glasgow-faces-reality-commonwealth-games>
 and bulldozed the local park to make way for a “transport hub” for the games. 
Assemble have since been helping to pick up the pieces, building anadventure 
playground that prioritises mud and understands the fun to be had with logs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/scotland-blog/2014/jul/25/glasgow-kids-rediscover-adventure-shadow-commonwealth-games>
, sewer pipes and tree-houses, instead of the officially sanctioned play 
equipment beloved of risk-averse local councils. In June, they’ll be unleashing 
further ideas aboutplay with a Brutalist Playground installation at the Royal 
Institute of British Architects 
<http://www.architecture.com/Explore/ExhibitionsandEvents/BrutalistPlayground/BrutalistPlayground.aspx>
, injecting a much-needed dose of whimsy into the prim surrounds of Portland 
Place.
 Goldsmiths Art Gallery … being carved out from a series of extraordinary 
spaces within a former Victorian bathhouse. 
All this and more is what piqued the interest of Alistair Hudson, director of 
the Middlesbrough Institute of ModernArt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> and one of this year’s Turner 
prize judges. He invited himself to visit the Assemble studio earlier this 
year. They didn’t know why he had come and, as usual, they were mostly too busy 
to talk.

Receiving the phonecall from Penelope Curtis last week – an occurrence met 
with equal bafflement – Assemble’s first reaction was to call the Granby 
residents. If the community didn’t want the attention, they wouldn’t accept the 
nomination.

“They were very conscious that the residents had been battling to save their 
the street for 25 years,” says Rushton. “It had been a gradual process, 
beginning with the community doing guerilla gardening and setting up a monthly 
street market, which gradually changed the reputation of the place and started 
to bring people back during the last five years. It’s not something that’s 
happened overnight.”

Back in Granby, the residents couldn’t be prouder of the Turner prize news.

“It’s just a fantastic boost for the whole area,” says Delucia Emina, 31, who 
set up the Baby Dolls beauty salon on Granby Street last year, the first new 
sign of life the high street had seen in a decade, where most of the units 
remain boarded up. Born on Granby Street, Emina moved away at age eight, but 
recently returned, buoyed by the fresh shoots of optimism poking up through the 
pavement cracks. Since she set up in July last year, a kebab shop has sprung up 
next door, and she’s planning to expand across the street.

Whether any of this is of interest to the Turner prize judges is neither here 
nor there. Assemble’s work with the residents is thankfully bereft of any of 
the pretensions that the bestowal of such a gong implies. But if the prize 
wants to look outwards and engage with the real world, then its arbiters need 
look no further.

• This article was updated on 15 May to add further detail about Assemble’s 
Granby Four Streets project
 