
Malaysia, Thailand <https://www.theguardian.com/world/thailand> and Burma are 
all suffering a backwards slide from the basic standards expected of modern-day 
representative democracies. While the reasons vary, the results are similar: 
growing public unrest, increased state repression, negative economic effects, 
weakened institutions and reputational damage.

Malaysia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia> vividly exemplifies 
these phenomena. The former British colony has never been a faultless 
democracy. The United Malays National Organisation, representing the ethnic 
Malay majority, has held power since independence in 1957. The mostly 
non-Muslim, ethnic Chinese and Indian minorities, whose ancestors were shipped 
in by the British as cheap labour, have suffered historical discrimination, yet 
this furore has little to do with history, race or religion. It is about 
probity in government – which appears to be sorely lacking.

The problem centres on Najib Razak, the prime minister, who is alleged to have 
benefited from the disappearance of $3.5bn from a state-owned investment 
company called 1MDB. Last year,the Wall Street Journal reported 
<http://www.wsj.com/specialcoverage/malaysia-controversy> that $700m was 
diverted to Najib’s personal bank account. In July, theUS justice department 
alleged wrongdoing 
<http://thediplomat.com/2016/07/us-lawsuit-against-malaysias-1mdb-who-is-official-1/>
 by “Malaysian Official 1”, identified as Najib.For his part, Najib flatly 
denies <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-33447456> any wrongdoing.

However, his administration has delayed a parliamentary investigation, purged 
internal critics and further intimidated Malaysia’s much put-upon independent 
media. Demonstrators have been attacked by pro-Najib thugs and protest 
organisers arrested. Last week, the US expressed concern about the continuing
detention under counter-terrorism laws of Maria Chin Abdullah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/24/us-malaysia-detention-activist-maria-chin-abdullah>
, chairwoman of the Bersih pro-democracy group. No one has been charged over 
the missing funds.

This scandal has gone on for too long. Najib’s leadership has grown toxic. For 
the good of his country and its creaking democracy, he should stand down, at 
least until an independent inquiry has established the facts of the 1MDB 
matter. Sadly, the likelihood of that happening is slim. If Najib can survive 
in office, he will.

In this respect, his behaviour resembles that of neighbouring Thailand’s 
military bosses who, having seized power in a coup in 2014, ostensibly because 
democracy was not working, have grown adept atfinding ways of clinging to 
arbitrary power. <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-36972396> General 
Prayuth Chan-o-cha, the coup’s leader, who styles himself as prime minister, 
promised reconciliation and an abundance of happiness for the Thai people.

Instead, he has presided over a repressive political and media climate, an 
underperforming economy, a gerrymandered constitution entrenching military 
control and an upsurge in violence among the disadvantaged Muslim minority in 
the impoverished south. Now, uncertainty caused by the recent death of King 
Bhumibol Adulyadej has thrown into doubt the junta’s promise to hold elections 
next year, although officials areadamant that the polls will go ahead.  
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-thailand-king-idUSKCN12I0HV?il=0>

There is speculation that parliament, which will meet in extraordinary session 
this week, will invite Crown Prince Maha Vajiralongkorn to ascend the throne, 
despite concerns about what is politely describedas his “colourful” lifestyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/13/thailand-maha-vajiralongkorn-crown-prince-king>
. Yet even these limited efforts to normalise the political and constitutional 
situation could fail, given Prayuth’s volatile, paranoid personality. The crown 
prince is said to have been close to Thaksin Shinawatra, the popular, former 
(elected) prime minister.Elevating the prince  
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-thailand-king-idUSKBN13K0CX>might threaten 
Prayuth’s stranglehold on power.

In Burma, disappointment attends the performance of Aung San Suu Kyi, the 
democracy campaigner who swept to power last year after decades of 
ill-treatment by the military (which renamed the country Myanmar). It is too 
soon to say that hopes have been dashed, but her failure to stand up for the 
oppressed Rohingya Muslims, victims of a renewed and lethal military assault 
since October, hasdismayed her many supporters 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-myanmar-rohingya-suukyi-idUKKBN13I26I> in the 
west.

Up to 30,000 Rohingya have been displaced in the north-west and aid suspended 
to 150,000 under the military lockdown. Meanwhile, renewed clashes between the 
army and ethnic minority groups are reported in Shan state – another return to 
the bad old days.

When it comes to reuniting a fractured country and rolling back the twin, 
malign influences of the military andBuddhist chauvinism 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/rise-of-buddhist-chauvinism-myanmar-sri-lanka-by-yuriko-koike-2015-07?barrier=true>
, Suu Kyi’s powers are strictly limited. It seems clear that, like other parts 
of south-east Asia, the Burmese road to democracy is a long one, featuring 
numerous wrong turnings and dead ends.
 