
The history of Mexico has been written, all too often, with the blood of the 
victims of unspeakable tragedies. Before the arrival of the Spanish, the Aztecs 
and numerous other civilisations performed gruesome human sacrifice rituals. 
Today, bloodthirsty drug cartels terrorise local populations, sometimes with 
the cooperation of the authorities, as was revealed duringlast year’s massacre 
of 43 student protesters from an Ayotzinapa school 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/24/mexican-governor-steps-aside-after-disappearance-of-43-students>
. No one place embodies that painful history more than Tlatelolco.


Today a district of Mexico City, Tlatelolco began as a city-state on the shore 
of Lake Texcoco, eventually overtaken by the ascendant Aztecs, who made it a 
part of their empire. During the brutal conquest of Mexico by Hernán Cortés, in 
1521 Tlatelolco was the site of the last battle between the Aztecs and the 
Spanish conquistadors. In the battle, Cortés triumphed, and some 40,000 Aztecs 
were killed. Centuries later, a plaque would be built on the site that reads: 
“The battle was not a triumph, nor was it a defeat. It was the painful birth of 
themestizo nation that is the Mexico <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico> 
of today.”


The deaths of the battle left a scar on the national psyche of the new colony, 
and later Mexico. The Spaniards did their best to pave over Tlatelolco’s dark 
history, demolishing its temple and using the stones to build a church. Much 
later, in the 1950s, Mexican leaders resolved to finally right the wrongs 
suffered on the site, putting it to good use by building a modern housing 
project there.


It was claimed that the complex would improve the lives of its inhabitants 
through the virtues of modern design
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F07%2Fmexico-city-tlatelolco-housing-complex-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F7%2F1430992913037%2F2ed441a2-e749-4959-b927-b7c93d3a9b67-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20tragedies%20of%20Mexico%20City%E2%80%99s%20Tlatelolco%20housing%20complex%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2031&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F07%2Fmexico-city-tlatelolco-housing-complex-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20tragedies%20of%20Mexico%20City%E2%80%99s%20Tlatelolco%20housing%20complex%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2031&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F07%2Fmexico-city-tlatelolco-housing-complex-history-cities-50-buildings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F7%2F1430992913037%2F2ed441a2-e749-4959-b927-b7c93d3a9b67-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Mario Pani-designed Tlatelolco complex in 1964. Photograph: Armando Salas 
Portugal 
Naturally, the new plans were the subject of more practical motives too. 
Mexico City had grown significantly since the Spanish conquest and was 
continuing to boom. After infrastructure projects drained Lake Texcoco, the 
city grew steadily out from the centre of the Aztec city of Tenochtitlán, which 
today is Mexico City’s central plaza. After the country gained independence in 
1810, gradual industrialisation during the 19th century and the creation of a 
railway network laid the foundations for a steady population shift from rural 
to urban. By the 1950s, Mexico City was facing a serious housing shortage.


Seeking to address this issue, the Mexican government sought to implement the 
most innovative building design of the time. They contracted Mario Pani, a 
young architect who had become one of the biggest proponents of the modernist 
ideas of Le Corbusier in the country.


His plan called for 102 residential towers, ranging in height from four to 22 
floors, placed in large blocks with plazas and public space in between –Le 
Corbusier’s “towers in the park” concept 
<http://www.archdaily.com/411878/ad-classics-ville-radieuse-le-corbusier/>. 
Additionally, the area near the recently excavated ruins of the former 
Tlatelolco temple and the Spanish church would be converted into a plaza, named 
Plaza de las Tres Culturas (“Square of the Three Cultures”, after the Aztecs, 
Spain and Mexico).


Though part of the plan’s rationale was to provide an economical solution to 
the housing crisis, it also claimed to improve the lives of the inhabitants of 
the complex, through the virtues of modern design. Pani believed that the 
complex would be part of a “general process of regeneration”. Far from 
achieving these lofty goals, the complex instead set the stage for the next 
instalment in Tlatelolco’s tragic history.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F07%2Fmexico-city-tlatelolco-housing-complex-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F30%2F1430391119662%2Fb99080aa-761b-46c9-b114-c1191887c976-1020x743.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20tragedies%20of%20Mexico%20City%E2%80%99s%20Tlatelolco%20housing%20complex%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2031&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F07%2Fmexico-city-tlatelolco-housing-complex-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20tragedies%20of%20Mexico%20City%E2%80%99s%20Tlatelolco%20housing%20complex%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2031&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F07%2Fmexico-city-tlatelolco-housing-complex-history-cities-50-buildings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F30%2F1430391119662%2Fb99080aa-761b-46c9-b114-c1191887c976-1020x743.jpeg>
 Student protesters are held at gunpoint by soldiers inside an apartment 
building in Tlatelolco, Mexico City. Photograph: AP 
At that point, the Plaza de las Tres Culturas became a living hell
Elena Poniatowska 
In 1968, Mexico City was preparing to host the Olympics. While the government 
saw the event as a way to raise Mexico’s stature in the eyes of the world, a 
coalition of left-leaning activists instead wanted to turn attention to social 
ills and the frequently violent overreach of military forces in Mexico. In 
response, the government created the Olympia battalion, a paramilitary squad 
intended to ensure the games wouldn’t be interrupted by protesters.


The protests reached tipping point on 2 October, 10 days before the opening 
ceremony, when protesters gathered in the Plaza de las Tres Culturas in the 
late afternoon for a rally. At the same time, snipers from the battalion took 
strategic posts in the new housing complexes, providing them with a clear 
shoton the people below.


At 6:10pm, a shot was fired, though no one was sure where it came from. 
Security forces acted immediately, opening fire on the protesters. “At that 
point,” journalist Elena Poniatowska wrote in her book The Night of Tlatelolco, 
“the Plaza de las Tres Culturas became a living hell.”


The protesters ran eastward, but many did not escape. The battalion and other 
security forces broke into residences, and the wide superblocks made fleeing 
protesters easy targets. After the killings ended, the government’s initial 
reaction was to minimise the carnage, estimating that only 24 had been killed. 
This figure was dramatically contradicted by other accounts. Poniatowska’s 
account includes an interview with a mother living in Tlatelolco who claims to 
have seen at least 65 dead bodies during the massacre. John Rodda, Olympic 
correspondent for The Guardian, witnessed the event and concluded 350 had been 
killed. Though the final body count remains unknown,photos surfaced in 2001 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2001/dec/11/mexico> confirming key elements 
of Rodda’s testimony.


The tragic events that night left a lasting legacy and remain a hot topic in 
Mexican politics <http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=97546687>
. Alongside the plaque to the 1521 defeat of the Aztecs, another was placed to 
the memory of the student demonstrators. But though the events were seen as an 
indictment of the Mexican government, they didn’t tarnish the reputation of the 
Tlatelolco complex itself. Two decades later, another tragedy would occur at 
the site that would do just that.


Two of the three segments of the Nuevo León building collapsed, killing all 
residents inside
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F07%2Fmexico-city-tlatelolco-housing-complex-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F30%2F1430391235130%2F9316d2d5-a4d9-4073-8e03-f12a57cd1853-1020x678.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20tragedies%20of%20Mexico%20City%E2%80%99s%20Tlatelolco%20housing%20complex%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2031&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F07%2Fmexico-city-tlatelolco-housing-complex-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20tragedies%20of%20Mexico%20City%E2%80%99s%20Tlatelolco%20housing%20complex%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2031&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F07%2Fmexico-city-tlatelolco-housing-complex-history-cities-50-buildings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F30%2F1430391235130%2F9316d2d5-a4d9-4073-8e03-f12a57cd1853-1020x678.jpeg>
 The Nuevo Leon flats in Tlatelolco after the 8.1-magnitude earthquake on 9 
September 1985. Photograph: KeystoneUSA-ZUM/Rex Shutterstock 
On the morning of 9 September 1985, Mexico was hit by an 8.1 magnitude 
earthquake. Though the epicentre was off the coast of the southwest state of 
Michoacán, it was powerful enough to cause major damage in Mexico City, 
demolishing buildings, damaging metro stations and killing thousands.


The Tlatelolco complex was hit particularly hard. Two of the three segments of 
the Nuevo León building collapsed, killing all residents inside. The collapse, 
exacerbated by a toxic combination of cost cutting during the original 
construction and improper maintenance, left between 200 and 300 dead.

Due to earthquake damage, eight other buildings in the complex were demolished 
and four more had their uppermost floors removed. It was an event charged with 
symbolism. Just asPruitt-Igoe in St Louis, Missouri 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/apr/22/pruitt-igoe-high-rise-urban-america-history-cities?CMP=share_btn_tw>
 had demonstrated the “death of modernism” in the United States, the partial 
demolition of Tlatelolco showed it to be a failure south of the border as well.


Today, Tlatelolco seems to have put its tragic days in the past, but living 
conditions there remain far from perfect. Mexico’sEl Universal characterises 
the complex 
<http://www.eluniversal.com.mx/ciudad-metropoli/2014/impreso/la-unidad-que-vive-en-121104.html>
 as being under a virtual curfew at night, as high crime rates keep most people 
inside. In addition, the dangerous lack of maintenance persists. Architecture 
magazinePlataforma Arqitectonica reports 
<http://www.plataformaarquitectura.cl/cl/750513/edificios-multifamiliares-de-tlatelolco-siguen-peligrando-por-los-sismos>
 that five of the buildings are inclined at a level of 1.5%, where buildings 
inclining greater than 1% are considered at risk.


Pruitt-Igoe: the troubled high-rise that came to define urban America – a 
history of cities in 50 buildings, day 21
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/apr/22/pruitt-igoe-high-rise-urban-america-history-cities>
But the downfall of modernism at Tlatelolco may also represent the rise of a 
new trend in housing, with a uniquely Latin American twist. This change is at 
the centre of the argument made by architecture critic Justin McGuirk in his 
recent book Radical Cities. McGuirk sees the decline of Tlatelolco as 
coinciding with the beginning of a new movement he calls “activist 
architecture”.


McGuirk highlights programmes such as slum upgrading and the social urbanism 
of Medellín, Colombia, to be the future of cities in Latin America, as well as 
the rest of the world. “[Activist architects] have to play off the private 
against the public to get the most out of both. They have to insinuate 
themselves into politicians’ plans,” he writes. “Above all, they have to be 
extroverts.”


The activist architect approach seems to be gaining ground among planning 
professionals, and it’s becoming increasingly popular in Mexico as well. Even 
in Tlatelolco itself, groups likeUnidos por Tlatelolco (United for Tlatelolco) 
have emerged to coordinate the efforts of residents to make up for neglect by 
authorities whenever possible. Today, it seems clear that groups like these, 
just as much as central planning authorities, will be the ones to confront the 
difficult task of creating better living conditions for the citizens of Mexico.

 * Which other buildings in the world tell stories about urban history? Share 
your own pictures and descriptions with GuardianWitness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/mar/23/50-buildings-great-stories-urban-history>
, on Twitter and Instagram using #hoc50 or let us know suggestions in the 
comments below  