
Has 2016 gotten to be a bit much? Has the election driven you to digital 
distraction? All right: stop, collaborate and listen.

The internet is back with a brand new invention, one that involves stopping 
everything for a moment and pretending that you’re a non-sentient being immune 
to whatever nonsense is currently going on in the world.

This was the election of disillusionment | Steven Thrasher
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/08/this-was-the-election-of-disillusionment>
I am referring, of course, to the Mannequin Challenge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/shortcuts/2016/nov/07/the-mannequin-challenge-like-the-harlem-shake-but-stationary>
, which has recently become a thing. Indeed, it’s now starting to overtake long 
political rants as the thing you’re probably seeing most of on your social 
media feed. The trend apparentlystarted 
<https://twitter.com/thvtmelanin_/status/791414169329369088> with high school 
kids who may have taken their teacher’s supplications to ‘please, can you all 
just sit still’ a little too literally. It infiltrated the adult world over the 
weekend; the hashtag #mannequinchallenge has been mentioned2.3m times 
<http://time.com/4562272/hillary-clinton-mannequin-challenge/> in the past week 
on Twitter.Everyone 
<http://people.com/celebrity/destinys-child-adele-mannequin-challenge/> from 
Adele to Ellen DeGeneres the New York Giants has given it a go. Destiny’s Child 
even briefly reunited briefly to film their take. And Hillary Clinton’s teamgot 
in on the (non)action 
<https://twitter.com/HillaryClinton/status/795955854059171840> Tuesday morning.

So what exactly is the Mannequin Challenge? The clue is in the name. A group 
of people freeze in mid-action like mannequins while someone goes around 
filming them. The only thing moving in the shot should be the camera. Then you 
put a soundtrack on it, stick it online, and watch the likes rack up. Black 
Beatles by Rae Sremmurd is one of the more popular options for soundtracks. 
It’s a perfect song for the challenge because there’s a quiet build up and 
then, around 25 seconds in, the beat drops and … nothing happens.

You see, normally when the beat drops in a video meme, things happen. In the 
Harlem Shake it’s the moment where everyone starts dancing. But with the 
Mannequin Challenge, the song gets going and everyone stays resolutely in 
position. It’s, like, we’re all going to stand this one out, OK? We’re 
exhausted. Let’s see about dancing next year.

In a sense, the Mannequin Challenge is not actually that new; it’s just a 
digital reboot of a craze from the 19th century for tableau vivant. Otherwise 
known as ‘living pictures’, these were used to dramatize important moments of 
history or famous paintings. They were also a bit of after-dinner fun. People 
used to hang around in their parlors after dinner and recreate famous scenes. 
To younger readers: yes, that is what life was like before the internet. It was 
rough.

But while it may date back to the 19th century, the Mannequin Challenge is 
also very much of the moment. The fact that just being quiet and still for a 
moment has been so enthusiastically embraced by everyone from high schoolers to 
imminent presidents is a sign, I feel, that we are all very, very tired, and we 
would like a little rest, please.

What can we salvage from the trauma of the US presidential election? | Lucia 
Graves
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/08/trauma-presidential-election-2016-turning-point>
The Mannequin Challenge isn’t the only indicator of a need for less speed in 
an always-on, always-moving world. In August, Netflix started to air slow TV. 
Something of a cultural phenomenon in Norway, slow TV is basically a genre 
where nothing happens for hours on end. The first installment, a7.5-hour train 
ride <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z7VYVjR_nwE> from Bergen to Oslo, was 
watched by around 45% of Norway’s population.

Just to reiterate, absolutely nothing happens on this train ride. There’s no 
background music or narrative. It’s just train sounds. Oh, and there are 
several tunnels, so the screen often just goes dark. This quiet hit was 
followed by other instant classics such as National Knitting Morning, National 
Knitting Evening, and National Knitting Night (my favorite of the trilogy). 
That Netflix US has recently picked up Slow TV might be a sign it thinks that 
Americans may well be in need of a little audiovisual Xanax.

And then, of course, there’s the growing popularity of mindfulness, which has 
gone mainstream in the last couple of years. In a world where being busy is the 
ultimate badge of honor, corporatized mindfulness allows you to take some time 
out in a socially approved way. You’re not just sitting around doing nothing, 
you’re not taking a break, you’re beingmindful.

When there’s constant pressure to be achieving, and doing, and ticking off 
boxes, and racking up likes, it’s worth remembering that there’s nothing wrong 
with doing nothing now and again. We shouldn’t need Slow TV or mindfulness apps 
or Mannequin Challenges to give us an excuse to just sit quietly.

Still, here’s hoping the Mannequin Challenge ushers in a new era of Slow Viral 
Memes. Maybe a Putting on the Kettle For a Nice Cup of Tea Challenge? Or a Just 
Having a Quick Nap Challenge? Of course, depending on how the presidential 
election turns out, the next viral trend may well be emigrating en masse to 
Canada.
 