
Since 23 June, the choice to leave the European Union has been debated in 
Britain largely as if it were a reflexive action – something the nation does to 
itself. But Brexit must also be understood transitively – something this 
country does to other countries. Naturally, domestic considerations dominate 
the discussion, especially since separation talks have not begun. But as the 
outline of those negotiations comes into view, it is essential that more 
attention is given to perspectives from across the channel. That picture is far 
from simple. The EU position will combine the interests of individual member 
states and the priorities of supra-national institutions, asDavid Davis had 
occasion to remember on a trip to Brussels last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/21/pm-warned-transition-brexit-deal-fiendishly-difficult-to-achieve-theresa-may-eu>
. The Brexit secretary met Guy Verhofstadt, the former Belgian prime minister 
who will represent the European parliament in the divorce negotiations.

MEPs must approve any final agreement and they cannot be expected to 
rubber-stamp anything. No EU leader welcomes the imposition of Brexit on to an 
already difficult agenda. France, the Netherlands and Germany all hold 
elections next year in which European solidarity will be corroded by insurgent 
nationalism.A constitutional referendum in Italy next week could destroy the 
government there 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/24/after-trump-victory-italy-referendum-is-seen-as-test-of-populisms-rise>
. The eurozone debt crisis is in remission, not cured. This context makes the 
UK’s negotiating position weaker in two ways. First, embattled governments are 
disinclined to make time for British concerns. Second, a perception that Brexit 
is one of many forces conspiring to undo the whole European project strengthens 
the feeling that Britain cannot be seen to be rewarded for an act of 
destabilising, unilateral adventurism. That is the view taken by the 
commission’s lead negotiator,Michel Barnier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/27/jean-claude-juncker-puts-michel-barnier-in-charge-brexit-talks>
, who also met Mr Davis. Mr Barnier said the encounter was a “courtesy visit” 
granted at the Brexit secretary’s request – a formulation that underlines EU 
officials’ refusal to be drawn into any substantial discussion beforearticle 50 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/jun/29/what-is-article-50-brexit-video-explainer>
 is triggered.

There is a tendency in Britain to caricature “Brussels” as a single entity 
that can be made to dispense concessions. But Brexit cannot be understood as 
one deal between the UK and the EU, because the EU itself is a negotiated 
entity – a complex system with multiple points of power and shifting internal 
dynamics. It is a process not a place.

There is also a complacent British habit of thinking that leaders from big 
countries can override fiddly EU diplomacy in ad hoc deals.David Cameron vastly 
overestimated Angela Merkel’s capacity to influence the outcome of his failed 
attempt to renegotiate membership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/20/angela-merkel-uk-eu-deal-willingness-compromise-david-cameron>
. That mistake is repeated in the minds of Brexiters who think that economic 
interests – the need to retain access to UK markets for German exporters – will 
trump all other considerations. Their presumption ignores the premium that all 
EU governments, and Germany’s in particular, place on the long-term integrity 
of the European project. It does not matter that Theresa May’s stated intent is 
for a mutually beneficial trading arrangement.

In principle, any Brexit is hostile to the interests of those with whom she 
wants to do a deal. This problem must be better communicated to the British 
public, not just to prepare people for inevitable compromise but because the 
negotiations won’t make any sense without recognition that the rest of the EU 
perceives itself to be mitigating an existential threat. Lord Kerr, the former 
British diplomat who helped draft article 50,sagely advised ministers this week 
<https://hansard.parliament.uk/Lords/2016-11-22/debates/3F75D2F3-68BC-41CC-8144-ACABF8D01DA2/Article50(ConstitutionCommitteeReport)#contribution-953F9019-6010-4D14-A27A-96A0C11DDDB3>
 to let MPs consider a green paper explaining “to the country what the choices 
are and what the upsides and downsides are of the various [Brexit] options”.

The cost-benefit equation of Brexit for Britain has so far been formulated 
only in economic terms.This week’s autumn statement brought the fiscal 
implications <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-38068358> of an uncertain 
future into sharp relief. That has revived speculation about a national change 
of heart; perhaps a second referendum as mooted separately byTony Blair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/24/tony-blair-brexit-could-be-stopped-if-britons-change-their-minds>
 andJohn Major 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/25/brexit-sir-john-major-says-perfectly-credible-case-for-second-referendum>
 this week. Their voices can easily be dismissed by Brexiters as anguished 
cries from an ancien regime, unworthy of attention in the revolutionary world 
post-referendum. But the former prime ministers’ observation that voters are 
yet to confront the real cost of what is in store, and that their opinions 
might shift, is unarguably true. As the talks draw nearer, it will become 
clearer that the UK is not only imposing a financial penalty on itself but 
forcing a burden on essential allies at a time when the international order 
looks precarious enough already.
 