
“We don’t want to be just about Dharavi – we are about finding a unique 
hip-hop style,” says Akash Dhangar, founder of the SlumGods crew. “You know 
[the rapper]KRS-One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/sep/01/krs-one-gospel-hip-hop>? He said 
you can’t learnhip-hop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2011/aug/10/how-hip-hop-changed-the-world>
. You have to become hip-hop.”

I meet Dhangar, aka B Boy Akku, and members of his crew at a cafe in Mahim 
West one warm Sunday morning. In Mumbai, where railway lines partition 
localities into Easts and Wests, there is no recognisable Mahim East. Instead, 
you only have Dharavi, the infamous shantytown that forms the backdrop of Danny 
Boyle’s filmSlumdog Millionaire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jan/09/slumdog-millionaire-review-danny-boyle>
 and Mani Ratnam’sNayakan <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nayakan_%281987_film%29>
. In this 500 acres of land, you will find no cafes – at least, not ones with 
couches, air-conditioning and a perplexing list of coffees. We are at the 
nearest relatively chic option to Dharavi, on the other side of the railway 
line.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fnov%2F28%2Fslumgods-mumbai-hip-hop-dharavi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F27%2F1417084302123%2Fa29fb9d1-0ceb-4cc8-983a-710f0b8d86a4-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20SlumGods%20of%20Mumbai%3A%20%E2%80%98hip-hop%20has%20brought%20us%20to%20the%20world%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fnov%2F28%2Fslumgods-mumbai-hip-hop-dharavi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20SlumGods%20of%20Mumbai%3A%20%E2%80%98hip-hop%20has%20brought%20us%20to%20the%20world%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fnov%2F28%2Fslumgods-mumbai-hip-hop-dharavi%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F27%2F1417084302123%2Fa29fb9d1-0ceb-4cc8-983a-710f0b8d86a4-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Akash and Sagar of the SlumGods. Photograph: Benita Fernando 
Dhangar is one of the estimated 750,000 residents of Dharavi, and belongs to a 
settlement of a once-nomadic community known as theKunchikorve 
<http://mythologiesofmumbai.pukar.org.in/dharavi/documentation/community-profiles/kunchikorve>
. The 22-year-old founded the SlumGods, many of whom are Dharavi youth, in 
2009; they are currently an underground hip-hop crew of 17 members.

As he and his bros gulp down cappuccinos, Dhangar recalls feeling out of place 
at a trendy restaurant just a couple of years ago. “Looking at the other 
diners, we seemed shabbily dressed. From the moment we entered, everybody was 
staring at us. As I cut into my burger, the patty unfortunately slipped out, 
and it was obvious that people were judging us,” he says.

Not any more. Over the past five years, the crew has collaborated with 
renowned hip-hop artists such as Tokyo-based DJ Sarasa, AKA Silverboombox, 
dancer-choreographer Prosenjit Guy Kundu, and the California-based MC Mandeep 
Sethi. Their previous Saturday night had been spent at an international street 
artist’s birthday party in the fashionable part of town called Bandra (at this 
point, Dhangar brings up the legendary block parties thrown byAfrika Bambaataa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/apr/14/afrika-bambaataa-q-and-a> in the 
Bronx). “Hip-hop and SlumGods gave us the self confidence that we badly 
needed,” he says.

The SlumGods crew is ever-growing, with all the core elements of hip-hop 
culture: graffiti artists and beatboxers, b-boys and b-girls, breakdancers and 
DJs. Their conscious rap, by MCs such as Vineet Nair (Poetik Justis) and Rohan 
Augustine (Supersonik) is part of a socially relevant hip-hop culture that is 
emerging inIndia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>, in line with the 
“reality rap” of Kashmiri rappers Shyn9 and EssXaar.

“Take Dharavi Rap, for example,” says Dhangar. “It’s a freestyle piece about 
the perception that tourists and foreigners have of our home. They think there 
is only poverty in Dharavi, but when they come here, they realise there is so 
much more to the place. People are industrious and hardworking; you will not 
find beggary here.”

SlumGods easily draws in local talent such as Rakesh Kunchikorve, known as 
Martin. The 23-year-old joined the crew in 2010 as a self-taught breakdancer. 
His greatest challenge prior to the SlumGods was finding a room spacious enough 
to train in. This is considered a luxury in Dharavi.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fnov%2F28%2Fslumgods-mumbai-hip-hop-dharavi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F27%2F1417085443831%2F9c786c34-c4e0-4b02-8256-5e9415545058-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20SlumGods%20of%20Mumbai%3A%20%E2%80%98hip-hop%20has%20brought%20us%20to%20the%20world%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fnov%2F28%2Fslumgods-mumbai-hip-hop-dharavi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20SlumGods%20of%20Mumbai%3A%20%E2%80%98hip-hop%20has%20brought%20us%20to%20the%20world%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fnov%2F28%2Fslumgods-mumbai-hip-hop-dharavi%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F27%2F1417085443831%2F9c786c34-c4e0-4b02-8256-5e9415545058-2060x1236.jpeg>
 SlumGods co-founder Akash Dhangar, aka B Boy Akku. Photograph: Amit Madheshiya 
Since last year, however, not only do the SlumGods practise out of two centres 
in Dharavi, they also teach young children from the slum and the streets about 
the things they know best. (I work at one of these centres, called theColour Box
 <http://dharavibiennale.wordpress.com/2013/11/19/colour-box-is-our-new-house/>
; in the evening it’s a miniature hip-hop artists’ parade.)

The children wear baggy pants and fluorescent earrings, and have spiked 
haircuts. They headspin and breakdance, and stand in a Buffalo stance. Many of 
them do not attend regular school. Dhangar believes in preparing them for “a 
future of opportunities and recognition for hip-hop in India ... Some years 
ago, I did not even know how to speak English or use the internet.Hip-hop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/hip-hop> and rap taught me these things, and 
it can do the same for these children.”

The lessons are free and the SlumGods refrain from accepting donations. They 
fund themselves with their concurrent venture,SlumGods Tours and Travels 
<http://www.slumgods.in/>, brainchild of Sagar Vatapu (DJ Segar). Vatapu 
previously worked as a travel guide at a slum tourism enterprise in Dharavi, 
but broke away – wanting to show tourists “the real Dharavi” of 
entrepreneurship and enterprise. He is more embarrassed to admit that there was 
a time when he played Bollywood beats at marriages and events in Mumbai. “The 
company is not the same as the crew. Akku and I stepped out of the bubble to 
start something new and support the bubble,” says Vatapu.

Having rubbed shoulders with internationally acclaimed artists such as Karsh 
Kale <http://karshkale.com/biography/>and B.L.O.T <http://slumgods.tumblr.com/>
, the SlumGods are frequently invited to participate in competitions and 
festivals overseas. Unfortunately, none of them have passports. The reasons are 
trying: Dhangar’s house has no electricity supply, and thus there is no 
electricity bill for address proof. Vatapu’s family has lost his birth 
certificate.

But beyond the practicality of missing documents, their greatest hurdle is the 
perception that what is born in a slum is destined to stay in a slum. No amount 
of Slumdog Millionare-ing can change that. Dhangar says their families and 
friends do not understand their talents, and simply label them as “painter” and 
“dancer” or as doing “time-pass”. “But hip-hop has brought us to the world,” he 
adds, smiling quietly.

Benita Fernando blogs for the Dharavi Biennale 
<https://dharavibiennale.wordpress.com/author/jbfernando/>.

 