
Maxim Gorky <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/may/19/theatre.stage>’s 
1902 play is one of those seminal works we rarely get to see. Now it is being 
imaginatively paired and cross-cast withChekhov’s The Cherry Orchard 
<http://www.arcolatheatre.com/event/the-cherry-orchard/> (1904), in a season 
devoted to revolution. It’s an ambitious undertaking but, while I was glad to 
see Gorky’s great play,Helena Kaut-Howson <http://helenakauthowson.weebly.com/>
’s production has yet to find its rhythm.

 The setting is a dosshouse filled with the kind of drifters and derelicts 
Gorky had met on his travels through Russia: a stratum of society never before 
seen on stage. Fuelled by drink and dreams, they include a card sharp, a 
cap-maker, a locksmith, a self-styled baron and a thief called Vassily.
 Jim Bywater (Luka) and Abhin Galeya (Kleesht) in The Lower Depths. 
Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Two events stir these sad figures out of their inertia. One is the arrival of 
a tattered pilgrim, Luka, who offers them hope and tells them “whatever you 
believe in, exists”. The other is the violence that erupts when Vassily, who 
has been carrying on with the landlord’s wife, transfers his affection to her 
younger sister.

 What strikes one instantly is the huge debt modern drama owes to Gorky. The 
battle between truth and lies visibly influenced O’Neill’s The Iceman Cometh; 
Beckett and Pinter inherited Gorky’s sympathy with down-and-outs; andAlexander 
Zeldin’s Love 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/dec/14/love-review-homelessness-%20drama-alexander-zeldin-dorfman-national-theatre>
, recently at the National, showed drama could be created out of the daily 
lives of forgotten people.

But, if Gorky’s play endures, it is not just because of the long shadow it 
casts: it is because of its blend of compassion and cruelty. We are moved by 
Luka’s Christian charity and by the hymn the card cheat, Satin, offers to 
humankind. Yet Gorky, the pioneering realist, also shows that deprivation 
breeds hard-heartedness. After the anguished death of the locksmith’s 
tubercular wife, the cap-maker’s only comment is: “Stopped her coughing, has 
she?”

Kaut-Howson’s production keeps the Russian setting but updates the action and 
sprays the translation by Jeremy Brooks and Kitty Hunter-Blair, commissioned 
for the 1972 RSC revival, with four-letter words. I have no big issue with that 
but a production that is spellbinding up to the interval later loses its 
momentum. Brooks called the play “a dark and brooding poem” but, especially in 
the scene where Luka’s vision of a utopian virtuous land is vehemently 
contradicted by the locksmith, Gorky’s rhythmic balance is undone by hesitant 
caesuras.
 Ruth Everett (Vassilissa Karpovna) and Doug Rao (Vassily Pepel) in The Lower 
Depths. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
 With cast of 18, it remains an impressive company show in which certain 
individuals stand out. Jim Bywater lends the philosophical Luka the wryness and 
charm of a Russian Alan Bennett, while Jack Klaff shrewdly reminds us that 
Satin’s great hymn to humanity comes from a brain befuddled by drink. There is 
strong support from Doug Rao as the lecherous thief, from Ruth Everett, vicious 
in leopardskin, as his rejected lover, and from Simon Scardifield as an 
alcoholic actor deluded by false hope. It makes for a long three-hour evening 
but, even if the production needs tightening, Gorky’s play is essential viewing 
for anyone interested in the origins of modern theatre.

• At the Arcola, London <http://www.arcolatheatre.com/event/the-lower-depths/>
, until 11 February. Box office: 020-7503 1646.


 