
The extended benefit cap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/06/brutal-reality-lower-benefit-cap-hits-home-struggling-families>
, introduced this week, is yet another cynical ploy from a government 
determined to exploit social divisions and prejudice in order to further its 
own ideological agenda.

By the time the roll-out is completed, at the end of January 2017, 116,000 of 
the poorest families in the UK will have had their benefits reduced by up to 
£115 a week. The cap now limits total household benefits to £23,000 a year in 
London, and £20,000 outside the capital.

And really, could there be a more obvious target: the workshy family living in 
their taxpayer-funded paradise, sitting on their sofa eating Domino’s pizza, 
watching satellite TV, and laughing out loud at mugs like you, slaving for 60 
hours a week, with a three-hour-a-day commute on top, because you can’t afford 
to live anywhere near work, who are paying for the whole shebang?

Benefit cap will pitch thousands more British children into poverty | Patrick 
Butler
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jul/07/benefit-cap-pitch-children-poverty-12bn-cuts-tory-budget>
Never mind that the reality is far more complex. This government doesn’t do 
complexity. Prejudice thrives on gut instincts. Never mind that these 
benefits are largely being paid to landlords in a grossly inflated rental 
market, which successive governments have failed to address. Why would they, 
whenalmost a third of MPs are private landlords themselves? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/jan/14/mp-landlords-number-risen-quarter-last-parliament-housing-bill>
 And this is not just a London problem, either. Thanks to the cap, a family 
with two children living outside London will have less than £120 a week for 
housing costs. In large parts of the country, it is simply impossible to rent a 
two-bedroom property at this price.

Damian Green, the work and pensions secretary, thinks the cap is a “real 
success 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/07/damian-green-says-governments-benefits-cap-is-a-real-success>
”. It’s all about fairness, apparently. And encouraging people to work. Because 
that’s the problem: there are all these jobs and they’re just too lazy 
to do them. You’ve got to starve them out. Never mind thatresearch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jun/05/docking-welfare-payments-is-not-incentive-to-work-report-claims>
 has shown that cutting out of work benefits makes it harder for people to find 
employment, as just getting by becomes the priority. But this isn’t about how 
things are, just how they look.

People on disability benefits are largely exempt from the cap. This includes 
anyone in receipt of disability living allowance (DLA) or the new personal 
independence payment (PIP) and those in receipt of the support element of 
employment and support allowance (ESA). The cap does apply to ESA claimants in 
the work-related activity group though – a double whammy as, from April next 
year, support for new claimants in this group is also being cut by £30, or 
around a third of the current weekly benefit.

We all exist at any time somewhere on a spectrum of mental wellbeing

The rhetoric is, of course, that these measures protect “the vulnerable”. But, 
while I welcome any exemptions from the cap, I also find such language, with 
its implication that society is divided into those who are vulnerable and those 
who are not, distinctly troubling. “The vulnerable”, “the mentally ill”, “the 
long-term sick” – they are not separate species. There is no impermeable 
barrier, dividing the mentally healthy from mentally ill, for example. We all 
exist at any time somewhere on a spectrum of mental wellbeing, and factors such 
as housing insecurity, financial hardship and debt, unemployment, loss of 
support networks and so on, can rapidly propel us along it in a negative 
direction.

The politics of austerity have led to an increase in referrals to community 
mental health teams by a staggering 20% in the five years to 2015 
<http://www.communitycare.co.uk/2015/03/20/mental-health-trust-funding-8-since-2010-despite-coalitions-drive-parity-esteem/>
.

Instead of using bullying tactics to scare people into work, why not try 
tackling the roots of the problem, offering genuine (not tick-box) support, 
personalised to individuals and their situation? Why not try working with 
people, instead of stigmatising them, building them up instead of breaking them 
down? That doesn’t play to the crowds so well though, does it?
 