
In popular accounts, Africa and the international criminal court 
<https://www.icc-cpi.int/> are pitted against each other 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/01/african-union-kenyan-plan-leave-international-criminal-court>
. The ICC is derided as being “biased” against Africa, ignorant of the 
attitudes and desires of Africans, even neocolonial.

In reality, the relationship suffers from misinformation and 
misunderstandings. Many parties share responsibility for this. Some African 
leaders have, on occasion,decried the ICC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/14/why-south-africa-is-wrong-to-leave-the-international-criminal-court>
 in order to protect themselves from the court’s scrutiny.

Equally, the ICC has not been able to communicate its message effectively on 
the continent, leaving it susceptible to misrepresentation by those who seek to 
undermine the institution.

Hissène Habré's conviction the first step on a longer road to justice for Chad 
| Kolbassia Haoussou
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/03/hissene-habre-crimes-against-humanity-chad-justice>
Some insist that the ICC has no place in Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> and that African states must 
withdraw from the court because the institution has intervened primarily in 
African conflicts, while situations outside the continent are not investigated. 
However, it makes little sense to suggest that because justice cannot be served 
everywhere, justice should not be servedanywhere. Such an attitude insults 
victims and survivors alike.

 Why has the ICC focused its investigations almost exclusively on Africa? 
Well, can anyone argue that the situations in Africa where the court has opened 
official investigations – northernUganda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/12/walkout-at-ugandan-presidents-inauguration-over-icc-remarks>
, theDemocratic Republic of the Congo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jun/21/jean-pierre-bemba-sentenced-to-18-years-in-prison-by-international-criminal-court>
,Central African Republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/21/icc-finds-ex-congolese-vice-president-jean-pierre-bemba-guilty-of-war-crimes>
,Darfur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/14/icc-darfur-war-crimes-fatou-bensouda-sudan>
,Sudan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/15/south-africa-to-fight-omar-al-bashirs-arrest-warrant-sudan>
,Kenya, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/05/international-criminal-court-william-ruto-kenya-deputy-president-election-violence>
Libya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/07/gaddafi-son-saif-al-islam-freed-after-death-sentence-quashed>
,Ivory Coast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/28/former-ivory-coast-president-on-trial-for-unspeakable-crimes>
 andMali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/may/24/malian-jihadi-to-plead-guilty-forgiveness-icc-cultural-destruction-trial>
 – arenot deserving of an ICC intervention? 

In all these situations, local justice systems were either unwilling or unable 
to investigate and prosecute themselves. For the most part, the relevant 
governments invited the court and cooperated with its officials. In other 
cases, African member states of the security council voted in favour of 
referring the situations to the ICC.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Finternational-criminal-court-vital-fight-against-impunity-africa-group-for-justice-accountability%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ed5e189bdc48aba0c2d82e41fd67c016d461e8d%2F0_0_3264_2448%2Fmaster%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20international%20criminal%20court%20is%20vital%20to%20our%20fight%20against%20impunity%20in%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Finternational-criminal-court-vital-fight-against-impunity-africa-group-for-justice-accountability%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20international%20criminal%20court%20is%20vital%20to%20our%20fight%20against%20impunity%20in%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Finternational-criminal-court-vital-fight-against-impunity-africa-group-for-justice-accountability%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ed5e189bdc48aba0c2d82e41fd67c016d461e8d%2F0_0_3264_2448%2Fmaster%2F3264.jpg>
 Fatou Bensouda, the ICC’s chief prosecutor, speaks to the Darfur Women Action 
Group in 2014. Photograph: Courtesy of ICC 
 Why has the ICC not intervened elsewhere and, especially, in powerful states? 
The court is severely limited in its reach. While there have been recent calls 
for the ICC to act inSyria  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/16/un-condemns-isis-genocide-against-yazidis-in-iraq-and-syria>
andNorth Korea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/12/north-koreas-h-bomb-shouldnt-stop-us-calling-out-human-rights-atrocities>
, its jurisdiction prohibits it from doing so. Our group has consistently 
advocated universal ratification of theRome statute 
<https://www.icc-cpi.int/nr/rdonlyres/ea9aeff7-5752-4f84-be94-0a655eb30e16/0/rome_statute_english.pdf>
 to ensure justice and accountability around the world.

 It is important to note that the ICC has now opened an investigation into the 
2008war between Georgia and Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/commentisfree/2016/mar/24/the-russia-georgia-war-why-the-icc-is-launching-war-crimes-probe>
, the latter of which is a permanent member of the security council. The court 
also continues to examine allegations of international crimes on other 
continents, including claims of torture and enhanced interrogation techniques by
US officials in Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/dec/10/cia-report-prosecutions-international-law-icc>
 and war crimes byBritish troops in Iraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2014/may/13/icc-to-investigate-alleged-british-war-crimes-iraq>
.

 Some argue that the kind of retributive justice offered by the ICC is 
inappropriate in Africa. Some even suggest criminal punishment may perpetuate 
conflict. In reality, burying grievances and injustices fuels unrest. Impunity 
for powerful perpetrators of mass atrocities risks undermining long-term 
stability and development.

 Of course, no single approach to justice is sufficient. African communities 
can and should have a say in what types of mechanisms are most appropriate. But 
the ICC does not present itself as a magic bullet for peace or justice. It can 
only prosecute those most responsible for mass atrocities. Moreover, it has 
shown itself to be increasingly sensitive to the voices and desires of African 
constituencies.

In northern Uganda, many citizens have made it clear they do not want Lord’s 
Resistance Army combatants to be prosecuted. Instead, they want them to be 
integrated into their communities following a process of traditional justice. 
So the ICC’schief prosecutor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jun/05/fatou-bensouda-international-criminal-court-tyrants>
 has assured LRA combatants that the court is only prosecutingJoseph Kony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/oct/09/polline-akello-joseph-kony-lords-resistance-army-uganda>
 andDominic Ongwen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/21/dominic-ongwen-the-hague-lords-resistance-army-war-crimes-uganda>
 and has encouraged fighters to defect.

Never before has so much been done on the African continent to achieve 
accountability for international crimes. We welcome the trial ofHissène Habré 
in Senegal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/30/chad-hissene-habre-guilty-crimes-against-humanity-senegal>
, Central African Republic’splan to set up a special criminal court 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2015/12/23/central-african-republic-progress-special-court>
, South Sudan’s proposedhybrid tribunal 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-34393329>, and the expansion of the 
jurisdiction of theAfrican Court on Human and Peoples’ Rights 
<http://en.african-court.org/> to include international crimes.


Congo politician guilty in first ICC trial to focus on rape as a war crime
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/21/icc-finds-ex-congolese-vice-president-jean-pierre-bemba-guilty-of-war-crimes>
While none is perfect in itself, these and other recent developments point to 
a continent with the potential to take a leadership role in international 
criminal justice, if its leaders keep their pledges.

These are also opportunities for us and the international community to share 
expertise and engage in respectful and context-specific judicial 
capacity-building projects.

The ICC must listen to constructive criticism. Many say the court is too close 
to the security council, whose three most powerful members – Russia, China and 
the US – are not parties to the Rome statute. The ICC prosecutor is not bound 
to accept security council referrals automatically and will independently 
ensure that the necessary legal requirements of the Rome statute are met, but 
it is difficult to accept that referrals for the worst crimes known to mankind 
can be made with caveats that exclude a number of potential players in those 
conflicts from the ICC’s jurisdictional reach.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Finternational-criminal-court-vital-fight-against-impunity-africa-group-for-justice-accountability%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa020b183817159a6f6f8716a5632ee9a6a00ddb4%2F0_277_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20international%20criminal%20court%20is%20vital%20to%20our%20fight%20against%20impunity%20in%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Finternational-criminal-court-vital-fight-against-impunity-africa-group-for-justice-accountability%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20international%20criminal%20court%20is%20vital%20to%20our%20fight%20against%20impunity%20in%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Finternational-criminal-court-vital-fight-against-impunity-africa-group-for-justice-accountability%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa020b183817159a6f6f8716a5632ee9a6a00ddb4%2F0_277_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
 An ICC representative at a town hall meeting with women’s groups in 
Bossembélé, Central African Republic, in 2010. Photograph: Courtesy of ICC 
 The ICC must do a better job of responding to overt attempts to politicise 
its mandate. It must not only do justice, but be seen to be doing justice by 
being more effective, robust and responsive.

 African states are friends of the ICC. African states have continued to refer 
situations to the ICC. Africans hold the most senior positions in the court. 
African states fund the institution.

Many African officials and diplomats say they have no intention of leaving the 
Rome statute system. We call on these governments to speak loudly and 
courageously in the fight against impunity – both in Africa and beyond.

 * The Africa Group for Justice and Accountability 
<http://www.wayamo.com/africa-group-for-justice-and-accountability/> is an 
independent group of African experts from diverse backgrounds.The members are 
Dapo Akande, Femi Falana, Hassan Bubacar Jallow, Richard Goldstone, Tiyanjana 
Maluwa, Athaliah Molokomme, Betty Murungi, Mohamed Chande Othman, Navi Pillay, 
Catherine Samba-Panza, Fatiha Serour and Abdul Tejan-Cole
 