
R&B star the Weeknd has donated $250,000 (£193,000) to the Black Lives Matter 
network.The Fader reported the donation 
<http://www.thefader.com/2016/08/10/the-weeknd-donate-black-lives-matter>, 
which was later confirmed by his representatives, according to other US reports.

The Weeknd <https://www.theguardian.com/music/the-weeknd> – 26-year-old Abel 
Tesfaye – had previously Tweeted his support for the movement. Last month he 
told his followers: “Enough is enough. It’s time to stand up for this. We can 
either sit and watch, or do something about it. The time is now.”

Earlier this month the musician, whose parents emigrated to Canada from 
Ethiopia, had donated $50,000 to the University of Toronto to establish an 
Ethiopic studies course.

The focus on US police violence against people of colour and the rise of the 
Black Lives Matter movement has become an increasingly important topic for some 
of US music’s biggest stars over the past year. Kendrick Lamar’s albumTo Pimp a 
Butterfly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/dec/18/best-albums-of-2015-no-1-to-pimp-a-butterfly-by-kendrick-lamar>
 and Beyoncé’sLemonade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/24/beyonce-lemonade-review-a-woman-not-to-be-messed-with>
 both addressed, with varying levels of directness, issues of black identity. 
Beyoncé also put the topic front and centre before the US’s biggest TV audience 
in February, when sheperformed her single Formation at the Super Bowl half-time 
show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/07/beyonce-coldplay-super-bowl-50-halftime-show-review>
 with dancers paying tribute to the Black Panthers.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Fbeyonce-super-bowl-half-time-highlights-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beyonc%C3%A9%20steals%20the%20show%3A%20Super%20Bowl%20half-time%20highlights%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Fbeyonce-super-bowl-half-time-highlights-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beyonc%C3%A9%20steals%20the%20show%3A%20Super%20Bowl%20half-time%20highlights%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Fbeyonce-super-bowl-half-time-highlights-video&media=>
Beyoncé steals the show: Super Bowl half-time highlights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2016/feb/08/beyonce-super-bowl-half-time-highlights-video>
Last month, both Beyoncé and her husband Jay Z responded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/08/jay-z-beyonce-killing-police-spiritual-alton-sterling-philando-castile>
 to the shootings of Alton Sterling in Louisiana and Philando Castile in 
Minnesota. Jay Z released a song called Spiritual, along with a quote from the 
19th-century abolitionist Frederick Douglass: “Where justice is denied, where 
poverty is enforced, where ignorance prevails, and where any one class is made 
to feel that society is an organised conspiracy to oppress, rob and degrade 
them, neither persons nor property will be safe.”

Beyoncé <https://www.theguardian.com/music/beyonce> said in a statement posted 
online: “We don’t need sympathy. We need everyone to respect our lives … These 
robberies of lives make us feel helpless and hopeless but we have to believe 
that we are fighting for the rights of the next generation. This is a fight for 
anyone who feels marginalised, who is struggling for freedom and human rights … 
The war on people of colour and all minorities needs to be over.”

At her concert in Glasgow in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/10/formation-tour-beyonce-police-brutality-tour-political-evolution>
, she called for a moment’s silence and used the giant screens on stage to 
display the names of black people killed by US police.

Drake, too, commented on the killings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/07/drake-open-letter-alton-sterling-killing-louisiana-police>
, posting a statement to Instagram in which he said: “It’s impossible to ignore 
that the relationship between black and brown communities and law enforcement 
remains as strained as it was decades ago. No one begins their life as a 
hashtag. Yet the trend of being reduced to one continues.”
 