
Khalil Ligon couldn’t tell if the robbers were in her house. She had just 
returned home to find her front window smashed and a brick lying among 
shattered glass on the floor. Ligon, an urban planner who lives alone on 
Detroit’s east side, stepped out and called the police.


It wasn’t the first time Ligon’s home had been broken into, she told me. And 
when Detroit police officers finally arrived the next day, surveying an area 
marred by abandoned structures and overgrown vegetation, they asked Ligon a 
question she often ponders herself: why is she still in Detroit?

Ligon understands the city’s root problems better than most. She was the 
project manager for theLower Eastside Action Plan 
<https://sites.google.com/site/leapdetroit/> (Leap), an ambitious proposal to 
transform vacant land 
<http://www.freep.com/article/20140209/BUSINESS06/302090037/LEAP-and-Detroit-and-DeSantis>
 in some of the city’s most blighted areas. But like so many people in the 
sprawling metropolis, home to the largest municipal bankruptcy in American 
history, she too grapples with Detroiters’ greatest dilemma.

“Do I want to be a part of it, to grind it out and make Detroit liveable for 
the next generation? I know I probably won’t see it change,” Ligon said. “Or do 
I want to go to one of these places that is already there? I want to live 
somewhere it’s not so difficult to achieve simple things. Everything in Detroit 
seems so hard.”

Ligon has to drive her 12-year-old car wherever she goes, both for safety and 
due to Detroit’s lack of worthwhile public transit. Unkempt roads make matters 
even worse. After a water main break last month, nearby streets became too icy 
for driving, let alone walking. Like much of the city, her area has few grocery 
stores or restaurants, making food a question of logistics, not just health or 
taste. Retail options are few and far between: “I have to go outside of my 
neighbourhood for everything I need.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fapr%2F03%2Fthe-death-of-a-great-american-city-why-does-anyone-still-live-in-detroit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F4%2F2%2F1396443555478%2F6d2e96d3-e288-4e08-b45b-e73c766f883b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20death%20of%20a%20great%20American%20city%3A%20why%20does%20anyone%20still%20live%20in%20Detroit%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fapr%2F03%2Fthe-death-of-a-great-american-city-why-does-anyone-still-live-in-detroit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20death%20of%20a%20great%20American%20city%3A%20why%20does%20anyone%20still%20live%20in%20Detroit%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fapr%2F03%2Fthe-death-of-a-great-american-city-why-does-anyone-still-live-in-detroit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F4%2F2%2F1396443555478%2F6d2e96d3-e288-4e08-b45b-e73c766f883b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 With grocery shops and restaurants few and far between, a simple task like 
buying food becomes a logistical challenge. Photograph: Charles Ommanney/Getty 
Images 
Such are the daily quality-of-life struggles in neighbourhoods like Ravendale, 
the frontline in the battle for Detroit’s future. There is a new sense of 
urgency to stabilise these communities after decades of population decline, 
with planners and academics unveiling innovative proposals to combat blight and 
reimagine the urban landscape, and governments and outside donors pledging 
hundreds of millions to help. But everyone knows that time is running out. In 
January, the city's newly elected mayor, Mike Duggan,pleaded with residents 
<http://www.freep.com/article/20140107/NEWS01/301070087/Mike-Duggan-city-council-improve-services>
 to hold on for six more months before moving elsewhere.

“They’re trying their damnedest to hold the line,” said Alan Mallach, a senior 
fellow at the Centre for Community Progress who has studied Detroit 
extensively. “But the thing is, for the last 30 years or more, it has been 
sustained by the black middle class. Now, they’re getting out of there. They’re 
just leaving.”

The 36-year-old Ligon is exactly the type of resident Detroit is fighting – 
and struggling – to keep. Raised in the city, she holds a masters degree in 
urban planning from nearby Wayne State University. Along with spearheading 
Leap, Ligon speaks serviceable French and Mandarin and even garnered nearly
1,700 votes 
<http://www.detroitmi.gov/Portals/0/docs/elections/results/Aug_6_13_Official/Election%20Certification%20-%20August6,%202013%20City%20of%20Detroit_CITY%20COUNCIL%20DIST%204.pdf>
 – roughly 16% of those cast – in last year’s Democratic primary election for 
her city council district. Now, she consults on green infrastructure 
development and holdsfellowships 
<http://neworganizing.com/content/blog/meet-the-noi-climate-fellows> focused on 
engaging Detroiters on climate change.

Ligon graduated from Martin Luther King High School in 1996, when Detroit’s 
population still hovered around 1 million residents. It was a normal place to 
live then, having established tenuous stability after the struggles of the 60s 
and 70s amid a strong Midwestern economy and the growing housing bubble. 
Indeed, between 1990 and 2000, the city'smedian household income grew 17% 
<http://www.brookings.edu/research/reports/2003/11/livingcities-detroit>, its 
black homeownership rate reached 53% 
<http://www.brookings.edu/research/reports/2003/11/livingcities-detroit> and the
rate of population decline slowed 
<http://www.detroitnews.com/article/20070719/SPECIAL03/70718001>. But unknown 
to – or perhaps ignored by – many, Detroit's foundations were still fragile. 
And when both the housing market and domestic manufacturing imploded in the 
2000s, that fragility became all too apparent.

Ligon lives near the city’s underused public airport, not far from where she 
grew up. She moved to her house, a modest, white-panelled bungalow with a 
detached garage and small front yard, 11 years ago. Back then, she said, the 
homes on her street were all full. But her census tractlost nearly 48% 
<http://datadrivendetroit.org/web_ftp/Census/SF1/TRACT/D3_SF1_26163504400.pdf> 
of its population between 2000 and 2010. Of the eight residential lots on
Ligon’s block 
<https://www.google.com/maps/@42.40058,-82.98494,3a,75y,39.4h,78.11t/data=!3m4!1e1!3m2!1sm6FiALakSOdn8KqYnN-q7g!2e0>
 today, two are empty fields and another three hold homes that are abandoned 
and left to rot. Though Ligon likes her remaining neighbours – she has two on 
her block – people here tend to rent their homes, and often stay for as short 
as a year at a time.

The change has been traumatic, Ligon told me. The roads don’t get 
snow-ploughed and the grass doesn’t get cut. Some of the vacant structures on 
her block are unsecured, and it’s hard to say when or if they will be 
demolished. Every time Ligon leaves her house, she’s wary of who could be 
inside them; vacant homes throughout the city have become havens for drug 
dealers and targets for arsonists.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fapr%2F03%2Fthe-death-of-a-great-american-city-why-does-anyone-still-live-in-detroit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F4%2F2%2F1396446253425%2F6055061f-1f85-4b9f-aa9c-94e1481acbbe-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20death%20of%20a%20great%20American%20city%3A%20why%20does%20anyone%20still%20live%20in%20Detroit%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fapr%2F03%2Fthe-death-of-a-great-american-city-why-does-anyone-still-live-in-detroit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20death%20of%20a%20great%20American%20city%3A%20why%20does%20anyone%20still%20live%20in%20Detroit%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fapr%2F03%2Fthe-death-of-a-great-american-city-why-does-anyone-still-live-in-detroit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F4%2F2%2F1396446253425%2F6055061f-1f85-4b9f-aa9c-94e1481acbbe-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A sign in a vacant and overgrown lot in a formerly middle-class east side 
neighbourhood of Detroit. Photograph: Charles Ommanney/Getty Images 
Across Camden Street sits the hulking, two-storey carcass of Macomb Elementary 
School,closed since 2009 
<http://www.detroitnews.com/article/20090410/SCHOOLS/904100376> and unprotected 
from urban scavengers. The mesh portion of the property’s chain-link fence has 
been stolen, leaving lonely metal posts ringing the property. Portable 
classrooms outside have been tattooed with spray paint, and dozens of the 
building’s windows taken. In front of the school stands a tall sign whose bold 
letters read: “FOR LEASE”.

The city is composed almost uniformly of such inner-city suburbs, low-density 
developments stretching for miles. Given Detroit’s60% decline 
<http://www.freep.com/interactive/article/20130723/NEWS01/130721003/detroit-city-population>
 in population since 1950 – including a higher proportion of married, 
middle-class and well-educated residents – such neighbourhoods are pockmarked 
by more vacant structures and empty land than ashrinking tax base 
<http://www.freep.com/interactive/article/20130915/NEWS01/130801004/Detroit-Bankruptcy-history-1950-debt-pension-revenue>
 can handle.

Detroit’s social contract was torn to shreds 
<http://www.detroitnews.com/article/20140321/METRO01/303210035/Detroit-plans-mass-water-shutoffs-over-260M-delinquent-bills>
 long ago. Residents receive paltry public services from the local government. 
And they return the favour. ADetroit News analysis 
<http://www.detroitnews.com/article/20130221/METRO01/302210375> last year found 
that nearly half of all property owners in the city don’t pay taxes. And herein 
lies the city’s greatest challenge. Without diminishing the greater downtown 
area’smodest revival 
<http://www.freep.com/article/20140302/COL33/303010013/Stephen-Henderson-Detroit-s-rebirth-must-include-more-than-downtown-Midtown>
 of recent years, as Ligon says: “Until you get a handle on the neighbourhoods, 
it really doesn’t matter what happens downtown.”

Decision-makers have slowly begun acknowledging the plight of residential 
areas. Mayor Duggancampaigned on neighbourhoods 
<http://www.freep.com/article/20131224/NEWS01/312240072/Detroit-Duggan-appointments>
 and haspledged to expedite the demolition of as many as 80,000 abandoned homes 
<http://www.detroitnews.com/article/20140226/METRO01/302260041>. Detroit’s 
charter was amended to elect city council members from geographic districts 
rather than a citywide pool, a change that should make politicians more 
accountable to neighbourhoods. And the state-appointed emergency financial 
manager has made blight removal and service provision a priority.

Big ideas and heartfelt pledges, however, are worthless without cash to back 
them up. So private donors have stepped in to partly fill the financial void, 
funding planning projects and renewal efforts to help staunch the bleeding.
Detroit Future City <http://detroitfuturecity.com/> (DFC), a years-long effort 
engaging thousands of residents and funded by nonprofits, has become the de 
facto blueprint for shrinking the city and transforming the urban environment 
over the next 50 years. The Kresge Foundation alonepromised $150m 
<http://www.freep.com/article/20130109/NEWS01/130109052/Kresge-Foundation-promises-150M-toward-Detroit-Future-City-plan>
 to help implement the framework.

Like Ligon’s Leap, which focused on a narrow swath of Detroit, DFC envisions a 
city 
<http://www.freep.com/article/99999999/BLOG31/399990072/John-Gallagher-Tale-of-two-futures-Detroit-Future-City-blueprint-maps-an-alternative-to-a-blight-metropolis>
 with more green space and greater housing options. It assumes population will 
drop as low as 600,000 – less than one-third of its 1950 peak. The framework 
makes no attempt to return Detroit to its glory days.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fapr%2F03%2Fthe-death-of-a-great-american-city-why-does-anyone-still-live-in-detroit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F4%2F2%2F1396446389394%2F6b631481-92a5-4c3d-86ba-0cb71d1d7071-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20death%20of%20a%20great%20American%20city%3A%20why%20does%20anyone%20still%20live%20in%20Detroit%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fapr%2F03%2Fthe-death-of-a-great-american-city-why-does-anyone-still-live-in-detroit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20death%20of%20a%20great%20American%20city%3A%20why%20does%20anyone%20still%20live%20in%20Detroit%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fapr%2F03%2Fthe-death-of-a-great-american-city-why-does-anyone-still-live-in-detroit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F4%2F2%2F1396446389394%2F6b631481-92a5-4c3d-86ba-0cb71d1d7071-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The remains of the Packard factory, which shut its doors in the late 1950s. 
Detroit has been battling decline for decades. Photograph: Charles 
Ommanney/Getty Images 
Residential areas and commercial activity would be consolidated in densely 
populated nodes throughout the city – an effort to provide services more 
efficiently. The vacant lots left behind would be converted for green uses, 
including urban farms, woodlands or storm water retention ponds. With such 
sparsely populated tracts of land surrounding scattered residential centres, 
the future city’s 139 square miles might physically look more like a suburban 
county than a typical metropolis.

Planners and academics alike have generally lauded the plan, but it is, of 
course, predicated on a constant stream of development dollars, better city 
services – especially law enforcement – and improved public transportation. 
What’s more, Detroit has a long, racialised history offorced relocation 
<http://www.freep.com/article/20131215/OPINION05/312150060/Black-Bottom-Detroit-I-375-I-75-paradise-valley-removal>
, so convincing residents to move to more populated areas will be no small 
feat. Many in the city still hope for repopulation, meanwhile, however unlikely 
that is.

And then comes the logistical challenge. The myriad vacant houses, empty land 
and absentee property owners have created an unnavigable web of land titles, 
according to Brent Ryan, an associate professor of urban design at the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). The city has taken some steps to 
address the problem, creating a centralised Department of Neighbourhoods and 
citywide land bank. But the existing situation effectively nixes large-scale 
projects before ground can be broken.

“The tremendous paradox of Detroit is, in a city with lots and lots of vacant 
land, there’s almost no land for redevelopment,” Ryan said.

The greatest problem with grandiose proposals, however, is that of the ticking 
clock. There’s almost universal acceptance that Detroit must change. But 
convincing residents that such change will benefit their lives – and do so 
today – is another issue entirely.

Quincy Jones, head of the Osborn Neighbourhood Alliance 
<https://www.facebook.com/OsbornONA>, is one of the skeptics. When I visited 
his office in January, he said plans such as DFC are overwhelmingly positive – 
but that the difficulty lies in balancing long-term, overarching visions with 
quality-of-life improvements here and now. “I like all the big books and big 
strategies. But if it’s not going to move anything, then what’s the purpose?”

Osborn is a neighbourhood of about 27,000 residents, but Jones’s group is 
starting small. Last year, it received a$50,000 grant 
<http://www.cityconnectdetroit.org/dte-energy-youth-summer-orientation> to 
develop a three-block stretch into a “hub” of neighbourhood activity, he said. 
It lies in an area that lost about 40% of its residents between 2000 and 2010, 
according to acensus analysis by Data Driven Detroit 
<http://datadrivendetroit.org/web_ftp/Census/SF1/TRACT/D3_SF1_26163503500.pdf>. 
The number of families and children in the area plummeted even faster. And 
today, nearly one in three homes are abandoned.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fapr%2F03%2Fthe-death-of-a-great-american-city-why-does-anyone-still-live-in-detroit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F4%2F2%2F1396446707150%2F3ef9aa74-c856-4759-8b4b-eebaf2c892cb-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20death%20of%20a%20great%20American%20city%3A%20why%20does%20anyone%20still%20live%20in%20Detroit%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fapr%2F03%2Fthe-death-of-a-great-american-city-why-does-anyone-still-live-in-detroit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20death%20of%20a%20great%20American%20city%3A%20why%20does%20anyone%20still%20live%20in%20Detroit%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fapr%2F03%2Fthe-death-of-a-great-american-city-why-does-anyone-still-live-in-detroit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F4%2F2%2F1396446707150%2F3ef9aa74-c856-4759-8b4b-eebaf2c892cb-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Schoenherr Street in Osborn. Quincy Jones's neighbourhood plan revolves around 
a community centre and space for pop-up businesses and youth activities on a 
vacant lot. Photograph: David Uberti 
“Right now, we’re in action mode,” Jones said of his organisation. “Quit 
planning and get some action going, because folks are still leaving the 
neighbourhood. They’re saying, ‘Enough is enough.’”

The ‘Live in Osborn’ plan will attempt to use existing resources to funnel as 
much activity as possible into a small area. It revolves around a community 
centre that houses dozens of local service providers, including Jones’s. A 
public library branch and fuel station sit across the street; a vacant lot next 
door will be paved over for pop-up businesses and youth activities. Perhaps 
most importantly, the project calls for the demolition of the handful of 
abandoned homes and apartments that line the three-block corridor leading up to 
the proposed hub. Nearby residents, most of them living in two-storey brick 
houses, will help decide how the eventually empty land will be used, Jones said.

Community members have generally been supportive of the plan. They crave what 
Jones, who grew up nearby, describes as the “wow effect” – any sign of 
improvement, any reason to hold on just a little while longer. “At times, it 
just feels like we’re fighting this huge monster, and we don’t know how to chop 
off all its heads,” he said. “If we just take one part of it and attack it – 
and if that strategy works – we should keep using that strategy.”

Perhaps Detroit needs a hero to battle its hydra. Perhaps bulldozing tens of 
thousands of homes will only give way to more that will replace them. If 
history is any indication – the city hasrazed more than 200,000 housing units 
since 1960 <http://www.census.gov/prod/cen1990/cph2/cph-2-1-1.pdf> – demolition 
is the easiest answer, though not necessarily the best.

For Ligon, such blight removal will only be as successful as what follows it. 
Despite building a life and career in Detroit, she admits having thought about 
moving to cities like Portland or Seattle, where she wouldn’t have to think 
twice about walking to Starbucks. Like so many other Motor City residents, 
however, Ligon is trying to hang on.

“I feel like I have something to do here,” she told me. “And I want to do it. 
The reason this place hasn’t gone entirely under water is that there are a 
whole lot of people doing whatever they can to save it.”

But Ligon also doesn’t want to be on guard every time her house creaks. She 
doesn’t want to worry about the empty home across the street whose door remains 
ajar. She doesn’t want to feel unsafe when she walks outside.

“I’m really getting tired of the landscape that I have to look at every day; 
of having to fight to make this world a better place for other people to live,” 
she said. “Who’s fighting for me?”

David Uberti is a third-generation Detroiter and freelance writer now based in 
New York. Follow him on Twitter:@DavidUberti <https://twitter.com/daviduberti>

• New York storefronts: what a difference a decade makes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/gallery/2014/apr/03/new-york-storefronts-what-a-difference-a-decade-makes>
 