
In Montreal’s Saint-Henri neighbourhood, the hallmarks of gentrification shout 
loud and clear. Beautiful old brick buildings have been refurbished as funky 
shops, niche food markets and hipster cafes. Most notably, there are plenty of 
high-end restaurants.More than plenty, say some local residents – many of whom 
can’t afford to eat in any of them.

Earlier this month, the city council agreed enough was enough: the councillors 
of Montreal’s Southwest boroughvoted unanimously 
<http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/montreal/notre-dame-restaurant-bylaw-1.3829157> 
to restrict the opening of new restaurants. The bylaw roughly follows the 
“one-in-six” rule, with new eateries forbidden from opening up within 25 metres 
of an existing one.

“Our idea was very simple,” says Craig Sauvé, a city councillor with the 
Projet Montreal party. “Residents need to be able to have access to a range of 
goods and services within walking distance of their homes. Lots of restaurants 
are fine and dandy, but we also needs grocery stores, bakeries and retail 
spaces.”

It’s not as though Saint-Henri is saturated with business: a number of 
commercial and retail properties remain empty. In that environment, some 
residents have questioned whether it’s right to limit any business. Others felt 
that something had to be done.

Gentrification is a global problem. It's time we found a better solution
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/sep/29/gentrification-global-problem-better-solution-oliver-wainwright>
Tensions boiled over in May this year, when several restaurants were 
vandalised by a group of people wearing masks. At the grocery store Parreira 
Traiteur, which is attached to the restaurant 3734, vandals stole food, 
announcing they were taking from the rich and giving to the poor.

“I was really quite shocked,” says co-owner Maxime Tremblay. “I’m very aware 
of what’s going on in Saint-Henri: it’s getting hip, and the rents are going 
up. I understand that it’s problematic. They were under the impression that my 
store targets people from outside the area, which isn’t really the case. I’ve 
been very careful to work with local producers and artisans. Why would you 
attack a locally owned business? Why not a franchise or chain?”

Not everyone is sure the change in regulation will work. “The bylaw seems very 
abstract to me,” says Peter Morden, professor of applied human sciences at 
Concordia University who has written extensively on gentrification. “I wonder 
about the logic of singling out restaurants. I think the most important thing 
for that neighbourhood would be bylaws that protect low-income and social 
housing.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fone-in-six-rule-can-montreal-canada-fight-gentrification-banning-restaurants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc80fa2d8568b6257517027303a793c2339845f9f%2F0_134_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20one-in-six%20rule%3A%20can%20Montreal%20fight%20gentrification%20by%20banning%20restaurants%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fone-in-six-rule-can-montreal-canada-fight-gentrification-banning-restaurants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20one-in-six%20rule%3A%20can%20Montreal%20fight%20gentrification%20by%20banning%20restaurants%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fone-in-six-rule-can-montreal-canada-fight-gentrification-banning-restaurants%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc80fa2d8568b6257517027303a793c2339845f9f%2F0_134_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 Alongside restaurants, chic coffee shops have become emblematic of Montreal’s 
pace of change. Photograph: Alice Chiche/AFP/Getty Images 
As the debate rages, Montrealers are looking anxiously at what has happened to 
Canada’s two other major metropolises, Toronto and Vancouver. Both cities have 
experienced huge spikes in real-estate prices and rents, to the point where 
even upper-middle-class earners now feel shut out of the market. Much of 
Vancouver’s problem has been attributed toforeign property ownership and 
speculative buying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/jul/07/vancouver-chinese-city-racism-meets-real-estate-british-columbia>
, something the British Columbia government isnow attempting to address 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/sep/30/vancouver-canada-house-prices-solution-super-heated-housing-market>
. This has led to concern that many of the foreign buyers – mainly Chinese 
investors – couldshift their focus to Montreal 
<http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/montreal/montreal-real-estate-china-1.3803445>.

For now, the city’s real estate is markedly cheaper than that of Vancouver or 
Toronto: the average residential property value is $364,699, compared with 
Toronto’s $755,755 and Vancouver’s $864,566, according to the Canadian Real 
Estate Association. And rent is cheaper, too: the average for a two-bedroom 
apartment in central Montreal is $760, compared with Toronto’s $1,288 and 
Vancouver’s $1,368.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fone-in-six-rule-can-montreal-canada-fight-gentrification-banning-restaurants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F013182168ae2e08a4fe2874a5fd27a1f9f6768ee%2F0_704_5119_2199%2F5119.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20one-in-six%20rule%3A%20can%20Montreal%20fight%20gentrification%20by%20banning%20restaurants%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fone-in-six-rule-can-montreal-canada-fight-gentrification-banning-restaurants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20one-in-six%20rule%3A%20can%20Montreal%20fight%20gentrification%20by%20banning%20restaurants%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fone-in-six-rule-can-montreal-canada-fight-gentrification-banning-restaurants%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F013182168ae2e08a4fe2874a5fd27a1f9f6768ee%2F0_704_5119_2199%2F5119.jpg>
 Montrealers have little desire for their city to emulate Vancouver’s 
glass-and-steel skyline. Photograph: William Manning/Alamy 
The reasons for this are debatable – the never-entirely-dormant threat of 
Quebec separatism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/18/citizen-peladeau-flamboyant-tycoon-ready-to-revitalize-quebecs-separatists>
, the city’s high number of rental units and older buildings, its strict 
rent-control laws and a small-court system seen to generally favour the rights 
of tenants.

But regardless of why it’s so affordable, many Montrealers want it to stay 
that way. There is widespread hostility towards the seemingly endless array of 
glass-and-steel condos that have come to dominate the Vancouver and Toronto 
skylines. If Montreal does look a bit grittier than other Canadian cities, it 
owns a unique cultural cachet. The inexpensive cost of living makes it much 
more inviting to artists, which in turn makes the city a better place to live 
for everyone; its vibrant musical scene is the envy of the country, and its 
film, dance and theatre scenes bolster the city’s status as a tourist 
attraction. In this context, Montreal’s restaurant bylaw is designed to protect 
the city’s greatest asset: its cheap rents.

“I would argue this is a moderate bylaw,” says Sauvé. “We’re just saying one 
out of every six businesses can be a restaurant. There’s still room for 
restaurant development.”

Race and real estate: how hot Chinese money is making Vancouver unlivable
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/jul/07/vancouver-chinese-city-racism-meets-real-estate-british-columbia>
He says the restaurant restriction is only part of Projet Montreal’s plans, 
which also include increased funding for social housing. “Right now, the city 
sets aside a million dollars a year to buy land for social housing. Projet 
Montreal is proposing we spend $100m a year. The Quebec government hasn’t 
helped with its austerity cuts: in the last two budgets, they have cut funding 
for social housing in half. There are 25,000 people on a waiting list.”

Perhaps surprisingly, the provincial restaurant lobby group, the Association 
des Restaurateurs du Quebec, doesn’t have an issue with the bylaw. “We 
understand the impact gentrification can have,” says spokesperson Dominique 
Tremblay. “We understand the need for a diversity of businesses. Frankly, if 
there are too many restaurants on one street, it’ll be that much harder for 
them to stay open. There won’t be enough customers to go around.”

Even despite having been robbed, Tremblay says he recognises the anxiety that 
swirls around the subject of gentrification. “People feel a neighbourhood loses 
its soul,” he says. “I get that. I’d rather we find a dialogue, not a fight.”

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 