
Last Sunday, Samantha was scrolling through Twitter to join the conversation 
aboutLemonade, Beyoncé’s new visual album 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/29/beyonce-lemonade-jay-z-explainer>
, when she came across a post that shocked her. The tweet read: “We know who 
Becky is.”

“Becky”, based on lyrics from the song Sorry, is thought to be Jay Z’s former 
mistress (on the trackBeyoncé sings <http://genius.com/9046731>: “He only want 
me when I’m not there/ He better call Becky with the good hair”).

The 30-year-old office administrator immediately followed the link to fashion 
designer Rachel Roy’s Instagram page. Hours after the album’s debut, Royposted 
<http://pagesix.com/2016/04/24/rachel-roys-cryptic-post-sparks-jay-z-cheating-rumors/>
 a selfie with the caption: “Good hair don’t care ...” She hadalready been 
<http://hollywoodlife.com/2016/04/26/beyonce-jay-z-relationship-timeline-rachel-roy-cheating-rumors/>
 the subject of rumors related to Jay Z and, though Roy hassince  
<http://www.racked.com/2016/4/25/11505222/beyonce-jay-z-rachel-roy>denied any 
affair, her words shook the Beyhive – Beyoncé’s superfans who are eager to 
sting anyone who insults their queen.

Samantha, who declined to give her last name, was riled up. “I was drunk off 
of Lemonade from the night before,” says the Beyhiver who notes that for young 
black women,Beyoncé <https://www.theguardian.com/music/beyonce> is the Oprah of 
her generation. “I was like, ‘I can’t believe this bitch has the nerve to brag 
about being a mistress.’”

She read the other comments 
<https://www.google.com/search?q=Rachel+Roy+instagram+post&espv=2&biw=1422&bih=753&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwiEiO2Jl7DMAhXDph4KHWXfCosQ_AUIBygC#imgrc=BsYjwtO1uPhPSM%3A>
 on Roy’s Instagram – “your legit dead”, “WHOREEEEEE” and a bombardment of bee 
and lemon emojis 🍋 🐝 – and added her own:

Rachel you just played yourself. If you think people are going to support your 
career over Beyoncé you are so wrong. Your ugly clothes are going to go from 
Macy’s to Burlington Coat Factory in a week. #DustToSideChicks 🍋 🐝 🍋🐝 🍋 🐝 
🐝 🍋

Because of the vicious Beyhive swarm, Roy switched 
<http://perezhilton.com/2016-04-25-rachel-roy-daughter-ava-bullied-online#.VyJfoKMrKXV>
 her Instagram to private on Sunday, but the fans followed her to Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/pettyamazigh/status/724281452720959488>. They also 
<https://twitter.com/pettyamazigh/status/724281452720959488> mistakenly harassed
 
<http://video.foxnews.com/v/4863894384001/beyonc-fans-cyberbully-rachael-ray/?#sp=show-clips>
 celebrity chef Rachael Ray and attacked Roy’s 16-year-old daughter on social 
media with gems such as:

 “The daughter of a slut 🐝🐝🐝🐝🐝” 

“Yo mom needs to drink bleach.”

The “Becky” shaming is just the latest in a long line of vendettas executed by 
obsessive pop star fans. The most extreme supporters lurk in the Twitter 
trenches, ready to deploy at the first sign of an attack on their leader.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fbeyonce-beyhive-fans-rachel-roy-lemonade%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57f510ca9c27b73760cfff01d1d1d16640aaa7f6%2F0_570_4200_2519%2F4200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20wrath%20of%20Beyonc%C3%A9's%20Beyhive%3A%20how%20fans%20have%20lost%20the%20plot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fbeyonce-beyhive-fans-rachel-roy-lemonade%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20wrath%20of%20Beyonc%C3%A9%27s%20Beyhive%3A%20how%20fans%20have%20lost%20the%20plot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fbeyonce-beyhive-fans-rachel-roy-lemonade%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57f510ca9c27b73760cfff01d1d1d16640aaa7f6%2F0_570_4200_2519%2F4200.jpg>
 Fans of One Direction scream as the group performs at Madison Square Garden. 
Photograph: New York Daily News/Getty Images 
In addition to the Beyhive there are Justin Bieber’s “Beliebers”, Katy Perry’s 
“KatyCats”, One Direction’s “Directioners”, Taylor Swift’s “Swifties”, Lady 
Gaga’s “Little Monsters” and, well, you get the idea.

The most devoted members of these fanatical clubs are often young people who 
troll social media to remind anyone who doesn’t like Bieber’s hair that they 
deserve to die. And though many are well-intentioned, the toxic combination of 
online anonymity and power in numbers means these groups often act more like 
online bullies than passionate fans.

Because a musician’s work is often so personal, people feel they know the real 
Beyoncé and connect her music to aspects of their own identity. Lady Gaga helps 
outsiders embrace their quirkiness, Bieber makes young girls feel loved and 
Beyoncé empowers women to feel fearless. Those deep connections to celebrities 
can be positive, especially for marginalized groups, but they also breed an 
extreme kind of loyalty.

“[A fan] might take an attack on Beyoncé as being an attack on them,” says 
Alice Marwick <http://fordham.academia.edu/AliceMarwick>, an assistant 
professor of communications and media studies at Fordham University. “They’re 
going to play out that identity by coming to her defense.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fbeyonce-beyhive-fans-rachel-roy-lemonade%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc772faabe65448b25d2eaa3fde76ed192eb9adab%2F0_423_4363_2619%2F4363.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20wrath%20of%20Beyonc%C3%A9's%20Beyhive%3A%20how%20fans%20have%20lost%20the%20plot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fbeyonce-beyhive-fans-rachel-roy-lemonade%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20wrath%20of%20Beyonc%C3%A9%27s%20Beyhive%3A%20how%20fans%20have%20lost%20the%20plot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fbeyonce-beyhive-fans-rachel-roy-lemonade%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc772faabe65448b25d2eaa3fde76ed192eb9adab%2F0_423_4363_2619%2F4363.jpg>
 A young Justin Bieber fan wears stickers on her face. Photograph: QMI 
Agency/Rex 
The same mentality that causes fights to break out between sports fan happens 
in the cyberworld; the group dynamic tends to push the collective in a more 
extreme direction.

“If one person has a mean thing to say, the next person will support that,” 
said Don Forsyth, a professor of psychology and sociology at the University of 
Richmond. “But they also push it a little more so other people will take notice 
of them.” Call Roy a “rat 
<https://twitter.com/SinnerlnSecret/status/724279624985800704>” and the next fan
 <https://twitter.com/raisalucass/status/724280044076539905> will write “die 
bitch”.

It’s easy to become the target of celebrity fan base ire. Selena Gomez 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-1343823/Justin-Bieber-fans-send-Selena-Gomez-death-threats-kiss-Caribbean.html>
 received death threats just for dating Justin Bieber and theBlack Keys drummer 
<http://www.mtv.com/news/1665300/lady-gaga-black-keys/> Patrick Carney was 
bombarded with nasty insults when he compared Lady Gaga to Madonna. But since 
Roy “bragged about being a side chick” on Instagram, Samantha says, she 
deserves the negative attention.

“Did Beyoncé mention her? Did she hint at her? No,” she says. “Now [Roy] wants 
to cry about being bullied over the internet? She asked for this attention.” 
The superfan would not pounce on any old criticism of Beyoncé, but she has “no 
time for women who have affairs”, never mind the ones who mess with Queen Bey.

But Karlicia Lewis, a 31-year-old author and life coach who describes herself 
as a “super Beyoncé fan”, thought the assault on Roy went overboard. “Sometimes 
I call myself a Beyhive member, but sometimes I’m not proud of how they treat 
others while supporting her,” she said. “The bullying gets out of hand.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F29%2Ftrailer-beyonce-lemonade-album-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trailer%20for%20Beyonc%C3%A9's%20Lemonade%20album%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F29%2Ftrailer-beyonce-lemonade-album-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trailer%20for%20Beyonc%C3%A9%27s%20Lemonade%20album%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F29%2Ftrailer-beyonce-lemonade-album-video&media=>
Trailer for Beyoncé’s Lemonade album 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2016/apr/29/trailer-beyonce-lemonade-album-video>
Of course, online fan groups are not all bad. They make people feel like they 
belong, especially those who face discrimination or have trouble forming 
in-person connections. Forsyth points out that the mob mentality can also 
create effective support groups when people “join in” instead of “pile on” 
(take Prince fans mourning his death as an example). But too often celebrity 
fans use their energy to target nonmembers, rather than bond with one another.

While there’s nothing too harmful about an onslaught of bee and lemon emojis, 
the more hateful online attacks can force people to shut down their accounts, 
or even experience mental health issues.

Samantha, for her part, stopped tweeting about Roy and Beyoncé on Sunday, and 
has moved on to other topics such as the Game of Thrones premiere. But she 
thinks the most fanatic Beyhivers could take their anger offline.

“Will [Roy] get something thrown at her? Will she probably get spit on? Yes, 
that will probably happen,” she said. “And if somebody sees her, they probably 
will try and snatch her hair.

 