
The Indonesian capital, with a population of over 10 million, has been named 
themost gridlocked city on the planet 
<http://jakartaglobe.id/news/jakarta-worlds-worst-traffic-gridlock/>. Its 
greater metropolitan area, known as Jabodetabek, is the second largest in the 
world.


From 21 to 25 November, the Guardian Cities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities> team will be in Jakarta for a live week of 
in-depth reporting and special events all about the issues shaping the city. As 
a key part of this week, we’d love to hear from local residents about local 
life and how it’s changing – for better or worse – as well as aspirations for 
Jakarta’s future.

From huge street protests earlier this month against Jakarta’s Christian 
governor 
<http://www.news.com.au/world/breaking-news/jakarta-protest-demands-governors-arrest/news-story/4053e6357be04cfe8e2208dc613eac71>
 Ahok’s alleged blasphemy in his comments about the Qur’an, to the president’s 
spokespersonsaying there is “no room” for LGBT people in Indonesia 
<http://www.pinknews.co.uk/2016/08/11/indonesia-has-no-room-for-lgbt-community-says-presidents-spokesperson/>
 andplans to ban gay networking apps like Grindr 
<http://time.com/4496531/indonesia-lgbt-grinder/>, have you witnessed social 
division in the city, or experienced discrimination yourself?

Is the city’s rapid development – including the proliferation of shopping malls
 
<http://en.tempo.co/read/news/2016/04/15/055763032/Jakarta-to-have-New-Malls-This-Year>
 and a huge land reclamation projectto help house a growing population 
<https://news.mongabay.com/2016/11/controversial-jakarta-land-reclamation-project-gets-legal-go-ahead/>
 – a positive or negative thing in your view?

If you live or work in Jakarta, we’d love to hear from you. From traffic and 
urban development to community and culture, what are the best and worst things 
about life in the city? What would make Jakarta better, and what changes are 
most urgently needed?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fthe-future-of-jakarta-what-needs-to-change-share-your-thoughts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5afc1d5943171d82605838d91c9ba8a66004d894%2F0_313_4954_2973%2F4954.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20future%20of%20Jakarta%3A%20what%20needs%20to%20change%3F%20Share%20your%20thoughts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fthe-future-of-jakarta-what-needs-to-change-share-your-thoughts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20future%20of%20Jakarta%3A%20what%20needs%20to%20change%3F%20Share%20your%20thoughts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fthe-future-of-jakarta-what-needs-to-change-share-your-thoughts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5afc1d5943171d82605838d91c9ba8a66004d894%2F0_313_4954_2973%2F4954.jpg>
 Jakarta has been named the most gridlocked city on the planet. Photograph: 
Alamy 
Share your stories, thoughts, ideas and photos using the form below or with 
GuardianWitness 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/58234f21e4b0199b93895305> (by 
clicking on the blue “contribute” button) and we’ll publish a selection on
Guardian Cities <https://www.theguardian.com/cities>. You can also contribute on
Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and Instagram 
<https://www.instagram.com/guardiancities/> using the hashtag #GuardianJakarta 
orWhatsapp us on +447881337758. And if you’re in the city on 21 November at 
7pm, come to our eventJakarta at 30 million:  
<https://www.eventbrite.com/e/jakarta-30million-where-does-the-city-go-next-tickets-29215532444>
Where does the city go next? 
<https://www.eventbrite.com/e/jakarta-30million-where-does-the-city-go-next-tickets-29215532444>
 at the Goethe-Institut.

Dari 21 hingga 25 November tim Guardian Cities akan hadir di Jakarta selama 
satu minggu untuk memberikan laporan mendalam dan menggelar acara spesial 
terkait isu-isu seputar kota Jakarta; dan sebagai bagian penting dari acara ini 
kami ingin mendengar berbagai cerita dari penduduk Jakarta tentang kehidupan di 
kota ini dan perubahan-perubahan yang terjadi –baik atau pun buruk—serta 
aspirasimu untuk masa depan Jakarta.

Jika kamu tinggal atau bekerja di Jakarta, kami ingin mendengar ceritamu. Dari 
kisah mengenai kemacetan dan perkembangan kota hingga pengalamanmu terkait 
komunitas dan budaya Jakarta, apa menurutmu sisi terbaik dan terburuk dari 
kehidupan di kota ini? Apa yang akan membuat Jakarta lebih baik dan perubahan 
apa yang ingin kamu lihat?

Bagilah ide, pemikiran, kisah dan foto-fotomu dengan mengisi formulir di bawah 
ini atau lewatGuardianWitness 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/58234f21e4b0199b93895305> dan kami 
akan menerbitkannya diGuardian Cities <https://www.theguardian.com/cities>. 
Kamu juga bisa ikut berkontribusi via Twitter dan Instagram dengan menggunakan 
hashtag#GuardianJakarta atau Whatsapp kami di +447881337758 <>. Dan kalau kamu 
ada di Jakarta pada 21 November pukul 7 malam, datanglah ke acara kami Jakarta 
di 30 Juta: Ke Mana Arah Kota Kita Selanjutnya? di Goethe-Institut.

 * GuardianWitness <https://witness.theguardian.com/> is the home of readers’ 
content on the Guardian. Contribute your video, pictures and stories, and 
browse news, reviews and creations submitted by others. Posts will be reviewed 
prior to publication on GuardianWitness, and the best pieces will feature on 
the Guardian site. 
 * Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join in the discussion 
 * Ikuti Guardian Cities di Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> dan 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> dan bergabunglah dalam 
diskusi  