
Type “Paolo Negro” into the search bar on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/pg/guardianfootball/posts/> and you’ll discover the 
pageAutogol di Paolo Negro 
<https://www.facebook.com/pg/Autogol-di-Paolo-Negro-47134591458/posts/> (Paolo 
Negro’s own goal). The profile picture is a mocked up image of Negro wearing a 
Diadora-branded Roma shirt, the one they used at the turn of the millennium, 
with the orange collar and the stylised wolf profile on both sleeves.

The last post on the page dates back to 16 April 2014, the day Negro 
celebrates his birthday. It reads: “Buon compleanno bomber” (“happy birthday, 
goalscorer”). Apart from this, there is nothing more than a couple of posts 
from 2009 reminding the three thousand followers that the “past is 
unforgettable”, as well as some photos of the scoreboard after the2013 Coppa 
Italia final <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2013_Coppa_Italia_Final>, which 
were uploaded by Lazio fans as a riposte to Roma fans, who continue to mock 
them about Negro’s own goal.

Roma: Serie A alternative club guide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/dec/11/roma-serie-a-alternative-club-guide>
This rivalry pervades every wrinkle of Rome’s social fabric. It is lived by 
the inhabitants of the city all year long – a rivalry comprised of jokes, 
mockery, murals, songs and much more. Poor Paolo Negro became one of the 
favourite subjects of this dialectic battle. His status as satirical icon among
Roma <https://www.theguardian.com/football/roma> supporters is still strong 
today. And yet, before this infamy, he was just one of the many footballers who 
arrived in the capital from afar.

Negro was born 44 years ago, in Arzignano, a town near Vicenza in northern 
Italy. He started playing as a forward, but his feet were what they were, and 
his first coach at Brescia decided to turn him into a defender. He moved to 
Bologna in 1990, only to return to Brescia two years later. In the summer of 
1993, whenLazio <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lazio> decided to buy 
him, Negro was a solid defender. He was physically explosive, good in the air 
and already had 10 caps for the Italy under-21 team. As everyone said at the 
time, it was a good deal for all involved.

His years at Lazio went as fast as the wind. He was there when they won the 
Scudetto and Coppa Italia in the 1999-2000 season, and he was there when they 
lifted the 1999 Uefa Super Cup. Negro played in one of the strongest Lazio 
sides of all time, alongside legends such as Juan Sebastián Verón, Alessandro 
Nesta, Pavel Nedved, Dejan Stankovic and Roberto Mancini.

Being in the squad from a young age, Negro’s love for the shirt was genuine, 
despite not being a son of Rome. He was the kind of footballer every great team 
cannot do without: a utility player, an obedient and functional cog in the 
machine. He was not a historymaker, or the kind of player who would appear on 
theCorriere dello Sport’s front page on a Monday morning, and he had never 
thought that, on a cold December evening, he would secure his place in the hall 
of derby heroes. Although, unfortunately for Negro, he did not enter through 
the main door, but instead found himself pushed in through the side entrance.

At the end of September 2000, the euphoria surrounding their second ever 
Scudetto had mostly dissipated and Lazio were ready to face another tough 
campaign. The season started unusually late due to Euro 2000, World Cup 
qualification rounds and the Sydney Olympic Games. But right from the start, it 
was clear that Lazio’s main opponents were inside the city walls. With the 
purchases of Emerson, Walter Samuel and Gabriel Batistuta, Roma were among the 
teams to beat.

The first turning point of the season came on 17 December in the Derby della 
Capitale. Roma were first in the table and Lazio were fourth; with Juventus and 
Atalanta between them. The Stadio Olimpico was a sell-out, with just over 80, 
000 spectators brimming with anticipation. But it soon became clear that this 
would not be a classic. There was a palpable tension in the air and though the 
players demonstrated plenty of physical exuberance, little happened of note – 
except forCafu’s famous series of sombreros over Nedvěd’s head 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HrK4a8WVP88>.

But on 70 minutes, the almost bored public were suddenly shaken from their 
numbness. Cafu crossed the ball into the box from the right flank for Cristiano 
Zanetti to head toward goal. Lazio goalkeeper Angelo Peruzzi parried the ball 
into the path of Nesta, who instinctively tried to sweep it away with his right 
foot. Unfortunately for him and his teammate, he directed the ball towards 
Negro instead, who was standing less than a metre away from Nesta.

In that very instant, time stopped. A blink of an eye seemed to last 10 
minutes as Negro realised he was a few nanoseconds away from becoming a 
legendary figure. The worst kind of legendary figure. When time started ticking 
again, it was already too late. The poor defender could do nothing but feel the 
ball hitting his body and then entering the unprotected net, which was directly 
in front of him. The moment sparked jubilance among Roma supporters.

As they started to celebrate uncontrollably, the whole world seemed to be 
falling in on Negro: he was now a symbol ofGiallorossi joy. At that point, he 
was already aware that he would remain so for many years to come, probably for 
his entire life.

Milan v Internazionale: the game that made Mark Hateley a Rossoneri hero
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-gentleman-ultra/2016/nov/20/milan-internazionale-mark-hateley-serie-a-derby>
In the 20 minutes remaining, Lazio tried everything to spare their teammate 
the unbearable dishonour of having granted their city rivals victory in a 
crucial derby. But the result remained until the final whistle, which signaled 
an opening of the gates of hell for Paolo Negro.

From that day on, nothing was the same in Rome. That surname is etched into 
the memory of everyRomanista. It is one of the most common reference points 
when they write banners or sing stadium chants, and every year the anniversary 
of that derby is celebrated with new and more hilarious slogans, not to mention 
all the wishes Negro keeps on receiving from Roma supporters every time it’s 
his birthday. He is genuinely lauded as though he were a player who scored a 
hat-trick in the derby. Perhaps more.

Negro moved to Siena in 2005 and retired in 2007. After three years out of the 
game, he changed his mind and played for one year at Cerveteri, in the seventh 
tier of the Italian football system, before starting his coaching career. He 
will never dissociate his name from that episode, not in a million years.
Romanisti will never cease to find banners such as “Nesta, mark Negro closely!” 
funny, nor will they stop calling Negro “one of us” and thanking him for that 
unexpected gift.

This is the Derby della Capitale: the match every true Roman is waiting for, 
the moment when the whole city stops. This game can turn mortals into immortals 
– even if some are turned against their will.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DN1g0hANZDGw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DN1g0hANZDGw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DN1g0hANZDGw&media=>
• This blog first appeared on The Gentleman Ultra 
<http://www.thegentlemanultra.com/>
• Follow Franco Ficetola <https://twitter.com/Franco92C14> and The Gentleman 
Ultra <https://twitter.com/GentlemanUltra> on Twitter
 