
“The situation was one of sheer hopelessness,” says Sajjad Shah from Pakistan. 
“Those who could afford to stay and search for their dead loved ones did so. 
The others just had to go home.”

Almost three months after the deadliest Hajj crush in 25 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/24/mecca-crush-during-hajj-kills-at-least-100-saudi-state-tv>
, the Saudi government’s official death toll still stands at 769, butmost 
sources put the figure closer to 2,000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/09/hajj-stampede-death-toll-hits-1453>
. Shah, a hotel-owner from Mirpur, spent a month searching for his dead sister, 
but claims he met resistance from Saudi officials who covered up the full 
extent of the tragedy.

Just before 9am on 24 September, two groups preparing for one of the last 
major rites of the pilgrimage –the stoning of the devil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/dec/19/saudiarabia.religion> – collided 
at the intersection of two roads. Shah says that his sister Syeda and nephew 
Irtaza, a student,were near the front of the crowd that poured across the 
Jamarat bridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2015/sep/24/hajj-pilgrimage-stampede-visual-guide-fatal-crush-mecca>
.

Hajj crush: how crowd disasters happen, and how they can be avoided
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/03/hajj-crush-how-crowd-disasters-happen-and-how-they-can-be-avoided>
“People were packed so tightly that they could not breathe and started 
tumbling over each other, and many became trapped underfoot,” Shah says. Saudi 
officials denied reports that the stampede waslinked to the closure of two 
roads near the bridge for a prince and his 350-person convoy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/25/saudi-arabia-hajj-stampede-mecca-safety>
, butprotesters say leaving them open would have prevented the crush 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-middle-east-34357383>.

The road was flanked by 14ft-high fences and Irtaza tried to climb one. But he 
was knocked out for several hours and, when he regained consciousness, was too 
weak to pull his mother out from a pile of bodies. “That’s my mummy,” the 
26-year-old shouted. But an officer tore him away. “No mummy, go home.” When he 
returned later on, he could not find her.

“My nephew went back to the hotel and phoned me in Pakistan. That’s when he 
told me that Syeda died right in front of him,” Shah says.

Alone and unable to speak Arabic, Irtaza spent days scouring the dead bodies 
that lined the street, pulling rags from the faces of victims, each time in the 
hope that it would be his mother. “He walked through puddles of blood with 
bodies everywhere,” Shah says. “It was the closest thing to hell on earth.”

When Shah secured a visa, he arrived in Mina to devastation and a nephew 
turned half-mad by grief. By this time, five days after the crush, the 
authorities had begun to sweep up bodies, so Shah and Irtaza abandoned the 
blood-soaked streets and searched the city morgue. It was there that Shah saw 
about six or seven lorry-loads of bodies parked outside. “Bodies were left to 
rot. Blood dripped from the lorries and crept up to the morgue’s doors and 
seeped through even though they were sealed.” They were issued tickets and 
ordered to leave their phones on entry. Files lay strewn across the morgue 
floor and the doctors were overwhelmed by the number of bodies. “I saw horrific 
sights at the morgue: simply put, the mistreatment of the dead. They seemed to 
have no idea what they were doing.”

After 20 days of searching, Shah and Irtaza discovered Syeda’s body. “I was no 
longer angry, just filled with grief,” Shah says. “Her body still had the same 
clothing, but her face was disfigured because of the bleeding.”

Syeda’s body joined a mass of crudely built graves in Mina. She was denied her 
Islamic funeral rites: she was unwashed and buried without a white sheet.

“We could not put a permanent mark of any sort on the grave; there was no 
respect for the dead,” Shah says. He was told that the graves would probably be 
reused next year, so acute was the risk of another crush, and that chemicals 
would be poured in to dissolve the bodies.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2015%2Fdec%2F23%2Fhajj-crush-pilgrimage-mecca-stampede-saudi-arabia-mina-valley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba632fbf120ea60c3f1adbbdcd374582feae831c%2F0_0_2560_1534%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Hajj%20crush%3A%20%E2%80%98It%20was%20the%20closest%20thing%20to%C2%A0hell%20on%20earth%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2015%2Fdec%2F23%2Fhajj-crush-pilgrimage-mecca-stampede-saudi-arabia-mina-valley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Hajj%20crush%3A%20%E2%80%98It%20was%20the%20closest%20thing%20to%C2%A0hell%20on%20earth%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2015%2Fdec%2F23%2Fhajj-crush-pilgrimage-mecca-stampede-saudi-arabia-mina-valley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba632fbf120ea60c3f1adbbdcd374582feae831c%2F0_0_2560_1534%2F2560.jpg>
 Irtaza Shah with his mother Syeda, who died in the stampede, and with his 
uncle Sajjad. Photograph: Sajjad Shah/Handout 
Shah tried to take a photo of his sister’s grave, but an officer forced him to 
delete it. He described the photos he did take as “smuggled images” or “the 
side of the Hajj that Saudi Arabia doesn’t want you to see”. The Kingdom’s pace 
of development in recent years has beenat the expense of the ancient buildings 
of Mecca 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/oct/14/as-the-hajj-begins-the-destruction-of-meccas-heritage-continues>
; theMakkah Hilton 
<http://www3.hilton.com/en/hotels/saudi-arabia/makkah-hilton-hotel-MAKHITW/index.html>
 now stands on the site of the house of the first caliph, Abu Bakr, the 
Prophet’s closest companion. The Washington-basedInstitute for Gulf Affairs 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/middle-east/mecca-for-the-rich-islams-holiest-site-turning-into-vegas-2360114.html>
 believes  
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/middle-east/mecca-for-the-rich-islams-holiest-site-turning-into-vegas-2360114.html>
that about 95% of Mecca and Medina’s 1,000-year-old buildings have been 
destroyed in the past 20 years.

“Emotionally, I’m bankrupt,” says Shah. “You can’t really gather your 
thoughts. There’s no support. You’re left at the mercy of the Saudis who have a 
different understanding ofIslam <https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam> to 
us. They don’t want to know anything about the dead.

“I can accept the accident. But the treatment [of us] after was just awful. 
It’s been the worst time of my life.”

 * This article was amended on 29 December 2015. An earlier version mistakenly 
referred to the Arab Gulf States Institute in Washington, where it should have 
said the Institute for Gulf Affairs. This has been corrected.  