
If you’re a congressional Republican, you consider Obamacare a “failure”, and 
“repeal and replace” is your mantra. For all intents and purposes, the party 
appears to be a united front.

But cracks in that facade were already showing on Wednesday, day two of the 
115th Congress, when senators passed a resolution to repeal Barack Obama’s 
signature healthcare reform, one that sets in motion legislative machinery to 
end taxes and spending associated with the law. All Republican senators voted 
in favor, with one exception:Rand Paul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/rand-paul>.

How Obamacare could be dismantled by Republicans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2016/dec/17/obamacare-aca-republicans-trump-senate-repeal>
“If Congress fails to vote on a replacement at the same time as repeal, the 
repealers risk assuming the blame for the continued unraveling of Obamacare,” 
Paul wrote in anop-ed 
<https://www.paul.senate.gov/news/article/rare-op-ed-repeal-all-of-obamacare-and-replace-immediately>
 before the vote on Wednesday. “For, mark my words, Obamacare will continue to 
unravel and wreak havoc for years to come.”


Paul warned that keeping popular regulations, such as those requiring insurers 
to issue policies to the sick, could cause a “mass bankruptcy” of insurance 
companies. On Wednesday, he explained his vote on the Senate floor. While he 
said he supported repealing Obamacare, he said the GOP’s current proposal would 
increase the government’s debt by $9.7tn over the next 10 years. “Is that 
really what the Republican party represents?” he asked.

Republican senators Lamar Alexander and Susan Collins also voted yes but have 
previouslyexpressed concerns 
<http://www.pressherald.com/2016/12/02/collins-has-reservations-about-privatizing-medicare-repealing-affordable-care-act/>
 about the rush to repeal without a replacement plan.

In Tennessee, Alexander’s home state, insurance exchanges are in deep trouble. 
Just one insurance company covers Tennessee, and that company had to raise 
premiums significantly in 2017. Still, around163,000 people 
<http://www.tennessean.com/story/money/industries/health-care/2017/01/03/demand-rises-alternatives-obamacare-plans/95750942/>
 purchase insurance through those Obamacare exchanges.

Alexander said he thought the individual mandate, a tax penalty meant to 
encourage people to buy insurance, should be repealed, but first a replacement 
for Obamacare needed to be ready.

“There are a number of things that need to be repealed, but I think what we 
need to focus on first is what would we replace it with,” Alexandertold Slate 
<http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2016/11/17/repealing_obamacare_is_going_to_take_years_admits_key_republican.html>
 about a week after the election. “And what are the steps that it would take to 
do that?” Alexander’s comments are significant because he is chair of the 
Senate’s health, education, labor and pensions committee, one of the committees 
tasked with developing a repeal plan.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fobamacare-repeal-republicans-us-healthcare%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa3454cefd6d5cf1a6a13f2c68b9de0f9650f9a78%2F0_66_2048_1228%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Republicans%20who%20are%20not%20totally%20enthusiastic%20about%20repealing%20Obamacare&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fobamacare-repeal-republicans-us-healthcare%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Republicans%20who%20are%20not%20totally%20enthusiastic%20about%20repealing%20Obamacare&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fobamacare-repeal-republicans-us-healthcare%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa3454cefd6d5cf1a6a13f2c68b9de0f9650f9a78%2F0_66_2048_1228%2F2048.jpg>
 Lamar Alexander voted yes but has previously expressed concerns about the rush 
to repeal without a replacement plan. Photograph: Reuters 
Alexander’s colleague, Collins, of Maine, told the Portland Press Herald 
<http://www.pressherald.com/2016/12/02/collins-has-reservations-about-privatizing-medicare-repealing-affordable-care-act/>
 a month later that she tended to agree with his “more cautious approach”.

“You can’t just drop insurance for 84,000 people,” Collins said, referring to 
those who had signed up for health exchange plans in Maine.

Many other Republicans who have spoken in support of repealing Obamacare still 
face difficult decisions at home. Senator Dean Heller’s home state of Nevada, 
for example, expanded Medicaid as part of Obamacare and newly insured about
187,000 people 
<http://kff.org/other/state-indicator/medicaid-expansion-enrollment/?currentTimeframe=0>
. In 2016, another88,000 people 
<http://kff.org/health-reform/state-indicator/state-marketplace-statistics/?currentTimeframe=0>
 were insured through the state’s insurance exchange, which had one of the 
smallest average increases in healthcare premium costs in the country atjust 6% 
<https://aspe.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/pdf/212721/2017MarketplaceLandscapeBrief.pdf>
, or $15.



All of that underscores the problem Republicans are faced with: how to repeal 
a law that touchesnearly every facet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/03/barack-obama-president-legacy-policy-issues-wins-fights>
 of American healthcare, and insures an additional 20 million Americans, 
without shredding a fragile system.

“Both sides are going to have to grow up, because in sensitive races, voters 
are going to say: ‘A pox on both your houses,’ and you’re going to see 
incumbents on both sides lose their seats,” said Joe Antos, a healthcare policy 
researcher with the conservative American Enterprise Institute.

Americans are covered by a mix of commercial and government healthcare. The 
largest government healthcare programs cover the elderly (Medicare) and the 
very poor (Medicaid). About half of Americans get healthcare through their 
employers, and the rest purchase insurance through state marketplaces.

Though most people think of “Obamacare” as state exchanges where individuals 
can buy insurance with a subsidy, the law touched many other parts of the 
American healthcare system.

Mike Pence promises Obamacare repeal but shares few details on alternative
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/04/mike-pence-repeal-obama-healthcare-law-first>
For example, taxes on the wealthy shored up the Medicare trust fund. The 
federal government paid for states to expand Medicaid to cover millions of 
Americans who previously were not poor enough to qualify.

That means Republicans <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> 
looking to fulfill the seven-year pledge to repeal and replace the law will 
probably need to strike a whole new grand bargain, as Democrats did to enact 
the law – one that will eventually require the cooperation of Senate Democrats.

House Republicans are not necessarily immune from political fallout from 
health law changes either. House Republicans’ willingness to get rid of it and 
worry about how to replace it later depends on what kind of pressure members 
may receive from not just residents of their district, but also constituents 
such as hospitals and doctors.

“I also hear from a lot of House members who have these same kinds of 
dilemmas, really,” said Grace-Marie Turner, president of the conservative 
health policy research center the Galen Institute.

“It shows that Obamacare is full of land mines,” she said. “It’s like trying 
to remodel a house while it’s on a train speeding down the rails at 80 miles 
per hour. It’s really tough to do.”

Democrats’ loss in the 2010 midterms 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/why-democrats-lost-the-house-to-republicans/> 
showed just how difficult healthcare reform can be. Democrats lost more than 50 
seats during that cycle, not long after Obama’s health reforms passed. Though 
the economy was at the top of voters’ minds at the time, exit polls showed 
voters split on the Affordable Care Act.

The bill that passed Wednesday allows Republicans to start dismantling 
provisions that impact the federal budget 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2016/dec/17/obamacare-aca-republicans-trump-senate-repeal>
. Using a legislative maneuver called budget reconciliation, the Senate can 
pass bills with just 51 votes. There are 52 Republicans in the Senate.

But even this may prove unpalatable for some Republicans. For centrists, 
repealing Obamacare without a replacement, and imperiling the health insurance 
of hundreds of thousands of constituents, simply may not be worth the political 
risk. For conservatives, the need to spend money to keep low-income Americans 
insured could run up again anti-tax ideologies, again imperiling coverage for 
millions. To change Obamacare’s regulations, provisions that don’t impact the 
budget, Republicans will likely need to work with Democrats to reach 60 votes.

“This is going to get more and more difficult each step of the way going 
forward,” said G William Hoagland, a senior vice-president at the Bipartisan 
Policy Center and a former US Senate staffer.

“Once you put an entitlement out there – and these are entitlements – boy, 
it’s hard to take them away,” he said. “What you end up with is tinkering at 
the margin. You say, you’re still going to have the same level of coverage, 
you’re going to still increase the quality of care, you’re going to decrease 
the cost – those are the same three principles [as Obamacare’s].”

Because of Obamacare, more than 90% of Americans 
<http://kff.org/other/state-indicator/total-population/?dataView=0&currentTimeframe=0>
 have health insurance, andstate exchanges were busier than ever this fall 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/obamacare-signups-skyrocket-after-donald-trumps-election/>
. But state exchanges are indeed imperiled. More thanone-third of counties have 
only one insurance option 
<http://www.vox.com/science-and-health/2016/10/26/13407610/obamacare-counties-one-insurer>
. In most places,premiums are rising 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/26/upshot/rising-obamacare-rates-what-you-need-to-know.html>
, though overallhealthcare costs have slowed 
<http://talkingpointsmemo.com/dc/health-care-spending-growth-urban-institute-study>
 since Obamacare was implemented.

Republicans’ best bet, according to Antos, could be to prop up state exchanges 
established by Obamacare to prevent commercial insurers from fleeing those 
markets while a swift replacement is developed.

This could require Republicans to pay insurers millions in “risk corridor 
<http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/statements/2016/feb/25/marco-rubio/rubio-we-wiped-out-obamacare-bailout-fund-insuranc/>
” payments, which some of the same Republican lawmakers previously called a “
bailout 
<http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/statements/2016/feb/25/marco-rubio/rubio-we-wiped-out-obamacare-bailout-fund-insuranc/>
” for the insurance industry. Those payments were established by Obamacare to 
cover patients that turned out to be sicker than predicted.

“Donald Trump already said he doesn’t want interruption of coverage for 
people,” Antos said.

“Next year is going to be an issue, and a lot depends on what legislation 
passes this year. That is really hard to predict right now.”
 