
A nearly full moon was the only light over the village of Kavumu, in eastern 
Congo, on the night of 26 December 2015. Just before midnight, a figure slipped 
quietly through the shadows along the red-earth tracts between huts and entered 
one of the wooden shacks. The intruder proceeded to take a three-year-old girl 
called Denise from the bed where she was sleeping next to her mother. Also at 
home that night were two women and three other children. None of them heard 
anything.

Denise’s mother woke up after midnight and groped for her daughter next to her 
on the mattress. She found only an empty space. An iron bar normally used to 
block the door was on the floor. A machete was stabbed into the ground outside 
the entrance. The women recognised the signs: this scenario had been repeated 
in Kavumu many times in the previous two and a half years.

The family woke the neighbours, who spanned out into search parties. In a 
nearby field, beneath stalks of sorghum, corn, and desiccated cassava, they 
soon found Denise lying on the wet dirt, wearing only her fuchsia-pink hoodie. 
She had been raped and was badly hurt, bleeding from between her legs. They 
took her straight to the local hospital and one of the search party was sent to 
notify the village chief and police of the attack. Denise spent the night in 
hospital and the next morning, she was sent toPanzi hospital 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/01/congo-government-hounding-hospital-rape-victims>
, a much larger facility in the provincial capital of Bukavu. In the early days 
of the attacks, untrained medical staff in Kavumu had been washing away 
evidence in an attempt to clean up the girls, but Panzi doctors had since 
instructed them on how to treat victims of rape in a way that preserved 
forensic evidence.

Denise was, by some counts, the 39th child to be raped in the village of Kavumu
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/20/girls-gang-raped-suspects-free-democratic-republic-congo-president-kabila>
, since the first was reported on 3 June 2013. Each time, men in groups had 
kidnapped a girl of between 18 months and 11 years old from her bed, raped her, 
and either returned her to her home or left her in a nearby field, which is 
farmed by demobilised soldiers. At least two girls have died from their 
injuries.

Although rape has been used as a weapon of war in this part of the Democratic 
Republic of the Congo <https://www.theguardian.com/world/congo> (DRC) for 20 
years, these attacks on children are new – in terms of the repeated patterns, 
the symbolism and the youth of the victims. At first, the cases didn’t appear 
to be related. But over time, as each abduction resembled the last in certain 
significant details – the way men entered the houses; the way the girls were 
taken, violated and returned or left in the same field; and the fact that none 
of the families woke up as men stole their children – investigators began to 
suspect that there was an organised ring behind the attacks.

Because the girls are so little, their organs are often irreparably damaged. 
Panzi hospital’s founder and medical director, DrDenis Mukwege 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/oct/26/congo-doctor-rape-victims-murder-attempt>
, said that he and his staff frequently weep while operating on the girls. 
Another doctor said the brutality of the rapes made her faint for the first 
time in her life. “When I treat a child with all her bladder and abdomen 
destroyed, I think, This is really not something I want to do with my life,” 
Mukwege told me. We were sitting at a long, plastic-covered table in a 
conference room at Panzi in January. He looked exhausted. “You are thinking 
about how you are just repairing and instead you should be preventing this.”

And yet, despite the horror of these attacks, the news has barely trickled out 
of DRC.

“Everyone should be shocked by this,” said Mukwege. “But why aren’t they?”

Earlier in the week that Denise was taken, two other girls, aged five and six, 
were also gang-raped in Kavumu. All three now lay in beds shrouded in mosquito 
nets in Panzi hospital’s cavernous sexualised violence ward, medicated with 
antibiotics, antiseptic and painkillers. One child, the six-year-old, was 
particularly small and appeared catatonic – she sat unresponsive in her bed 
with her green-flowered shift dress falling off her shoulders. The girls spoke 
to me with their mothers. The children’s voices went whispery and the life 
seemed to leave their eyes when they talked about the attacks. All looked at 
their hands or the ground as they spoke.

The girls will reach puberty before they and their families know the extent of 
the physical and psychological harm done to them. “We don’t know if they will 
have sex normally because of fibrosis,” the girls’ doctor, Dr Neema Rukunghu 
(known to all as Dr Nene), said, “Because of destruction of the cervix, we 
don’t know if they will bleed normally or have babies. We don’t know.”

For the Kavumu families caring for their “ruined” (as they put it) daughters, 
every day that passed brought new terrors. “We don’t know who will be the next 
child visited by the rapist,” one mother said. (The families asked that I not 
use their names in order to protect them from retribution.) They had gathered 
in a sweaty, dim room and crammed on to benches, chairs and the floor in order 
to tell their stories and talk about their fear.

“Now,” the mother said, “we no longer sleep.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fkavumu-village-39-young-girls-raped-justice-drc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57c3d35bf0b987f69c650d43150a92a8f135c810%2F0_75_3008_1804%2F3008.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20village%20where%20dozens%20of%20girls%20have%20been%20raped%20is%20still%20waiting%20for%20justice%20%7C%20Lauren%20Wolfe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fkavumu-village-39-young-girls-raped-justice-drc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20village%20where%20dozens%20of%20girls%20have%20been%20raped%20is%20still%20waiting%20for%20justice%20%7C%20Lauren%20Wolfe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fkavumu-village-39-young-girls-raped-justice-drc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57c3d35bf0b987f69c650d43150a92a8f135c810%2F0_75_3008_1804%2F3008.jpg>
 Kavumu is described as a ‘very, very poor’ village by people who live in one 
of the poorest countries on Earth. Photograph: Lauren Wolfe for the Guardian 
Kavumu is described as a “very, very poor” village by people who live in one 
of the poorest countries on Earth. It is in the province ofSouth Kivu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/06/eastern-drc-oxfam-report-armed-groups-corrupt-officials-congo>
, where fighting between different groups has dragged on in bursts for years. 
Next door is the 1.5 million-acre Kahuzi-Biega national park, a Unesco world 
heritage site of tropical forest that is home to eastern lowland gorillas – 
and, since 1996, a number of armed groups fighting for control of land, natural 
resources and political power, fuelled by ethnic tensions and outside 
interference. Over time, some of these rebels have moved from the park over to 
Kavumu, bringing with them the threat of violence. “It’s a strange 
environment,” said one international NGO researcher who asked not to be named 
for fear of reprisals. “People are thrown together that shouldn’t be.”

Families in Kavumu generally make a dollar or two a day selling small 
quantities of fruit, charcoal or cassava. When I visited in December and 
January, children in torn shirts playfully ducked out from behind outhouses 
that were built from a patchwork of dirty, torn tarps. A pig foraged near some 
shacks, and roosters and goats made discontented noises.

The village was in deep trauma. Many people were troubled by night terrors. 
One father had spent every night keeping guard by the door since his daughter 
was abducted, in case the attackers came back; he could no longer work because 
he had to sleep during the day. Locks, where they existed at all, were 
generally a couple of bent nails with a bar slipped through them. They could 
easily be levered open from the outside. Some doorways were only covered with a 
curtain.

Those who have been abducted have been alienated from the community, because 
of the stigma of girls who have been raped

The fear that the attackers may return to the same house was well founded. An 
11-year-old girl named Yvette had been kidnapped and raped on two separate 
occasions, once at the end of March, the second time in August. She picked at a 
mosquito bite on her arm while she told me her story. Not only had she been 
assaulted twice, but the other children at school abused her for it, “because I 
was destroyed and they were not”, she said. Kids had singled out Yvette as the 
girl who had been taken, a psychologist at Panzi, Justin Cikuru, said. 
“Children feel uncomfortable and so they tease her.”

Those who have been abducted in Kavumu have been alienated from the wider 
community, because of the stigma of girls who have been raped. At first, each 
assault was treated in isolation, because the alternative was too terrible to 
contemplate – that there was some kind of organised campaign targeting the 
village. A division grew between the families whose children had been attacked 
and the rest, who did not want to be involved. “It’s a community in denial,” 
said Cikuru.

The victims and their families tended to keep to themselves. One reason for 
their silence was fear of retribution from both the perpetrators and the 
authorities. For 20 years, sexual violence has been inflicted by militias and 
the Congolese army. Perpetrators have visibly scarred rape victims to ensure 
they carry the stigma. For years, presidentJoseph Kabila 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/nov/25/joseph-kabila-congo-elections> 
denied that rape was a problem in the country, but in 2009, he seemed to change 
his mind, and declared a “zero tolerance” policy. In the past couple of years, 
official UN and DRC government records of the number of women assaulted in the 
eastern part of the country have ranged from 12,000 (over nine months in 2014) 
to more than 15,000 in 2015. And these numbers, according to experts, are 
probably just a fraction of the actual counts.

Government assistance for victims has been basically nonexistent. Reparations 
for victims of rape have been ordered by the courts, but not a single survivor 
has ever been paid. (The only payout was made to the wrong people: in 2014, a 
lawyer fraudulently claimed compensation for 29 women who posed as rape 
victims.)

In 2015, Kabila appointed a special representative on sexual violence, Jeanine 
Mabunda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/04/congo-presidential-adviser-hopes-shed-rape-capital-tag>
. She had previously held governmental and corporate positions, including 
minister of state-run companies. She is also on the board of Randgold 
Resources, a mining corporation which has its headquarters in Jersey. Her 
office has hired PR firms Crescent Consultants and KRL International in 
Washington, DC, at great expense, to represent her in the media and sell DRC to 
investors. That large sums have been spent curating her office’s public image 
does not sit well with Kavumu’s task force, since investigations into the 
attacks were stalled for more than a year by lack of funding. The same problem 
of funding has disrupted basic services throughout the country. Officials and 
members of the army and police are rarely paid, so they often try to gain money 
in other ways – a phenomenon I experienced in December, when I was detained by 
the Congolese intelligence services for several hours. One of the men in charge 
of my interrogation admitted he had not been paid for three months. One staffer 
repeatedly suggested I “help him out”, but I was eventually released without 
handing over any money.

In such an atmosphere of corruption and distrust of the authorities, as Dr 
Cikuru said: “You fear the consequences if you say the government is not 
protecting your community. So you stay quiet.”

One local police officer has made it his mission to solve these crimes. He, 
too, cannot be named for fear of reprisals but he was the man who drove 
three-year-old Denise from Kavumu to the hospital in Bukavu the morning after 
she was attacked. He cried as he picked up the little girl in his arms, carried 
her to his own car, and drove an hour and a half, over potholed roads, to 
Panzi. After months of struggling to stop the attacks, thwarted by a lack of 
government funds and trained investigators, he was worn out.

You can’t imagine what it’s like, every time they call me to say that yet 
another child has been raped
A local police officer 
“I felt like I was powerless,” the officer said when we met in the provincial 
capital Bukavu in the early evening, two days after the attack on Denise. “She 
was too small.” He sat forward on the edge of his chair. “I’ve experienced 
cases in which a parent kills a child because they want money; rapes of women 
that entail using sticks inside them;rapes like in Walikale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/oct/15/un-backed-troops-accused-rape-congo>
, where 300 were attacked; many cases. But this is the biggest investigation of 
my career.” The stress weighed on him. His shoulders hunched. “You can’t 
imagine what it’s like, every time they call me to say that yet another child 
has been raped.”

By September 2014, the attacks had become regular occurrences in Kavumu, but 
still the government refused to consider the possibility that the crimes were 
linked. After the first spate of child rapes, the Boston-based NGO Physicians 
for Human Rights, which documents human rights abuses and advocates on behalf 
of persecuted health workers, started pushing for the attacks to be treated as 
a mass crime. Dr Ellinor Ädelroth, a Swedish specialist in public health, 
became project manager for Panzi hospital’s sexual violence programme in 
December 2014. In her first weeks in the job, she compiled a dossier on nine 
Kavumu child rape cases and presented them to a few Swedish United Nations 
Police (Unpol) investigators she knew in Bukavu. (The UN Stabilisation Mission 
in Congo (Monusco) is the world’s largest military peacekeeping force. Its 
police wing, Unpol, is tasked with building up the national police force 
through training and development of law enforcement.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fkavumu-village-39-young-girls-raped-justice-drc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c4e4f31b5fa2479384af148fd8ad466cb7475a1%2F0_196_3008_1804%2F3008.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20village%20where%20dozens%20of%20girls%20have%20been%20raped%20is%20still%20waiting%20for%20justice%20%7C%20Lauren%20Wolfe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fkavumu-village-39-young-girls-raped-justice-drc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20village%20where%20dozens%20of%20girls%20have%20been%20raped%20is%20still%20waiting%20for%20justice%20%7C%20Lauren%20Wolfe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fkavumu-village-39-young-girls-raped-justice-drc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c4e4f31b5fa2479384af148fd8ad466cb7475a1%2F0_196_3008_1804%2F3008.jpg>
 A plantation near Kavumu. Photograph: Lauren Wolfe for the Guardian 
The information was passed on to different groups working on the protection of 
women and children. A non-governmental Kavumu task force had been formed in May 
2014, based in Bukavu, consisting of Monusco, other UN offices, Physicians for 
Human Rights and doctors from Panzi hospital. But not all parties in the group 
were agreed on strategy. Some members of the task force, which was meant to 
co-ordinate responses to the attacks and collect information, wanted to hold a 
press conference in Bukavu to tell the international press what was happening 
to girls in Kavumu but, according to Ädelroth, Monusco opposed the idea. 
Another source, who asked to remain anonymous, said the idea was quashed “due 
to the political sensitivity it could raise about Congolese authorities, mainly 
due to their poor response in terms of prevention and the [lack of] evolution 
on the justice and prosecution procedures”.

Through 2015, no arrests of any consequence were made. Girls continued to 
arrive at Panzi hospital on a regular basis, having been violently raped. One 
UN official resigned out of frustration at the UN’s continued failure to halt 
the atrocities. Each of the different UN sub-departments in DRC has its 
independent function; the Kavumu task force had come into being in response to 
the crisis, but coordinating efforts was no simple matter.

When Physicians for Human Rights set about stringing together a pattern of 
violence, with the help of the local police officer and the doctors at Panzi, 
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and others stepped up with 
financial and logistical support, donating not just funds but things such as 
office furniture and cars. Yet even with this support, local investigators were 
so under-resourced that, on one occasion when I was in Bukavu, they had to call 
around to different NGOs trying to find $250 to pay for fuel and photocopies to 
file legal papers at the tribunal in Kavumu.

“We need the culprits arrested,” Irma van Dueren, Monusco’s senior women’s 
protection adviser, told me in February. “We are frustrated about how long it’s 
been taking. Be assured though that this is at the top of the agenda.”

Some of the parents of victims, frustrated and bewildered by the government’s 
inaction, became convinced that the attacks were part of a conspiracy. “We 
think that the politics of destroying children is something decided on by the 
leaders of the country,” one mother said. “Because we see government people 
coming to investigate and you expect a certain kind of help from the 
government. But nothing happens.” She wondered if the attacks were a scheme to 
make money from the families. A number of parents reported that when they went 
to the police the night their daughters were raped, they were arrested and had 
to pay a bribe of up to $100 to be released. In one case, the injured daughter 
had been taken into custody, too.

Three men had been caught by family members as they tried to steal girls away 
or, in one case, as the assault was taking place. In February 2013, a girl 
named Isabelle, aged 10, was discovered missing by her mother, who then sent 
her older brother to look for her. While searching, the brother heard noises 
coming from one of the shacks. He looked through the gaps of the wooden slats 
of an outer wall to see his sister being raped. Soldiers were called and they 
caught the man with his pants around his ankles. As had happened to other 
families, they also arrested Isabelle’s father, but released him without 
charge. The perpetrator, according to Isabelle’s father, bought his way out of 
jail for $400. Isabelle shrunk into her heavy polyester dress as she told me, 
“God will punish them one day.”

Three or four other men have been arrested – according to newsletters from 
Jeanine Mabunda’s office – although sources told me that some of them may have 
had nothing to do with the attacks. The men have reportedly been sentenced to 
between 10 and 12 years, although it is not clear where they are serving their 
time or whether they are even still in jail.

It wasn’t until March 2015 – nearly two years after the rapes began – that 
Mabunda was dispatched to the country’s eastern border to meet with the Kavumu 
task force. A month later, her office put out a statement saying the government 
“will launch an investigation” into the attacks, but no one came to talk to the 
girls, or their families.

In May 2015, the UN refugee agency’s Bukavu office posted billboards in four 
areas of Kavumu decrying child rape; one showed a girl tied to a tree while two 
men buckled up their pants, accompanied by the slogan: “Break the silence, 
denounce sexual violence”. The UN Refugee Agency, which has a presence in this 
area to manage the many thousands of people displaced by conflict, had decided 
to undertake a programme of what it calls “sensitisation” to teach people to 
not tolerate the rape of children in their community.

But breaking the silence is not a simple matter. One well-known human rights 
campaigner named Evariste Kasali, a coordinator for NGO Organisation Populaire 
pour la Paix, was investigating allegations of abductions and child rape in 
Kavumu, and spoke out about the authorities’ apparent inability to stop them. 
On 17 March 2016, he was shot dead at his home in Kavumu.

By mid-2015, local police had started looking for patterns. One detail that 
resurfaced regularly was that the families of the girls abducted remained 
asleep while the break-ins occurred. The mother of the two girls who were taken 
the same night was convinced, like many of the parents, that there were 
supernatural forces at work. “Imagine you are sleeping and they take someone 
from you without your knowing,” she said. “Can’t you say that this is 
witchcraft?”

Many medicinal plants grow in the region’s remarkably fertile soil, and while 
locals worried about witchcraft, investigators looked for a combination of 
herbs or roots that would put a person into a deep sleep.

In one case, the police arrived at a house in which the parents were still 
sleeping after the abduction and rape of their child. Police carried the 
parents outside, still unconscious. They didn’t wake up until they were at the 
police station some time later. The rape victims didn’t initially seem to feel 
pain, which made investigators think some kind of anaesthetic might have been 
used. They started looking for anyone expert at mixing plants into potions.

In addition to multiple organised foreign militias inside DRC’s borders, there 
are also many local militia groups formed by people dissatisfied with the 
government, or who simply want to assert their own power. These groups are 
known asMai-Mai 
<http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/battle-control-drc-who-are-mai-mai-groups-1526276>, 
which literally means “water water” – either because the men douse themselves 
in “magic” water to protect themselves from bullets, or because bullets are 
said to harmlessly pass through these men like water instead of flesh. Over the 
years, Mai-Mai militias have kidnapped large numbers of women in both South and 
North Kivu, taking them into the bush to provide sexual services, according to 
Human Rights Watch.

Near Kavumu is a town called Lwiro, the main feature of which is a defunct 
university for the study of natural sciences built in a pink, Spanish-colonial 
style, which now houses a chimpanzee reserve. If you walk for 20 minutes along 
a sunken muddy rivulet past the campus, you come to a heavy stone church in a 
green pasture overgrown with sunflowers. Investigators began looking into a 
militia based in the town. In July 2012, a German botanist named Walter Müller 
had been murdered in Lwiro, just beyond the church, close to the perimeter of a 
huge plantation he owned.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fkavumu-village-39-young-girls-raped-justice-drc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc089f9924f88eda1ce1402d6345745c069b03cd3%2F0_196_3008_1804%2F3008.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20village%20where%20dozens%20of%20girls%20have%20been%20raped%20is%20still%20waiting%20for%20justice%20%7C%20Lauren%20Wolfe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fkavumu-village-39-young-girls-raped-justice-drc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20village%20where%20dozens%20of%20girls%20have%20been%20raped%20is%20still%20waiting%20for%20justice%20%7C%20Lauren%20Wolfe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fkavumu-village-39-young-girls-raped-justice-drc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc089f9924f88eda1ce1402d6345745c069b03cd3%2F0_196_3008_1804%2F3008.jpg>
 The church where Walter Müller was attacked. Photograph: Lauren Wolfe for the 
Guardian 
Müller had come to DRC in 1965 to work for a German pharmaceutical company 
named Pharmakina. When Müller, a short man with black hair and a limp, took 
over the plantation in the late 1960s, he fired many of the hundreds of people 
who had worked the land for years. While Müller spoke Swahili and Mashi and was 
considered by many to blend into local society, his decision to sack so many of 
the men created bitter resentment that turned to violence. Müller had to get 
warrants to force the workers out.

Decades later, displaced and disgruntled workers, along with disenfranchised 
former soldiers and rebels, found a leader, Frederic Batumike Rugimbanya, a 
member of parliament for South Kivu, who appears to have organised them into a 
private army that forced Müller off his own plantation.

Resentment towards Müller, who still felt he had a legitimate claim to the 
land, culminated on a hot, humid day in 2012 at the church. Armed men found 
Müller there and dragged him to the plantation, where they beat him, stabbed 
him with spears and left him gravely wounded. When government soldiers found 
him, Müller was taken to a hospital in Kigali, Rwanda, where he died six days 
later.

Batumike is 62 years old and the father of nine children. He is known as “10 
Litres” because of his small stature (10 litres is the size of a jerrycan 
commonly used to carry water). Since 2006, he has been elected twice to South 
Kivu’s parliament. He belongs to the CCU party, which is part of an alliance 
with President Kabila’s PPRD party. He has long been known around Kavumu as a 
defender of human rights, although no one could tell me why. He is also a local 
spiritual leader who conducts Saturday services at a church in his own home.

His grand house has smooth whitewashed walls and a sturdy red roof, which 
distinguish it from what are otherwise mainly wood shacks. He preaches a 
Christian service, but with what locals call an African orientation – he 
believes in the power of nature and spirits. More than one person described 
how, in his capacity as a pastor, Batumike buried locals wrapped in plastic – 
not a common practice in DRC.

Batumike and his men convened every week at the plantation, according to 
locals. They had weapons and frequently used them in skirmishes with the 
Congolese army, defending their illegal claim to Müller’s land, which the men 
profited from greatly, according to officials, renting out plots and selling 
whatever was grown. (Müller was well known for cultivating a wide variety of 
plants and herbs on the plantation, including Cinchona, or Fever Trees, used in 
the production of quinine, although what grows there now is a mystery; it’s too 
dangerous to enter.)

As police and local groups started pooling their information, it emerged that 
attacks by a local makeshift militia on Congolese army positions increased 
every time a child was raped. This fuelled suspicion that the attacks were 
inspired by sorcery: among some rebel groups in DRC, virgin blood is believed 
to fortify them and make them impervious to bullets. Investigators could not 
afford to ignore the rumours. “The people who are doing this believe in it,” 
said one official.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fkavumu-village-39-young-girls-raped-justice-drc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d9e1618bddfb946bc84f55a332d83ef850c175d%2F0_175_2720_1632%2F2720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20village%20where%20dozens%20of%20girls%20have%20been%20raped%20is%20still%20waiting%20for%20justice%20%7C%20Lauren%20Wolfe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fkavumu-village-39-young-girls-raped-justice-drc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20village%20where%20dozens%20of%20girls%20have%20been%20raped%20is%20still%20waiting%20for%20justice%20%7C%20Lauren%20Wolfe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fkavumu-village-39-young-girls-raped-justice-drc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d9e1618bddfb946bc84f55a332d83ef850c175d%2F0_175_2720_1632%2F2720.jpg>
 Batumike’s grand house with its smooth whitewashed walls and a sturdy red 
roof. Photograph: Lauren Wolfe for the Guardian 
By the time I left South Kivu in January, local police had their suspects, but 
seemed powerless to act. Months passed, and the authorities made no move to 
issue arrest warrants and end the nightmare in Kavumu. By 20 June, four more 
girls had been abducted and gang-raped.

At this point, I wrote an opinion piece in the Guardian, accusing the 
government of allowing the perpetrators to commit these terrible crimes with 
impunity. The following day, I awoke at 3am in New York to a message from 
Kavumu saying that the police had a suspect in custody. One hundred and twenty 
Congolese army soldiers had apprehended the alleged mastermind, Frederic 
Batumike, and 74 of his men, in an early morning raid. (A number of those 
arrested were quickly released.)

Batumike was charged with the Kavumu gang rapes, along with 67 men, who were 
suspected of forming part of his private militia. The men have also been 
charged with crimes against humanity, participation in an insurrection, and the 
assassination of military personnel. They are also chief suspects in the 
murders of human rights campaigner Evariste Kasali and the plantation owner 
Walter Müller.

“The militia that works for [Batumike] recruited a fetishist who advises the 
militiamen to rape very young girls to be assured of having a supernatural 
protection,” justice minister Alexis Thambwe said in an announcement. One 
official confirmed that this fetishist, who makes the “magic powder”, is also 
now under arrest.

The case has been classified as a crime against humanity because the attacks 
have been systematic and widespread, and perpetrated against a civilian 
population. This classification lifts any kind of time limit otherwise imposed 
by Congolese law to investigate and try the cases.

Partly thanks to heavy lobbying by the Kavumu task force, the government has 
shifted the cases’ jurisdiction from the civilian system to the military courts 
– considered marginally more effective at bringing cases to trial. Even so, the 
military judicial system is still unreliable: in November 2012, soldiers 
rampaged through the town of Minova in South Kivu and raped at least 76 women. 
There was an international outcry when out of 39 defendants, including 
officers, only two low-level army men were convicted.

The protracted series of kidnappings and rapes has taken a terrible toll on 
the girls of Kavumu.

Back in Panzi hospital’s low-lit conference room, as rain muddied the world 
outside, Dr Mukwege slowly shook his head. “With other women, I can keep going 
because I can see when you help them in the correct way how they can change 
their own life and the life of their community. They are strong enough to fight 
for their rights, but with children it’s a trouble for me. I can’t answer why 
or what will be the future – what will happen to them after they go through 
these terrible things.”

“It’s good that arrests have been made,” said the father of one of the 
victims. “We hope that justice will be done, but to tell the truth, none of us 
has much confidence in Congolese justice. If the suspects are not brought to 
trial quickly, things will be worse than before. If some of the men are still 
at large, they are liable to take their revenge. The authorities have shown 
themselves unable or unwilling to put a stop to this horror, and I no longer 
feel that DRC is my country. This is not my home. We are all traumatised. We’ve 
reached our limit: we’re ready to fight back now and we won’t be held 
accountable for our actions.”

His daughter, sitting quietly, whispered that she didn’t have a lot to say. 
“Since those men in uniform ruined me, I have not been well. But I don’t even 
know what’s wrong with me. I’ve asked papa to build a big fence so they can’t 
come back and hurt us any more.”

I went to visit Yvette, the girl who’d been abducted and raped on two separate 
occasions. Her house was being rebuilt after her attack to make it more secure, 
but the work had stalled because the money had run out; there were branches for 
walls and only half a tin roof in place. Earlier in the day I had given her a 
notebook to scribble in while I interviewed others. She returned it to me with 
a story she had written in Swahili, begging for the “people with good hearts” 
to help her find a safe home: “I fear if I go back home to my own house I will 
die,” she wrote.

Officials are now saying there may be up to 700 men involved in Batumike’s 
militia, which means that only a fraction of the group is currently in custody. 
It is not at all clear that peace has come to Kavumu.

One evening at the end of my stay in South Kivu, as the waters of Lake Kivu 
gently rippled below, the local police officer talked with equanimity about the 
danger of retribution. “People like us need accept the risks that will put an 
end to these kind of crimes. If we don’t risk our lives, then this will go on 
for ever. But if these guys kill me, they won’t go unpunished,” he said. 
“People will know who they are – that they killed me because I was 
investigating their cases. There will be justice.”

The victims’ names have been changed.

• Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread 
<https://twitter.com/@gdnlongread>, or sign up to the long read weekly email 
here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/jul/20/sign-up-to-the-long-read-email>.
 