
Those of us who enjoy the fruits of the BBC – everything from Planet Earth II 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p02544td> to Fleabag, from The Missing to 
Strictly, fromRadio 3’s The Listening Service 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b078n25h> to Jarvis Cocker’s The Sunday 
Service on 6 Music <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b00ptsjd> – tend to do so 
without worrying over-much about how the BBC is run. And yet it is the delicate 
mechanism of BBC governance – the manner in which its director general is 
supported and made accountable, and the BBC’s independence is upheld – on which 
depends the bounty that the public, in Britain and beyond, enjoys. This 
independence underpins the BBC’s impartiality: its aim, not always perfectly 
realised, is to report the news without fear, favour or bias.

This week interviews are being held to select the chair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/29/bbc-struggles-with-chair-shortlist-dearth-top-candidates>
 of the BBC’s new unitary board, which replaces the BBC Trust. Designed a 
decade ago as an independent body, the trust was judged to be insufficiently 
robust when the BBC stumbled into crisis in 2012 over reporting missteps that 
claimed the scalp of the thendirector general, George Entwistle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/george-entwistle>. It is important that this 
new system is tough enough to withstand future crises; the BBC cannot be in a 
position of changing its governance system every time disaster strikes. The 
first step to success, or otherwise, will be in the person of the new chair. 
The quality of the rest of the board – with its five independent 
non-executives, its four members recruited through the public appointments 
process, and its four executive members – depends in large part on that 
person’s qualities.

What, then, are the qualities required? First, it is essential that he or she 
is visibly independent of the government and is appointed in a manner that is 
open, transparent and fair. The prime minister must resist the temptation – 
which is being strongly urged in some quarters – to insert someone from her own 
political circle into the role. The BBC has had fractious relationships with 
governments of all stripes, from John Reith’s struggles with Stanley Baldwin 
over coverage of the General Strike in 1926 to the bust-up with the Labour 
government over the reporting of the Iraq war from 2003. No doubt there will be 
rows in the future, too, but the BBC’s most significant strength – and the one 
that makes it such a trusted purveyor of news, especially beyond British shores 
– is precisely its independence from the government. What has sustained theBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> since 1922 is the fact that it is a 
public, not a state, broadcaster.

Second, the new chair must not be a wrecker, a figure sent in aggressively to 
“sort out” the BBC. What the BBC needs, now, as its new 11-year charter comes 
into force from 1 January, is a period of stability. It has to cope with cuts of
£750m a year by 2020 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jul/06/osborne-slashes-bbc-budget-pay-over-75s-tv-licences>
 – imposed by George Osborne. It needs nurturing rather than browbeating: its 
chair ought to be a figure who can inspire the corporation to do its very best 
creative work and its most vigorous, fearless reporting. At the same time, it 
is vital that he or she is no walkover, no enabler of the excesses that the BBC 
can sometimes be tempted towards: the chair must be able to say “no” to the 
BBC, and, with a strong moral core to steer her or him, save it from its own 
occasional vaingloriousness. Tough-skinned, emotionally intelligent and with a 
steady touch in a crisis, the chair must also lack ego. The successful 
candidate must be prepared to be that most thankless and noble of things – a 
selfless public servant.
 