
Theatre 

Groundhog Day

The Old Vic’s hosting of the hit movie adaptation (pictured, above) reaches 
its final week, and reviews have remained frothing throughout its two-month 
run. Tim Minchin and Danny Rubin repeat the trick the former pulled off with 
Matilda, taking a revered source (in this case, Bill Murray’s 1993 tragi-com 
about a weatherman destined to repeat the same day over and over) and building 
a rich musical around it, preserving the original magic while adding in 
Minchin’s superbly off-kilter music.

Old Vic, SE1, until 17 September 
<http://www.oldvictheatre.com/whats-on/2016/groundhog-day/>

TV

Motherland
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fthe-10-best-things-to-do-this-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd0ac0ee0af482a7ea2d05b51e1f30813bc4d2dfd%2F139_1_1774_1064%2F1774.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2010%20best%E2%80%A6%20things%20to%20do%20this%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fthe-10-best-things-to-do-this-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2010%20best%E2%80%A6%20things%20to%20do%20this%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fthe-10-best-things-to-do-this-week%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd0ac0ee0af482a7ea2d05b51e1f30813bc4d2dfd%2F139_1_1774_1064%2F1774.jpg>
 Paul Ready and Diane Morgan in Motherland. Photograph: -/BBC 
The BBC’s sitcom season may have been greeted with mixed reviews – 
particularly in the case of shonky revivals of old favourites such as Porridge 
– but there has been the odd gem. This pilot created by Graham Linehan and 
Sharon Horgan, offers a pointed look at the annoyances of middle-class 
motherhood. Diane “Philomena Cunk” Morgan is among the stars.

It’s available to view on iPlayer. 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/episode/b07v3wrn/motherland>

American Horror Story

So far, the theme of season six of Ryan Murphy’s kitsch splatterfest has been 
kept a secret, though considering previous themes have included haunted houses, 
witches, asylums and freakshows, it’s unlikely to be about some jolly talking 
animals forgetting their differences by having a picnic in a wood. If you’ve 
never caught it before, don’t worry; each season is its own standalone tale.

Begins 16 September, 10pm, FOX 
<http://www.foxtv.co.uk/shows/fox/american-horror-story>

Music

Last Night Of The Proms
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fthe-10-best-things-to-do-this-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5e9d744418d745d8ff5884e45e578cd4efdcb1d%2F0_107_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2010%20best%E2%80%A6%20things%20to%20do%20this%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fthe-10-best-things-to-do-this-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2010%20best%E2%80%A6%20things%20to%20do%20this%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fthe-10-best-things-to-do-this-week%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5e9d744418d745d8ff5884e45e578cd4efdcb1d%2F0_107_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Photograph: BBC 
No longer confined to London, the final night of the classical concert series 
on Saturday is a national affair, with Proms In The Park events in Colwyn Bay, 
Belfast, Glasgow and Hyde Park.

various venues, Saturday <http://www.bbc.co.uk/events/ehgv2m>

Mercury music prize

Despite the death of David Bowie, it doesn’t feel as if the result of this 
year’s Mercurys is a foregone conclusion. Blackstar would probably be a top 
contender even if Bowie were alive, but with Kano, Michael Kiwanuka, Radiohead,
Skepta <https://www.theguardian.com/music/skepta> and Anohni (pictured, above) 
on the shortlist, it’s by no means guaranteed victory. The outsider’s punt is 
on jazz mob the Comet Is Coming’s Channel The Spirits but, beyond this, it’s a 
difficult year to call. For the first time, fans will also be able to select 
the first of the six finalists who will duke it out on Thursday (9pm, BBC4), 
meaning the decision won’t now solely be down to industry chin strokers.

Hammersmith Apollo, Thursday 
<http://www.eventimapollo.com/events/detail/mercury-prize>

This Is Grime
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fthe-10-best-things-to-do-this-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c5ab0dc48416113f989dd5d947302262df67f25%2F84_1724_4935_2959%2F4935.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2010%20best%E2%80%A6%20things%20to%20do%20this%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fthe-10-best-things-to-do-this-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2010%20best%E2%80%A6%20things%20to%20do%20this%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fthe-10-best-things-to-do-this-week%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c5ab0dc48416113f989dd5d947302262df67f25%2F84_1724_4935_2959%2F4935.jpg>
 Skepta. Photograph: Olivia Rose for the Guardian 
With Stormzy, Kano and the star of this very issue, Skepta, inarguably 
breaking through to the mainstream, it seems an apposite juncture for the tale 
of grime to be told in handsome book form. Journalist Hattie Collins and 
snapper Olivia Rose – who shot this week’s Guide cover – explore the genre’s 
early-00s genesis, and draft in MCs, bloggers and producers to spin the yarn as 
they saw it.

It’s available to buy now. <http://www.roughtrade.com/albums/106880>

Films

Birmingham On Film

Part of Brum’s Flatpack film festival, this series of events, running until 15 
October, examines the ever-changing cinematic image of the largest city in the 
UK outside the capital, through film shot in the region, episodes of famous TV 
shows (such as African-Caribbean soap opera Empire Road), tours of cinematic 
locations, talks, documentaries and events. It will, quite possibly, be bosting.

Various venues, 16 September until 15 October 
<http://flatpackfestival.org.uk/season/birmingham-on-film/?order_by=Name>

Captain Fantastic
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCjEL1f4-xAw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCjEL1f4-xAw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCjEL1f4-xAw&media=>
A father (Viggo Mortensen) raising his kids in the wilderness is forced to 
return to society and question his beliefs in this heartfelt drama, in cinemas 
now.

Exhibition

You Say You Want A Revolution? Records And Rebels 1966-1970

You Say You Want a Revolution review: a dizzying trip to the heart of the 1960s
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/07/you-say-you-want-a-revolution-review-v-and-a-dizzying-trip>
Flower power, social justice, free love, drug culture: the 1960s was all about 
sticking it to The Man. Today, we perhaps need reminding that rebellion can 
make a difference. This V&A exhibition looks back at the successes and failures 
of the latter part of swinging 60s activism; just how much change was actually 
effected?

Victoria and Albert Museum, SW7, Saturday until 26 February 2017 
<https://www.vam.ac.uk/exhibitions/you-say-you-want-a-revolution-records-and-rebels-1966-70>

Food

Dinner With The Twits

You can’t see Dahl’s Twits scooping the cash on Come Dine With Me, and this 
immersive dining event from the Les Enfants Terribles theatre troupe aims to 
disgust. Only, the food is good, the cocktails strong, and there’s beer made 
with yeast swabbed from Dahl’s chair.

Waterloo Vaults, SE1, to 30 Oct <https://www.twitsdinner.com/>
 