
With more than 21,500 stores <http://www.loxcel.com/sbux> in 64 countries and 
territories, theStarbucks <https://www.theguardian.com/business/starbucks> 
coffee chain has enjoyed the image of omnipresence for so long that jokes about 
walking across the street from one branch straight into another have themselves 
become clichéd. In certain cities, it’s simply the reality: Seattle, for 
instance, where the now universally recognised green mermaid got her humble 
start.

But when the very first Starbucks opened on 30 March 1971, its sign bore not a 
green mermaid but a brown one — and a more anatomically detailed one at that. 
Founders Jerry Baldwin, Zev Siegl and Gordon Bowker (friends from the 
University of San Francisco, all instructed in the art of roasting by Peet’s 
Coffee and Tea founder Alfred Peet) drew the theme of their new coffee company 
from nautical mythology, commissioning that first version of the company’s 
signature siren and picking a name out ofHerman Melville’s Moby-Dick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2012/oct/18/herman-melville-books-moby-dick>
 – “Starbucks” having narrowly pipped the second-place contender, “Pequod 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pequod_%28Moby-Dick%29>”.

You can still see Starbucks’ original mermaid, baring her breasts and 
spreading her tails, on the window of the “original Starbucks” (actually the 
second location of the original Starbucks, to which it moved in 1977) at 
Seattle’s tourist-beloved Pike Place market. A site of pilgrimage forStarbucks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/starbucks> habitués the world over, the 
store offers not just all the drinks on the company’s modern menu — from normal 
coffee and espresso to chai tea lattes and caramel Frappuccinos — but a sense 
of just how much the operation has changed over the decades.

You can still see Starbucks’ original mermaid, baring her breasts and 
spreading her tails, on the window of the store
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F14%2Fthe-first-starbucks-coffee-shop-seattle-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-36%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F11%2F1431356540517%2Ffbd121d8-b190-4d92-bb89-9d5f610659c0-2060x1577.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20first%20Starbucks%20coffee%20shop%2C%20Seattle%20-%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2036&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F14%2Fthe-first-starbucks-coffee-shop-seattle-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-36%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20first%20Starbucks%20coffee%20shop%2C%20Seattle%20-%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2036&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F14%2Fthe-first-starbucks-coffee-shop-seattle-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-36%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F11%2F1431356540517%2Ffbd121d8-b190-4d92-bb89-9d5f610659c0-2060x1577.jpeg>
 The Seattle cafe has become a site of pilgrimage for Starbucks habitués the 
world over. Photograph: Kevin P Casey/AP 
Those who visit the original Starbucks will find themselves at the back of a 
line stretching well past the small building’s door, and once inside will see 
nowhere to sit and linger — just as Baldwin, Siegl and Bowker intended. They 
founded Starbucks not as a place to drink freshly brewed coffee, but as a place 
to buy freshly roasted beans. The home-brewing coffee aficionados of 1970s 
Seattle loved it, and demand had grown sufficiently by decade’s end that a 
curious Howard Schultz – then the general manager of their filter supplier, 
Hammarplast – paid a visit to No.1912 Pike Place to watch this booming small 
business in action.

Impressed, Schultz joined Starbucks as director of marketing in 1982 and, on a 
buying trip to Milan, experienced the cultural awakening that would give the 
company its destiny – in the form of the Piazza del Duomo’s many coffee bars, 
all of them serving high-grade espresso, all of them providing quasi-public 
meeting places for Milanese society. There, amid “the light banter of political 
debate and the chatter of kids in school uniforms”, the question hit Schultz: 
why couldn’t American cities have the same thing? And if they could, why 
couldn’t they serve coffee made with Starbucks-roasted beans?

Unable to convince Starbucks’ founders of the viability of a concept as novel 
as coffee bars in Seattle, Schultz left the company in 1985. The next year he 
opened a coffee bar of his own, named “Il Giornale” after one of Milan’s 
newspapers. Two years after that, he found enough investors to purchase 
Starbucks outright, which put him in a position, as CEO, to set about his 
Milanifying mission in earnest: first Seattle, then the United States, then the 
world.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F14%2Fthe-first-starbucks-coffee-shop-seattle-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-36%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F13%2F1431544826055%2F67d3f175-988e-42ae-814f-309538089f50-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20first%20Starbucks%20coffee%20shop%2C%20Seattle%20-%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2036&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F14%2Fthe-first-starbucks-coffee-shop-seattle-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-36%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20first%20Starbucks%20coffee%20shop%2C%20Seattle%20-%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2036&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F14%2Fthe-first-starbucks-coffee-shop-seattle-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-36%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F13%2F1431544826055%2F67d3f175-988e-42ae-814f-309538089f50-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The layout and decor of the Pike Place branch is largely as it was when 
Starbucks first launched in 1971. Photograph: Kevin P Casey/Associated Press 
Starbucks’ greatest period of expansion began in the early 1990s: having 
already opened money-losing branches in the US-midwest and British Columbia, it 
then moved profitably into California in 1991, making its initial public 
offering on the stock market the following year. Starbucks seemed unstoppable 
throughout that decade and most of the next, opening on average two new stores 
every day until 2007. But the increasingly globalised company’s fortunes 
started to mirror those of the global economy, and the following year saw 
Starbucks shutter hundreds of locations, a grim necessity unthinkable just a 
decade earlier.

The Great Recession played its part, but Starbucks had also lost its own way, 
a fact nobody admitted more readily than Schultz himself. Having stepped back 
from his duties as CEO in 2000, he wrote a memo diagnosing the company’s ills – 
quickly leaked to the media – which cited “a series of decisions that, in 
retrospect, have led to the watering-down of the Starbucks experience”. These 
included the adoption of fast automatic espresso machines bereft of the 
“romance and theatre” of the old ones, and easily replicable store designs 
“that no longer have the soul of the past and reflect a chain of stores vs the 
warm feeling of a neighbourhood store”.

Ostensibly, Schultz had addressed the message to then-CEO Jim Donald — 
tellingly, a former executive at Wal-Mart, the “big box” retail giant which 
surely exemplifies the very opposite of what Schultz revelled in on the 
sidewalks of Milan. As the revisions of Starbucks’ mermaid rendered her bland 
and asexual, so the revisions of Starbucks itself drained it of whatever local 
charm could have made its stores into social centres.

Schultz’s Starbucks has always aspired to create what urban sociologist Ray 
Oldenburg first termed “third places”: real-life sites that “host the regular, 
voluntary, informal and happily anticipated gatherings of individuals beyond 
the realms of home and work” — exactly, in other words, what the life of the 
suburb-housed, crime-fearing American commuter lost in the 1970s and 80s. He 
wrote of the importance of the “‘place on the corner’, real-life alternatives 
to television, easy escapes from the cabin fever of marriage and family life 
that do not necessitate getting into an automobile”.

Starbucks moved beyond its little original store and wove itself into the 
fabric of American cities
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F14%2Fthe-first-starbucks-coffee-shop-seattle-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-36%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F11%2F1431356996471%2Fd08f4fb9-2dbc-4d62-93b8-7f23cd7a6b8c-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20first%20Starbucks%20coffee%20shop%2C%20Seattle%20-%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2036&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F14%2Fthe-first-starbucks-coffee-shop-seattle-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-36%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20first%20Starbucks%20coffee%20shop%2C%20Seattle%20-%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2036&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F14%2Fthe-first-starbucks-coffee-shop-seattle-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-36%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F11%2F1431356996471%2Fd08f4fb9-2dbc-4d62-93b8-7f23cd7a6b8c-1020x612.jpeg>
 Today Starbucks boasts more than 21,500 stores in 64 countries and territories 
worldwide – but none in Italy. 
Now that so many street corners seem to have a Starbucks, has the 
international chain truly become that “place on the corner” where people 
connect? In fact, Oldenburg dismisses the Starbucks coffee shop as an 
“imitation”, debilitated by the company’s pursuit of that other 
quintessentially American obsession, security, and the sterile, predictable 
environment it produces. “With its overriding concern for safety,” Oldenburg 
told Bryant Simon, author ofEverything But the Coffee: Learning about America 
from Starbucks 
<http://news.temple.edu/news/historian-studies-starbucks%E2%80%99-cultural-implications>
, “it can’t achieve the kind of connections I had in mind.”

Walk into a Starbucks today, and you may not notice much connection going on: 
some customers come in chatty groups, but many others arrive in search of 
nothing more than a place to open their laptops and get some work done; in 
effect, using Starbucks not as a third but a second place — their workplace. 
Most simply grab their coffee and go, never pausing to avail themselves of the 
chairs and couches provided, while others prefer to keep human interaction to 
an absolute minimum by using the drive-through window, a resoundingly un-urban 
feature Starbucks introduced in 1994.

Starbucks’ ongoing retooling and experimentation suggests that Schultz, for 
all he talks about his company’s resurrection of the “third place”, has yet to 
hear a sufficient amount of political banter and schoolchildren’s chatter in 
his stores. Starbucks’ enormous scale and need to service the American demand 
for frictionless convenience contradicts its mission to replicate the appeal of 
continental coffee-house culture: how much of a neighbourhood-rooted venue for 
chance encounter can you provide when you have to run thousands and thousands 
of them, making sure they all do more-or-less the same thing?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F14%2Fthe-first-starbucks-coffee-shop-seattle-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-36%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F11%2F1431356926588%2F15cd2ba5-53fa-4274-9dbb-371f7378e79f-2060x1364.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20first%20Starbucks%20coffee%20shop%2C%20Seattle%20-%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2036&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F14%2Fthe-first-starbucks-coffee-shop-seattle-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-36%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20first%20Starbucks%20coffee%20shop%2C%20Seattle%20-%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2036&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F14%2Fthe-first-starbucks-coffee-shop-seattle-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-36%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F11%2F1431356926588%2F15cd2ba5-53fa-4274-9dbb-371f7378e79f-2060x1364.jpeg>
 Starbucks aspired to create what urban sociologist Ray Oldenburg first termed 
‘third places’. Photograph: Simon Crumpton/Alamy 
Still, when Starbucks moved beyond its little original store and wove itself 
into the fabric of American cities, it primed the public for subsequent waves 
of more genuinely local coffee shops that really do function as third places. 
These smaller players may accuse Starbucks of abusing its unfair advantage, 
ignoring city-planning regulations, saturating the market with loss-making 
stores in prime real estate, and setting its lawyers upon even the faintest 
hint of trademark infringement, but the fact remains that Starbucks paved the 
way by introducing an urban coffee culture into places that had never known it 
before.

Starbucks’ opening in the already coffee-soaked Tokyo in 1996 marked its first 
step outside North America. The company’s international president, Howard 
Behar, spoke at the time of losing sleep over stepping into a city with such 
entrenched competition, but now Japan has well over a thousand Starbucks stores 
all over the country.


Southdale Center: America's first shopping mall – a history of cities in 50 
buildings, day 30
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/may/06/southdale-center-america-first-shopping-mall-history-cities-50-buildings>
Of the ever-fewer nations in which Starbucks hasn’t yet established itself, 
one in particular stands out: Italy. Schultz speaks now and again of his intent 
to bring his coffee bars into the land that gave him the idea in the first 
place, but also hints that the company doesn’t see that coffee-saturated market 
as its highest priority.


Milan, for its part, now boasts several branches of Arnold Coffee, a homegrown 
chain that promises “the AmericanCoffee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/coffee> Experience” – one friendlier 
to students and laptop jockeys than what traditional Italian coffee bars offer. 
So closely did Arnold’s founders model its branding on Starbucks’ that they had 
to alter the original circular logo to avoid a lawsuit – opting instead for an 
inoffensive and decidedly un-mermaidish coffee mug in profile, which seems like 
a missed opportunity. If you can get away with a racier logo than the original 
Starbucks’ anywhere, surely you can do it in Italy.

 * Which other buildings in the world tell stories about urban history? Share 
your own pictures and descriptions with GuardianWitness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/mar/23/50-buildings-great-stories-urban-history>
, on Twitter and Instagram using #hoc50 or let us know suggestions in the 
comments below  