
1. Five Stop Mother Superior Rain <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lXGcyq2EJXI>

There’s a tendency, in 2016, to think of the Flaming Lips as rather 
soft-bellied beasts – glitter cannons, confetti explosions and laser-shooting 
hands. They’ve struggled in recent times to produce anything more striking than 
some by-the-numbers wackiness with Miley Cyrus. At their very best, though, 
Oklahoma’s finest have produced wonderful and strange pop music that, for all 
its oddness, is littered with sublime little truths. Witness the sweet spot 
they hit on this ramshackle alt-country stomp, from 1990’s In a Priest Driven 
Ambulance. “I was born the day they shot JFK / The way you look at me sucks me 
down the sidewalk / Somebody please tell this machine I’m not a machine,” 
babbles frontman Wayne Coyne, before suddenly turning into a psych-rock savant 
who’s stumbled upon some deep, dark secret. “You’re fucked if you do, and 
you’re fucked if you don’t,” he howls. He would later explain the Flaming Lips 
ethos: “We wanted to sing about shit that we truly didn’t understand, but then 
we would come up with these lines that cut right to the heart of things.” That 
was their essence: to find pockets of meaning in the most peculiar places.


2. The Sun <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oyQLBojBHwg>

The Flaming Lips were always blessed with the type of origin story that could 
have been lifted from a comic book – it’s easy to imagine flipping through the 
pages of The Adventures of Young Wayne Coyne, the tale of a normal kid from 
Oklahoma whose life was turned upside down when he spied some musical 
instruments in a church hall and, on a whim, decided to pinch them and start a 
band. But it took some time before the music lived up to the creation myth. The 
band’s first studio three albums were patchy, their line-up was constantly 
chopping and changing, and they had to wait seven years and four records for 
their first great LP,In a Priest Driven Ambulance 
<http://www.allmusic.com/album/in-a-priest-driven-ambulance-mw0000309874>, to 
arrive. By 1992’s major label debutHit to Death in the Future Head 
<http://www.allmusic.com/album/hit-to-death-in-the-future-head-mw0000071518>, 
though, Coyne and his bandmates – including Mercury Rev guitarist Jonathan 
Donahue – had learnt to marry the odd flights of fancy with canny pop nous. The 
Sun, in particular, is a splendid little thing, with its wicked, misshapen 
strings bending this way and that as guitars bloom and burst. “It’d be so kind 
to see your face in my door,” sings Coyne sweetly, and even though it’s a line 
stolen fromCarole King’s So Far Away 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1GAaWz4X4nU>, it’s used to make something 
entirely their own.

3. Moth in the Incubator <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XA9z5Jq2f_w>

She Don’t Use Jelly <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cvfxKbpoxRE> didn’t do 
for the Flaming Lips what Smells Like Teen Spirit did for Nirvana, or Creep did 
for Radiohead, but it came close: in 1993 it became their biggest hit and an 
unlikely success, eventually peaking at a career-high No 9 in the Billboard 
chart, and introducing them to a new cluster of fans. It’s hard to know what 
those same newbies would have made of the album from which it came, though.
Transmissions from the Satellite Heart 
<http://www.allmusic.com/album/transmissions-from-the-satellite-heart-mw0000098207>
 is one the Flaming Lips’ best albums; it’s also one of their strangest and 
most ambitious, where throwaway ditties about girls who think of ghosts are 
scant but there’s plenty of sonic weirdness, from the pop-crunch of Turn It On 
to the dizzy heights of Oh, My Pregnant Head. Moth in the Incubator is a 
brilliantly trippy triptych that comes on like three songs cut-and-pasted 
together: it starts with a hazy acoustic strum, then it explodes into a nasty 
intergalactic jam with Coyne droning “I’ve been born before, I’m getting used 
to it,” like a reincarnated zombie, and finally finishes with a grand flourish 
of soaring noise, like magical sparks of sound whizzing overhead.

4. Christmas at the Zoo <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y3mRC-foSZs>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DY3mRC-foSZs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DY3mRC-foSZs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DY3mRC-foSZs&media=>
One of the Flaming Lips’ most charming songs, from 1995’s noise-pop spectacular
Clouds Taste Metallic 
<http://www.allmusic.com/album/clouds-taste-metallic-mw0000645557>, with a 
premise so cosy and heartwarming it could be turned into a children’s picture 
book. It’s Christmas Eve, and a young Coyne decides to spread some Yuletide 
cheer to the local zoo by freeing all the animals. There’s just one snag: the 
critters don’t want his charity because, even though they’re miserable, they’d 
rather organise their own jailbreak and save themselves. “The elephants, 
orangutans / All the birds and kangaroos,” sings Coyne, over a sweet Beach 
Boys-like melody, underpinned by fuzzy, sludgy guitars and the sound of cymbals 
crashing like Christmas bells. “All said, ‘Thanks but no thanks, man / But to 
be concerned is good’.” In some parallel universe, listening to it every year 
on 24 December is as cherished a part of the Christmas ritual as watching The 
Snowman.

5. Thirty-Five Thousand Feet of Despair  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6aEW37JIOX0>

Guitarist Roland Jones quit the Lips a year after the release of Clouds Taste 
Metallic. When he left, he took the idea of a traditional, guitar-driven sound 
with him, leaving the rest of the band to find a new purpose. Their solution was
 Zaireeka <http://www.allmusic.com/album/zaireeka-mw0000027784>. Inspired by 
the band’s old Parking Lot Experiments, in which Coyne had fans blast 40-odd 
cassette tapes from their car stereos at different times to create one long, 
perfectly-synced symphony, it’s one of the grandest follies ever: a single 
album split over four separate CDs, designed to be played simultaneously on 
four separate stereo systems. NME hailed it as a “work of genius” in its 10/10 
review; it’s also still just one of a handful of albums to geta 0.0 score from 
Pitchfork 
<http://web.archive.org/web/20020404172254/www.pitchforkmedia.com/record-reviews/f/flaming-lips/zaireeka.shtml>
. Look past the outlandish concept and you can find the first roots of the new 
Flaming Lips beginning to take shape, largely thanks to drummer Steven Drozd 
slowly shifting into the role of multi-instrumentalist. Thirty-Five Thousand 
Feet of Despair, for example, is still fantastic: a majestic mixture of 
throbbing strings, trembling piano and the terrifying roar of a jet engine as 
Coyne laments a pilot who’s “gone insane” and hangs himself in a bathroom 
mid-flight.
 Listen to 10 of the best Flaming Lips tracks on Spotify 
6. Race for the Prize <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bs56ygZplQA>

The Soft Bulletin 
<http://www.allmusic.com/album/the-soft-bulletin-mw0000667374>, released in 
1999, still stands as a pinnacle of what pop music can be at its most magical 
and inventive, an album rattling with wondrous sounds and ideas you’ll want to 
hold on to forever. On one hand, it’s their most sonically breathtaking work, 
built on otherworldly noises and instrumentation that sound as if they’re being 
beamed from a future disco in an orbiting space-station; on the other, it’s 
their most moving and vulnerable, too, with Coyne finding more frailty than 
ever before in his outlandish ideas. Race for the Prize, a touching tale of two 
scientists prepared to sacrifice themselves and find a cure that will save the 
world, is a belter: just listen, now, to the giant crack of those distorted 
drums, that giddy piano riff, the rush of those shrieking synthesised strings 
that fizz in your synapses like sherbert being poured on your brain. And then 
Coyne, somehow, touches looks past the HG Wells-like set-up to hit just the 
right nerve and bring you back down to Earth. “Theirs is to win / If it kills 
them,” he yelps. “They’re just humans with wives and children.” It’s four-odd 
minutes of glorious, perfect psych-pop, and a bittersweet sci-fi masterwork to 
boot.

7. Feeling Yourself Disintegrate <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l8IP3S8dxU8>

The Soft Bulletin has so many special moments it could easily half-fill a 10 
of the Best on its own. But on an album where nearly every song’s a gem, from 
the brittle beauty of The Spiderbite Song to The Spark That Bled’s gorgeous 
six-minute symphony, Feeling Yourself Disintegrate feels particularly precious. 
Here, Coyne floats high above the everyday muck and, cushioned by soft pillows 
of celestial synths and strings, realising that his body’s been slowly breaking 
apart ever since he was born; that all life is destined to die. “Love in our 
life is just too valuable / Oh to feel for even a second without it / But life 
without death is just impossible / Oh, to realise something is ending within 
us,” he sings gently, and for just a fleeting second, he’s grabbed hold of 
nirvana. In slightly grubbier fashion, The Soft Bulletin helped Warners see the 
light, too: after years of bemoaning the band’s lack of commercial success, 
they suddenly had a mainstream breakthrough act on their books. Their next 
project would be even bigger.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjrYHavAOzkI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjrYHavAOzkI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjrYHavAOzkI&media=>
8. Fight Test <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fye1XtXQn9s>

By 2002, The Flaming Lips weren’t cult weirdos anymore. If The Soft Bulletin 
had ended their status as beloved indie fuck-ups by turning them into a 
mainstream band, thenYoshimi Battles the Pink Robots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2002/jul/12/popandrock.artsfeatures> helped 
establish them as a legitimate big deal. As ever, strangeness abounds, and the 
album’s quasi-concept gives a sci-fi bent to plenty of the songs: the first 
instalment of the two-part title track is bubblegum sci-fi, a catchy-as-hell 
ode to a young Japanese girl who brings down some killer androids; elsewhere, 
One More Robot/Sympathy 3000-21 finds those same machines developing pangs of 
human emotions, like a trippier take on Isaac Asimov’s short story I, Robot. 
But, as with The Soft Bulletin, there’s a real heart to Coyne’s lyrics that 
stops it from ever feeling too trivial. Fight Test takes the the melody of Cat 
Stevens’ weepyFather and Son <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vdMPuMeTxzY> but, 
courtesy of some splendid squelchy synths and lovely acoustic guitar, turns it 
into a meditation on self-respect and standing up for what’s right, as Coyne 
regrets not duffing up his ex’s new beau. “For to lose I could accept,” he 
sings. “But to surrender? I just wept and regretted this moment.” The prettiest 
space-rock endorsement of throwing down fisticuffs you’ll ever hear.

9. Do You Realize?? <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lPXWt2ESxVY>

It’s previously been said that Do You Realize?? is quite similar to John 
Lennon’s Imagine, which in turn is like saying a T rex is a bit like a chicken: 
they might share some DNA, but that’s about it. Because while Imagine clucks 
around in its coop preaching soppy sanctimony over a hum-drum piano, Do You 
Realize?? is tilting back its big, beastly head and roaring magnificently at 
the sky above. It’s an anthem for the atheist generation: there’s no afterlife 
and we’re all going to be food for the worms eventually, but that doesn’t stop 
any of this from being beautiful. “Do you realize that everyone you know, 
someday, will die?” asks a wide-eyed Coyne, like a man who’s just clocked what 
carpe diem really means after chugging down some hallucinogens, and then 
suddenly there’s a giant wave of woozy noise that’s engulfing him and 
everything else, as bells chime and strings soar, and an angelic choir 
materialises out of thin air. Coyne has since described it as one of his 
proudest creations, stating: “A part of you makes it and you don’t really think 
that much of it. Then someone comes up and says ‘We used that song at my 
mother’s funeral.’ You can say it’s just a dumb song, or you can say, ‘I 
understand.’”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4r_xJO_s-mE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4r_xJO_s-mE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4r_xJO_s-mE&media=>
10. Watching the Planets <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TMCNhRmye2w>

What’s really strange about last year’s Miley Cyrus & Her Dead Petz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/06/miley-cyrus-dead-petz-kitty-empire-review-wayne-coyne>
 experiment, a 23-track album of wafty psych on which Coyne served as co-writer 
and co-producer, is just how drearily banal it is: there are songs about 
lactating nipples (Milky Milk Milk) and odes to smoking weed (Dooo It!), but it 
all sounds so safe. There have been other spots over the past 10 years, too, 
when the Lips have felt in danger of turning from fearless freaks into cuddly 
crusties; a group who have grown wacky in such a predictable, mild-mannered way 
you half-expect to see Coyne onstage sipping from a “You don’t have to be mad 
to work here, but it helps!” mug. But you doubt their capacity to still make 
something thrilling at your peril. 2009’sEmbryonic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/oct/08/the-flaming-lips-cd-review> is 
the Flaming Lips at their darkest and most dangerous: an album of evil noise 
and terrifying visions. Even the pop singles are odd: on I Can Be a Frog, Yeah 
Yeah Yeahs singer Karen O ribbits, growls and meows her way through a series of 
creepy animal impressions that’ll stop you from sleeping. She’s also one of the 
angry mob on the eerie din of Watching the Planets, on which Coyne makes like a 
cult leader waiting for the rapture. “Oh oh oh, burning the Bible tonight!” he 
chants manically, backed by spooky piano and pounding war-drums, as he spurs 
his followers on in some demented Wicker Man-like ritual. A nightmarish 
reminder that you should never get too close to The Flaming Lips; even if 
they’re tamer than they once were, they’ve still got teeth.
 