
Last Wednesday 11 green leather seats were placed behind a semi-circular bench 
in court number one of the supreme court. Never before had 11 chairs been 
needed. The court has never before sat “en banc” – as a full bench of judges.

The seats were tagged with yellow Post-it stickers, the judges’ surnames 
scrawled on them so nobody could mistake where they were to sit. A teenage boy 
from a Belfast grammar, here on a school trip, stared at the stickers.Neuberger 
(David), president of the court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/dec/04/david-neuberger-brexit-judge-supreme-court-president-article-50-appeal-judgment>
, in the middle;his deputy, Hale (Brenda) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/oct/20/lady-hale-criminal-courts-charge-access-justice>
, to his right;Sumption (Jonathan) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/aug/06/jonathan-sumption-brain-of-britain>
, another well-known name, three down on the left. “Why is it the judges can 
overturn Brexit?” the teenager blurted out. His teacher wrung her hands. Had 
the boy paid more attention he’d know that judges had done no such thing. They 
are not concerned with politics but with upholding the rule of law.

The point of law at issue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/parliament-must-trigger-brexit-high-court-rules>
 – to be examined again when the government’s appeal starts on Monday – is not
whether Brexit can be triggered under article 50 of the Lisbon treaty, but how. 
What is the legal route?

The government claims it can act alone, without consulting parliament, citing 
prerogative powers wielded by the crown until the civil war, which they claim 
can still be used when international treaties are concerned.

Courts and judges are under attack around the world, as the populist surge 
spreads and accepted norms are discarded

Those challenging the government accept that article 50 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/22/what-could-happen-if-the-article-50-legal-challenge-is-successful>
 is part of an international treaty, but argue that it is embedded in British 
law by the European Communities Act of 1972. Because of this, and because 
withdrawal directly affects the rights of British citizens, only parliament can 
trigger it. It was to preserve those rights thatin 1648 parliament ordered the 
king’s head to be chopped off 
<http://www.historylearningsite.co.uk/stuart-england/the-trial-and-execution-of-charles-i/>
.

When the high court ruled against the government last month, Brexiteers, led 
by Nigel Farage’s Ukip, erupted in furore, and the Daily Mail declared the 
judges“enemies of the people” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/04/enemies-of-the-people-british-newspapers-react-judges-brexit-ruling>
 standing in the way of Brexit. And yet not only were the judges not 
obstructing Brexit, they were giving more power to parliament – which is what 
the out camp had called for throughout its campaign.

This week’s hearing is perhaps the most important constitutional case in 140 
years. It has a significance far wider than Brexit. Not since1876, when law 
lords first sat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/oct/01/supreme-court-law-reform>
, have judges been asked to rule so broadly on who in Britain wields power. 
Unless the justices hold the line, asserting the sovereignty of parliament, 
tyranny of the majority threatens, according to human rights lawyers. “That 
tyranny today is embodied in the hyenas of the Daily Mail and the populist 
politicians both here and in the US, “ said Lord Lester, staunch campaigner for 
the removal of all crown powers. “I say make parliament the king.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fparliament-supreme-court-judges-protest-us-brexiteers-media-war-on-judiciary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9899301ffb45561ceca8279659e8eeb281024c78%2F0_20_3449_4311%2F3449.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20judges%20protect%20us.%20It%E2%80%99s%20time%20to%20stand%20up%20for%20them%20%7C%20Sarah%20Helm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fparliament-supreme-court-judges-protest-us-brexiteers-media-war-on-judiciary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20judges%20protect%20us.%20It%E2%80%99s%20time%20to%20stand%20up%20for%20them%20%7C%20Sarah%20Helm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fparliament-supreme-court-judges-protest-us-brexiteers-media-war-on-judiciary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9899301ffb45561ceca8279659e8eeb281024c78%2F0_20_3449_4311%2F3449.jpg>
 The Daily Mail front page branding the high court judges who ruled against the 
government ‘enemies of the people’ standing in the way of Brexit. Photograph: 
Daily Mail 
But it is precisely because the case is so important that the onslaught on the 
judges by the Mail, as well as the Murdoch press and Ukip, has been so extreme. 
Their attacks – made uglier because the judges cannot answer back – stem from 
the fear that if the supreme court upholds the earlier ruling, it might 
undermine the hard Brexit they wish for.

In a sense, these attacks have been no surprise – they are a continuation of 
the intemperate leave campaign’s stirring up of distrust of the liberal elite 
and its institutions. And the judges, though not all liberal, are certainly all 
part of the elite: with only one woman on the bench and no ethnic minorities, 
they have a long way to go to be truly representative.

Even so there is a wider context, because courts and judges are under attack 
around the world, as the populist surge spreads and accepted norms are 
discarded. Donald Trump plans to fill three potential vacancies in thesupreme 
court with rightwing ideologues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-legacy-right-wing-supreme-court-civil-rights>
. And the international criminal court is being undermined by thedesertion of a 
number of African countries, led by South Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/oct/27/african-revolt-international-criminal-court-gambia>
.

High on the Brexiteers’ complaints is that the judiciary is unaccountable. The 
Mail proposes that judges be elected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/nov/07/does-the-daily-mail-really-want-the-people-to-elect-judges>
, but this entirely misses the point of the British system, in which the 
judiciary, the third arm of government, must remain independent to enforce the 
rule of law without fear or favour.

This is not to say, however, that the judges can’t be accountable. In their 
own way they are. These are men and women who, as one lawyer put it, “deal in 
words” – analysing and weighing the words of earlier judges, and adapting their 
meaning for today. One could say therefore that they are answerable to judges 
past, to whose gowns were once cut from the same cloth and to whose words they 
owe a duty of care when considering or reproducing them – such as Sir Edward 
Coke, who in a 1610 case insisted: “The king hath no prerogative but that which 
the law of the land allows him.” Quoted in the high court judgment, Sir Edward 
will no doubt be heard again this week, as his guidance is sought by the 
supreme court.

David Neuberger: the judge with the nation’s eager eyes upon him | Observer 
profile
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/dec/04/david-neuberger-brexit-judge-supreme-court-president-article-50-appeal-judgment>
The justices are embracing transparency as a way of being accountable too. It 
is now nearly 10 years since they left their home in the dingy committee rooms 
of the House of Lords to move into a rebranded supreme court building. This 
week’s hearing will be live-streamed on four channels, with an internal video 
link for those who cannot find a seat in the court itself. This openness may 
have increased the scrutiny of and hostility towards the judges themselves. 
Even so, transparency has been a good thing.

Though the attacks have been extraordinary and unprecedented, there are signs 
that the judges will not be cowed. Sitting “en banc” they have strength in 
numbers. They cannot be accused of fixing the result by selecting the most 
pro-European among them to hear the case. A carpenter has even extended the 
bench to make sure the 11th judge can squeeze in behind.

Once they have heard both sides, they will deliberate in private. Neuberger 
will give each judge a say, starting with the most recently appointed - those 
sitting on the outside edge of the bench - and working his way in. When the 
degree of consensus is clear, one will write the draft of the judgment, while 
others with dissenting views will write theirs. If possible, Neuberger will 
then seek to close the differences, achieving unanimity.

Hale and Neuberger are liberals and will be wary of overturning the earlier 
ruling, especially given the seniority of the judges in that case. Some say the 
two Scottish judges could be dissenters, as might Sumption, a known 
conservative. If he dissents, his arguments could be of sufficient intellectual 
calibre to win others round.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fparliament-supreme-court-judges-protest-us-brexiteers-media-war-on-judiciary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F399ee959785e0198b1b2e590e6ae965a30654ac9%2F0_164_5315_3191%2F5315.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20judges%20protect%20us.%20It%E2%80%99s%20time%20to%20stand%20up%20for%20them%20%7C%20Sarah%20Helm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fparliament-supreme-court-judges-protest-us-brexiteers-media-war-on-judiciary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20judges%20protect%20us.%20It%E2%80%99s%20time%20to%20stand%20up%20for%20them%20%7C%20Sarah%20Helm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fparliament-supreme-court-judges-protest-us-brexiteers-media-war-on-judiciary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F399ee959785e0198b1b2e590e6ae965a30654ac9%2F0_164_5315_3191%2F5315.jpg>
 The supreme court judges, pictured this year: Back row from left: Lord Toulson 
(now retired), Lord Carnwath, Lord Sumption, Lord Wilson, Lord Reed, Lord 
Hughes, Lord Hodge. Front row: Lord Kerr, Lady Hale, Lord Neuberger, Lord 
Mance, Lord Clarke Photograph: supreme court 
On the other hand, Sumption is also a medieval historian who knows how 
painstakingly the country has constructed its rule of law. It is said that 
Sumption has been outraged by the attacks on judges, and has been heard to warn 
that the very political order is in danger of collapse. In that case, he may 
prove the most independent of all.

As the 11 justices take their seats they will certainly be prepared for more 
attacks from the Mail and others. On Friday came thepaper’s worst salvo yet 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3995754/The-judges-people-week-11-unaccountable-individuals-consider-case-help-thwart-majority-Brexit-Mail-makes-no-apology-revealing-views-links-Europe.html>
, a carefully crafted set of slurs about the judges and their families, with 
sinister hints that far worse was yet to come. Saturday brought more external 
pressure as the critical arguments to be made to the supreme court by Jeremy 
Wright, the attorney general,were aired via an already hostile press 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/12/03/government-warns-brexit-vote-must-not-relegated-footnote-ahead/>
.

This is unfair, and dangerous, for it is a testament to the judges’ 
independence that nobody really knows how they will rule. They have seats and 
stage directions, but the words will be entirely their own. The attorney 
general complained that the high court rendered Brexit itself a footnote. That 
is indeed how the supreme court should view the week ahead, for the stakes are 
now so much higher than Brexit.

As they rule, one hopes their words will demonstrate the true position. The 
independent judiciary is far from being the people’s enemy. It is – in fact – 
the people’s protector: our truest friend.

• This article was amended on 5 December 2016 to correct the date of Sir 
Edward Coke’s 1610 high court judgment on the king’s prerogative
 