
Pregnant with potential meanings, the title of the xx 
<http://thexx.info/tourannounce/>’s immersive third album gradually reveals 
itself over the course of 10 new songs. It is not accusative – “I see you, 
stealing that guitar sound” – but more in keeping with the ongoing themes of 
this minimal, intimate band; more consolatory. “I see you”, this album says, 
“as you are.”

Prefaced by a series of more outgoing tracks 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=blJKoXWlqJk>, I See You has been touted as the 
xx’s least insular album thus far. If Jamie Smith’s solo outing of 2015,In 
Colour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/24/jamie-xx-in-colour-review-larging-it-for-introverts>
, constituted a successful experiment with shades beyond the minimal monochrome 
that originally defined the band, thenI See You finds them a little gaudier of 
palette. Using samples for the first time, they have tweaked their sound in 
myriad ways, while still retaining the sense of proximity within spaciousness 
for which they are famous. You could say it was more commercial, if the 
mainstream hadn’t been biting the xx’s style relentlessly. (“Justin Bieber is 
doing tropical house,” noted Smith in arecent interview 
<http://pitchfork.com/features/cover-story/9997-ill-be-your-mirror-how-the-xx-found-themselvesand-their-vibrant-new-soundin-each-other/>
.)

The first song opens with a Caribbean horn fanfare, the shock of which will 
have you running to the track-listing to see if you haven’t accidentally hit 
play on a different band. Sinuous and garagey, Dangerous sounds like it could 
have come from Smith’s solo outing, and finds singers Oliver Sim and Romy 
Madley Croft sharing lines such as “I couldn’t care less/ If they call us 
reckless.”
Listen to Say Something by the xx. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wl9tcrIeJ48> 
Likewise, the bittersweet Say Something Loving 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/hear-the-xxs-shimmering-new-single-say-something-loving-w458617>
 is – in xx money, at least – an out-and-out pop song, with a nod to Sade’sThe 
Sweetest Taboo <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kcPc18SG6uA> (“Don’t let it 
slip away!”). Smith’s signature steel pan arpeggio sound is there, but – pace, 
Bieber – transcribed on to keyboards. As ever, Madley Croft and Sim – childhood 
best friends – enact a loving boy-girl relationship in which sex is absent but 
present, just directed offstage. Lips is a particularly sensual outing for this 
most glacial of bands. Throughout the album runs a subplot in which one sense 
takes precedence: that of seeing and being seen.

The three-way relationships that sustain the band were sorely tested over the 
course of recording. Sims, in particular, has stepped back from partying as a 
result. (“Does the night chase me?” he wonders on Replica).

Located at the heart of the album, Performance finds Madley Croft “putting on 
a show” and “playing hide and seek” while Smith’s scything keyboard violin 
sound etches zigzags above her head. The album closer, a gospelly piano-led 
duet called Test Me, is more abrupt. A ghostly analogue curlicue tracks a sonar 
bloop. “You look”, murmurs Madley Croft, “but you never see.”
 