
On a building site gazed over by the latticed middle finger that is Centre 
Point <https://centrepointlondon.com/the-new-centre-point/>, Amy Lamé 
<http://www.lgbtarchive.uk/wiki/Amy_Lam%C3%A9>, writer, entertainer, sometime 
Pink List National Treasure and recentlyappointed 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-london-37872501> as London’s first “night 
tsar” by Sadiq Khan, explained to a hi-vised, hard-hatted showbiz camera crew 
why flattening a patch of aconservation area 
<http://file:///Users/davehill/Downloads/Denmark%20street.pdf> has been a good 
idea. “This is incredibly exciting,” she enthused: “We’ve got the 
infrastructure. London’s changing and having a night tsar is part of that. What 
a wonderful opportunity.”

That infrastructure is Crossrail. That opportunity is to be most conspicuously 
realised as what is shown in CGIs as aglass and gold-coloured construction 
<http://www.orms.co.uk/news/new-grassroots-music-venue-for-denmark-street/> to 
be calledthe NOW building 
<http://www.charcoalblue.com/index.php/projects/being-built/st-giles-circus-london.html>
: perhaps NOW as in POW and in WOW. It will grace what site developer 
Consolidated Developments hassuggested 
<http://www.test05.thehuntartcompany.com/st-giles-circus-london-w1/> will 
become “the equivalent of New York’s Times Square in London”, a cultural piazza 
atSt Giles Circus <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/St_Giles_Circus>, beckoning 
from the teeming,expanding 
<http://www.crossrail.co.uk/route/stations/tottenham-court-road/> Tottenham 
Court Road transport junction where Oxford Street and Charing Cross Road meet.

There will be a ground floor “urban gallery” hosting exhibitions, product 
launches, award ceremonies, conferences and fashion shows and a “sky bar”. The 
development as a whole will include a hotel, shops, some intermediate 
affordable housing and, somewhere in the mix, what isdescribed 
<http://www.charcoalblue.com/index.php/projects/being-built/st-giles-circus-london.html>
 by one of the scheme’s consultants as “the London home of the Outernet”, this 
being a “a radical new technology-driven marketing, entertainment and 
information service housed in a super-flexible, digitally enabled streetscape” 
to be “wrapped around the main exit from the new Tottenham Court Road Crossrail 
station and spreading into Soho”. Below ground there will be a brand new 
800-capacity hall for live music and other events. This last in particular 
pleases tsar Lamé.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fdavehillblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fthe-future-of-denmark-street-rebirth-or-dystopia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ddc59648a26267291a122d5a448f13090fe5659%2F0_302_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20future%20of%20Denmark%20Street%3A%20rebirth%20opportunity%20or%20dystopian%20hell%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fdavehillblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fthe-future-of-denmark-street-rebirth-or-dystopia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20future%20of%20Denmark%20Street%3A%20rebirth%20opportunity%20or%20dystopian%20hell%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fdavehillblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fthe-future-of-denmark-street-rebirth-or-dystopia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ddc59648a26267291a122d5a448f13090fe5659%2F0_302_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
 Amy Lamé among the hard hats. Photograph: Dave Hill for the Guardian 
“It’s time to change the conversation about the night-time economy, and start 
thinking about the benefits it brings,” she explained. “This is living proof of 
what we can do.” Lamé’s job is to protect and promote nocturnal fun. She is 
well aware thatLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> has lost a lot of 
music venues in recent years – around 50, some 35% of them – due largely to 
soaring property prices inducing owners to shut down and sell up. The coming of 
Crossrail has intensified the trend. The Astoria on Charing Cross Road has been 
demolished to make way for it. Smaller nearby clubs have closed.

Given all this, especially the new performance space, you might wonder why the 
St Giles Circus project has inspired a lot of hostility and bad press, in 
particular from musicians and music lovers. There was a clue just a few yards 
from where Lamé held court. Preparing the site has entailed knocking down 
buildings that faced on to the narrow part of St Giles High Street except for 
their facades. Squatting against the backdrop of these propped-up remnants and 
braced with metal struts like an accident survivor in intensive care, is an 
early 18th century blacksmith’s forge that until last year had formed the stage 
of the 12 Bar Club at 26 Denmark Street, a short avenue of music history known 
as London’s Tin Pan Alley. The12 Bar <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/12_Bar_Club>
 resided there for more than 20 years, before relocating to the Holloway Road 
in 2015 (and sadly not lasting there for long). Its remnant will be embedded 
within a new small “grassroots” performance space beside the main subterranean 
hall. “Living proof,” in Lamé’s words, “that it won’t all be shiny and new 
here”.

Her need to give this reassurance was telling. The salvaging of the 12 Bar 
relic,hoisted through space and time 
<http://www.engenuiti.com/item/269/MOVING-THE-SMITHY-AT-ST-GILES-CIRCUS> as if 
by some preservationist Tardis, shows how sacred to some the old place was. But 
it will not still the fears of those most perturbed by what is happening to the 
creativity cluster at the heart of the capital, whose main avenue Denmark 
Street has been for a century. For them, Lamé’s upbeat promise cannot 
compensate for the erosion of something less tangible yet more substantial than 
any digitally-enabled streetscape. They might call it the spirit of rock’n’roll.

Dystopian hell

There’s a pub called The Angel on St Giles High Street, just beyond Denmark 
Street. There I met Henry Scott-Irvine, who got straight to the point. “What is 
special and unique about rock music is that people like it to be scuzzy and old 
and with sticky floors and black walls in small spaces where young bands can 
start,” he said.

An experienced music documentary maker and researcher, Scott-Irvine started 
his career during a summer break from film school on Ken Loach’sRiff-Raff 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Riff-Raff_(1991_film)>, working at 7 Denmark St 
synchronising clapper boards <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clapperboard> 
(“they don’t do that anymore”). He loves its history of guitar shops and the 
rooms above them housing a beehive of agents, managers, publishers, 
instrument-repairers, all making a living from one performing art or another. 
He loved going to the12 Bar Club <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/12_Bar_Club> – 
“I saw Jeff Buckley there, in 1994. It was one of the finest gigs I’ve seen in 
my life” – and is now the leading light of a campaign called Save Tin Pan 
Alley. He fears that peril has been impending since November 2013, whenCamden 
council gave permission 
<http://www.out-law.com/en/articles/2013/november/camden-approves-st-giles-circus-redevelopment/>
 to the West End firm Consolidated Developments to hollow out the one-acre site 
to the north of it: “I could see that money was rolling in and creativity was 
rolling out. And I wanted to fight it.”

Others felt the same way. The club was squatted until Consolidated took legal 
recourse. By then, familiar battle lines had been drawn and familiar protests 
were being heard. As London booms, we hear them about Soho as a whole and from 
everywhere, about pubs and bookshops and street markets and football grounds. 
The cry is that greed and gentrification are turning London into a sanitised, 
corporatised “playground for the rich” and robbing the city of its soul.

Scott-Irvine is firmly in that camp. He anticipates the coming of the NOW and 
the Outernet with horror. “It’s dystopian hell. It’s a monolith for brands that 
people don’t even want, if you ask me – that’s what’s driving them. It will end 
up dead like the Elephant and Castle shopping centre did and the worst aspects 
of Le Corbusier. Yet here we have it, in the new millennium. It’s just a box.”

He’s made every effort to hold back the tide, annoying Consolidated, nagging 
Camden council,raising a petition 
<https://www.change.org/p/don-t-bin-tin-pan-alley>, speaking in court, 
generating publicity (this article is just the latest example) and tracking 
down a host of past and present Denmark Street inhabitants and luminaries for a 
film about the street to be called Tin Pan Alley Tales, which has just 
succeeded inraising the £21,600 it needs 
<https://www.phundee.com/reward/campaign/tin-pan-alley-tales-the-film>. He 
knows as well as anyone the roll call of agents, publishers, writers, producers 
and performers whose endeavours form the potent Denmark Street lore. These 
range from the Rolling Stones, who recorded their first album there in 1964, to 
Jimmy Kennedy, the man who wrote The Hokey Cokey and the Teddy Bears’ Picnic, 
to Charlie Chaplin, who co-wrote the lyrics to Smile in the street at the 
office of Keith Prowse in 1954.

He’s happy with what has become of La Giaconda, originally a cafe where David 
Bowie <https://www.theguardian.com/music/davidbowie> and scores of other stars 
and dreamers used to hang out and now a restaurant, but he hates the thinning 
out of the guitar and other instrument shops and what he says is an ongoing 
exodus of the sorts of people who’ve made the London music industry sing. That 
singing is certainly struggling to be heard just now, drowned by the sound of 
heavy vehicles and machinery as parts of the insides of old Denmark Street 
addresses are gouged out, refurbished and converted, some to be transformed 
into flats.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fdavehillblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fthe-future-of-denmark-street-rebirth-or-dystopia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d54c2aa4623c35752bdf0239a721542eef5115a%2F0_302_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20future%20of%20Denmark%20Street%3A%20rebirth%20opportunity%20or%20dystopian%20hell%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fdavehillblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fthe-future-of-denmark-street-rebirth-or-dystopia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20future%20of%20Denmark%20Street%3A%20rebirth%20opportunity%20or%20dystopian%20hell%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fdavehillblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fthe-future-of-denmark-street-rebirth-or-dystopia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d54c2aa4623c35752bdf0239a721542eef5115a%2F0_302_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
 One of Denmark Street’s guitar shops. Photograph: Dave Hill for the Guardian 
Amy Lamé and City Hall think Camden has placed enough conditions on the 
development,initially approved 
<http://www.out-law.com/en/articles/2013/november/camden-approves-st-giles-circus-redevelopment/>
 in November 2013, to ensure that Denmark Street retains its musical character. 
Under a provision called Tin Pan Alley Uses, protections have been negotiated 
for existing retailers in the properties Consolidated owns (which is most of 
them) and requirements written in that new tenants for any units becoming 
vacant must be reserved for businesses conforming to Tin Pan Alley Uses for six 
months.

Such measures did not previously exist. But Scott-Irvine doesn’t think them 
sufficiently strong: “They are vague enough to be open to interpretation. And 
rents will go up. They’re not going to multiply by five, but they will go up 
incrementally.” He suspects that individual rent levels are tailored to the 
landlord’s desire to see certain tenants moved out and otherwise retained for 
now, giving an impression that, so to speak, the beat goes on, but which will 
ultimately prove to be cosmetic. “It’s developer chess,” he says. “They’ve got 
every move worked out.”

Very little about the St Giles Circus development comforts him, despite 
Consolidated’s insistence that both its heart and its business headsee the value
 
<http://www.mi-pro.co.uk/news/read/denmark-st-developer-responds-to-tin-pan-alley-preservation-petition/018956>
 of retaining the area’s special qualities. The company’s owner, Laurence 
Kirschel,told London writer Peter Watts in 2014 
<https://greatwen.com/2014/08/26/denmark-street-and-regeneration-slow-death-or-triumphant-rebirth/>
 that he could have got rid of the guitar shops years ago had he wanted to and 
that the relatively low rents the tenants had been paying meant that some of 
the buildings were becoming dilapidated. Will the St Giles Circus scheme, as 
Watts put it, “create something new that doesn’t kill the spirit of the old?”

Iconoclasts and conservationists

The allure of Denmark Street has lasted long and travelled far. I first felt 
it years before I went there, thanks to self-immersing in pop music during my 
small town adolescence far from the capital. My sense of connection with it has 
a further, far more recent, dimension too. My youngest son bought a guitar 
there when he was in a teenage band and my youngest daughter auditioned for a 
film role in the office of a casting director at number 20, above one of the 
guitar shops (andgot the part 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Swallows_and_Amazons_(2016_film)>). 

My children kindly indulged me as I imparting my bits of knowledge in the hope 
that, if nothing else, I could convey something of the magic that can brew in a 
city’s covert clusters, the backwaters of romance, difference and disrepute 
that the mainstream passes by. But the problem now for Denmark Street might be 
that the mainstream is at last devouring it fully, just as alternative music 
itself, be it punk, or skiffle, ordisco 
<https://thump.vice.com/en_us/article/steve-fabus-qa>, or psychedelic rock, or 
reggae, or indie or folk, has always been commodified for the masses. What was 
Denmark Street itself when in its prime if not a corridor of such popular 
commerce?

My fellow Guardian writer Simon Jenkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/simonjenkins>, though a London heritage 
defender and critic of Crossrail,wrote in the Evening Standard 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/comment/comment/simon-jenkins-it-has-a-great-history-but-the-music-has-died-in-tin-pan-alley-9927983.html>
 two years ago that the case for saving Denmark Street was a hard to make. 
Regretfully, he called it “a mere ghost of its past”, largely because the very 
making of music is different nowadays. He was “all for treating as historic the 
place where Pete Townshend bought his first Fender Stratocaster”, but doubted 
there are enough would-be, modern-day Townshends to keep Denmark Street the way 
it was halfway through the last century. The same can be said of recording and 
releasing music, things people can now do in their bedrooms.

And there’s more to music in London than Denmark Street. Some defenders of its 
milieu have looked young, but my son had never heard of it until I took him 
there. The band he was in rehearsed in a cheap studio in Stoke Newington, 
recorded in a smarter one in Forest Hill and played gigs at, among other 
places, theBorderline <http://theborderlinelondon.com/>, the Nambucca 
<https://www.list.co.uk/place/62256-nambucca/>, the George Tavern 
<http://www.thegeorgetavern.co.uk/about_02.html>, the O2 Academy 
<https://www.academymusicgroup.com/o2academyislington/academyislington> and 
Upper Street’s Hope and Anchor, not sticky-floored or smoky as it was in the 
punk and pub rock era when I went there, butstill in business 
<https://www.ents24.com/london-events/hope-and-anchor-and-the-hope-theatre> a 
generation on. As for core Soho’s creative industries, most of my daughter’s 
acting endeavours involve auditions in its tucked away corners orADR tweaks 
<http://creativeskillset.org/job_roles/3835_adr_automated_dialogue_replacement_dialogue_editors>
 in its warren of post-production studios. It’s not a dead zone yet.

As ever, there are ironies in all this: Henry Scott-Irvine wants musicians and 
their industry to buy leases in Denmark Street and turn it into a “music 
heritage zone <http://savetpa.tk/about/>”. Despite its current, blighted look 
he’s yet to accept that the music has to die and is understandably pleased that 
former Sex Pistols Glen Matlock and Paul Cook, who lived on Denmark Street for 
a while, are among those who’ve wished him well. But see how yesterday’s 
iconoclasts have become today’s conservationists. There are also other points 
of view: while the area’s morenefarious activities 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-london-19581407> mean gritty authenticity 
to some, to others, not least some local residents, they are menacing 
criminality.

Crossrail 1, St Giles 0: farewell to one of London's last wild corners
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/jan/07/crossrail-st-giles-arewell-london-last-wild-corners>
The space Consolidated is now changing, which takes in Denmark Place and 
Andrew Borde Street, has long been earmarked for a major makeover. Camden 
produced adevelopment brief 
<http://file:///Users/davehill/Downloads/appendix6-denmark-place-brief.pdf> way 
back in 2004, to “ensure a comprehensive approach to development of the land at 
Denmark Place” and “maximise the benefits”. Phil Jones, the council’s cabinet 
member for regeneration, transport and planning, sticks up for the scheme. 
“London is changing and we want renewal, we want growth and we want jobs,” he 
says. He points out that local authorities can only do so much in the face of 
global economic forces that drive development, and that just saying “no” to 
developers isn’t an option for long, given their right to repeatedly appeal. 
“What we can do is to try to shape those forces of change so that some solid 
public benefits are built in.”

Those benefits or otherwise will, of course, be in the eyes of different 
beholders of the St Giles Circus project as it unfolds. Will it be bland and 
expensive or an engine of evolution, helping this celebrated niche of central 
London be reborn for a new age? Amy Lamé, whose exploits include chairing the 
successful campaign to save the Royal Vauxhall Tavern, a famous gay venue in 
south London, from demolition, is clearly hopeful. Mayor Khan, who has pledged 
to protect music and other cultural assets, such as cinemas, from threats posed 
by redevelopment and has set up a commission to support night time industries, 
will hope that this proves justified.

Henry Scott-Irvine, whose film looks worthy of your support 
<https://www.phundee.com/reward/campaign/tin-pan-alley-tales-the-film> whether 
or not you share his views, remains to be convinced. He does, though, allow 
that if Laurence Kirschel’s firm delivers all it’s promising there ought to be 
a statue in his honour. Perhaps we shouldn’t rule it out. After all, some 
people have even learned to love Centre Point.
 