2016 rainfall 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-23T14:34:39/embed.html>
The first half of 2016 was unsettled and quite wet. The winter of 2015-16 was 
the equal mildest on record in England and Wales and it continued the recent 
trend to mild, quite stormy winters. June was notably dull and wet in southern 
Britain. The second half of the year saw more settled weather, especially in 
the south where a sequence of dry months lasted from July to October. Autumn 
was often fine with quiet “blocked” weather. The year as a whole was mild with 
rainfall close to average.

Temperatures


The provisional average Central England temperature was 10.4C, 0.4C above the 
1981-2010 average. This is 1.2C above the average for the whole 357-year 
series. Regional temperature anomalies were similar except for East Anglia and 
South East England where the anomaly (from 1981-2010) was around 0.7C. The only 
months below the average temperature were March (England and Wales), April and 
November. The highest temperature of the year was 35.2C at St. Helier, Jersey, 
on 19 July and the following night was one of the warmest on record with minima 
widely 21-22C. The lowest temperature was –14.1C at Braemar, Aberdeenshire, on 
14 February.


Rainfall


The provisional England and Wales rainfall total was 933mm (99% of average). 
Rainfall was generally above average in January and February, especially in 
north-west upland areas. Easterly winds in the first five days of the year gave 
a whole month’s average rainfall to parts of Aberdeenshire. The wettest month 
of the year in lowland Britain was June when many places here recorded over 
100mm. By contrast, July and August were very dry in the south and October was 
dry in all areas, notably in western Scotland.


Sunshine

Most of the UK had near, or rather below average sunshine in 2016. None of the 
summer months was particularly sunny, and the wet weather in June in the south 
of the country resulted in several places here having little more than half the 
monthly average. A highlight was the very sunny start to October in northern 
Scotland. At Stornoway, October was sunnier than July. December was dull and 
dismal.

Winds

There was a profusion of named storms in the winter of 2015-16 and the passage 
of Storm Gertrude on 28-29th January resulted in a gust of 105mph at Lerwick, 
Shetland. On 28 March, 106mph was recorded at the very exposed Needles, Isle of 
Wight. The latter half of the year was calm until the invigoration of the 
jet-stream in the run-up to Christmas.
 