
BBC Music Sound of 2017 longlist revealed: Jorja Smith, Anderson Paak and more
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/28/bbc-music-sound-of-2017-longlist-revealed-jorja-smith-anderson-paak-and-more>
It’s May 2015, and Instagrammers are commenting on a picture of a stormy sky 
uploaded by mysterious musician the Japanese House. “The 1975, that you?” asks 
one. “The Japanese House is the 1975, solved,” posts another. Amber Bain laughs 
as she recalls the speculation. The vague cover art for her first EP, Pools To 
Bathe In, plus the fact that the Manchester indie poppers were producing her 
music, meant rumours swirled about her identity.

“Everyone thought [effervescent 1975 frontman] Matt Healy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/11/matt-healy-the-1975-pretentious-not-apologising-interview>
 was singing,” the 21-year-old laughs, and it’s true that her vocal style bears 
a resemblance. But when Bain eventually decided to unveil herself – sporting 
baggy knitwear, aKurt Cobain <https://www.theguardian.com/music/kurt-cobain>
-ish mop of hair over her eyes and Fender Mustang in hand – another question 
arose. “There was a big debate online as to my gender,” she says. Did it offend 
her? “No, it probably benefitted me, because at the beginning I wasn’t labelled 
as ‘female artist X’ rather than ‘songwriter’.”

Of course, a bit of mystery is hardly uncommon in the minimal electronic pop 
genre in which Bain operates, where you can’t always be sure that a song has 
ended, and everyone usually turns out to be from the Home Counties anyway (Bain 
is from Buckinghamshire). Even while their songs were soundtracking every 
British drama on TV at the time,the xx 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/the-xx> remained indistinguishable from most 
other hoodie-wearing London teens. And London Grammar’s initial web presence 
was so limited that it was a struggle to track them down among all the online 
dictionaries. Yet hungry Spotify playlisters can’t get enough of this 
“enigmatic” genre and its sparkling, shoegazey sadness.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_peMDiN6f14&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_peMDiN6f14>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_peMDiN6f14&media=>
The 1975’s Matt Healy: ‘I am pretentious. And I’m not apologising’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/11/matt-healy-the-1975-pretentious-not-apologising-interview>
Bain’s own trajectory has been steep. She was spotted by Healy after posting 
demos online as a bored A-level student, and was soon signed to the same label 
as the 1975 (Dirty Hit, also home toWolf Alice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/19/wolf-alice-indie-rock> and 
Marika Hackman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/apr/01/marika-hackman-bush-hall-london-review>
). For the next two years, she worked on the Japanese House – named after a 
Cornwall holiday home she stayed in as a child and where she pretended to be a 
boy for a week – and has to date released three EPs. She’s about to go on a 
stadium tour in support of – you guessed it – The 1975 and has just been 
unveiled on the longlist for the BBC’s influential Sound Of… poll (“My dad’s 
always emailing me these things as if I didn’t know. I’m like: ‘Dad, this is my 
job!’”).

Key to being good at her “job” is her knack for writing an introspective song 
for a glum-hum, bringing together that tried and tested sparseness withMy 
Bloody Valentine <https://www.theguardian.com/music/my-bloody-valentine>-ish 
guitars and swelling drums. Her music is meditative by name and nature, with 
titles such as Cool Blue, Still and Letter By The Water. She has attempted to 
find inspiration in other places, but each one seems to come back to loss and 
heartbreak. Of her song Leon, she says she was originally inspired by the film 
of the same name.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Famber-bain-the-japanese-house-sad-modern-synthpop%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5880b8c4b2aed91b5e0f452f7a130860f9ae1a3%2F0_35_742_445%2F742.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Japanese%20House%3A%20%E2%80%98Coming%20to%20terms%20with%20what%20pop%20actually%20means%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Famber-bain-the-japanese-house-sad-modern-synthpop%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Japanese%20House%3A%20%E2%80%98Coming%20to%20terms%20with%20what%20pop%20actually%20means%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Famber-bain-the-japanese-house-sad-modern-synthpop%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5880b8c4b2aed91b5e0f452f7a130860f9ae1a3%2F0_35_742_445%2F742.jpg>
The xx announce details of their third album, I See You – and listen to their 
new track On Hold
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/10/the-xx-announce-details-third-album-i-see-you-hear-track-on-hold>
“I found it really interesting, the blurred lines of morality in the 
protagonists’ relationship – but it ended up turning into something personal,” 
she explains. The song, she continues, was “drawn from being broken up with, I 
was just really pissed off”. Her heart is no longer shattered – she briefly 
mentions a girlfriend – but these are the themes she still gravitates towards. 
“I’ve been fairly happy for quite a while but still the songs I seem to write 
are – unhappy is not the right word – searching, maybe. Reflective, maybe not 
on the brightest of things.”

Bain’s music may be moody but she is slowly starting to embrace perky pop 
hooks alongside those barely there beats, too. Face Like Thunder, from her 
latest EP, Swim Against The Tide, starts like the others – quiet, pleading – 
before an exuberant 80s-style synth line forces its way out. “Obviously it is 
different to my other songs,” says Bain, “but when I listen to the rest of my 
stuff I kind of go: ‘Is it pop [too]?’ I’m still coming to terms with what pop 
actually means in relation to my music.” It is not, however, a dirty word to 
her: “I listen to a lot of Beyoncé, obviously, and I went through aTaylor Swift 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/taylor-swift> stage, everyone has. There’s 
definitely a skill in writing a banger.”

Despite her reverence for polished chart tunes, it seems doubtful that we’ll 
see Bain asking Pitbull for a middle eight quite yet. But she’s working on the 
road, and has already penned a tune for her debut LP. The premise? “Oh, just 
another uplifting club hit!” she says wryly. Don’t bet your house on it.

The Japanese House supports the 1975 at Manchester Arena, Tuesday 13 December; 
The O2, SE10, Thursday 15 & Friday 16 December; touring to 22 December 
<http://www.songkick.com/artists/8552784-japanese-house>
 