
A forbidding clock tower rises above the arched windows of a former Victorian 
workhouse in east London’s Mile End, behind a hoarding which trumpets the 
conversion of the crusty old pileinto an enclave of luxury apartments 
<http://www.lindenhomes.co.uk/developments/london/st-clements-london>. The 
mortuary, morbidly located next to a graveyard at the end of this brutal 
conveyor-belt complex, has been reborn as The Lodge, a two-bed flat for 
£999,995 – the kind of inflated price that is increasingly familiar, even here 
in one of London’s poorest boroughs.

But buried among the workhouse chic and the new brick apartment blocks is an 
unlikely experiment in building homes that will remain affordable to local 
people forever. After a decade of campaigning, theEast London Community Land 
Trust <http://www.londonclt.org/where/east/> has succeeded in creating housing 
where the prices will be linked to local income in perpetuity, entirely 
detached from the superheated speculation of the property market.

“It’s incredibly exciting to finally see it for real,” says Taj Uddin, a 
40-year-old local government worker, walking into the living room of his new 
two-bed flat for the first time, where full-height windows lead to a balcony 
looking out over a communal lawn. Born down the road, Uddin has watched as the 
neighbourhood’s property prices have spiralled beyond his reach, forcing him to 
live with his brother. Jessie Brennan, a 34-year-old artist, was in a similarly 
precarious situation, having rented in the area for years before being priced 
out to the Thamesmead estate, an hour’s bus and train ride further east, where 
she has been living as aproperty guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/dec/24/the-high-price-of-cheap-living-how-the-property-guardianship-dream-soured>
.

“As soon as I heard about the community land trust, it was a no-brainer,” she 
says. A CLT puts the housing in community ownership, with homes sold or rented 
at a rate linked to local wages and membership open to anyone with a connection 
to the area. It’s a radical model that effectively takes housing out of the 
property market and pegs it to the labour market instead. “It’s crazy how in 
this country we treat housing as an asset for accumulating wealth,” Brennan 
adds. “I don’t see why you should be able to make a profit from your home.”

The catch? When they come to move on, they will forgo the potential windfalls 
of London’s property lottery

She and her partner, together with 23 other households, will move in this 
month, paying less than half the market rate for their properties. One-bed 
flats offered by the CLT are around £130,000, while identical private flats in 
the rest of the development start at £450,000. The catch? When they come to 
move on, they will have to sell at a price that remains pegged to local 
earnings, forgoing the potential windfalls of London’s property lottery.
 The St Clement’s site during redevelopment. Photograph: Graham Turner for the 
Guardian 
As the capital’s first community land trust, the St Clement’s project was made 
possible because the site, home to a mental health hospital that closed in 
2005, was owned by the Greater London Authority. After along grassroots campaign
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2014/mar/27/half-price-housing-east-london-community-land-trust>
, led by charity Citizens UK, the GLA asked the successful developer, Linden 
Homes, to work with the East London CLT group, which had also bid for the site.

The 23 CLT flats represent a small proportion of the overall development of 
252 homes, comprising just under a third of the 35% affordable quota, with the 
rest rented out by the Peabody housing association. It’s a fraction of what the 
campaign had originally hoped for, but they have laid the groundwork for a form 
of truly affordable housing that is gathering momentum across the country.

In 2010, there were 36 community land trusts in England and Wales; now there 
are 225 groups, with 700 homes built to date and a further 3,000 in the 
pipeline to be completed by 2020. With CLTs taking off in low-income inner-city 
areas, they can no longer simply be dismissed as the niche preserve of Grand 
Designs enthusiasts.

“It has become a real resistance movement now,” says Catherine Harrington, 
director of theNational Community Land Trust Network 
<http://www.communitylandtrusts.org.uk/>. 

“People are demanding more of a say about what regeneration looks like, 
instead of sitting back and being told what the future of their area is going 
to be,” she adds. “It’s about changing the narrative of housing: building homes 
rather than investment units; having security and stability in a particular 
place, rather than being forced to move every six months; and mobilising 
popular support for development.”

In December the government announced a new £300m Community Housing Fund 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/60-million-boost-for-communities-affected-by-second-homeownership>
, of £60m a year over five years, to support CLTs, which Harrington says could 
triple the number of homes delivered.

 A rendering of the completed scheme at St Clement’s. Illustration: JTP 
Community ownership of land has a long history in the UK, dating back to the 
Garden City movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2014/mar/17/ebbsfleet-garden-city-george-osborne>
 and beyond, but the community land trust model is something of an import. It 
was developed in the US, born out of the civil rights movement in the southern 
states in the 1960s, where it enabled African Americans to control the 
production of their own homes and food. It was revived in the 1980s, and 
America’s largest CLT, theChamplain Housing Trust 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/business/metropolis/2016/01/bernie_sanders_made_burlington_s_land_trust_possible_it_s_still_an_innovative.html>
 in Burlington, Vermont (founded by Bernie Sanders, then mayor of Burlington), 
now owns more than 2,000 homes.

[CLTs] have the potential to be a hugely disruptive force
Stephen Hill 
In England, CLTs began cropping up in the early 2000s, and have mainly 
operated in middle class rural areas, providing a means of preserving community 
stability against influxes of second-home buyers. But over the last few years 
they have begun to be used in urban locations as both a powerful tool in the 
battle against gentrification and as a means of reviving blighted empty streets.

“They have the potential to be a hugely disruptive force,” says housing and 
planning expert Stephen Hill, who advises many of the urban CLT groups across 
the country. “They allow people to say ‘the land market doesn’t work in this 
area, so we’re going to get together and change it’.”

According to Hill, the crucial moment came in 2008, when the Housing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/housing> and Regeneration Act gave 
community land trusts a legal definition for the first time, which he describes 
as “one of the most important but barely noticed political acts of recent 
years”. Stating that CLTs must be set up expressly to further the social, 
economic and environmental interests of their communities, and be 
democratically accountable to their communities, it aligned them with the 
objectives of local authorities at every level.

They are also a phenomenon that enjoys cross-party support, attractive to 
different political administrations for different reasons. For Labour, they 
represent bottom-up communitarianism; for the Tories, they are self-help and 
the “big society” in action; for the Lib Dems they embody the great liberal 
quest for land reform. And, crucially, for all local authorities being forced 
to sell-off their council housing stock, they are one of the only forms of 
affordable housing that are immune from theright to buy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/aug/12/right-to-buy-social-housing-councils>
.
 Granby Four Streets CLT is bringing back life to rundown houses in Liverpool 
with the help of Assemble. Photograph: Assemble 
From Leeds <http://leedscommunityhomes.org.uk/> and Liverpool to Oxford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/may/31/build-affordable-homes-oxford-land-trust-value>
 and Hastings, the nature and purpose of CLTs can be hard to generalise because 
they are each responding to the specific local housing need in their respective 
areas. In Anfield, theHomebaked CLT <http://homebaked.org.uk/> began with the 
revival of a bakery near the Liverpool FC football ground, and it is now 
looking at ways of tackling other empty units in the area to provide workspace 
for social enterprise, affordable housing and “spaces to meet, chat and 
celebrate”.

Across town, Toxteth’s Granby Four Streets CLT 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2015/may/12/assemble-turner-prize-2015-wildcard-how-the-young-architecture-crew-assemble-rocked-the-art-world>
 is about bringing back life torundown rows of tinned-up terraced housing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/mar/27/liverpool-rotting-housing-renewal-pathfinder>
, stabilising the fragmented community and attracting people back to the area. 
Its architects, Assemble, won the Turner Prize for their work there, and are 
now working witha CLT group in Hastings <http://heartofhastings.org.uk/> to 
develop community-led housing in the Ore Valley, one of the town’s most 
deprived neighbourhoods. Conscious of the town’s rising prices, they are trying 
to establish the project before the gentrification tipping point.

In Camley Street 
<http://camleystreet.org.uk/meeting/public-meeting/camley-street-community-land-trust/>
 in Camden, a stone’s throw from the high-end towers of the £2bn King’s Cross 
regeneration project, values have already exploded, and development pressure is 
threatening to squeeze industrial space out of the area. The neighbourhood 
forum has come together with local businesses to form a CLT that is proposing a 
dense mixed-use scheme of hundreds of homes and further employment space, with 
rental income fed back into the community over the long-term. It’s still in the 
early stages, but it could provide a template for how to build a truly 
mixed-use urban quarter, without a developer creaming off the value.

In such highly prized urban areas, access to land is perhaps the biggest 
obstacle facing CLTs; but that’s why, in the absence of longterm-thinking 
landowners, local authorities are perfectly placed to help. By law, councils 
are required to dispose of their land on the basis of the “best consideration” 
reasonably obtainable, which should take into account long-term value. Social 
and economic benefits can justify the sale of land below market price – local 
authorities are not required to automatically flog their land to the highest 
bidder.

In Lewisham, home to a couple of pioneering self-build council housing projects
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/sep/16/anarchism-community-walter-segal-self-build-south-london-estate>
 in the 1980s, the local authority recently ran an open competitive EU bid for 
a site in Ladywell, weighted in favour of community benefits. It awarded it to
the Russ CLT <http://www.theruss.org/>, which plans build 33 permanently 
affordable homes at a range of tenures, due to start construction next year.

“Local councils are under pressure to sell assets for maximum value to balance 
the books,” says Russ founder Kareem Dayes, who grew up in one of the 
self-built homes on Walter’s Way in Honor Oak. “But by working with us, the 
benefits for the area in the long-term will outweigh any nominal cash raised 
upfront.”
 Bristol CLT has completed its first project of 12 homes on the site of a 
former school. Photograph: Bristol CLT 
In Bristol, a city that has long been shaped by strong third sector 
organisations, the council is taking an active interest in facilitating the 
work of CLTs, rewriting its policies to take community-led development into 
account. “The main driver for us is about people being in more control over 
their own areas,” says the Labour council’s cabinet member for housing, Paul 
Smith.

“Council housing has historically served a significant need, but what wasn’t 
thought about so much was how those communities would be sustainable in the 
long-term,” he adds. “Community-led housing might traditionally be seen as a 
middle-class, middle-aged solution, but we’re now getting a lot of demand from 
working class areas for this kind of approach too.”

Bristol CLT <http://bristolclt.org.uk/> has completed its first project of 12 
homes on the site of a former school, bought from the council for £1, where 
residents were involved in finishing elements of the interiors, accumulating 
“sweat equity” in the process. They are now working on a second scheme of 25 
homes for another council-owned site. Smith says the ambition is to scale up 
the projects: by 2020, he wants to see the community sector building 300-500 
homes across the city, a level that would outstrip what the council or housing 
associations have achieved in recent years.

Critics argue that community housing represents no real solution to the 
housing crisis. Others see it as a symptom of councils shirking their 
responsibilities, or a result of having their own housebuilding capacities 
relentlessly slashed. But, as Catherine Harrington points out, one of the 
biggest obstacles to the government achieving its target of building one 
million homes by 2020 is nimbyism – a phenomenon that community land trusts are 
perfectly placed to counter.

“In many cases, CLTs have a unique ability to gather popular support for new 
development, because the local community is in control,” she says. The 
proposals are defined and driven by local residents themselves, with the 
long-term interests of the neighbourhood at the very heart of the plans.
 Residents helped finish elements of the new Bristol CLT housing, accumulating 
‘sweat equity’. Photograph: Bristol CLT 
Tony Wood, a founding member of the St Ann’s Redevelopment Trust 
<http://www.startharingey.co.uk/> (or StART) CLT in Haringey, north London, has 
had years of experience as a community campaigner and never found people so 
receptive to a cause. “I’ve stood on street corners leafleting passersby about 
saving parks or opposing planning applications,” he says. “But I’ve never had 
such a positive response as when trying to get support for the community land 
trust. Everyone understands the desperate need for affordable housing.” The 
borough’s council house waiting list is 10,000, and around 90% of those 
families “will never be housed in social rented accommodation”,according to the 
council’s website <http://www.haringey.gov.uk/housing/housing-options>.

Such is the level of support for StART, that the group is forging ahead with 
plans for up to 800 homes on an NHS-owned site, which has existing planning 
permission for a private development of just 470 homes – against which there 
has been substantial local opposition. Only 14% of the homes in the previously 
proposed scheme would be “affordable” (ie up to 80% of market rate), whereas 
the majority of StART’s homes would be pegged to between 30-40% of the median 
local household income.

“People say that if we can guarantee the homes are going to be genuinely 
affordable and stop local people moving out of the area, then they won’t 
object,” says Woods. “But it’s better than that. The joy with the rental side 
is that, once we’ve paid off the mortgage, we would have nearly £6m income a 
year to use for local community benefit.”

The group ran a successful crowd-funding campaign to cover architects’ fees 
for a masterplan, and is currently in talks with the NHS and the council. “The 
planning officers were saying it’s nice for the community and the council to be 
working on the same side for once,” says Woods. “It doesn’t happen very often 
with large housing developments.”

Related: Is gentrification inevitable – and inevitably bad? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/jan/16/gentrification-inevitable-bad-urban-change>

It would be the biggest CLT in the country by a long stretch if they managed 
to pull it off. Together with Camley Street, Russ, St Clements,Brixton Green 
<http://www.brixtongreen.org/> and an alternative plan for the West Ken and 
Gibbs Green estate <https://westkengibbsgreen.wordpress.com/the-peoples-plan/> 
in Earl’s Court, it amounts to 2–3,000 permanently affordable homes in London 
alone. “If we get more schemes of this scale, mayor Sadiq Khan might actually 
achieve his 50% affordable target,” says Hill.

During his campaign, Khan talked 
<http://www.citizensuk.org/london_mayoral_assembly_south_bank_su_report> of 
wanting to see 1,000 CLT homes built by the end of his first year as mayor – 
though he has yet to announce any policies that might begin to help. And 
StART’s efforts may still come to nothing. “A big housebuilder like Barratt 
Homes could come in and offer to pay way over the odds for the site, so we 
might all be putting in huge amounts of work for no reason,” Woods adds.

“But we want to try. I cycle past the site every day, and I don’t think I 
could have lived with myself if I hadn’t tried to do something to stop it from 
becoming homes that local people couldn’t afford.”

Oliver Wainwright will be chairing a debate on UK housing on 19 January at 
Central Saint Martins, London, as part of theFundamentals 
<http://fundamentals-london.uk> debate series

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> to join the discussion, and 
explore our archive here <https://www.theguardian.com/cities>
 