
When four Israeli cyclists suggested to the Tel Aviv city council in 1994 that 
it might be a clever idea to promote the bicycle as a new mode of transport, 
they were met with laughter.

“They were told that cycling was something for third world nations,” says 
Yotam Avizohar,director of the Israel Bicycle Association 
<http://www.bike.org.il/#!about1/c10sn>. “The council official said: ‘Tel Aviv 
is a modern city. We only promote sophisticated transport solutions. Very soon 
we will have a light rail system.’”

Undeterred, the cyclists gave it another try and approached a council official 
who they knew to be a cyclist himself. “This time, they were told that cycling 
was something for European countries. The man said: ‘Israel is a Middle-Eastern 
country and Israelis are addicted to their cars or to their camels.’ He didn’t 
see how it could ever be changed.”

More than 20 years later, the realisation of the Tel Aviv light rail system is 
still a very long way off. But cycling has definitely become the new mode of 
transport in the city. Everywhere you go in Tel Aviv, you see people on bikes, 
and most of them aren’t wearing any special gear. In Israel’s hippest city, 
cycling is the hippest way to get around.


According to city council statistics, about 15% of the inhabitants of central 
Tel Aviv cycle to work or school. There are many miles of bike lanes, including 
a breathtaking track along the seafront that connects the northern part of town 
with the ancient harbour of Jaffa in the south. Five years ago, asuccessful 
bike sharing system was launched 
<http://www.timesofisrael.com/losing-its-training-wheels-tel-avivs-bike-share-scheme-turns-five/>
, which caused bike use to go up by 54% among Tel Avivians. And every year in 
October the city hosts a huge bicycle event, closing the Ayalon highway and the 
big boulevards to cars tomake way for 30,000 cyclists 
<http://www.nbn.org.il/aliyah-inspiration/visions-of-aliyah/trending-in-israel/sovev-tel-aviv-israels-largest-biking-event/>
.

“We have achieved a lot,” says Avizohar. “But it still remains a big challenge 
to break the ‘car first’ mentality.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fcycling-tel-aviv-israel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5fb5d1f2de551ab6e03c0976c8258332f29eae36%2F129_180_4852_2911%2F4852.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tel%20Aviv's%20journey%20to%20becoming%20the%20hippest%20cycling%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fcycling-tel-aviv-israel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tel%20Aviv%27s%20journey%20to%20becoming%20the%20hippest%20cycling%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fcycling-tel-aviv-israel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5fb5d1f2de551ab6e03c0976c8258332f29eae36%2F129_180_4852_2911%2F4852.jpg>
 Bicycles on Tel Aviv’s Nachlat Benjamin street in the early 1920s. Photograph: 
Alamy 
A hundred years ago, when Tel Aviv was being built, the bike was a much-used 
mode of transport in the city. The circumstances for cycling were favourable: 
the town being flat and compact with temperatures never dropping below zero 
(although the summer heat could be quite a challenge). And most people simply 
didn’t have the money to buy a car.

But as living standards went up, the car became the dominant mode of 
transport, causing dreadful traffic jams and notorious parking problems. 
Avizohar says: “That’s when people started to think about the bike as a clean, 
fast, healthy and cheap alternative.”

A senior official of the Ministry of Transport said: ‘People will die like 
flies.’ But of course, this never happened
Guido Segal 
To attract attention and put pressure on decision-makers, bicycle activists 
organised critical mass rides every last Friday of the month, meeting at Rabin 
Square and cycling through the city with placards and decorated bikes. The 
group grew bigger and bigger and is still active today.

A breakthrough came in 1998, when former brigadier general Ron Huldai was 
elected mayor of Tel Aviv. Huldai promised to build cycle paths during his 
election campaign and turned out to be genuinely committed to promote the bike 
as the solution to Tel Aviv’s traffic problems.

“A year after he was elected we started to experiment with bike lanes on the 
central reservations of the big boulevards,” says architect and urban planner 
Guido Segal, who has been involved in the planning of the Tel Aviv bicycle 
infrastructure from the beginning. “In those days, the central reservations of 
the boulevards consisted of not much more than sand and trees, and they were 
quite wide. They could easily be converted into bike lanes. It was the easiest 
way to start, because cars didn’t have to make way for bikes.”

A lot of people were apprehensive about what would happen at the junctions 
once these bike lanes were in use. “Some even wanted to put fences in front of 
the bike lanes at junctions,” Segal remembers. “A senior official of the 
Ministry of Transport said: ‘People will die like flies.’ But of course, this 
never happened. The more bicycles you have in a city, the less often accidents 
occur. Once we had the infrastructure, more and more people wanted to use it. 
We saw the number of cyclists go up and the number of accidents go down. This 
convinced decision-makers.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fcycling-tel-aviv-israel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2dca23119249566943cf2a5ab81265b2e238ce86%2F0_0_5760_3458%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tel%20Aviv's%20journey%20to%20becoming%20the%20hippest%20cycling%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fcycling-tel-aviv-israel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tel%20Aviv%27s%20journey%20to%20becoming%20the%20hippest%20cycling%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fcycling-tel-aviv-israel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2dca23119249566943cf2a5ab81265b2e238ce86%2F0_0_5760_3458%2F5760.jpg>
 Around 15% of the inhabitants of central Tel Aviv (plus the odd horse) cycle 
to work or school. Photograph: Ariel Schalit/AP 
Nowadays, Tel Aviv boasts about 85 miles of cycle lanes. And there are new 
plans to establish a big network of more than 90 miles of cycle paths in the 
greater Tel Aviv region, to enable commuters to go to work by bike.

It would be a mistake, however, to expect ingenious cycling infrastructure in 
the style of Amsterdam or Copenhagen when you jump on your bike in the Israeli 
metropolis.

Some of the Tel Aviv cycle lanes consist of not much more than a painted logo 
on the pavement

Some of the Tel Aviv cycle lanes consist of not much more than a painted logo 
on the pavement. Most cycle lanes simply break off at junctions and it’s not 
always easy to find out where they continue – if they continue at all. And it’s 
not unusual to encounter a bus stop or a lottery stand in the middle of your 
cycle lane.

Cycling <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/cycling> through Tel Aviv’s 
chaotic streets requires resourcefulness and a talent for improvisation – it’s 
a constant juggling act to avoid pedestrians, objects that are blocking the way 
and motorists, some of whom are clearly not aware that bikes are a legal mode 
of transport. In many streets cyclists and pedestrians share the pavement – not 
only because cycle paths are often part of it, but also because the road is 
considered simply too dangerous for cyclists.

Shared pavements combined with robust Israeli street etiquette have resulted 
in growing friction between pedestrians and cyclists. “The pavement is for 
pedestrians. Cyclists who use it should be more gentle,” says Avizohar. “But 
being gentle inIsrael <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> is an 
oxymoron.”

There has been an evolution in the design of bike lanes in Tel Aviv, says 
Guido Segal. “We started with lanes that were used both by cyclists and 
pedestrians. Then there was a series of colour-coded bike lanes on the 
pavement. But we are now constructing safe, Dutch-style separated bike paths at 
street level,” he says. “We have a growing community of cyclists that demands 
better infrastructure. And we have been learning along the way.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fcycling-tel-aviv-israel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F940e1bfe96b183e630df239230726f2f0b5fdcdf%2F0_0_3240_2112%2F3240.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tel%20Aviv's%20journey%20to%20becoming%20the%20hippest%20cycling%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fcycling-tel-aviv-israel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tel%20Aviv%27s%20journey%20to%20becoming%20the%20hippest%20cycling%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fcycling-tel-aviv-israel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F940e1bfe96b183e630df239230726f2f0b5fdcdf%2F0_0_3240_2112%2F3240.jpg>
 Sweat factor: a child cycles during a heat-wave in Tel Aviv. Photograph: Ariel 
Schalit/AP 
One such learning moment was the renovation of Ibn Gabirol Street in 2010, the 
city’s most important artery, connecting the northern Yarkon Park to the 
southern part of town. The road was narrowed to make space for bikes. But much 
to the chagrin of the Israel Bicycle Association, no separate bike paths were 
created. The pavement was simply broadened with dark paving indicating the 
rather narrow strip allotted to cyclists.

“We had a big row with the council about it, but we failed to convince them to 
do it differently,” Avizohar remembers. “But nowadays everybody recognises that 
this was a mistake.”

The situation in Ibn Gabirol Street has led to fights and accidents between 
pedestrians and cyclists. In 2014, a 68-year-old woman was hit by a bike when 
she got off a bus right next to a cycle lane. She hurt her shinbone and isnow 
suing the city of Tel Aviv 
<http://www.jpost.com/Israel-News/Bicycle-accident-victims-sue-Tel-Aviv-Municipality-408433>
, arguing that the council encourages the development of a cycling culture, but 
fails to protect people who simply adhere to the traffic rules.

When it comes to cycle paths, Tel Aviv is learning from its mistakes. In 2012, 
separate bicycle paths at street level were built in Bloch Street, but it was 
by no means an easy task. Angry residents fiercely protested because some 50 
parking places were sacrificed in the process. “This is Israel: in the weekend 
we don’t have public transport,” explains Guido Segal. “People said we need our 
cars and we need to be able to park them, but the mayor went ahead with the 
plan in spite of the protests. I think he was very brave.”

How Groningen invented a cycling template for cities all over the world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jul/29/how-groningen-invented-a-cycling-template-for-cities-all-over-the-world>
Although Tel Aviv is well on its way to developing a serious cycling culture, 
there are still many problems to tackle. One is the growing use of electric 
bikes – including illegal ones that go as fast as 25 miles per hour – that 
poses a serious threat to pedestrians. Another is the lack of connectivity. 
“When streets are renovated, bike lanes do get built, but they do not always 
connect to other bike lanes. We don’t have a continuous network making it easy 
to get from A to B,” says Avizohar.


Many Tel Avivians still refrain from cycling because of the danger posed by 
unaware motorists and the shortage of good parking places. And then there is 
what Avizohar describes as “the sweat factor”: the scorching heat during the 
endless Tel Aviv summer. “Showers in workplaces really are vital if we want the 
number of cyclists to go up,” he says.

Showers in workplaces are, along with more bicycle infrastructure and bike 
parking places, among the measures in the Bike bill, devised to encourage 
cycling in the country. This bill has been under discussion since 2008 but has 
so far failed to pass. “Some Israeli politicians still need to be convinced 
that the bike is not the problem but the solution,” says Avizohar. He is, 
however, hopeful that the bill will this year pass its final reading in the 
Knesset.

“We still have a lot of work to do,” he says. “But we are optimists.”

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 