
It has already won multiple awards, brought in $100m at the box office and the 
soundtrack is set for the top of the US billboard charts. And now thehit film 
La La Land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/31/la-la-land-review-ryan-gosling-emma-stone>
 is likely, against the will of some of its devoted fans, to go on to Broadway 
and London’s West End as a live stage show.

A contemporary Hollywood musical, which opened this weekend in British cinemas,
 La La Land follows the bumpy love story of a hopeful actress and a failing 
jazz pianist, played by Emma Stone andRyan Gosling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ryan-gosling>. The film has generated so much 
interest in the five weeks since its release in the US that investors are 
prepared to commit to developing a stage show.

It is an extraordinarily speedy outcome for a film project once regarded as 
too risky when director and screenwriter Damien Chazelle approached producers 
in Los Angeles. While film musicals are no longer seen as the financial black 
holes they were two decades ago, it was a difficult proposition. When Chazelle 
first attempted to sell the idea, he was repeatedly disappointed. “It’s the 
typical Hollywood story — everything falls apart. Every time, I would curse 
myself and go, ‘Goddamn it,’” he has said.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fryan-gosling-emma-stone-la-la-land-video-interview&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ryan%20Gosling%20on%20La%20La%20Land%3A%20'The%20world%20is%20quick%20to%20shame%20you%20for%20trying'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fryan-gosling-emma-stone-la-la-land-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ryan%20Gosling%20on%20La%20La%20Land%3A%20%27The%20world%20is%20quick%20to%20shame%20you%20for%20trying%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fryan-gosling-emma-stone-la-la-land-video-interview&media=>
Ryan Gosling on La La Land: ‘The world is quick to shame you for trying’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2017/jan/13/ryan-gosling-emma-stone-la-la-land-video-interview>
Now Chazelle, 31, who made his name with Whiplash in 2014, has the kind of 
critical success on his hands that defines an era. The positive buzz began when 
the musical premiered at theCannes film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/cannesfilmfestival> last spring. Last week it 
swept the board at the Golden Globes, with a record-breaking seven wins. It has 
also just earned 11 Bafta nominations. The Oscar nominations are out next week, 
butLa La Land’s chances are good.

Later today the soundtrack, written by Justin Hurwitz, is expected to reach 
the top five of the Billboard 200 albums chart, an appropriate reward for a 
film about a jazz musician defending a dying art form.

La La Land does have critics, of course. Unusually for a crowdpleaser, its 
rare detractors have so far attacked it for being too “arty” or “knowing”, 
rather than too soppy. Writing in theAustralian, Peter Craven has argued that 
La La Landis “just an unusually decadent example of the recent phenomenon of 
Oscar fodder: “serious” films made for the niche market that clings to drama 
and art, and which may produce masterpieces or drivel, but long ago ceded the 
middle ground to television.”

For his part, Chazelle admits he has produced a homage to the past and not a 
recreation of the musicals of the 1940s and 50s. He was, he has said: “trying 
to call back certain things from the past that I felt had been lost and didn’t 
need to be lost. But also, really, the main goal was to try and update those 
things ....There’s things you can do with the camera, and things you can do 
with modern expectations today that you couldn’t do in the Fifties.”

The director was influenced by Jacques Demy’s 1964 French musical Les 
Parapluies de Cherbourg, with its mix of grit and romance, but in some ways the 
mood ofLa La Land is closer to the glamour and banter of a film like the 1944 
Gene Kelly classicCover Girl, co-starring Rita Hayworth.

The idea for La La Land dates back to Chazelle’s Harvard days when he and 
Hurwitz played in an indie pop band. Together they made a cheap black and white 
musical film,Guy and Madeline on a Park Bench, with a similar plot. Although 
Chazelle was later diverted by makingWhiplash, he did not give up on the story.

This weekend Lionsgate Motion Picture Group co-president Erik Feig told 
investors that the pathway to a liveBroadway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/broadway> show was clear if chosen, although 
Gosling has indicated he would not be keen to appear. “If we want to do a stage 
show, we can do a stage show,” said Feig, adding: “We haven’t hit our full 
expansion.”

Some fans balk at the idea, since part of the in-joke of La La Land is its 
modern “motion picture” incarnation of the stage musical format. It is a 
tension that was also there in the 1930s and 40s, when Hollywood plundered 
Broadway for hits. Much later the traffic started going back the other way, 
with films42nd Street and Singin’ in the Rain becoming stage shows. More 
recently a conveyor belt process for transforming cinematic hits has 
established itself. Stage versions of the original filmsGhost, Elf, Groundhog 
Day, Once and Kinky Boots are all recent arrivals, to say nothing of West End 
landmarks such as Billy Elliot, The Producers, Hairspray or The Lion King. A 
cautionary note is sounded though by the fate of the stage adaptation ofLes 
Parapluies: a glinting gem of realism on screen, it lost its sparkle in the 
theatre.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fla-la-land-trailer-ryan-gosling-emma-stone-star-musical-movie-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=La%20La%20Land%20trailer%3A%20Ryan%20Gosling%20and%20Emma%20Stone%20star%20in%20musical%20movie%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fla-la-land-trailer-ryan-gosling-emma-stone-star-musical-movie-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=La%20La%20Land%20trailer%3A%20Ryan%20Gosling%20and%20Emma%20Stone%20star%20in%20musical%20movie%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fla-la-land-trailer-ryan-gosling-emma-stone-star-musical-movie-video&media=>
La La Land trailer: Ryan Gosling and Emma Stone star in musical movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/sep/01/la-la-land-trailer-ryan-gosling-emma-stone-star-musical-movie-video>
While Gosling convincingly emerged from a crash course in jazz piano to star in
La La Land, and his co-star John Legend had to learn to switch from piano to 
guitar for his role in the film, the leading actors in Chazelle’s film do not 
seem like the stars of a musical. They sing and dance more like normal people.

As the critic Jason Solomons has said, much of the appeal of La La Land lies 
in the chemistry between Stone and Gosling. Just as Fred Astaire and Ginger 
Rogers fitted together on screen, so these actors, who have appeared together 
twice before, inCrazy, Stupid, Love and Gangster Squad, are gaining team 
status. “They — for me — feel like the closest thing that we have to an old 
Hollywood couple, like Spencer Tracy and Katharine Hepburn, or Fred and Ginger, 
or Myrna Loy and Dick Powell,” Chazelle toldEntertainment Weekly. “There’s 
something about the recurrence of Ryan and Emma as a couple and about them 
individually as actors and the way they register onscreen — the timeless 
glamour that they’re capable of.”
 