
An audience of around 20 people have put down their cups of vegetable soup to 
watch primary school teacher James Jordan spin on his head on the fourth floor 
of aLiverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/liverpool> city centre office 
block. As he stands up to switch off the small, white beat-box he’s positioned 
by the window, he hopes he’s done enough to scoop the £100 prize – not for 
himself, but for The Scouse Jam, his idea for a hip-hop dance workshop for 
young people in the city.

In the end, it’s not enough. Despite getting the X on my ballot paper (I’m 
getting used to being on the wrong side of a vote) James’s pitch loses out to 
web designer Steve Ingley, who is creating Ticksi, a lower-cost rival to 
Eventbrite that he hopes to trial with public and third sector organisations in 
the city.

Ticksi is the 12th project to gain funding via Liverpool Soup 
<http://www.sentogether.net/liverpool-soup/>, the city’s version of a growing 
worldwide experiment in crowdsourced micro-funding of local projects. Here in 
Liverpool, social entrepreneurs are given just four minutes to pitch their 
ideas for improving the city to an audience who have donated between £5 and £10 
each to the prize pot. The audience gets soup and salad. The winners get the 
evening’s takings, a business mentor and an invitation to return in three 
months time to demonstrate the progress they’ve made.

It’s a concept transplanted from Detroit <http://detroitsoup.com/about/> where 
the project began as a monthly citywide dinner in February 2010. It’s now grown 
into nine neighbourhood-centric dinners that meet three times a year.

To be fair, Detroit didn’t invent the Soup concept. An arts group was doing 
something similar on Sunday evenings in Chicago as far back as 2007. ButDetroit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/detroit> repurposed it for all kinds of 
social enterprises, not just the arts, and coverage on Oprah, NBC and the BBC 
has inspired many others to follow a similar micro-granting model in their 
cities.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fsoup-revolution-changing-cities-over-dinner-detroit-liverpool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff207e680710526a1da75cb2fe49cdde4afac6da9%2F0_274_4104_2462%2F4104.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20soup%20revolution%3A%20changing%20cities%20over%20dinner%2C%20from%20Detroit%20to%20Liverpool&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fsoup-revolution-changing-cities-over-dinner-detroit-liverpool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20soup%20revolution%3A%20changing%20cities%20over%20dinner%2C%20from%20Detroit%20to%20Liverpool&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fsoup-revolution-changing-cities-over-dinner-detroit-liverpool%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff207e680710526a1da75cb2fe49cdde4afac6da9%2F0_274_4104_2462%2F4104.jpg>
 Detroit Soup now takes place in nine neighbourhoods across the city. 
Photograph: David Lewinski/Detroit Soup 
In Liverpool, the Soup is run by Social Enterprise Network (Sen), a support 
organisation for the city’s social economy, and has so far funded a dozen 
projects where the only commonality is that they promise to make some kind of 
social impact.

Previous winners include Juvo, a design agency that is collaborating with the 
head of PE at St Vincent’s, a local school for children with visual 
impairments, to create a rugby ball that has textures and sounds. The Liverpool 
John Moores University graduates behind Juvo have just returned from China 
where they have been seeking a manufacturer for the product.

“Soup gave us the funding we needed to get off the ground, open our business 
banking account and get set-up efficiently,” explains co-director Leigh Hughes. 
“It also introduced us to the world of networking and we’ve received some 
invaluable advice and support as a result.”

Liverpool Soup is beginning to attract sponsorship from local companies, such 
as outsourcing company Arvato, which is adding money to the prize pot for the 
next event, and Launch22, which offers some of its co-working spaces for free. 
Others offer coaching and web design.


“There’s often nowhere else for social enterprises to go,” says Rosie Jolly, 
the chief executive of SEN who reports directly to Liverpool mayor Joe 
Anderson. “They might get a loan but there are no grants anymore. Social 
entrepreneurs are getting into debt from the start.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fsoup-revolution-changing-cities-over-dinner-detroit-liverpool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f83a083ddf88d7184a3bdc6b0a01d0973a008ab%2F0_254_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20soup%20revolution%3A%20changing%20cities%20over%20dinner%2C%20from%20Detroit%20to%20Liverpool&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fsoup-revolution-changing-cities-over-dinner-detroit-liverpool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20soup%20revolution%3A%20changing%20cities%20over%20dinner%2C%20from%20Detroit%20to%20Liverpool&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fsoup-revolution-changing-cities-over-dinner-detroit-liverpool%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f83a083ddf88d7184a3bdc6b0a01d0973a008ab%2F0_254_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Soups’s up: Liverpool Soup has funded 12 projects so far. Photograph: 
Christopher Thomond 
But as nice and Shoreditch as it is, this central venue with its table 
football, John Lennon prints and view of the docks is only scratching at the 
surface in a city which has suffered disproportionately from central government 
cuts. Austerity measures have forced the city council to find savings of £329m 
over the last six years, representing a 58% cut in the funding of public 
services. For Jolly and her assistant, Patrick Hurley, these monthly events in 
the heart of Liverpool are not enough. Instead they want to take Soup to the 
heart of the city’s problems.

In October, in the shadow of Liverpool Football Club’s famous Kop stand, a 
small home bakery will be the venue for the city’s first neighbourhood Soup. 
Anfield is one of the country’s most deprived wards; the streets aroundHomebaked
 <http://homebaked.org.uk/> are designated for demolition under the 
controversial Housing Market Renewal Initiative. Since the regeneration scheme 
stalled in 2008, Anfield has been left in half-demolished limbo.

“I don’t understand what the problems are in areas like Anfield or other 
deprived wards, but the people who live there do,” says Jolly. “And they’re the 
ones with the solutions to many of those problems. And if they have a chance to 
come up with their own solutions and take ownership of them, then they stand a 
greater chance of being successful. But often they are people who never come 
into the city centre, so we have to go direct and take Soup to the communities.”

She acknowledges that before the Sunday afternoon, family-friendly Soup on 9 
October, a good deal of preparatory work will need to be done. Homebaked, which 
operates as a community co-operative, will help recruit contestants who will 
then receive coaching and advice on pitching their ideas. These workshops will 
be based on the MerseyStart programme of support and advice that SEN already 
runs for potential entrepreneurs with the backing of NatWest bank.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fsoup-revolution-changing-cities-over-dinner-detroit-liverpool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ad08bfd50d0c3eada8db14dcd60686f095df0cd%2F0_173_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20soup%20revolution%3A%20changing%20cities%20over%20dinner%2C%20from%20Detroit%20to%20Liverpool&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fsoup-revolution-changing-cities-over-dinner-detroit-liverpool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20soup%20revolution%3A%20changing%20cities%20over%20dinner%2C%20from%20Detroit%20to%20Liverpool&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fsoup-revolution-changing-cities-over-dinner-detroit-liverpool%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ad08bfd50d0c3eada8db14dcd60686f095df0cd%2F0_173_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Anfield, in Liverpool, is one of the country’s most deprived wards. 
Photograph: Matthew Ashton/Corbis via Getty Images 
“It’s our chance to bring a sense of entrepreneurialism directly into 
communities to give those people who might have solutions the chance to test 
them out,” says Jolly. “The workshops will enable people to develop an idea, 
understand how to cost it out, and then pitch their idea in front of their 
community. And together they will decide which idea will make the most impact 
on their community.

It’s our chance to bring a sense of entrepreneurialism directly into 
communities
Rosie Jolly 
“The chance to change even one person’s life and the difference that would 
have on them, their family, and community far outweighs any up-front investment 
we have to make,” says Jolly, who wants to see a Soup in as many areas of 
Liverpool as possible.

Jolly’s ambition meets with the approval of Amy Kaherl, founder of Detroit 
Soup. Over the course of more than 130 Soups there, attended by 20,000 people, 
prize money of $124,000 has been awarded to 57 different projects.

Its most high-profile success is a project called The Empowerment Plan 
<http://www.empowermentplan.org/>, which employs previously homeless women to 
create coats that cleverly double as sleeping bags. Kyle Bartell and Charles 
Molnar used the money they won at Detroit Soup to build benches for bus stops 
with a difference:Sit on It Detroit <http://detroitsoup.com/sit-on-it-detroit/>
’s benches have a built-in free library, giving passengers something to read on 
their journey.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fsoup-revolution-changing-cities-over-dinner-detroit-liverpool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb27340b6cc71ad2cff7f73eb10cdd1c7560075ab%2F122_397_4778_2867%2F4778.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20soup%20revolution%3A%20changing%20cities%20over%20dinner%2C%20from%20Detroit%20to%20Liverpool&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fsoup-revolution-changing-cities-over-dinner-detroit-liverpool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20soup%20revolution%3A%20changing%20cities%20over%20dinner%2C%20from%20Detroit%20to%20Liverpool&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fsoup-revolution-changing-cities-over-dinner-detroit-liverpool%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb27340b6cc71ad2cff7f73eb10cdd1c7560075ab%2F122_397_4778_2867%2F4778.jpg>
 Sit on It Detroit. Photograph: Kenny Karpov 
Kaherl says she has learnt to consider a range of metrics to prove that Soup 
is working for her city. “I look to see, are people staying, are they investing 
in the community, are they investing into each other?” she says. “At Detroit 
Soup, we’ve had couples meet and get married, buy houses in the city, set up 
their businesses here, and find collaborators for ventures that they’ve already 
begun.”



The spreadsheet she shows me lists more than 150 Soups in cities around the 
world, from Vancouver to Sydney and Johannesburg in between. Kaherl’s vision is 
to turn this spreadsheet into an AA-meets-TedX experience – no matter where you 
are in the world, you’ll find a city with a Soup.


“Our goal next year is to raise money to build out a global online ecosystem 
where people running Soups can exchange stories of what’s working and what’s 
not,” she explains. “I think we can be stronger together, finding projects that 
work in UK could work in America, India or Australia. We sell ourselves short 
if we think we can’t be part of a bigger picture.”

Almost half of the Soups on the spreadsheet are in the UK. “I’ve been paying 
real attention to what is happening in the UK where you have so many unknowns 
right now. Maybe Soups can help people there, and elsewhere, create their 
future.”

Southend <http://southendsoup.co.uk/>, London <http://londonsoup.org.uk/> and 
Sheffield <https://sheffieldsoup.wordpress.com/> were among the first to launch 
Soups in the UK, and today there are more than 60 scattered around the country.
Birmingham Soup <https://birminghamsoup.co.uk/> took shape when Amy Martin’s 
mother forwarded her a link to a documentary about the initiative in Detroit. 
“It seemed like a small but powerful way for a community to directly support 
one another and a super accessible way for people to access money for projects 
with social impact,” says Martin. “It made sense to try it here in Birmingham.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fsoup-revolution-changing-cities-over-dinner-detroit-liverpool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2b5f796b1395705e13f11a70bea3721fc95aa9eb%2F0_300_4496_2697%2F4496.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20soup%20revolution%3A%20changing%20cities%20over%20dinner%2C%20from%20Detroit%20to%20Liverpool&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fsoup-revolution-changing-cities-over-dinner-detroit-liverpool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20soup%20revolution%3A%20changing%20cities%20over%20dinner%2C%20from%20Detroit%20to%20Liverpool&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fsoup-revolution-changing-cities-over-dinner-detroit-liverpool%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2b5f796b1395705e13f11a70bea3721fc95aa9eb%2F0_300_4496_2697%2F4496.jpg>
 Sheffield Soup was one of the first examples of the initiative in the UK. 
Photograph: Chris Bentley/Sheffield Soup 
Previous winners from the nine monthly Soups held so far have included Elliot 
Lord’s special cardboard bed for homeless people, that raises them from the 
floor to give them a better night’s sleep, and Jordanne Cameron who puts 
together artist-made care packages for people with anxiety.

In Walker – one of Newcastle’s most economically deprived wards – Soup founder 
<https://www.facebook.com/Newcastle-SOUP-399201210252488/> Francesca Maddison 
explains that the project there is a response to dwindling opportunities to 
access funding locally. “Walker is a resilient and proud community, and people 
have always pitched in to help each other, but it’s near-impossible to access 
funds to do something positive within your community if you’re not a registered 
charity or business,” she says.

Winners in Walker include the Welbeck Warriors, a group of local mums who have 
plugged the gap in affordable exercise opportunities locally by starting a 
running club and twice weekly exercise sessions.

Thames Baths is a great idea, but should city projects be crowdfunded at all?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/may/21/thames-baths-crowdfunded-city-projects-urban-kickstarter>
In Belfast 
<http://www.culturenorthernireland.org/features/performing-arts/belfast-soup>, 
Will McConnell is one of seven Soup organisers who co-ordinate their events via 
What’s App while juggling jobs and kids. “When austerity hit Northern Ireland, 
it hit hard, and a lot of community organisations that relied on funding 
starved and died,” explains McConnell, who says winners so far have included a 
project to fix bikes and donate them to the families of asylum seekers. “I 
think the best changes go unreported. No one’s going to make headlines giving 
free coding lessons to schoolgirls – another of our Soup applicants – but these 
are the things that make a big difference to people’s lives.”

Guardian Cities is a member of the Habitat III Journalism Project. Read more 
about the project here <http://citiscope.org/journalism-project>
 