
At some point, when all the memes have been exhausted, we will stop talking 
about Theresa May and her gold leather trousers. But until then, there are 
still questions to be answered. Or so it seems. On board her flight to Bahrain,
May was asked by a journalist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/06/theresa-may-sidesteps-question-about-995-pound-leather-trousers>
whether wearing a pair of £995 trousers for an interview distanced her from the 
general public, a question she neatly sidestepped but which has, naturally, 
awoken the kraken of double standards in politics.

Still, there must be some reason she wore leather trousers – one she must 
expect to be asked about. On paper, the message feels relatively obvious. They 
are by Amanda Wakeley, which is an establishment brand, and May is 
establishment. These trousers are about as on-trend as Wakeley gets; in wearing 
them, May is trialling her fashionable currency within the safety of a magazine 
photoshoot. Still, the look – leather trackpants, Burberry trainers – does 
suggest she wants to be in touch with fashion even if she’s not, or at least 
show a desire to adapt should she need to. Stubbornness is useful in politics, 
but an ability to flex herself sartorially suggests room for change. At least 
that’s one message.

Theresa May sidesteps question about £995 leather trousers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/06/theresa-may-sidesteps-question-about-995-pound-leather-trousers>
 The other message, of course, is that she doesn’t care if people disapprove. 
Leather trousers aren’t that outlandish for May. She likesleopard print and 
asymmetric necklines. 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/conservative/11450145/Theresa-Mays-greatest-footwear-hits.html>
 The problem here isn’t the trousers’ cost, either, contrary to what political 
rivals may say. In an interview with the Times, former education secretaryNicky 
Morgan made a dig at May over the pricetag 
<http://www.itv.com/news/2016-12-07/theresa-may-branded-out-of-touch-over-995-leather-trousers-for-magazine-photoshoot/>
. Discussing whether May can really help the “just about managing” families 
while wearing high fashion, Morgan said it had “been noticed and discussed”... 
adding: “I don’t think I’ve ever spent that much on anything, apart from my 
wedding dress.”

But are we really surprised that the Prime Minister can afford these pants? 
David Cameron’s Richard James bespoke suits were estimated to cost around 
£3,500 apiece 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/david-cameron/6291362/The-curious-case-of-David-Camerons-suit.html>
. And if May were wearing a £995 dress, would that differentiate her from any 
other woman in politics (Michelle Obama, Hillary Clinton, Sarah Palin; they all 
wore designer clothes). The issue is more about context. Every evocative item 
of clothing has a subtext. These are leather trousers, a material that is both 
expensive and fruity in the eyes of the mainstream.

The trousers were worn for the part of the Sunday Times interview in which May 
went “low-ley”; presumably the bit about selfies and NCIS and online shopping. 
Despite the fact there are more women working in government, there is still no 
female uniform equivalent to a suit. Hillary Clinton’s Ralph Lauren pantsuit is 
as close at it gets, but even shewas vilified for dressing like a flag 
<http://www.harpersbazaar.com/fashion/trends/news/a18336/hillary-clinton-presidential-debate-pantsuits/>
 (she wore red, white and blue for each of the three debates). That we still 
place so much focus on what women wear in the public sphere exemplifies just 
how much gender roles continue to shape the lives of female politicians – and 
moreover, how the double-standards enforced on them put their appearances as 
well as their politics squarely in the spotlight. I don’t agree with May’s 
policies, but come on, these trouserslooked gold – they weren’t made of the 
stuff.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Ftheresa-mays-leather-trousers-you-need-a-tough-hide-to-wear-them%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1cae2c43a64a4fd9cdd23098d0d50e6d3f4133c%2F0_0_2068_3144%2F2068.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Theresa%20May's%20leather%20trousers%3A%20you%20need%20a%20tough%20hide%20to%20wear%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Ftheresa-mays-leather-trousers-you-need-a-tough-hide-to-wear-them%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Theresa%20May%27s%20leather%20trousers%3A%20you%20need%20a%20tough%20hide%20to%20wear%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Ftheresa-mays-leather-trousers-you-need-a-tough-hide-to-wear-them%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1cae2c43a64a4fd9cdd23098d0d50e6d3f4133c%2F0_0_2068_3144%2F2068.jpg>
 Donald Trump, like Vladimir Putin, favours Brioni suits. Photograph: Startraks 
Photo/REX/Shutterstock 
 Perhaps then it’s less about what you wear and more about how you wear it. 
The two male politicians most associated with May – the opposition, Jeremy 
Corbyn, and the “ally”, Donald Trump – are at opposing ends of the sartorial 
spectrum. Towards election time,campaign spokesperson Hope Hicks confirmed that 
Trump was wearing Brioni suits 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/07/fashion/mens-style/donald-trump-brioni-martin-greenfield-suits.html?_r=0>
. Brioni is an expensive brand (prices start at about £5,000), but it is a 
brand long associated with the Washington elite. Regardless of cost, repetition 
breeds familiarity. The styling tics – the creased jacket, the staid ties, the 
baseball caps – only helped his cause.

Corbyn has run the gamut of questionable styling but his standout piece – a 
beige Polo Harrington jacket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jul/28/jeremy-corbyn-and-his-ralph-lauren-jacket-stylewatch>
 – will have cost almost £200. As brands go, Ralph Lauren doesn’t chime 
particularly well with his socialist vision but then the way he wears it – 
repeatedly, eking out the cost per wear – suggests the brand is immaterial. The 
two men are scarcely comparable but there’s certainly less focus on their 
clothing than there could be, given there’s a lot to play with.

 We want our politicians to reflect and represent us, and that includes their 
wardrobes. The minute they deviate, we jump on them. Therein lies a paradox: a 
good politician is rooted in commonality but a bone of vanity, or even 
narcissism, must come with the job. So maybe it’s a question of taste. Gold 
leather trousers aren’t for everyone. Personally, I’m quite into them.
 