
What was Theresa May thinking in attacking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/29/theresa-may-john-kerry-comments-israel-palestine-un-resolution>
 the US secretary of stateJohn Kerry’s address 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/28/john-kerry-israel-palestine-speech-video>
 on the need for atwo-state solution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/28/the-two-state-solution-in-the-middle-east-all-you-need-to-know>
 to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict? Her spokesman said on Thursday: “We do 
not ... believe that the way to negotiate peace is by focusing on only one 
issue, in this case the construction of settlements, when clearly the conflict 
between the Israelis and Palestinians is so deeply complex.”

This is extraordinary. Why would May attack Kerry for suggesting that 
settlements were the main obstacle to peace? Did she read his speech? In it, he 
stated that “settlements are not the whole or even the primary cause of this 
conflict” and strongly condemned terrorism and incitement against Israel. More 
extraordinary still, why would the British prime minister criticise Kerry when 
her own government played a leading role in the passing ofUN security council 
resolution 2334 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/23/us-abstention-allows-un-to-demand-end-to-israeli-settlements>
 which condemned Israel over its settlement expansion? Kerry ordered the United 
States to abstain while May’s government voted in favour.

Critics of the expansion of Jewish settlements on the West Bank have warned 
that this will lead to the burial of the two-state solution withIsrael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> becoming responsible for some 2.6 
million Palestinians in the West Bank.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fjohn-kerry-israel-palestine-speech-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=John%20Kerry%3A%20Israel%20must%20adopt%20two-state%20solution%20for%20lasting%20peace%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fjohn-kerry-israel-palestine-speech-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=John%20Kerry%3A%20Israel%20must%20adopt%20two-state%20solution%20for%20lasting%20peace%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fjohn-kerry-israel-palestine-speech-video&media=>
John Kerry: Israel must adopt two-state solution for lasting peace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/28/john-kerry-israel-palestine-speech-video>
Certainly, May is a strong supporter of Israel. On 12 December, she delivered 
<http://www.conservativehome.com/parliament/2016/12/mays-speech-to-the-conservative-friends-of-israel-full-text.html>
 one of the more pro-Israeli speeches you will hear by a sitting British prime 
minister. In an address to theConservative Friends of Israel 
<https://cfoi.co.uk/>, she spoke of her pride in the Balfour Declaration of 1917
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/on-the-middle-east/2016/jul/27/will-palestinians-sue-britain-over-the-balfour-declaration-of-1917>
 in which Britain recognised the establishment of a Jewish homeland in 
Palestine. She described Israel as “a remarkable country ... a thriving 
democracy, a beacon of tolerance, an engine of enterprise and an example to the 
rest of the world.” Yet in the same address, she added that it was important to 
be “honest with our friends, like Israel, because that is what true friendship 
is about. That is why [Britain] has been clear about building new, illegal 
settlements: it is wrong; it is not conducive to peace; and it must stop.”

The US state department has already expressed its disappointment with May’s 
comments and pointed out that Kerry’s remarks were in line with UK policy. Like 
Kerry, she is also convinced that the two-state solution is the only avenue to 
durable peace in the Middle East. So what explains her attack on Kerry this 
week?

One immediate clue is the reaction of Israel’s prime minister Binyamin 
Netanyahu <https://www.theguardian.com/world/binyamin-netanyahu> to UN 
resolution 2334. If May thought that negotiating Brexit was difficult, she has 
another headache to contend with: Netanyahu is furious with Britain because of 
its strong backing for the resolution. It went through with the United States 
uncharacteristically withholding its veto and Britain is now on the naughty 
step. The Netanyahu government’s response to the international condemnation was 
somewhathysterical 
<https://www.thenation.com/article/the-reason-for-israels-hysterical-response-to-the-un-security-council-resolution/>
, and May might have calculated that retaining influence with the Netanyahu 
government requires her to distance herself from the Obama administration which 
is not flavour of the month in Jerusalem. Britain remains one of Israel’s 
strongest allies in Europe and May wants to keep it that way.

There are interesting parallels here with Margaret Thatcher’s relationship 
with the Israeli leaderMenachem Begin 
<http://www.nytimes.com/learning/general/onthisday/bday/0816.html> during her 
early years in power. Thatcher, like May, was very sympathetic towards Israel. 
Yet Begin made the mistake of alienating Thatcher with his truculent stance 
over settlement expansion, and their relationship never recovered. Netanyahu is 
making the same mistake with Israel’s friends today, but May no doubt believes 
that she can exercise a positive influence over the Israeli leader who is still 
on record (for now) as a supporter of the two-state solution.

Theresa May's criticism of John Kerry Israel speech sparks blunt US reply
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/29/theresa-may-john-kerry-comments-israel-palestine-un-resolution>
Critically, May also wants to curry favour with the incoming Trump 
administration which has suggested that it is ready tomove the US embassy to 
Jerusalem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/21/us-israel-embassy-jerusalem-peace-process>
, as part of a break with existing US policy on the Arab-Israeli conflict. His 
designated ambassador to Israel is a strong supporter of settlement expansion 
in the West Bank.

Britain’s ambassador to Washington, Kim Darroch, has suggested that in 
building ties with Trump, May will want to emulate the Reagan-Thatcher 
relationship. However, the Arab-Israeli conflict was one arena where there were 
very strong disagreements between the two leaders. Thatcher tried valiantly to 
persuade Reagan to exert pressure on the Israelis as a means to breaking the 
deadlock in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict but she was unsuccessful. She was 
not especially sympathetic to the Palestinian cause but she feared that a 
failure to resolve the conflict would leave a dangerous vacuum that would work 
to the advantage of the Soviet Union and extremist forces in the region. 
Ultimately, she was right.

Perhaps May believes that she can succeed where Thatcher failed in persuading 
Trump to advance the two-state solution. If that is the case, we can only wish 
her the best of luck.
 