
Theresa May will undertake one of the toughest diplomatic tasks of her 
premiership when she visits Turkey later this month to try to assuage anger at 
Ankara’s treatment by theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> 
and the Obama administration.


The British prime minister will also have to respond to claims that her 
cabinet colleagues used the unlikely threat of imminent Turkish membership of 
the EU to whip up a leave vote in the Brexit referendum.

Boris Johnson, now the foreign secretary, was one of the leading voices in the 
leave campaign who claimed Turkey was on the brink of joining the EU and was 
set to be given permission for mass visa-free travel into the EU.He also wrote 
a satirical limerick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/19/boris-johnson-wins-most-offensive-erdogan-poem-competition>
 describing President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan as a “wankerer” who had sex with a 
goat.

Johnson has since visited Ankara 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/27/boris-johnson-turkey-recep-tayyip-erdogan-lewd-poem-mevlut-cavusoglu-kurds>
 to repair the damage and assert that the UK supports Turkish membership of the 
EU – the longstanding Foreign Office position.

Ankara deeply resents what it views as the EU’s collective failure to deliver 
in full onpromises made last March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/18/eu-deal-turkey-migrants-refugees-q-and-a>
 of visa-free travel and cash to compensate Turkey for the burden of looking 
after millions of Syrian refugees.

The EU has been increasingly alarmed at the authoritarian trend in Turkish 
politics, especially sincethe attempted coup in July last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey-coup-attempt>. Turkey has defended 
mass arrests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/12/turkish-police-arrests-istanbul-bombings>
 and acrackdown on free speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/03/free-speech-groups-condemn-turkeys-closure-of-29-publishers-after-failed-coup>
 by arguing that it is locked in a twin war against Kurdish separatists and 
Islamic State fighters.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Ftheresa-may-diplomatic-trip-to-turkey-ankara-refugees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e77ff40d6b9bcdb6e4d5e312cad92ae357abd0e%2F0_217_3480_2088%2F3480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Theresa%20May%20to%20make%20delicate%20diplomatic%20trip%20to%20Turkey&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Ftheresa-may-diplomatic-trip-to-turkey-ankara-refugees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Theresa%20May%20to%20make%20delicate%20diplomatic%20trip%20to%20Turkey&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Ftheresa-may-diplomatic-trip-to-turkey-ankara-refugees%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e77ff40d6b9bcdb6e4d5e312cad92ae357abd0e%2F0_217_3480_2088%2F3480.jpg>
 Boris Johnson shakes hands with President Erdoğan during a visit to Ankara in 
September. Photograph: EPA 
This week, the foreign minister, Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu, accused the EU of wasting 
Turkey’s time and reminded Brussels to meet the obligations of the March 
refugee deal. A payment of €3bn due before the end of 2016 was still to be 
finalised, he said.

May, who will probably arrive in Ankara on 17 January, will distance the UK 
from the hold-up in the flow of EU cash toTurkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey>.


Turkey’s trading relationship with the EU has been held up as a possible 
future model for the UK. Since 1996, Turkey has been a member of the EU customs 
union for some goods but not for others.

Overall, Turkey’s relations with the UK are better than with many other EU 
countries, partly because the UK responded quickly to the coup attempt. The
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> minister, Alan Duncan, 
was dispatched to Ankara on 22 July, becoming the first EU minister to express 
solidarity with the Turkish government by visiting the capital.

To keep those relations on an even keel, May will need to tread a careful path 
over the UK’s approach to the Syrian Kurdish forces of the Democratic Union 
party (PYD), the force at the forefront of the US-led battle to drive Islamic 
State from Raqqa, the Isis headquarters in north-eastSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>.

Turkey regards the PYD as an extension of the PKK terrorist organisation that 
is fighting for greater independence in Turkey. Ankara hopes that Donald Trump 
will join Turkey’s new alliance with Vladimir Putin and reject working with the 
PYD.

May, who is likely to arrive days before Trump is inaugurated, will have to 
acknowledge Turkish concerns about the PYD without setting out a new approach 
to Syria before the US or the EU has formulated any such policy.

The UK’s public position remains that President Bashar al-Assad must leave 
office as part of a political transition, but that may not emerge as the stance 
of the Trump administration.

May’s visit will also come as talks on a possible reunification of Cyprus 
reach a critical stage. The two sides of the island are due to hold a peace 
conference in Geneva next week, with Turkey, Greece and the UK acting as 
security guarantors. The aim is to hold a referendum later this year, which 
will require agreement on the gradual withdrawal of up to 30,000 Turkish troops 
from the north of the island.
 