
Abbas Kiarostami’s death and the furore in Iran over whether patients are 
denied information over how ill they are (Death of acclaimed film-maker ignites 
row over secrecy in Iranian hospitals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/14/abbas-kiarostami-film-maker-death-sparks-debate-patient-right-be-informed-iran>
, 15 July) has an even darker side when it comes to numerous political 
prisoners being held in Iran. In places like Tehran’s notorious Evin prison, 
inmates are regularly denied urgently needed medical treatment as a means to 
pressure them into “confessing” to crimes or providing statements of 
“repentance”.

Even prisoners with very serious conditions like cancer or brain haemorrhages 
have been denied treatment for years on end. Our research shows that Iranian 
prison officials, doctors and prosecutors are all complicit in this abuse, 
which is tantamount to torture.

One such case is Kamal Foroughi, a 76-year-old UK-Iranian businessman who’s 
been held at Evin since 2011. Despite suffering from various medical conditions 
and needing specialised medical tests – including screening for cancer – 
Foroughi was denied medical tests for four and a half years.

Like Nazanin Ratcliffe-Zaghari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/12/nazanin-zaghari-ratcliffe-iran-husband-urges-cameron-help>
, the UK-Iranian charity worker who’s been detained for 100 days and counting, 
Mr Foroughi appears to be a pawn in Iran’s ongoing diplomatic battle with the 
west.

Theresa May’s new government needs to ensure that the plight of these and 
other detained British nationals in Iran are now made a key focus of the UK’s 
bilateral relations with Iran.
Allan Hogarth
Head of policy and government affairs, Amnesty International 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/amnesty-international> UK

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 