
It was a good day to query the government’s use of flimsy statistics to 
justify massive infrastructure projects.After Hinkley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/15/hinkley-point-c-nuclear-power-station-gets-go-ahead>
, we’re on to Heathrow’s third runway and HS2 – and Andrew Tyrie, chairman of 
the Treasury select committee, is unhappy on both fronts.

On airports, he still hasn’t had a reply to five requests for more detailed 
disclosures of the assumptions used in theAirports Commission’s final report 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/increasing-the-uks-long-term-aviation-capacity>
. But his bigger beef is with the high-speed railway. “HS2 has the weakest 
economic case of all the projects within the infrastructure programme, yet it 
is being pushed through with the most enthusiasm,” he says. He’s right.

What’s more, the cost of HS2 almost puts the other two in the shade. Hinkley 
and Heathrow are both £18bn projects, or thereabouts.HS2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/hs2> is a £42.5bn or £55bn adventure, depending 
on whose numbers you prefer, and could be hurtling towards £70bn or £80bn by 
the time incidentals, like new trains, are included. The case for review ought 
to be overwhelming.

The momentum behind HS2, however, seems strong now that Chris Grayling, the 
new transport secretary,has come out in favour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/17/hs2-go-ahead-transport-secretary-chris-grayling>
. Like some of his predecessors, Grayling has given up justifying HS2 on 
grounds of speed and instead relies on the argument that more capacity is 
needed, especially on the west coast mainline. But then Grayling makes the leap 
that any new capacity must automatically be of the high-speed variety. “Of 
course it makes sense, if we’re going to build a new railway line, for it to be 
a fast railway line, to reduce travel times from north to south,” he said in 
July. “That’s logical.”

Urgent clarity needed on HS2 costs and timescale, MPs warn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/14/hs2-high-speed-rail-project-commons-public-accounts-committee-report>
Is it really, though? Has the government approached the cost-benefit analysis 
with an open mind? A House of Lords committee last year urged the government to 
review options involving lower speeds, and Tyrie wants to see something 
similar. “The question of whether it is possible to improve capacity at lower 
speed and, consequently, at a lower cost, has not been comprehensively 
examined,” he told Grayling yesterday.

It should be examined. So should smaller-scale enhancements of the road and 
railway networks that could deliver benefits more quickly. With Hinkley, prime 
minister Theresa May paused for thought and then failed, it seems, to consider 
costs. She must do better with HS2.

Choppy waters jolt Next’s even keel

For once, Lord Wolfson’s ingrained caution was fully justified. Next’s chief 
executive warned of tough trading conditions in his last City outing, and he 
was correct. Sales at Next rose 2.6% to £1.96bn in the six months to July, but
pre-tax profits fell 1.5% to £342m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/15/next-retail-profits-slide-as-consumers-shun-full-price-clothes>
. The punters come out for cut-price sales but it is harder to persuade them to 
buy new clothes at full price.

In the circumstances, the 5% fall in the share price was understandable. Note, 
however, that Wolfson, who is admirably strict in providing forecasts of 
profits for the full year, didn’t tweak his projections one jot. He’s still 
expecting the final quarter to be strong compared with a year ago, when the 
country was basking in winter sunshine.

That should serve as a reminder that the post-Brexit fall in sterling, though 
important for clothing retailers, is not the whole story. Next’s shares, at a 
shade under £50, trade at about 11 times earnings and carry a 3% dividend 
yield. Not bad for a company that hasn’t gone seriously off the rails for a 
couple of decades.

Juncker talks the talk over Barroso’s Goldman affair

“Personally I do not have a problem with him working for a private bank – but 
maybe not this bank,”says European commission president Jean-Claude Juncker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/15/jean-claude-juncker-jose-manuel-barroso-decision-to-join-goldman-sachs>
, getting himself deeper into the row over predecessor José Manuel Barroso’s 
choice of Goldman Sachs as new employer.

Loathing Goldman, as an icon of Wall Street’s power and greed, is a popular 
sport, and not only in Europe. But let’s hear Juncker’s definition of an 
unsuitable bank for a former Brussels bureaucrat. Goldman, says Juncker, was 
“one of the organisations that knowingly or unknowingly contributed to the 
enormous financial crisis we had between 2007 and 2009”.

Barroso hits back at Brussels over inquiry into Goldman Sachs role
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/13/jose-manuel-barroso-brussels-ec-european-commission-inquiry-ethics-goldman-sachs>
But dozens of banks could fit that description – certainly those that 
originated US sub-prime mortgages. Goldman, as it happens, did little 
origination, although it was up to its neck in the securitisation of financial 
junk. Should all banks in the sub-prime game be ruled offside? If so, shouldn’t 
the commission have drawn up a blacklist, which would include several European 
firms?

Juncker has booted the Barroso affair to the commission’s ethics committee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/06/eu-ethics-watchdog-intervenes-on-jose-manuel-barroso-goldman-job>
, but it’s hard to believe he intends to apply any actual sanctions. It would 
oblige him to draw up a few rules, which is harder than making airy statements.
 