
A rather curious posting appeared over on the Atlantic's entertainment pages 
this week. TitledJack White's Women Problem 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/entertainment/archive/2012/04/jack-whites-women-problem/256349/>
, it set out the case against theformer White Striper 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/jack-white>, Raconteur, Dead Weatherer and 
lately Blunderbussing solo artist as a man waging a personal war against the 
ladies.

White, its author insisted, unleashes vitriol on any woman who threatens his 
"control"; his songs reveal a man who wants women to be "quiet and submissive" 
while storing up special rage for the "modern-day woman, with her sexual 
freedom and iPhone [representing] power and choice". His professional dealings 
with female artists, meanwhile, show nothing more than a fellow who delights in 
shaping and controlling women. And furthermore: "As a lyricist [he] has been 
obsessed with women for more than a decade now, perhaps to a greater extent 
than any other rock star in his generation."

Tell that to Dave Grohl <https://www.theguardian.com/music/dave-grohl>. Or the 
Kings of Leon. Or Josh Homme.

It wasn't the most robust of arguments, fuelled by supposition and leaps of 
speculation, and the cherrypicking of White lyrics to fit the cause. But it's 
worth disputing, because this type of character assassination is too easily and 
too casually spun, and perhaps more importantly, it bleeds all the joy out of 
rock'n'roll.

Listen to any of the most revered artists of the past 80 years, be they male 
or female, and you'll see their work tells of the great bewildering battle of 
the sexes: that Bessie Smith sure had a man problem. And jeez, was that Bruce 
Springsteen ever hung up on the ladies. And exactly what didBob Dylan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/bobdylan> mean about breaking just like a 
little girl?

I listened to Jack White being interviewed on the Today programme 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/today/hi/today/newsid_9716000/9716534.stm> earlier this 
week. Asked if the material onhis first solo album 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/album/37f48931-e5e6-488f-a531-ad2db311158d> 
was inherently more personal, he took a deft little step to the left and spoke 
of how once upon a time songs were recognised as stories, tales dreamed up 
about mining disasters or shipwrecks, rather than the gut-spilling troubadour 
confessionals we've grown accustomed to.

Whether or not this is true in the case of the songs on Blunderbuss, or if his 
response was a double-fox or a tail-turn, who can say – certainly not since 
Dylan has an artist played with our perceptions the way that White does. But I 
do think we need to be wary of squeezing the literal truth out of songs; rarely 
are they fossils belonging to a certain time or place; a love song can 
encompass many lovers; to paraphraseRobert Frost 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robert_Frost>, a blues can begin as a 
homesickness, a lovesickness, or sometimes just a lump in the throat.

So is White, as the Atlantic article suggests, all riled up over Meg White and 
Karen Elson? Possibly. But these are women he has been married to, and we tend 
to have a few feathers to spit in the direction of those we love and have 
loved; and ultimately, this is an issue of proximity rather than gender.

If you wish to pore over White's lyrics you'll find plenty of examples of 
tenderness to counterbalance any venom. Springing to his baby's defence in 
Truth Doesn't Make a Noise, he snarls: "The way you treat her, it fills me with 
rage, and I wanna tear apart the place." Or as the protagonist of You've Got 
Her in Your Pocket, seeing his own flaws and failings, and so petrified of 
losing the girl he loves that he wants to keep her to himself: "But now she 
might leave, like she's threatened before / Grab hold of her fast before her 
feet leave the floor / And she's out the door / Cause you want / To keep her in 
your pocket …" These aren't examples of misogyny, but of the types of extreme 
emotion that love can inspire.

More broadly, White has been a great champion of women in rock'n'roll – from 
his "big sister Meg" playing drums in theStripes 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/thewhitestripes>, to Alison Mosshart fronting 
theDead Weather 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/artist/334bd887-9044-4c38-aebd-4baab851efb4>, 
to the work he's done withLoretta Lynn 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/artist/613260c3-d620-4645-94cd-33cd55f29b1e>, 
Wanda Jackson and Smoke Fairies, to name but a few.

It's undeniable that White's music is fired by the difference between male and 
female – he makes this quite clear on his current tourby employing two separate 
male and female bands 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/apr/24/jack-white-review>, and it was 
equally clear in the White Stripes, a duo forged by the energy between its male 
and female players.

Often his lyrics do reveal a yearning for a time when the roles of the sexes 
were more distinct, with all his talk of chivalry and gentlemen and jackets in 
the mud, and of how "every little girl needs help climbing up a tree". But 
nowhere does he assert that the masculine is superior to the feminine, rather 
that there are differences to be celebrated.

I love the masculinity of White's music. In an era of Coldplays 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/friday_review/story/0,,347745,00.html> and Keanes, I 
love the unabashed virility of it. And the reason I always adored the White 
Stripes was that there was such raw sexuality to it – a kind of primal 
femininity to Meg's drumming that met perfectly the masculinity of Jack's voice 
and guitar. It was music from the gut and the groin.

So does Jack White <https://www.theguardian.com/music/jack-white> have a woman 
problem? No more than any man ever had a woman problem, and no more than any 
woman had a man problem. What has always driven great art, great literature, 
great music has been the fire between the sexes. No matter what the social 
equalities we achieve, the pay gaps diminished, the glass ceilings broken, 
we're never going to dampen that fire. And nor should we want to. For in the 
push and the pull of gender lies a glory and a magic.
 