
The danger in Cyprus <https://www.theguardian.com/world/cyprus> is now very 
great. However good the Government’s new plan may be, there is virtually no 
chance that it will satisfy both sides and so prevent another bloody outbreak 
of violence in the island. Indeed, it cannot satisfy the Turkish minority 
which, inspired and directed by the Turkish Government, is determined to 
prevent any settlement which does not give them partition at once. It is true 
that, in so behaving, the Turks are merely imitating the Greeks, who have tried 
to get Enosis by means of terrorism. But there is an officially calculated 
brutality about present Turkish policy which nothing can justify.

The British Government should make two things clear to the world. First, 
Britain cannot and must not leave Cyprus until some settlement has been reached 
which will protect the lives of the Cypriots. One Palestine story is enough. 
Secondly, Britain no longer has any reason or desire to retain permanent 
sovereignty over the island. If a base is really needed, it should be a Nato 
base and not a British one.

Everything possible should now be done to internationalise this dispute. The 
United States should be asked to restrain Turkey, and if need be the Government 
should not hesitate to go to the United Nations. It is not only Cyprus which is 
at stake but peace in the Eastern Mediterranean.

Key quote

“My honour is 15 years too late. They always are for the arts. Nobody gets 
anything until they are in their seventies.” Dame Maggie Teyte on her inclusion 
in the Queen’s birthday honours list

Talking point

The Wolverhampton licensing magistrate will have to decide whether to renew 
the licence of a new luxury ballroom which is openly operating a colour bar as 
a matter of policy.

Observer news story
 