
It’s not very long ago that advocates for Brexit were making the forceful case 
that if the European Union were really serious about hanging on to the UK it 
would be prepared to seriously rethink what our membership would mean. They had 
a point. If David Cameron had been able to return from his Brussels 
negotiations with the kind of indisputable headline concessions that would have 
won over some waverers in parliament and muted the Eurosceptic press – 
specifically, an“emergency brake” on migration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/24/brexit-deal-free-movement-exemption-seven-years>
 – it is very possible that the integrity of that union would have endured. 
Four months later, the failure to accept that price begins to seem tragic.

Weird, then, that the very people who pointed out that problem are now in 
danger of committing exactly the same mistake themselves. Today, Theresa May 
will hold talks about Brexit with the leaders of the devolved governments of 
Scotland, Wales andNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>, and while that initiative is 
welcome (and overdue), much of the mood music around it betrays exactly the 
same magical thinking that has infected so much of our response to the 
referendum result.

Europe isn’t just about trade. It’s about humanity too | Zoe Williams
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/24/europe-not-just-trade-about-humanity-too>
Amid warnings from the Institute of Government that a failure to reach 
agreement with the devolved leaders over the termscould lead to a 
constitutional crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/24/theresa-may-constitutional-crisis-brexit-deal-institute-for-government>
, the most substantial concession May appears to have been willing to make is 
the offer of a “direct line” to David Davis for Nicola Sturgeon et al. Thrilled 
though they will surely be to get his number, this is ultimately not the sort 
of concession that is likely to build a consensus. Instead, asthe Sun on Sunday 
quoted 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/2031215/theresa-may-will-lay-down-the-law-on-brexit-to-scotland-wales-and-northern-ireland/>
 a Downing Street source as saying yesterday, May “will make it clear that this 
is a decision for the whole UK and that she is in charge”. Well, if Downing 
Street Sources want a critique of that rhetorical approach, they would do well 
to ring up Vote Leave Sources from about June, who will patiently explain to 
them that no decent government would meekly subordinate the interests of the 
people it represents to some abstract appeal about the greater good of the 
wider union.

In particular, the Scottish government’s case for a flexible Brexit – Flexit! 
– for different parts of the UK may be hard to swallow, and to execute; but if 
there isn’t at least a willingness to talk about such a step (and May has shown 
none), Scottish people will listen much more closely to Sturgeon’s case that 
their interests are simply being ignored. Instead, an anglo-centric 
Conservative government is making tubthumping appeals to its own constituents, 
and putting the future of the union at risk. It’s hard not to think of the 
spluttering apoplexy of those who thought thatUnilever’s position on Marmite 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/13/unilever-finance-director-graeme-pitkethly-defends-company-tesco-price-row-marmite>
 was unpatriotic, or that the remaining EU nations will be doing something 
wicked if they choose to make it difficult for us to leavepour encourager les 
autres. Each of these arguments is based on a blind faith that the interests of 
the UK (and, in particular, English people) are somehow a universal benefit, a 
goal that should be a priority for every relevant actor even when they clash 
with their own best outcome. If we’re going to have a bearable Brexit, this 
rhetorical myopia has to end quickly. And if it doesn’t, the future of our own 
union may be just as blighted as the future of the European one.
 