
Fashion week is one of those things that completely dominates your life for 
eight weeks of every year. (That's four cities, twice around, in spring and 
autumn.) Or else it catches your eye from the middle shelf of your 
supermarket's print section every once in a while.

If you're a fashion journalist or designer, chances are you've been living on 
instant ramen and Alka-Seltzer for the past month, observing "momentous" 
shifts. If you're anybody else, absolutely nothing has changed. There's a 
disconnect between real time and fashion time that makes it difficult for 
things that might seem fantastically controversial during fashion week to cross 
over into the mainstream.

To the fashion press, Marc Jacobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/marc-jacobs> dressing Cara Delevingne 
and Georgia Jagger in flat shoes with thick, straw-coloured bobbed wigs was a 
pivotal moment in New York this season. To the rest of the world, it was a 
couple of people with scarecrow hair.

I'm sure you get the point. It's hard for fashion to hold people's attention 
for longer than the 15 seconds it takes to describe whatVictoria Beckham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/victoria-beckham> wore to dinner with 
Karl Lagerfeld <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/karl-lagerfeld> last night. 
Of course, we've learned to acknowledge theeconomic importance of fashion. 
Because, while the manic month of shows is about as familiar to most of us as 
the idea of buying aSaint Laurent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/saint-laurent> tube dress for £1,500, the 
fashion industry is a behemoth of employment.

We're also learning about the importance of the representation of women in the 
industry. There is still a distinct lack of diversity – from the high street 
right up to the shows. White models outnumber all other ethnicities combined. 
And the line that fashion is for thin people might be the most tired of 
cliches, but that doesn't stop it from being 100% accurate.

Fashion is certainly a wonderful expression of art and culture and anyone who 
brushes it off as entirely shallow or frivolous is missing the point – but 
inclusive and accessible it is not.

Which is why those with a keen interest in the industry become especially 
alert when fashion stories go mainstream. And those moments are, more often 
than not, to do with issues of female representation. Heroin chic is an obvious 
example, which directed the public's gaze to the protruding ribs of its fashion 
icons.John Galliano's antisemitic rant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/video/2013/jun/13/john-galliano-apologises-antisemitic-video>
 was another. In fact, anorexia, drugs and racism are the three main reasons my 
dad might call me up to inquire nervously whether I really think it's a good 
idea to aspire to being a fashion editor.

Sure, it can be a pretty cruel world. Which is probably why nobody was 
particularly surprised to seeFemen <https://www.theguardian.com/world/femen>, 
the feminist protest group, storming the catwalk atNina Ricci 
<http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/articles/509777/20130928/femen-naked-bare-breasted-feminist-paris-fashion.htm>
 in Paris on Friday, chests daubed with the messages: "Model don't go to 
brothel" and "Fashion Dictaterror".

It's not hard to see how Femen would come to the conclusion that the fashion 
industry is a hostile, intolerant place; and, in the past few years, there has 
been some pretty depressing coverage of just how bad it can be. The recent 
documentary,Girl Model 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/143068/girl-model>, featuring 
13-year-old girls scouted in Siberia and sent to Japan where they're swindled 
into running up huge debts by agencies, isn't a particularly reassuring 
snapshot of the modelling world. The fact that so many of these young girls are 
forced into the sex trade because they're left to fend for themselves, broke in 
a country where they can't even read the road signs, is certainly good reason 
to highlight unhealthy attitudes towards women.

In this case, though, I'm not entirely convinced at how effective the stunt 
will be. Femen's argument that a sexualised and aggressively sexist media are 
consistently undermining genuine female beauty and femininity is incredibly 
important. The problem is: Femen's tried-and-tested methods will not force much 
of a shift in established assumptions.

The world already looks at the fashion industry with mixed feelings of 
bemusement, if not distaste. Images ofFemen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/femen> storming a runway surrounded by 
bored, uncomfortable journalists don't really scream anything other than: just 
how fired is that PR company going to be, the one that accidentally let the 
protesters in?

If you really want to make a clear statement about issues in the industry, you 
need to pick up the tools being used against women and work with them 
constructively. This is precisely whatRick Owens did at his Paris fashion week 
show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2013/sep/27/rick-owens-models-dancers-paris-fashion-week>
, when he decided to design for – and present his collection with – a team of 
athletes from across the US. Futuristic sportswear in black, white and tan did 
not hang off teenagers, but was worn by healthy, powerful and ethnically 
diverse women, working together in performance.

Perhaps this, much more than any stunt, is the most important moment of the 
season and a significant landmark in fashion history. Owens didn't just decide 
to court controversy by inviting a few "out of the ordinary" models to parade 
down his catwalk. In any case, we are now inured to the sight of the odd 
anomaly or two. Instead, Owens designed clothes specifically to fit and 
complement this powerful group of women.

Managing to draw issues of female representation in fashion to the forefront 
of people's minds with art and performance, and on the back of his entire 
reputation, is hugely brave and hugely effective. Anna Wintour once said that 
"fashion reflects the times just as much as a headline in a newspaper". Femen's 
objective of justmaking headlines misses the point; it was Rick Owens who so 
successfully reflected a serious cultural issue in his work.

Which is why I'll be wearing Rick Owens for the foreseeable future. Though 
when I say wear, I am using that term very loosely. (Have you seen the prices?) 
Why don't we just channel Owens instead? After all, who doesn't have a pair of 
trainers and a scowl knocking around at the back of their wardrobe?

Bertie Brandes works for Vice magazine
 