
Almost as staggering as the current enormous influx into cities across the 
globe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/nov/23/cities-in-numbers-how-patterns-of-urban-growth-change-the-world>
 is the dramatic slowdown in urbanisation that will follow it. The world is 
literally going to town on urbanisation – but it is a project that is both 
immense and historically fleeting.

In less than 100 years, the world’s urban population is expected to double to 
8 or 9 billion – accounting for the bulk of aprojected global population of 
around 11 billion 
<https://esa.un.org/unpd/wup/Publications/Files/WUP2014-Highlights.pdf>. Yet in 
all the centuries that follow this one, cities may add, at most, another 
billion to their ranks. So if this century is the most urbanising in history, 
it will also mark the end of humankind’s “great urbanisation” era.


Thus the next few decades will be hugely influential in determining the 
patterns of production, behaviour and governance that humanity locks into, and 
the innovative efficiency with which it utilises the earth’s resources. The 
future of the world’s urban population will mostly be built in our lifetimes.

The consequences of bad government and inaction over planning and urban design 
will last decades or centuries. Once the urban population is stable, and road, 
rail and utility networks have been laid down, it will be much harder to 
undertake reform or retrofit urban infrastructure. This is why the subject 
deserves the urgent attention of policymakers, academics and business 
entrepreneurs worldwide.


This week, global leaders are meeting in Marrakech for the 22nd UN climate 
summit (Cop22 <http://cop22.ma/en>). They are discussing how to limit 
greenhouse gas emissions sufficiently to hold global warming well below 2°C,as 
was agreed a year ago in Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/12/paris-climate-deal-key-points>
. If new cities are built on a carbon-intensive, resource-hungry model, then 
all hope of meeting these ambitious targets will be lost.

Humans work best in cities … but urbanisation also creates pollution, 
congestion, poor health, crime and waste

The good news, however, is that it is possible to meet these targets in a way 
that improves wellbeing and stimulates global productivity and wealth. 
Innovative, well-run cities are uniquely placed to solve these major global 
challenges, in conjunction with national governments.

Humans work best in cities, that’s why we’re moving there. The clustering of 
people generates higher productivity and higher wages. A mix of specialisation 
and diversity generates a fertile environment for innovation in ideas, 
technologies and processes.

But urbanisation also creates its own problems, in the form of pollution, 
congestion, poor health, crime and waste. Unregulated, unplanned urban sprawl 
is often the cheapest option in the short run – but the long-run costs to 
society, the economy and the environment can be dire.


At the UN’s Habitat III 
<http://citiscope.org/habitatIII/explainer/2016/09/what-habitat-iii> conference 
in Ecuador last month, global leaders and urban experts signed into force the
New Urban Agenda <https://habitat3.org/the-new-urban-agenda/>, a blueprint for 
the next 20 years of urban transformation. It set out an ambitious and laudable 
vision of more compact cities and public transport-based development – but the 
real test will be in the implementation.

Turning words into action requires overcoming domestic opposition and 
providing finance to the cities most in need. This means recognising that 
climate action can deliver local benefits to citizens, even in the short term – 
and it’s why theParis Agreement 
<http://unfccc.int/paris_agreement/items/9485.php>, which came into effect last 
week, set out to bring city actors together with national players through the
Global Covenant of Mayors 
<https://www.compactofmayors.org/globalcovenantofmayors/>. Already, 7,100 
cities from 119 countries have committed to the associatedCompact of Mayors for 
Climate and Energy <https://www.compactofmayors.org/>, pledging to support 
meeting national targets.

With the cost of renewable and energy efficiency technologies having fallen to 
levels competitive with conventional fuels (even before accounting for the 
unpriced costs associated with the latter’s use), the opportunities from urban 
action to reduce emissions becomes plain to see. Be it through investing in 
electric vehicles, building smart grids, constructing energy-efficient homes, 
planning limits on urban sprawl, investing in renewable power or providing 
integrated public transport, such action generates a number of important 
benefits – not least, tackling the growing and deadly problem ofair pollution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/pollution> all over the world.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fmankind-great-urbanisation-era-act-now-planet-pay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c571af886e6ca1274d3dfcb78ec6f8eb38105d1%2F0_316_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=This%20is%20humankind's%20'great%20urbanisation'.%20We%20must%20do%20it%20right%2C%20or%20the%20planet%20will%20pay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fmankind-great-urbanisation-era-act-now-planet-pay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=This%20is%20humankind%27s%20%27great%20urbanisation%27.%20We%20must%20do%20it%20right%2C%20or%20the%20planet%20will%20pay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fmankind-great-urbanisation-era-act-now-planet-pay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c571af886e6ca1274d3dfcb78ec6f8eb38105d1%2F0_316_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 Pedestrians walk through dust and smog in New Delhi at the weekend. 
Photograph: Harish Tyagi/EPA 
Air pollution costs millions of lives every year. The European Environment 
Agency 
<http://www.eea.europa.eu/media/newsreleases/many-europeans-still-exposed-to-air-pollution-2015/premature-deaths-attributable-to-air-pollution>
 estimates that premature deaths resulting from a single particulate pollutant 
(PM2.5) totalled approximately 432,000 in 2012 in Europe alone, while around 
75,000 people die each year as a result of prolonged exposure to NO2 air 
pollution. Arecent study <http://newclimateeconomy.report/> by the World 
Resources Institute put the health impacts in China of PM2.5 exposure 
(including premature deaths) at a shocking 10-13% of the country’s annual GDP.

Thus, air pollution is one key reason why the Global Commission on the Economy 
and Climate <http://newclimateeconomy.report/2014> found that more than half of 
the reduction in global emissions required to meet an ambitious climate target 
could generate net benefits to the economy.

Implementing policy action to reduce emissions is often easiest at the city 
level. This means increased effort is required to devolve administration to the 
urban level and empower cities through greater fiscal autonomy. Things like 
recycling schemes, energy from waste, broadband networks, integrated public 
transport systems, “smart” buildings and biking networks are easy to appreciate 
and can come with popular local support.

Corruption stifles incentives to work and innovate … and risks rendering 
cities dysfunctional

Local accountability is also a vital part of good governance. In large parts 
of the world, this means fighting urban corruption and supporting institutional 
capacity. Corruption stifles incentives to work and innovate, undermining 
property rights and threatening to usurp the returns to productive activities. 
This offsets many of the benefits of urban clustering, and risks rendering 
cities dysfunctional.


The tragedy is that some of the poorest cities in the world are also the 
fastest growing – and they lack the resources and capacity to prevent locking 
into structures that are inefficient, unreliable and polluting.


New mechanisms to finance investments in urban infrastructure and smart 
technology need to be developed. These may include: greater use of land-value 
capture mechanisms, where the construction of new transit infrastructure is 
financed with the profits generated by the increase in land value stimulated by 
the presence of that infrastructure; municipal bonds such as Johannesburg’s 
recently issued $136m (£110m) green bond; and the creation of dedicated 
national, regional or city-level investment platforms as mechanisms for 
aggregating smaller infrastructure projects and attracting private investment 
at scale.


Climate change and cities: a prime source of problems, yet key to a solution
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/nov/17/cities-climate-change-problems-solution>
But successful urbanisation is not just about infrastructure; it’s also about 
skills. Mexico and Rwanda have invested heavily in urban vocational and 
technical training. Investment in talent and skills (from jobs training 
programmes to secondary education) helps raise wages, attract talent and 
promote urban growth. It also improves the flow of information vital to civic 
inclusion and effective governance.


In other words, there must be continued innovation in governance and learning 
from best practice. To learn from each other and demonstrate the benefits of 
sustainable planning and decarbonisation, urban policymakers should develop and 
utilise city networks such asC40 <http://www.c40.org/>, the International 
Council for Local Environmental Initiatives (ICLEI <http://www.iclei.org/>), the
Compact of Mayors <https://www.compactofmayors.org/> and United Cities and 
Local Governments (UCLG <https://www.uclg.org/>), which all facilitate the 
sharing of experience.


Cities are at the heart of the process of human development, innovation and 
productivity growth. The world is moving to cities, and those we build over the 
next few decades will broadly define the urban centres we are stuck with for 
generations to come. Cities that are poorly planned risk leaving humanity with 
a hostile and potentially deadly climate.

The clock is ticking. Humanity has a narrow window of time in which to plan 
and design its future. That opportunity must not – and need not – be squandered.

Professor Lord Stern of Brentford and Dimitri Zenghelis are, respectively, 
chair and co-head of policy at the Grantham Research Institute on Climate 
Change and the Environment at the London School ofEconomics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics> and Political Science
 