
Travel operator Thomas Cook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/thomascookgroup> has cancelled all 
British bookings to Tunisia until November following a wave of violent protests 
across the country.

The Foreign Office advised against all but essential travel to the north 
African country, which is experiencing its worst social unrest since the 2011 
revolution and the tour company said that as a result it had taken the decision 
“to cancel all bookings toTunisia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/tunisia> 
up to and including 31 October 2016”.

It added that customers would be contacted individually and said: “We 
appreciate that this may be frustrating for our customers who have been looking 
forward to their holiday.”

The Thomas Cook cancellations came as easyJet announced a decline in revenues 
per seat following theterrorist attacks on Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris-attacks> and the suspected bombing of 
a passenger plane over Egypt. The two announcements underline the problems 
facing sections of the tourism industry as tourists steer clear of destinations 
hit by political turmoil and terror attacks.

In the latest sign of Tunisia’s economic and social woes, Hundreds of police 
staged a protest on Monday outside the country’s presidential palace to demand 
a pay rise.

Reporting on its last three months, the budget airline said its revenues per 
seat were strong in October but fell sharply – by “high single digit” 
percentages – in November and December aseasyJet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/easyjet> cut prices in a bid to attract 
customers.


Stelios Haji-Ioannou poised to block easyHotel chiefs' pay deals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/18/stelios-haji-ioannou-block-easyhotel-pay-deals>
The coordinated murder of 130 people in Paris on 13 November accounted for 
about two percentage points of that fall in revenue per seat. The halting of 
flights after 224 people were killed in thedowning of a Russian flight from 
Egypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/31/russian-plane-crashes-in-sinai-egyptian-pm-says>
 on 31 October, which Russia claims was caused by a terrorist bomb, caused 
another 1.5 percentage point fall, EasyJet said.

Though revenues per seat improved in January, they were still lower than 
before the terrorist attacks.

The airline’s shares, down 10% since the Paris attacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris-attacks>, fell 3% to £15.79 and were 
the biggest losers in the FTSE 100 index.

In response, easyJet has been cutting costs, although pressure on revenues has 
been offset by falling fuel prices. EasyJet said that if fuel prices remain 
stable it will save £165m-£180m this year although exchange rate changes would 
cost around £50m.

The airline said further cost controls would keep it in line for record 
pre-tax profit of £738m for the year ending in September.

Other incidents last year that caused trouble for travel companies also 
included thedeliberate crashing of a Germanwings passenger plane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/06/germanwings-co-pilot-practised-descent-move-previous-flight-andreas-lubitz>
 by its co-pilot andthe killing of 38 holidaymakers in Tunisia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/26/tunisia-tourist-hotel-reportedly-attacked>
. Thomas Cook’s chief executive, Peter Fankhauser,said in November the industry 
faced the greatest turmoil he had seen in the past 30 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/25/travel-industry-in-greatest-turmoil-in-30-years-after-paris-attacks-says-thomas-cook-boss>
.

EasyJet, which is the second-biggest airline in France, said in November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/17/easyjet-boss-says-travel-sector-will-recover-after-terror-attacks>
 that business to and from the country had fallen and that some customers were 
choosing not to show up for flights.

James Hollins, analyst at Nomura, said: “The French and Egyptian issues have 
had a more damaging impact on fares than we had expected”, but added that they 
were likely to by “relatively exceptional and short-term issues”.


The number of passengers carried by asyJet rose 8.1% to 16.1 million in the 
three months to the end of December, mainly because of increased capacity. The 
company said it was not planning job cuts to control costs and that its 
employee numbers were growing.



 