
Thomas “the Tank Engine” Waldrom shows no sign of running out of steam in a 
season when he will reach the age of 34. The England No8, the leading tryscorer 
in last season’s Champions Cup, is closing in on a half-century in the 
Premiership, in sight of Neil Back’s record 59 for a forward.

Since joining Exeter <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/exeter> in 2014 from 
Leicester, Waldrom has become the most prolific tryscorer in England. He has 
topped the Premiership table in the past two seasons, with 16 and 13, and his 
tally of four this campaign is bettered only by Saracens’ Jamie George.

Thomas Waldrom leads Exeter to bonus point win over Clermont Auvergne
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/12/exeter-chiefs-clermont-auvergne-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
When the Top 14 leaders, Clermont Auvergne, arrive at Sandy Park on Sunday 
evening, they will be only too aware of the threat posed by Waldrom who scored 
two tries in the Champions Cup group matchbetween the sides in Exeter last 
December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/12/exeter-chiefs-clermont-auvergne-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
. He helped the Chiefs secure a winning bonus point, a feat they have achieved 
in their last seven home matches in Europe, the first four in the Challenge Cup.

“One of the best decisions I have ever made was to join Exeter,” he says. 
“That is no disrespect to Leicester, but I knew where the club here was heading 
and wanted to be a part of it. I have another season to go on my contract and 
then I will see where we are going.”

Waldrom has maintained his scoring exploits this season despite a change in 
the maul law. It has helped hookers, including Exeter’s Luke Cowan-Dickie, who
scored a hat-trick against Harlequins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/17/exeter-harlequins-premiership-match-report>
 last month, but Waldrom remains one of the hardest players in the Premiership 
to stop when he nears the line. “The new maul law has changed my role a bit 
because the ball is now passed back, but what has not altered is that you still 
have to get the ball over the line,” he says.

“We have played well in patches this season, but there is a lot more to come 
from us. It is important to make a good start in the Champions Cup and you have 
to enjoy matches in the tournament.”

Waldrom has scored 46 tries in 128 Premiership appearances, 25 as a 
replacement. That is a notable return for a forward, but his 33 league tries 
for the Chiefs have come in 50 matches, four from the bench, and overall he has 
touched down 40 times for Exeter in 59 outings. There is no prospect, though, 
of him adding to his four England caps, having been overlooked by Eddie Jones.

“You have to perform well for your club first otherwise you are not going to 
get in the mix,” he says. “Eddie has talked to me and he has other options. You 
never want to rule it out, but he has a direction he wants to go in. It is 
quite nice being able to concentrate on Exeter and do what I can to get us as 
far as possible in the Premiership and Europe.”

Sam Burgess flourishes on return to rugby league fold at South Sydney | Aaron 
Bower
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/oct/15/sam-burgess-return-rugby-league-south-sydney-england-rugby-union>
The Chiefs are in the form group of the five with Clermont and Ulster, next 
Saturday’s opponents in Belfast, both topping their leagues while the fourth 
team, Bordeaux-Bègles, are in the play-off positions in the Top 14. Exeter, 
fifth in the Premiership, have been the slowest starters this season with two 
victories in their six matches.

“Having made last season’s Premiership final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/28/saracens-exeter-premiership-play-off-final-match-report>
, we cannot pitch ourselves as underdogs any more,” says Waldrom. “We have made 
significant progress in the last few seasons and we are a good team. We have 
let ourselves down in a couple of games, not reacting quickly enough when there 
have been momentum shifts, but we are not a million miles away. We have to 
concentrate on what we do well, starting with Clermont.

“We played them and Bordeaux-Bègles in last season’s Champions Cup and having 
them again is good in one sense because you know how they play. The lesson we 
need to take from a year ago is that we need to do better on the road. We got 
one point from our three away games and that very nearly cost us a place in the 
quarter-finals.

“The first two matches will be massive for us with Clermont and Ulster both 
making strong starts to the season. You want to measure yourself against the 
best around. That is the whole point of the Champions Cup and the key to 
winning our pool will be picking up points on the road.”
 