
The explosions in Brussels have sent travel companies and businesses dependent 
on tourists and consumer confidence sharply lower.

Thomas Cook had already warned in a trading update that summer bookings were 
down 2% on the same time last year as holidaymakers worried about growing 
risks. It said:

Bookings continue to be disrupted by a volatile geopolitical backdrop as some 
customers postpone their holiday decisions, leading to a later booking pattern 
for the summer season.

It still believed underlying demand remained strong in a “challenging market.” 
But the events in Belgium have underlined the risks and sent the whole sector 
lower. Mike van Dulken, head of research at Accendo Markets, said:

No surprise to see European airlines and travel shares being offloaded this 
morning while gold and the yen benefit from fresh safe haven 
seeking...Investors will be fearful of the knock-on to European traveller 
sentiment which was clearly dented in the wake of the Parisian attacks last 
November (as well as those in Tunisia and Egypt)...

It’s always a sad day when terrorism has to be the driver to kick markets from 
their state of calm. It’s also a sign of times when the market response is - in 
relative terms - so muted. Investors have had to develop a thick skin for such 
horrific events over the years and their encouraging defiance may again result 
in near-term recovery for the stocks affected.

Meanwhile though Thomas Cook is down nearly 5% at 88.2p, rival Tui has lost 
nearly 3% to 973p, British Airways owner International Airlines Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/international-consolidated-airlines-group>
is 22p or 4% lower at 536p andeasyJet is down 3.5% at £14.47. Cruise company 
Carnival is off 2% at £34.35 while hotels group InterContinental is down 2% at 
£27.62.

But with investors seeking out precious metals as havens, Fresnillo is up 
nearly 2% at £10 and Randgold Resources has risen 80p to £65.15.

Overall the FTSE 100 is currently down 14.41 points at 6170.17, with UK 
inflation cominbg in lower than expected.

Elsewhere Barclays has fallen 3.15p to 157.35p after Goldman Sachs cut its 
target price from 310p to 265p and HSBC moved from buy to hold.

Housebuilder Bellway is 85p better at £25.58 after it reported a 42.6% rise in 
first half profits to £226.6m.
 