
All-inclusive package holidays could become more popular as British 
holidaymakers try and avoid Brexit-related price rises, according toThomas Cook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/thomascookgroup>.

The travel company revealed on Thursday that it had slumped to a quarterly 
loss and would miss annual profit targets after terrorist attacks inTurkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> hit trade.

Thomas Cook reported a £25m pretax loss on operations in the three months to 
30 June, compared with a £3m profit in the same period a year before, after 
revenues slid 8% to £1.85bn. It now expects an annual profit of £300m compared 
with previous forecasts of between £310m and £335m.

Sharp rise in cost of holidays abroad leads to staycation boom
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/jul/10/brexit-and-the-uk-tourist-industry>
Despite the warning, shares in Thomas Cook rose 6.5% to 63.9p as investors 
appeared relieved trading was not worse and chief executive Peter Fankhauser 
suggested Thomas Cook could benefit from a change in holiday habits.

“Package holidays are already popular but they could become even more popular 
in this environment, because of the uncertainty on price movement and, in this 
volatile environment that we are taking care [of holidaymakers] whatever 
happens at their destination,” Fankhauser said.

The value of the pound has sunk 12% against the the dollar and 9% against the 
euro sincethe UK voted to exit the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/britain-votes-for-brexit-eu-referendum-david-cameron>
 last month, potentially raising the cost of holiday spending money, hotels and 
travel abroad. But Fankhauser said Thomas Cook had hedged its currency 
arrangements until next autumn so that its holiday prices would not change. “It 
doesn’t cost people more to go with us,” he said.

Thomas Cook’s bookings from the UK were down 1% in the three months to the end 
of June, but the company said it expected a strong start to the winter season 
in the UK, with bookings up by 19% despite Brexit worries.

Analysts at Mintel had predicted more growth in independent city breaks rather 
than package holidays this year but Fergal McGivney, travel analyst for the 
market research firm, says any recession might alter the outlook.

With heavy competition for a more limited number of package destinations, as 
carriers switch away from Turkey andEgypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt>, prices have come down and more 
people have already opted to take a charter flight this year. Any recession or 
drop in the value of the pound is only likely to increase price competition as 
companies try to persuade families to go abroad rather than opting for a 
staycation in the UK.

“Everything is up in the air following Brexit but if there is a recession it 
could give package holidays a boost,” McGivney said. But he said he didn’t 
think the boost would be as strong as the last recession as competition from 
budget players such easyJet and Ryanair was strong.

In the three months to the end of June, overall bookings at Thomas Cook slid 
5% as a jump in travel to Spain and the US failed to offset a drop in holidays 
to Turkey, Egypt andTunisia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/tunisia>, all of 
which have been hit by terrorist attacks. So far this year bookings to Turkey 
were down by up to 40% after Thomas Cook cut the number of flights to the 
country.


The numbers reflected a 41% drop in tourists visiting Turkey in June, revealed 
by Ankara’s tourist ministry on Thursday – its worst-ever single monthly 
decline.

Thomas Cook also booked £60m less business from Belgium after a bombing at 
Brussels airport in March <https://www.theguardian.com/world/brussels-attacks> 
disrupted travel and made locals nervous about holidaying abroad.


Thomas Cook said it expected holidaymakers to switch to Spain, Bulgaria, 
Greece, Cuba and the US as alternatives to Turkey and Egypt.

Fankhauser said: “We are operating in a challenging geopolitical environment, 
with repeated disruption in some of our key source and destination markets. In 
addition, while Brexit has had no noticeable impact on our bookings so far, it 
has added to a general sense of uncertainty – for our business and our 
customers alike.”
 