
The president of the Philippines, Rodrigo Duterte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/rodrigo-duterte>, has not even been in power 
for six months, but it already seems like far too long. His constant amateur 
dramatics on international affairs generate catchy headlines, and a calamitous
war on drugs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/30/rodrigo-duterte-vows-to-kill-3-million-drug-addicts-and-likens-himself-to-hitler>
that has cost more than 5,000 people their lives draws attention, if not strong 
enough condemnation. Withlittle external pressure coming anytime soon 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/meghara/us-aid-dollars-phillipines?utm_term=.pqw7V944J#.lvjlwLbbX>
, the strongman only faces internal opposition from two political figures – 
both are women, and both are well placed and well equipped to combat the macho 
autocrat.

President Duterte’s anti-US populism is a dangerously isolationist path | Tom 
Smith
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/07/duterte-anti-us-philippines-isolationist-foreign-policy-insult-barack-obama-china>
The vice-president, Leni Robredo, resigned from her position 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/05/philippines-vice-president-resigns-cabinet-differences-with-rodrigo-duterte>
 in the cabinet this week and now openly presents herself as a desperately 
neededopposition force 
<http://www.rappler.com/thought-leaders/154557-robredo-liberation-millennials-rising>
. Robredo has joined the good fight, alongsideSenator Leila de Lima 
<http://sea-globe.com/leila-de-lima-portrait/>, who for the past six months has 
faced atirade of misogynist abuse 
<http://www.rappler.com/nation/149173-de-lima-not-slut-creeping-marginalization-sexism-ph>
 and a smear campaign that is only worth repeating in order to bring shame on 
Duterte and his acolytes.

Wild accusations that she is “a drug lord” who operated through prisons, and 
threats to broadcast a supposedsex tape of her in the Senate 
<http://www.philstar.com/headlines/2016/11/27/1647955/trillanes-slams-solons-over-slut-shaming-show-cause-order-vs-de-lima>
 are just the tip of theiceberg 
<http://www.rappler.com/nation/154613-de-lima-emotional-accusers-senate-hearing>
. But, together, Robredo and De Lima represent all that is left of liberal 
courage in Filipino politics.

It’s a development that recalls the country’s idiosyncratic relationship with 
women in politics. While Robredo andDe Lima are strong characters 
<http://www.rappler.com/nation/149184-de-lima-trump-duterte-dictatorial-sociopaths>
 they also have plenty of good role models. Many have only recently paid 
attention to the country because of Duterte’s insults and thebanal comparisons 
to Trump-popularism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/10/donald-trump-rodrigo-duterte-philippines>
, but it is important to recall the rich history of Filipinas in politics, not 
least in replacing previous dictators.

When Ferdinand Marcos was overthrown in the People Power revolution in 1986, 
Cory Aquino became one of the world’s first female heads of state. The uncanny 
parallels between the two widows – Robredo and Aquino – are impossible to 
ignore. Aquino’s husband, Benigno Aquino Jr, was assassinated on the tarmac at 
Manila airport (now named after him) when returning from exile in 1983. Robredo 
lost her husband Jesse, then interior secretary, in 2012 in a plane crash.

Despite the Philippines holding on to archaic, heavily Catholic-influenced 
policies on female reproductive rights, the country has had more female leaders 
than most nations and many prominent women in public life. In 2001 Gloria 
Arroyo became the second female president (after having served as 
vice-president) and in 2005 was named by Forbes as thefourth most powerful 
woman in the world <http://www.forbes.com/lists/2005/11/1YDI.html>. The recent 
death ofMiriam Defensor Santiago 
<http://time.com/4512686/the-philippines-iron-lady-miriam-santiago-obituary/> 
known asthe Iron Lady of Asia 
<http://www.hngn.com/articles/139826/20151013/philippines-iron-lady-of-asia-miriam-santiago-runs-for-president-after-surviving-cancer.htm>
, who even Duterte acknowledged, “ate death threats for breakfast 
<http://www.gmanetwork.com/news/story/583189/news/nation/duterte-remembers-miriam-as-graftbuster-who-ate-death-threats-for-breakfast>
”, was widely mourned. And even Imelda Marcos has to be acknowledged for her 
influence, and remains an elected member of Congress.

Yet despite such a feminist pedigree, in 2013 the World Economic Forum ranked 
the Philippines fifth (out of 137) in its Gender Gap Index, and in Duterte the 
country has elected an openly chauvinist candidatewho has joked about rape 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2016/04/19/asia/philippines-rodrigo-duterte-rape-joke/index.html>
. By wolf-whistling female journalists intelevised press conferences 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/02/philippines-duterte-accused-of-disrespect-after-wolf-whistling-female-journalist>
, Duterte has been willing to risk considerable political wrath from women. The 
media and his supporters have either lapped it up or ignored it, though. But 
Duterte will at least have to respect De Lima and Robredo in private from now 
on, if he is to see off the considerable challenge they represent.

Paradoxically, De Lima was the one person who perhaps could have saved Duterte 
from himself 
<http://www.philstar.com/headlines/2016/12/01/1649228/rody-threat-vs-rights-activists-serious-leila>
 and the country more pain. Her attempt toinvestigate the drug war 
<http://www.rappler.com/nation/149543-de-lima-reopening-senate-probe-extrajudicial-killings>
 could have led to reforms, if not staved off the growing spectre of a warrant 
from theICC for his arrest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/24/philippines-senator-calls-for-duterte-to-face-crimes-against-humanity-inquiry>
. Alex Whiting, a Harvard law professor and former ICC investigator, has argued 
that the ICC shouldbegin looking at the killings 
<https://www.justsecurity.org/33339/time-icc-open-preliminary-examination-philippines/>
. The ICC prosecutorFatou Bensouda 
<http://www.philstar.com/headlines/2016/10/14/1633540/icc-prosecutor-issues-warning-vs-killings-philippines>
 could well be the next woman Duterte has to take seriouslyrather than just 
throw insults at 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/news/2016/11/rodrigo-duterte-shrugs-bullsht-icc-threat-161128154340122.html>
.

For now Robredo and De Lima can lead an opposition on two fronts. First to the 
misogyny – a bipartisan social media campaign hasalready begun 
<http://www.esquiremag.ph/politics/everywoman-a1510-20160930-lfrm> to counter 
the army ofDuterte trolls 
<http://politics.com.ph/duterte-spox-recognized-power-trolls-denied-paying/> and
fake news stories 
<http://www.rappler.com/nation/148007-propaganda-war-weaponizing-internet> bred 
by Duterte supporters. Second, in theSupreme Court 
<http://www.rappler.com/nation/154101-de-lima-marcos-burial-supreme-court-motion-reconsideration>
, where they can oppose the decision to allow ahero’s burial for Ferdinand 
Marcos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/18/philippine-dictator-ferdinand-marcos-given-controversial-heros-burial>
. Robredo has already taken to passive-aggressivelyshaming him on this issue 
through Twitter 
<http://qz.com/841265/marcosnotahero-surprise-burial-the-philippines-vice-president-leni-robredo-is-passive-aggressively-shaming-her-boss-rodrigo-duterte-on-twitter/>
.

It can no longer be acceptable to say, “Well, he won by a landslide” or even “
a breath of fresh air 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/16/rodrigo-duterte-headlines-filipinos-philippine-president-murder>
”. What if that “fresh air” turns out to be poisonous? Now Duterte’s 
apologists, supporters and the silent majority have a real choice for the 
future in the shape of two courageous women who follow in the footsteps of 
other courageous Filipinas.
 