
Tinalbaraka Amano has done well to adapt to life in the desert 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?list=PLtPw-Y91GlmWgRhKkXf42eqes7-bm7fns&v=roxHqYbu960>
. Three years ago, the 16-year-old had her own room in a suburban house in 
Mali’s capital, Bamako. She had school friends with middle-class aspirations 
and Snapchat. At Mbera refugee camp in southern Mauritania, she sleeps in a 
tent with her parents. Before bed, she has to shake her sleeping mat for 
scorpions. The neighbours are mostly nomads who have never been online or in a 
classroom.

“Many of the girls get married – often they are younger than 12,” says 
Tinalbaraka, who is from a family of musicians. She has just sat her ninth-year 
exams. Her class of 54 pupils included only 15 girls. “That is how it is. When 
they get married, their parents or their husbands do not want them to stay on 
at school. Anyway, they have babies so it is not possible.”
Mauritania fact box 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/08/archive-4-zip/giv-310753iFyp1pCKQAx/>
The 42,000 residents of Mbera camp are dealing with a crisis among their bored 
youth. Agencies here warn that if the needs of 14,000 school-age residents are 
not addressed through education and training, boys will be tempted to join 
armed groups and more girls will be at risk of early marriage.

Situated 50km inside Mauritania <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mauritania>
, Mbera is one of the biggest refugee camps in sub-Saharan Africa, home mainly 
to Tuareg and Arab Malians. They are blamed by southern black Malians for the 
killing – Islamic terror, clan feuding and armed banditry – that began in 2012 
and has brought the country to its knees.

Two peace deals signed last year between the Malian government and armed groups
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/30/mali-separatist-war-ends-touareg-azawad-rebels>
 (excluding al-Qaida) have increased pressure on the camp, says Taleb Bouya 
Abdallah, an emergency education officer for the UN children’s agency, Unicef. 
“When peace was declared, funding fell away. It does not matter how many peace 
deals are signed, or repatriation agreements are made;as long as it is not safe 
for people to return to Mali, they won’t 
<https://webcache.googleusercontent.com/search?q=cache:u7FGvUNxbLwJ:https://data.unhcr.org/SahelSituation/download.php%3Fid%3D2061+&cd=1&hl=en&ct=clnk&gl=us>
,” he said.

According to UN figures <http://www.girlsnotbrides.org/where-does-it-happen/>, 
55% of girls in Mali and 34% in Mauritania are married before the age of 18.

It happened – twice – to 16-year-old Nafissa* from Léré, in the Timbuktu 
region. Married at 12 to her cousin, she faced so much violence from him that 
her widowed mother returned 50,000 CFA francs (£64) of the dowry in the hope of 
a divorce. But when Nafissa and her mother moved to Mbera in 2013, he followed 
them. He raped her and she gave birth to a boy, Mohamed, who is now 18 months 
old. Then, Nafissa began having epileptic fits.

The local branch of humanitarian agency Intersos 
<https://www.intersos.org/en/mauritania/> and the UN refugee agency, UNHCR, 
raised the money to pay back the balance of the dowry – 250,000 ouguiyas (£535) 
– and applied to a judge for a restraining order against Nafissa’s husband, 
which was granted. The family then found a second husband for her, but he 
walked out, blaming harassment from the first husband.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fchild-marriage-mauritania-when-it-has-ended-i-will-be-so-happy-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Child%20marriage%20in%20Mauritania%3A%20'When%20it%20has%20ended%2C%20I%20will%20be%20so%20happy'%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fchild-marriage-mauritania-when-it-has-ended-i-will-be-so-happy-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Child%20marriage%20in%20Mauritania%3A%20%27When%20it%20has%20ended%2C%20I%20will%20be%20so%20happy%27%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fchild-marriage-mauritania-when-it-has-ended-i-will-be-so-happy-video&media=>
Child marriage in Mauritania: ‘When it has ended, I will be so happy’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2015/nov/28/child-marriage-mauritania-when-it-has-ended-i-will-be-so-happy-video>
“I lie in bed and I cannot sleep because I am so worried that [my first 
husband] is going to come back,” says Nafissa, who lives with Mohamed and her 
mother. “The neighbours look out for him, and when he comes someone runs to the 
gendarmerie. But by the time the gendarmes arrive, he has usually left.

“I have pain in my hip from when he kicked me,” says Nafissa, who has never 
been to school because “there was too much housework”.

Houleye Diawara, 23, a social work graduate employed at Intersos’s 
gender-based violence drop-in centre, says Nafissa’s family need material help, 
counselling, medical care and protection. “A psychologist comes from Nouakchott 
every other month. It is not enough. There are so many traumatised women in the 
camp. No one here really has the qualifications or the experience to help her 
fully. We would like to find a trade for Nafissa – maybe sewing – and give her 
training, but we are short of funds.”

Abdallah says early marriage is recurrent and unchanging. “There is a real 
need to explain to parents what school is for. They also need to be told about 
the health dangers linked to early marriage. Unlike inMali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mali>, education is free in the camp so this 
is a good place to start.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fthreat-of-marriage-young-malian-refugee-girls-mauritania-mbera-camp%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32db459868dd827aa6ed4b0a8fe01052ca4621b5%2F388_0_3260_2424%2F3260.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Threat%20of%20marriage%20hangs%20over%20young%20Malian%20refugee%20girls%20in%20Mauritania&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fthreat-of-marriage-young-malian-refugee-girls-mauritania-mbera-camp%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Threat%20of%20marriage%20hangs%20over%20young%20Malian%20refugee%20girls%20in%20Mauritania&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fthreat-of-marriage-young-malian-refugee-girls-mauritania-mbera-camp%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32db459868dd827aa6ed4b0a8fe01052ca4621b5%2F388_0_3260_2424%2F3260.jpg>
 Nafissa with a volunteer and an employee of Intersos’s support centre for 
gender-based violence 
Unicef says 6,000 children who had never been to school have attended literacy 
classes at Mbera since 2013. The camp offers accelerated teaching for 
illiterate older children who are too old to learn alongside six-year-olds.

But Abdallah says the teenagers need vocational training. “Because of the high 
cost, we have only managed to train 240 of them in a trade. Boredom is the 
worst possible thing. It can lead them astray, into drugs or, in the case of 
boys, into the armed groups.”

Only 5,000 of Mbera’s 14,000 school-age residents attend the camp’s six 
primary schools. Secondary school attendance is disastrously low. There are 
only 220 pupils, of whom 51 are girls. Only a quarter of the teachers are 
qualified, and the retention rate is low. Teachers’ monthly salaries of 55,000 
ouguiyas are roughly a third of those offered by NGOs in the camp.

Tinalbaraka is looking forward to the new school year. She is convinced her 
musician father <https://soundcloud.com/abdallahagamano>, Abdallah Ag Amano, 
will allow her to study to baccalaureate level and beyond. She is part of a 
drama group that stages sketches about school life; she believes life in the 
camp does, at least, allow some girls to acquire basic literacy. “Being here 
means some of the [nomadic] children experience school for the first time. In 
the camp, girls have fewer domestic responsibilities than when they are in 
Mali.”

Asked if she worries about being married off against her will, she says: “I am 
not afraid it will happen to me. My parents will let me do what I want.”

*Some names have been changed to protect identities

 * Alex Duval Smith travelled to Mauritania with the EU, which supports 
projects at Mbera camp  