
A tour of Europe by the southern hemisphere superpowers often generates talk 
of the gap between north and south,but with this month’s score 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/13/england-south-africa-autumn-international-rugby-twickenham>
 3-2 in favour of the four home unions the Wales lock Luke Charteris believes 
the debate has changed.

“There are gaps in the southern hemisphere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/12/wales-argentina-autumn-internationals-match-report>
,” the Bath second-row said. “New Zealand are significantly ahead of South 
Africa and Australia and the task for the rest of the world is to catch them up.
Ireland have shown that beating New Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/05/ireland-new-zealand-rugby-union-report>
 is doable and the more you play these teams, the more confident and better you 
get.”

As well as Ireland’s victory against the All Blacks in Chicago, England have 
beaten South Africa and Wales have overcome Argentina. Australia are so far 
unbeaten on their five-match tour, winning handsomely in Cardiffbefore sneaking 
home against Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/12/scotland-australia-autumn-internationals-match-report>
.

Japan beat South Africa in greatest Rugby World Cup shock ever
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/19/south-africa-japan-rugby-world-cup-2015-match-report>
“It is hard to gauge because teams are at different points in the season,” 
Charteris said. “I don’t think you can ever say what any gap between north and 
south is because it depends who is playing each other.

“England have had a big year, following up their grand slam with a series win 
in Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/18/australia-england-match-report> 
and a good victory over South Africa. Speaking to their players at Bath, they 
are clearly enjoying being part of the national set-up and the challenge for 
Wales is to get as good a result against South Africa next week.”

Wales face Japan in Cardiff on Saturday and Charteris feels one gap that is 
closing is between the tier-one nations and tier two. The last time Wales 
played Japan they lost in Tokyo, three years ago. The side were weakened by 
Lions call-ups, but included Liam Williams at full-back and Dan Biggar at 
outside-half.

Wales ring changes and end woeful run with narrow win over Argentina
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/12/wales-argentina-autumn-internationals-match-report>
“Teams like Japan, Romania and Georgia are closing the gap between tier one 
and two,” Charteris said. “It is definitely getting smaller. Japan played well 
during the World Cup and as a squad,we watched their victory over South Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/19/south-africa-japan-rugby-world-cup-2015-match-report>
 in the team room, cheering them on. It is good to see so-called establishment 
teams coming unstuck and the beauty of the World Cup is that you face teams you 
do not meet very often.

“Scotland were lucky to get Japan on a short turnaround otherwise that game 
would have been more interesting. We know it will be tough on Saturday even 
though they have changed since the World Cup with a new coaching team and the 
next generation of players. They like to play a high-tempo game and will be 
different to sides we are used to facing.”

Wales name their side on Thursday and with their interim head coach Rob Howley 
considering resting his thirtysomething players, one selection debate will be 
whether to award a first cap to the 18-year-old Ospreys wing Keelan Giles, who 
was called into the squad last week.
 