
Harlequins overcame a remarkable flurry of injuries that saw them lose three 
props –including the England loosehead Joe Marler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/harlequins-joe-marler-england-injury-six-nations>
 just before kick-off – to clinch a hugely spirited victory that maintains 
their 100% home record this season and condemned Sale to a ninth consecutive 
defeat.

Marler’s late withdrawal with a calf injury is a concern for England, already 
without Mako Vunipola for the Six Nations, but Quins soldiered on despite 
losing Owen Evans and Will Collier, as well as the returning fly-half Nick 
Evans, in the first quarter.

Saracens survive loss of Richard Barrington to sneak draw against Exeter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/saracens-exeter-premiership-match-report>
Adam Jones is not a bad 24th man to call on, though, considering his 100 
international caps, and he produced an admirable 60-minute shift in the 
unfamiliar position of loosehead as quickfire tries from Charlie Walker and Tim 
Swiel, who notched 24 points, just before half-time proved pivotal.

“We showed unbelievable tenacity. I’m really proud of them today,” said 
Harlequins’ director of rugby, John Kingston. “[Adam] was phoned at 11:30am 
because unfortunately [forwards coach] Graham Rowntree couldn’t make it. [Adam] 
drove up and he took on the forwards coach position and he took the warm up 
until he realised he was going to have to warm up himself. I’ve been working in 
this industry for 20 years and I don’t think I know a more professional man.”

Will Addison’s penalty opened the scoring for Sale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/salesharks> and six minutes in, Quins lost 
Evans; the New Zealander failing a head injury assessment after a robust hit 
from Denny Solomona and TJ Ioane. A minute later and Collier was the next to 
limp off, with a broken ankle, replaced by Kyle Sinckler, before Danny Care 
milked a penalty and Swiel, on at fly-half, levelled and then traded penalties 
with Addison.

Then on came Jones for Owen Evans to pack down at loosehead, as he did against 
Northampton in October, but Solomona struck for his third try in as many
Premiership <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership> matches soon after, 
following a wonderful break from Addison.

Quins were ahead by half-time however. First, Walker was on hand to finish 
under the posts after a powerful surge and slick offload from Mike Brown, 
typically feisty throughout. Barely a minute later, Swiel was over after 
seizing the loose ball on halfway, pinning back his ears and darting for the 
line after Marland Yarde had knocked a high ball backwards.

Jason Woodward leads heroics but Bristol fall just short at Northampton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/northampton-bristol-premiership-rugby-match-report>
Swiel kicked Harlequins <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/harlequinsru> 10 
points ahead after the break before Byron McGuigan finished an overlap on the 
left to bring Sale back within touching distance. Addison missed the conversion 
however and Swiel added another three points to give the hosts breathing space 
again.

Addison and Swiel added further penalties before a superb pick-up and finish 
from Solomona, following Ioane’s crossfield kick, but another missed conversion 
left the Sharks needing a try for victory and Quins were in no mood to let 
their lead slip away.

“We were unlucky with the bounce [for Swiel’s try] just before half-time,” 
said Sale’s director of rugby, Steve Diamond. “People have been saying we 
haven’t been playing well lately but we have. But the penalty against us was 
crucial at the start of the second half and after that I was happy to get away 
with a bonus point to be honest.”

HARLEQUINS Brown; Yarde, Alofa, Marchant (Hopper 71), Walker; N Evans (Swiel 
6), Care (capt; Dickson 69); O Evans (Jones 21), Buchanan, Collier (Sinckler 
7), Merrick, Matthews, Wallace (Naoupu 62), Ward, ChisholmTries Walker, Swiel 
ConsSwiel 2 Pens Swiel 5

SALE Haley; Solomona, Addison, Leota, McGuigan; James, Mitchell (Phillips 61); 
Harrison (Flynn 68), Webber (Briggs 61), Aulika, Evans, Ostrikov (Mills 61), 
Neild, Ioane, Beaumont (capt; Curry 50)Tries Solomona 2, McGuigan Con Addison 
Pens Addison 3

Attendance 14,148 Game rating 7 Referee JP Doyle (Ire)
 