
Eclipsed by the state of tumult in the region, a quiet miracle has occurred in 
the eastern Mediterranean, whereCyprus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cyprus> has come back from the brink of 
economic disaster in a recovery that would be the envy of its cousins in Greece.

As the race to reunite the divided island begins in earnest on Friday, in a 
meeting between the leaders of its Turkish and Greek communities, there is 
mounting evidence that the EU’s most easterly state could be heading for a new 
era. “The moment of truth has arrived,” says Hubert Faustmann, an associate 
professor of history and political science at the University of Nicosia. “The 
coming weeks will be decisive.”

At no time since conflict split the island in 1974 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/06/turkish-invasion-divided-cyprus-40-years-on-eyewitness-greek-cypriot-family>
 has a confluence of events pointed as much in the direction of peace. InNicos 
Anastasiades and Mustafa Akıncı 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/31/mustafa-ankinci-advocates-focus-future-for-splintered-cyprus>
, the two men now leading the Greek and Turkish communities, Cyprus has 
politicians determined to end its ethnic partition. More than ever, they say, 
the island nation is too small to remain fractured by the legacy of hate. But 
it is the remarkable economic recovery of Greeks in the south – barely two 
years after thecollapse of its banks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/apr/02/cyprus-finance-minister-resigns> 
briefly put the country at the centre of Europe’s financial crisis – and a 
growing recognition of the benefits of reunification which has fuelled 
enthusiasm that a settlement can finally be reached.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F30%2Fcyprus-reunification-erdogan-economic-gains-settlement-election-turkey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F227f2aa08a458c1b57e3031c0e239bc2df0b2307%2F205_160_3678_2207%2F3678.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Time%20for%20Cyprus's%20reunification%20has%20come%20%E2%80%93%20but%20Erdo%C4%9Fan%20holds%20the%20key&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F30%2Fcyprus-reunification-erdogan-economic-gains-settlement-election-turkey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Time%20for%20Cyprus%27s%20reunification%20has%20come%20%E2%80%93%20but%20Erdo%C4%9Fan%20holds%20the%20key&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F30%2Fcyprus-reunification-erdogan-economic-gains-settlement-election-turkey%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F227f2aa08a458c1b57e3031c0e239bc2df0b2307%2F205_160_3678_2207%2F3678.jpg>
 A Turkish woman and a child flee the fighting between Greeks and Turks in 
Cyprus in August 1974. Photograph: Reg Lancaster/Getty Images 
When Anastasiades and Akıncı meet in an abandoned, bullet-pocked airport 
terminal that, like the UN buffer zone which cuts through the island, has 
become the most potent symbol of its division, there is rare and genuine belief 
that both will be treading on a path leading to the formation of a federal 
state. “For the first time, there is a feeling that this time it could be 
real,” says Faustmann. “In the next six to eight weeks, over the course of the 
leaders’ meetings, we will know if the dynamics for a settlement can be 
maintained.”

All agree that the challenges remain immense. Talks over territorial 
readjustments and the ever-explosive issue of property restitution could yet 
throw a wrench in the progress.Sunday’s general election in Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2015/oct/28/turkey-election-2015-guide-parties-polls-electoral-system>
, six months after polls resulted in a hung parliament, could also lead to a 
setback. But on the ground, what is sure is that 12 years after free travel was 
allowed – with the lifting of barriers by the Turkish-run republic in the north 
– there is a growing, some would say irreversible, hunger for coexistence.


This week, a ceremony in the heart of old Nicosia gave voice to that desire. 
In bright sunshine, Greek and Turkish Cypriots piled into an airy cafe 
established with the express purpose of encouraging entrepreneurial contact 
across the ethnic divide. There, one after another, they extolled the riches of 
reunification as the easyJet founder and self-described serial entrepreneur, 
Sir Stelios Haji-Ioannou, handed out his annualbicommunal business awards 
<http://stelios.org/stelios-award-cyprus/blog.html> – 31 cash prizes of €10,000 
(£7,200). “We are super-optimistic,” says Tania Matsuka, who recently joined 
Nazo Canitez, a Turkish Cypriot, to set up Climb Mediterranean, a company 
dedicated to rock climbing and yoga on the beach. “Division belongs to the 
past. There is a border in our land but in our minds we have let go of it,” she 
adds.

The two women might never have met had it not been for a chance encounter 
during a climbing expedition on the Greek island of Kalymnos. “This award has 
given us the injection, motivation and acceleration to base our company here in 
Cyprus,” says Canitez, who had crossed the island’sUN-patrolled ceasefire line 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/1999/jul/17/weekend7.weekend> to 
attend the ceremony in the internationally recognised south.

“Rock climbing is an activity of trust. Even if there is no solution, we will 
try to bring people closer together here through it,” she adds.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F30%2Fcyprus-reunification-erdogan-economic-gains-settlement-election-turkey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24734fba536c879446282f3cf85fdf51312d5667%2F2071_1691_3582_2149%2F3582.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Time%20for%20Cyprus's%20reunification%20has%20come%20%E2%80%93%20but%20Erdo%C4%9Fan%20holds%20the%20key&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F30%2Fcyprus-reunification-erdogan-economic-gains-settlement-election-turkey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Time%20for%20Cyprus%27s%20reunification%20has%20come%20%E2%80%93%20but%20Erdo%C4%9Fan%20holds%20the%20key&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F30%2Fcyprus-reunification-erdogan-economic-gains-settlement-election-turkey%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24734fba536c879446282f3cf85fdf51312d5667%2F2071_1691_3582_2149%2F3582.jpg>
 Greek Cypriot Michalis Michael and his Turkish Cypriot wife, Sukran Ozerdem, 
at Stelios Haji-Ioannou’s bicommunal business awards. Photograph: Petros 
Karadjias/AP 
Haji-Ioannou was astounded when applications for the award – established to 
promote common business endeavours – were four times higher than in previous 
years.

“We have to change hearts and minds” Haji-Ioannou, whose father was a Greek 
Cypriot ship owner, tells the Guardian. “Cyprus is the fault-line between 
Christianity and Islam. I really believe that you need to build links between 
people first to get to a solution.”

The British businessman jokes that 25 years ago, when memories of the Turkish 
invasion were all too fresh, he “would probably” have been assassinated for 
establishing such a prize. But this year, the awards were handed out in the 
presence of Anastasiades, with Haji-Ioannou meeting Akıncı in the north the 
following day.

Increasingly, both sides agree that financial and creative coexistence is the 
best way forward for an island whose geostrategic location could make it a 
regional energy hub in years to come.

In the hushed halls of Nicosia’s finance ministry, Greek Cypriot officials are 
jubilant that the island’s economy – branded a lost cause when it was rescued 
to the tune of €10bn two years ago – is now being hailed a success story on a 
par with Ireland and Spain. In their latest report on the bailed-out state’s 
financial progress, creditors at the EU, European Central Bank and 
International Monetary Fund said Cyprus was well on course to exit its bailout 
programme by March, leaving only perpetually problem-plagued Greece in the EU 
under external stewardship. “Economic recovery has started,” the lenders wrote. 
“Budget developments remain above expectations.”

On Tuesday, for the first time since the economic crisis erupted, Cyprus 
successfully issued 10-year bonds. The issue drew €1bn at a yield of 4.5%, the 
lowest rate secured by the republic on 10-year bonds. “Confidence has returned 
to the Cyprus economy,” says George Sklavos, a finance ministry official, 
smiling broadly as he lists the centre-right government’s fiscal achievements. 
“We had a very good relationship with the troika [of creditors] and that helped 
us with implementation.”

Cypriots, more phlegmatic than volatile mainland Greeks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/15/greek-debt-crisis-alexis-tsipras-bailout-vote-violent-athens-protests>
, also put up less of a fight. “Many people here felt that the changes were 
necessary, that the reforms should have happened a long time ago,” Sklavos says.

Instead of increasing taxes – the focus of the latest bailout deal to prop up 
the Greek economy – the Anastasiades administration targeted public 
expenditure, freezing hirings in the state sector and taking an axe to welfare 
spending.

But while the south has also erased its deficit, local officials readily 
concede that the nation’s economy will soar only if reunification takes place. 
A recent study by the Cyprus Centre of the Peace Research Institute Oslo 
(PRIO), forecasts huge gains for the island financially, with GDP increasing by 
just under €5bn in the first five years after a peace deal and by €10bn within 
20 years. In terms of GDP per capita, Cypriots would see their income increase 
by about €1,700 in the first five years alone. “Reunification would open up a 
huge dynamic market in the form ofTurkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey>,” says Sklavos. “Right now, we have 
no access to it.”

The prospect of such economic gains may well make for compromise, the 
much-needed glue upon which any solution will be sealed. Greek Cypriots, who 
lost more than a third of the island when an ill-fated attempt at “enosis” – or 
union – with Greece triggered an invasion by the Turkish army, will almost 
certainly have to give way on key demands. Turks, too, will have to concede 
territory seized at the time.

Informed public debate will be pivotal to agreement being achieved. Any 
solution will be put to referendum in both communities. The last time Cyprus 
came close to a settlement in 2004, the UN-brokered blueprint outlining a 
bizonal, bicommunal federation was accepted by Turkish Cypriots but
wholeheartedly rejected by their Greek counterparts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2004/apr/22/eu.cyprus> after a fierce no 
campaign lead by Tassos Papadopoulos, Cyprus’s then president. Ostracised by 
lack of recognition, Turkish Cypriots were then left out in the cold, unable to 
participate in EU membership.

“Experience has shown that the essence of a solution is as equally important 
as the way it is communicated,” says Harry Tzimitras, who heads PRIO’s Cyprus 
Centre. “In 2004, leaders in both communities presented their respected 
audiences with very specific readings of what was negotiated. There is a 
crucial need for informed public debate.”

But in politics, timing is everything. And the time might just be right, 
analysts say.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F30%2Fcyprus-reunification-erdogan-economic-gains-settlement-election-turkey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd585ddbad45df8aa2559473652d8dff7b8d64f63%2F334_282_2498_1500%2F2498.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Time%20for%20Cyprus's%20reunification%20has%20come%20%E2%80%93%20but%20Erdo%C4%9Fan%20holds%20the%20key&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F30%2Fcyprus-reunification-erdogan-economic-gains-settlement-election-turkey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Time%20for%20Cyprus%27s%20reunification%20has%20come%20%E2%80%93%20but%20Erdo%C4%9Fan%20holds%20the%20key&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F30%2Fcyprus-reunification-erdogan-economic-gains-settlement-election-turkey%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd585ddbad45df8aa2559473652d8dff7b8d64f63%2F334_282_2498_1500%2F2498.jpg>
 Turkey’s increasingly authoritarian president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, may hold 
the key to reunification. Photograph: Umit Bektas/Reuters 
“A settlement would remove a major obstacle to Turkey’s European vocation, 
improve its ties with the west, further relations between Greece and Turkey and 
help Erdoğan score points domestically,” says Tzimitras.

Ironically, a big victory for Ankara’s increasingly authoritarian president, 
Recep Tayyip Erdoğan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/recep-tayyip-erdogan>, 
may serve Cyprus well. Although about 35,000 Turkish troops continue to be 
stationed on the island – in reflection of the belief that the invasion of 
Cyprus was Turkey’s greatest military victory since the sacking of Smyrna in 
1922 – Erdoğan has repeatedly spoken of the need for a solution, expressing 
frustration over Turkish Cypriots’ secular ways and the cost of bankrolling 
their mini-state.

“The irony is that a strong Erdoğan, an authoritarian Erdoğan, is good for a 
solution of the Cyprus problem,” says Faustmann. “It will then boil down to him 
and him alone as to whether there is a settlement or not.”
 