
In 1991, as communism was falling in Albania, 300,000 people poured into 
Tirana’s streets to welcome US ambassador James Baker. Some kissed the wheels 
of his limousine as it inched along Skanderbeg Square. Others fell to their 
knees and kissed the road. In the 23 years since, democracy has helpedAlbania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/albania> shed the legacy of five decades of 
despotic rule, during which it became one of the world’s most isolated states. 
But its slavish love of the car, emblem of capitalism, has come at a high 
price. And nowhere is this more apparent than in the country’s pollution-choked 
capital city.

Each morning the Rruga e Dibres road, a pleasant, piebald stretch of shops and 
cafes in central Tirana, turns to gridlock, its air thick with diesel smoke. In 
theory, there’s a cycle lane here – part of a citywide attempt to tackle air 
pollution and get people to leave their cars at home. In practice, it’s little 
more than a hard shoulder, clogged with parked cars, delivery vans or simply 
old folks smoking cigarettes in the sun. It's nearly impossible to cycle 
through, and a potent reminder of how difficult the Albanian capital’s struggle 
against chronic air pollution really is.

Tirana has exploded into life since the fall of its brutal socialist regime in 
1991. Entire neighbourhoods once dead now throng with cafe-going youngsters. 
The Block, a gridded district once off-limits to all but former despot Enver 
Hoxha’s politburo, is now a warren of trendy bars and restaurants. Even Hoxha’s 
private villa, from where he ordered the deaths and imprisonment of thousands, 
is being readied as a museum. People are no longer barred from foreign travel. 
Life under capitalism is, most people will tell you, pretty good.

But Tirana’s rapid modernisation also gave it a monumental pollution problem. 
When the regime fell there were just 250,000 inhabitants. Public-vehicle 
ownership was banned under Hoxha: there were only around 7,000 cars in the 
city. Horse-drawn carts and bicycles were the preferred mode of transport. By 
2004 the population had all but doubled, and 300,000 cars, many of them 
diesel-guzzling old Mercedes-Benzes stolen from westernEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, crammed Tirana’s narrow 
streets. The level of PM10s – airborne, cancer-causing particles – was up to 10 
times the World Health Organisation limit. The Guardian’s own Paul Brown 
described Tirana as the ‘pollution capital of Europe’.

A decade later little has changed. Tirana now has a population of around 
600,000 people, meaning there is one car for every two men, women and children 
in the city. Corrupt manufacturing that caused much of the pollution has been 
phased out, but Tirana remains choked by its obsession with the car: according 
to the WHO PM10 levels remain three times higher than the European average, 
which knocks up to two years off the local life expectancy.

Despite being flanked by mountains and a beautiful coastline Tirana has one of 
the lowest amounts of green space of any major European city. Efforts to build 
a tram link across town have been scuppered by a slow economy. Tirana is, 
despite small victories, a dirty place to live.

To thousands of Tiranans the answer is obvious –get people cycling again. 
Right now there are 20,000 cyclists in the city – around 3% of its population 
(there are 540,000 bicycle journeys a day among London’s 8.3 million 
residents). Ecovolis is a group that has been trying to get Tiranans in the 
saddle since 2009, and have even installed four bike share stations across 
town, each of which houses 10 cycles. 2,000 subscriptions have been sold so far 
– a small figure perhaps, but a significant one.
 A blocked cycle lane in Tirana. Photograph: Rudina Hoxha 
Tirana does have a smattering of cycle lanes but, like the ones on Rruga e 
Driga, they are poorly observed and hazard-strewn. “I’m a big fan of the 
bicycle but it’s still dangerous to cycle here in Tirana,” says vice mayor Enno 
Bozdo, who has launched a series of eco-projects including increased bus 
services and the planting of trees. “Tirana is great for cycling,” he adds. 
“The weather is excellent, there are very few days of rain. But old habits die 
hard. People love their cars.”

For most Albanians the car remains a growling talisman of the capitalism that 
exorcised them from Hoxha’s tyranny. Neighbouring former communists cities, in 
particular Belgrade and Zagreb, have nurtured robust cycling networks and bike 
share schemes. So too Athens, whose economic tumble has forced thousands out of 
their cars.

EU membership plays a big role. Member states must adhere to environmental 
protection requirements. Croatia is a member already, as is Greece, and 
negotiations for Serbia’s recognition were approved this January. Not so 
Albania, whose people, according to local journalist Rudina Hoxha, still view 
bicycles as the transport of the regime’s benighted proletariat. “Bikes were 
more present back then,” she says. “People are trying to revive that old image, 
but the bike is still on the periphery.”

“People in the EU can see in their media that cycling is not done by cheap or 
poor people, that it’s done by people who value health, the community, the 
environment,” says Eljo Kamberaj, an Ecovolis activist. “It’s not something for 
those who have less power but more.”

“In Serbia they’ve protected cycling from the communist era, it’s wonderful,” 
adds Ened Mato, the group’s director. He has been instrumental in organising 
street protests, and educating children on the environmental benefits of 
cycling. “We’ve had 20 years of nothing (in Tirana) and now we have cycle 
lanes. But a lot of cars are parked on them, and most of them don’t know 
they’re bike lanes at all. We have to promote this with the police, and they 
have to give real penalties to drivers occupying the bike lanes.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fjul%2F11%2Ftirana-addiction-cars-residents-cycling-albania-capital-bicycle-communist-image%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F9%2F1404917504940%2Fc7e46dba-c622-4693-bc53-931ca81c584f-2060x1302.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tirana%20fights%20to%20beat%20its%20addiction%20to%20cars%20and%20get%20its%20residents%20cycling&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fjul%2F11%2Ftirana-addiction-cars-residents-cycling-albania-capital-bicycle-communist-image%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tirana%20fights%20to%20beat%20its%20addiction%20to%20cars%20and%20get%20its%20residents%20cycling&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fjul%2F11%2Ftirana-addiction-cars-residents-cycling-albania-capital-bicycle-communist-image%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F9%2F1404917504940%2Fc7e46dba-c622-4693-bc53-931ca81c584f-2060x1302.jpeg>
 Cyclists block a bridge in Tirana during a protest to demand more cycle paths 
in the city. Photograph: Gent Shkullaku/AFP/Getty Images 
There’s domestic stalemate, too. Current mayor of Tirana Lulzim Basha is also 
head of the Democratic Party, Albania’s main opposition. Getting policy past 
socialist prime minister Edi Rama has, his deputy admits, been “very hard”. Yet 
despite this the mayor’s office has increased public transport lines from 35 
miles to 80 miles, and is adding 20 hectares of green space to the city.

Planting trees is one thing. Convincing Tiranans to give up their cars is 
quite another. “People are using cars badly,” says Mato. “They’re using cars to 
have a coffee with their friends, they’re using cars to go shopping for fruit. 
We’re worried they’re using their cars to drive to public toilets. They use 
them for everything. We are not against using cars, but for using them 
correctly.”

“People are getting more aggressive towards the car, because the car for them 
is a status symbol, of fashion, of wealth,” adds Kamberaj. “They’re not even 
trying to realise that whoever is driving a car is also being a big danger. 
Trying to change this has taken some time, and of course it will take some more 
time.”

There are promising signs, but Tiranans have a long way to go if they are to 
reverse their city’s most damaging addiction. In the fallout of that hot 
summer’s day in 1991, Sali Berisha, the first democratic president of Albania, 
turned to US ambassador Baker. “We killed communism,” he said. “But we are 
faced with its debris, which is still toxic.” Little did Berisha know how true 
those words would remain two decades later.
 