
The women of TLC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/20/tlc-announce-return-kickstarter-funded-album>
 are sitting on a couch in a tiny New York production facility taping safe-sex 
commercials to supplement their interview for an ABC special, In a New Light: 
Sex Unplugged. Network television has never been quite this real during prime 
time. Lisa “Left Eye” Lopes offers perky instructions on how to improvise a 
dental dam with Saran Wrap. Rozonda “Chilli” Thomas describes losing her 
virginity as a fractured fairytale worthy of Voltaire. Tionne “T-Boz” Watkins 
explains convincingly why casual sex is vastly overrated.


 There’s a free-floating charisma that makes TLC stars. As a unit, the girls 
exude the psychic allure of a secret club that you’ve always wanted to join. 
When you watch them laugh or interact or finish one another’s sentences, they 
seem to inhabit a closed universe, a world of secret delights that strangers 
can enter only by special invitation.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiWJI6GDMy-4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiWJI6GDMy-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiWJI6GDMy-4&media=>
 “You just wouldn’t expect three little, adorable, sweet young girls to 
terrorize the neighborhood the way we do,” says Thomas with her 1000-watt 
Cheshire cat smile. “It’s like we pull out the craziness in everyone, while we 
stay just the same … It’s almost like our energy is so powerful that it affects 
everyone around us.”

 TLC are three atomic vixens famous for wreaking havoc in studios and on tour 
buses. Their food fights and practical jokes are legendary, and saner heads 
constantly try to calm them down.

 CrazySexyCool, the second TLC album, is spreading that vibe into the 
mainstream. Certified triple platinum, sales of CrazySexyCool are approaching 
4m, and the LP hasn’t budged from the top reaches of the pop charts. Just as 
the first single, Creep, describes the darker side of TLC’s giddy hedonism, the 
current edition of TLC is a more serious bunch of girls than it was three years 
ago. TLC are not mere producers’ tools.

 Seeing this side of TLC – the adult, no-nonsense side – belies the 
fashionable bad-girl image that sent the band’s controversial 1992 debut, 
Ooooooohhh … On the TLC Tip, to multiplatinum status. Back then nobody 
suspected that these three brassy brown ladies would make an album hot enough 
to be the breakthrough moneymaker for the then hitless LaFace Records (run by 
Kenneth “Babyface” Edmonds and Antonio “LA” Reid). TLC’s first LP launched a 
sound, a look and not one but several careers. These three women have been the 
catalytic center of a thriving Atlanta R&B scene that would never have been 
quite the same without them.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8WEtxJ4-sh4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8WEtxJ4-sh4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8WEtxJ4-sh4&media=>
 TLC have also been the center of a storm of publicity. Controversy and 
melodrama have dogged the women of TLC on many levels since their commercial 
bow in 1992. All the ongoing creative, financial and personal hassles peaked on 
the fateful evening of 9 June, 1994, when a battered and tipsyLopes set fire to 
the mansion <http://theboombox.com/lisa-left-eye-lopes-tlc-burns-house/> of her 
fiance, Andre Rison, after an unusually violent lovers’ quarrel.

 In a scenario straight out of a TLC song, Rison (a professional football 
player) completely forgave his embattled lover; Lopes was fined and sentenced 
to a term of counselling, and the judge also urged Rison to seek help for his 
abusive tendencies. Then in mid-July of this year, Lopes and the other two 
members of the group filed for bankruptcy. The insurance companies weren’t as 
forgiving as Rison; reportedly, a $1.3m claim against Lopes by Lloyd’s of 
London constitutes a healthy share of her personal debts. Rison lent the women 
of TLC $15,000 each so they could hire a bankruptcy lawyer.

 “It’s not to make LaFace look bad,” Watkins insists. “But it is what it is. A 
lot of people have made money off of us, and we haven’t.” Such unrelenting 
pragmatism has always been part of TLC – and not just in their music. “What I 
really loved about TLC when I first met them was that they had a definite 
opinion of what kind of group they wanted to be,” says Reid. “TLC won’t sing 
songs that don’t represent their points of view – I don’t care who wrote it or 
how big a hit it could be.”

 “See, we came pretty much as is,” says Watkins, the sultry caramel blonde 
whose reedy alto anchors the group’s mid-tempo songs and ballads. “We knew how 
we were going to sing, dress and everything. All you had to do was the 
paperwork and help us out with the business stuff we didn’t know.” Growing up, 
Tionne Watkins was a featured soloist in her church choir. As a teen in the 
College Park district of Atlanta, she hung out every week at the same roller 
disco where producer Dallas Austin and his crew came to dance and soak up the 
rootsy street vibes later poured into hit singles for Joyce Irby, Another Bad 
Creation and Boyz II Men. “He and his boys would dance in line and were really 
good!” Watkins says.

10 of the best: 90s R&amp;B
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/feb/26/10-of-the-best-90s-r-and-b>
 Watkins’s favourite neighbour was Rico Wade, later a member of the production 
team Organized Noize. A righteous tomboy, she adopted so much of Wade’s dress, 
attitude and choreography that the struggling young musician called her his 
“little brother in lipstick.”

 “I started wearing baggy clothes because of Rico,” Watkins affirms today. And 
then Lopes chimes in: “And Rico sent me to the audition where I first met 
Tionne!” As usual, Left Eye’s story is a little more unorthodox than you might 
expect. Unlike Watkins and Thomas, Lopes was discovered bouncing around Atlanta 
without benefit of parental supervision or support. She’d come to town on what 
she terms “a humbug,” following a boyfriend-manager down from Philly on the 
rumour that a group he knew was looking for a female rapper.

 “I didn’t trust him, but I trusted myself,” Lopes says. “I knew I could take 
care of myself because I’d already been out on my own all this time without a 
stable place to live.”

 Through Wade, Lopes auditioned for a girl group with Watkins. Thomas was 
already on the scene as a dancer with another LaFace act called Damian Dame. 
She also possessed a promising singing voice that a little training would round 
out into a fine mid-range instrument. An elfin half-black, half-Indian Atlanta 
belle, Thomas was the perfect visual complement to what Lopes and Watkins had 
to offer. When offbeat nicknames were chosen to enhance the raucous 
individualism of TLC, the name Chilli fit Thomas’ exotic sensuality and 
sometimes spiky temperament like a glove.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdP2t9LBeAwo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdP2t9LBeAwo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdP2t9LBeAwo&media=>
 From the first album straight through to CrazySexyCool, TLC have had a hand 
in parceling out songwriting and production chores – essentially doing their 
own A&R for free. “They are much clearer than anybody else on what is and isn’t 
TLC,” says Reid. “They make it very dear to the writers and producers on their 
projects what they will and will not sing. And because of that, I think they’ll 
always be a little ahead.”

 For the CD single of Red Light Special, Lopes produced a brilliant and darkly 
confessional B-side called My Secret Enemy. On this relatively obscure track, 
Lopes explored the Rison incident – and her own conflicted feelings about it – 
with astonishing depth and style. It is such an exciting departure from the 
work the group has done with established producers that you start to feel that 
TLC’s album output thus far only hints at the women’s true capabilities. Now if 
they can just straighten out their business affairs in the meantime.

 “People are always looking at us, saying, ‘Man, you guys have really come a 
long way,’” says Thomas. “But I’m sorry. We’re not at the level we’re supposed 
to be in terms of cash flow.”

 “The only thing that’s going to keep me going,” says Lopes, “is the man who 
can make me happy … ‘Cause all my happiness ain’t coming from this career.”

 © Carol Cooper, 1995
 