
Be grateful, dear retail investor, that George Osborne never got a chance to 
unleash his mass-market offer of shares in Lloyds Banking Group. The former 
chancellor had planned to sell discounted stock to the populace at 70p apiece, 
or thereabouts.Lloyds’ shares now fetch just 52.5p in non-discounted form 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/28/lloyds-bank-to-axe-3000-jobs-and-close-200-branches>
.

The other side of the story, of course, is that Osborne did well to shift more 
than a few Lloyds shares to City institutions at prices that now look pretty 
only from the seller’s point of view. The reduction in the state’s stake from 
43% in 2009 to 9% today was achieved at an average price of 79p. It is a rare 
of example of the City being a medium-term loser in a government sell-off.

In January, “market volatility” was blamed for the postponement of the Lloyds 
retail offer. Now, Brexit has surely delayed the spectacle for ages.Philip 
Hammond <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/philip-hammond>, Osborne’s 
successor, would be silly to attempt a revival at the current share price when 
he has a credible alternative strategy: do nothing.

Lloyds bank to axe 3,000 jobs and close 200 branches
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/28/lloyds-bank-to-axe-3000-jobs-and-close-200-branches>
Brexit has dented the idea that Lloyds would suddenly turn into a dividend 
gusher, which is why the share price has fallen by 23% since the referendum. 
The bank’s capital-generating capacity may have reduced by about a fifth owing 
to various technical tweaks, like adjustments to risk weights. Low interest 
rates, for even longer, won’t help profit margins. And, if the UK’s short-term 
growth prospects are weaker, so is Lloyds’ earnings potential: as the country’s 
biggest bank, it is a geared bet on the UK economy.

But some details of Lloyds’ tale are unaltered by Brexit. Disasters like 
provisions for PPI mis-selling are washing out of the system, which was the 
main reason whystatutory pretax profits doubled to £2.45bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/28/lloyds-bank-to-axe-3000-jobs-and-close-200-branches>
 in the first half of the year. Meanwhile, chief executive António Horta-Osório 
can continue his attack on costs; another 3,000 posts are going. And, barring a 
serious crash in house prices, the mortgage book looks sound.

Add it all up and Lloyds should still be able to afford a dividend this year 
of 2.55p a share, or maybe a touch more. It’s just that a special dividend 
sweetener probably won’t happen. But 2.55p equates to a dividend yield of 4.8%. 
That’s not so bad. Hold the shares, Mr Hammond, if you want to signal 
confidence in the UK’s post-Brexit prospects.

Could Hinkley Point C yet be derailed?

EDF of France has taken the plunge and will sign the contract to build a 
nuclear power station at Hinkley Point 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/28/hinkley-point-c-to-go-ahead-after-edf-board-approves-project>
 in Somerset. But should you really approve an £18bn project on the basis of a 
10-7 boardroom majority?

That slim margin does not generate confidence. EDF’s executives could not 
convince the workers’ representatives on the board to show solidarity. And, 
before the crucial meeting,a state-appointed director resigned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/28/resignation-edf-director-hinkley-point-gerard-magnin>
, saying Hinkley was “very risky”. EDF’s last finance directordid the same a 
few months ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/07/hinkley-point-c-nuclear-project-in-crisis-as-edf-finance-director-resigns>
.

Hinkley's nuclear plant fails all tests - bar the politics | Damian Carrington
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/damian-carrington-blog/2016/jul/28/hinkley-point-c-nuclear-plant-fails-all-tests-bar-the-politics>
It is still hard to believe this project will proceed, whatever is said about 
the decision being “final”. The UK has offered a contract to a company that 
looks fundamentally divided, is carrying a mountain of debt and is permanently 
at the call of a changing cast of French politicians.

Meanwhile, our own National Audit Office has rightly questioned the economics 
of Hinkley, which look grotesque for UK consumers. This would be the world’s 
most expensive power station, to be constructed to a design that is not even 
proven.

Events could still derail this absurd adventure. Let’s hope so.

Rolls-Royce revs up but there’s a way to go

A share to have bought on 24 June was Rolls-Royce: it’s up by almost a third 
since the referendum. Part of that bounce is mechanical. It’s great to have 
half your costs in the UK when you are selling engines for dollars. The other 
part, which yielded a 13.5% rise in the share price on Thursday, is about 
confidence in management.

Chief executive Warren East has clearly learned from his predecessors’ 
mistakes. When he arrived from ARM Holdings a year ago, he set expectations 
low. He grumbled about accounting “fog” and pleaded for time to unpick a 
top-heavy management structure. The City was half-braced for yet another 
profits warning.

Rolls-Royce to cut 400 senior management jobs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/28/rolls-royce-to-cut-400-senior-management-jobs>
In the event, yesterday’s half-year numbers delivered the reverse. A 
break-even position was on the cards but Rollsproduced underlying pretax 
profits of £104m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/28/rolls-royce-to-cut-400-senior-management-jobs>
. That was still 80% lower than a year ago, but East now sounds vaguely 
cheerful. The target was to achieve cost savings of £150m to £200m by the end 
of next year. At the current rate of progress, it will happen sooner.

For his next trick, East may have to contain shareholders’ excitement. Some 
may already be dreaming of the day that Rolls matches arch-rival General 
Electric’s profit margins and boosts its annual profits by £1bn. It’s a nice 
ambition to pursue but, in a long-term business like engine manufacturing, 
progress is measured over decades.
 