
The toadstools opened from the graveyard like fleshy satellite dishes – ears 
of the necropolis listening to the living. We were inShrewsbury cemetery 
<http://www.findagrave.com/cgi-bin/fg.cgi?page=cr&CRid=2176561> to pay our 
respects at the turning year to those we knew there. The newer part had serried 
ranks of black or white marble headstones between drives, their funerary 
decorations modest symbols of grief and remembrance in a utilitarian order to 
keep the public face of death tidy.

The older part of the cemetery belonged to a much more Gothic sensibility: the 
graves mostly Victorian to the 1930s, their mossy stones listing on undulating 
ground and scattered randomly under trees, separated by meadow grasses.


How Mary Webb and DH Lawrence helped build Cold Comfort Farm
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2013/dec/10/mary-webb-dh-lawrence-cold-comfort-farm>
We walked down the lime avenue to the grave of the Shropshire poet-novelist 
Mary Webb (1881-1927) <http://www.marywebbsociety.co.uk/> and found the fungi 
growing around her neighbours’ headstones. They were scattered under the trees, 
popping up in lines around graves: a hand’s-span wide, honey-beige with gills 
as if breathing air, scores of them.

Temptingly macabre as it was to imagine the fungus living on the dead in the 
graveyard, this brittlegill,Russula pectinata 
<http://www.mushroomslook.com/en/russula-pectinata> (I think), had a more 
complicated and inspirational existence. The fungus was a symbiont of lime 
trees, anectomycorrhiza <http://mycorrhizas.info/ecm.html>, growing as a lacy 
sleeve of hyphae filaments between the tree root cells to which it provided 
water and nutrients and received carbohydrates.

The hyphae also formed a sheath-like photo-optic cable and ventured out into 
the soil in search of food and water and new tree roots.

I don’t know if the fungus was one organism or many, but its toadstool 
fruiting bodies appeared perfectly synchronised: the underground listening to 
the living world. Far from being an agent of doom the fungus was a life-giver, 
and I thinkWebb, a pantheist with a mystic ecology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/dec/06/featuresreviews.guardianreview34>
, would have appreciated that symbiotic relationship in her resting place.

As she wrote propitiously in Gone to Earth 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/gone-to-earth.html>, “she had so deep a 
kinship with the trees, so intuitive a sympathy with leaf and flower, that it 
seemed as if the blood in her veins was not slow-moving human blood, but 
volatile sap”.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>
 