
The Nashville songwriter John D Loudermilk, whose songs were hits for George 
Hamilton IV <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/sep/18/george-hamilton-iv>, 
Eddie Cochran, the Everly Brothers, Marianne Faithfull,Glen Campbell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/aug/26/glen-campbell-interview> and 
many more, has died at the age of 82.

His death on Wednesday at home in Christiana, Tennessee, was made public via 
Facebook by his friend and fellow songwriter Bobby Braddock. He had suffered a 
heart attack.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DeGuZY6NVXqU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DeGuZY6NVXqU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DeGuZY6NVXqU&media=>
Loudermilk was also a recording artist who began his career as a performer in 
the 1950s, but his greatest success came when his songs were recorded by others 
– his first big hit came in 1957, when Cochran recordedSittin’ in the Balcony 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yZ1BmskTE6A>. 

Although he was a Nashville songwriter, primarily composing with mainstream 
country stars in mind, his songs were versatile and adaptable enough to have 
been recorded by distinctly uncountry artists including Marilyn Manson and 
David Lee Roth.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Ftobacco-road-song-writer-john-d-loudermilk-dies-nashville%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7f394c9eaef885cf3783bf926f7e49753d769e9%2F0_8_2326_2905%2F2326.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tobacco%20Road%20writer%20John%20D%20Loudermilk%20dies%20aged%2082&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Ftobacco-road-song-writer-john-d-loudermilk-dies-nashville%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tobacco%20Road%20writer%20John%20D%20Loudermilk%20dies%20aged%2082&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Ftobacco-road-song-writer-john-d-loudermilk-dies-nashville%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7f394c9eaef885cf3783bf926f7e49753d769e9%2F0_8_2326_2905%2F2326.jpg>
 John D Loudermilk performing at Wembley Arena, London, 1983. Photograph: Peter 
Kemp/AP 
His two most famous songs, in fact, became hits for rock bands. Tobacco Road, 
which Loudermilk recorded on his own in 1960, was covered by the English group 
the Nashville Teens in 1964 and became a huge hit, and then a staple for garage 
bands around the world. It has been recorded more than 200 times, including 
versions by, Lou Rawls, Jefferson Airplane, Eric Burdon and War, Rare Earth and 
David Lee Roth.

The Pale Faced Indian <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aIpRJlWV0AM>, recorded 
by Marvin Rainwater in 1959, was revamped by Paul Revere and the Raiders in 
1971 asIndian Reservation <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zQ6RjP7MlXk> (The 
Lament of the Cherokee Reservation Indian), and captured the post-hippy mood of 
guilt over the treatment of America’s first peoples, giving the Raiders their 
only US No 1 single. The song was later covered by the UK punk band 999, who 
reached No 51 in the UK charts with it.

In 1961, Loudermilk told the Tennessean newspaper in Nashville about the 
inspiration behind his songwriting. “I’m looking for the most different thing I 
can find,” he said. “Everybody’s writing ‘I love you truly.’ You’ve got to find 
something new. I talk to drunks at the bus station, browse through kiddie books 
at the public library [and] get phrases from college kids and our baby sitter. 
You’ve got to be looking all the time.”
 