
In one of his final acts in office, Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> selected key figures in 
sports, entrepreneurship, philanthropy, activism, academia and entertainment 
among the 21 people who will be awarded the 2016 Presidential Medal of Freedom 
– the highest civilian honor in the US.

 Obama will present recipients including rocker Bruce Springsteen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/13/stranded-bruce-springsteen-rescued-from-road-by-new-jersey-bikers>
, Motown soul singer Diana Ross, former basketball championsMichael Jordan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/25/michael-jordan-i-can-no-longer-stay-silent-on-violence-in-america>
 andKareem Abdul-Jabbar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/jul/29/kareem-abdul-jabbar-mocks-donald-trump-as-he-introduces-himself-as-michael-jordan-video>
 and actorsTom Hanks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/16/presidential-medal-of-freedom-tom-hanks-michael-jordan-obama>
,Robert De Niro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/nov/11/robert-de-niro-reacts-to-trump-presidential-victory-video>
 andRobert Redford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/11/robert-redford-says-he-will-retire-from-acting-after-two-more-films>
 with the medal at a White House ceremony on 22 November, the White House said 
on Wednesday.

Tom Hanks on the election result: 'America has been in worse places'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/16/tom-hanks-us-election-donald-trump-president>
 “The Presidential Medal of Freedom is not just our nation’s highest civilian 
honor – it’s a tribute to the idea that all of us, no matter where we come 
from, have the opportunity to change this country for the better,” Obama said 
in a statement.

 The medal is given annually to people who have made outstanding contributions 
to the security or national interests of the US, to world peace, or to cultural 
or other significant public or private endeavors.

 This year’s roster also includes Microsoft co-founder Bill Gates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/askjack/2016/apr/14/how-can-i-use-three-computer-monitors-like-bill-gates>
 and his wife Melinda for their philanthropic foundation, TV talkshow hostEllen 
DeGeneres 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/jul/29/ellen-degeneres-finding-dory-video-interview>
, veteran actor Cicely Tyson, architect Frank Gehry and baseball broadcaster 
Vin Scully.

 The group also includes several not so well known Americans, such as late 
Native American community leader Elouise Cobell and Nasa moon landing computer 
scientist Margaret H Hamilton.

 Obama leaves office in January after eight years, following the election of 
Republican businessman Donald Trump.

 Previous recipients of the medal from Obama include baseball champion Yogi 
Berra, singer-songwriter Bob Dylan, director Steven Spielberg and former US 
secretary of state Madeleine Albright.
 