
Tom Varndell looked to be on his way out at Bristol a few months ago, hauled 
off early in the second half in theSeptember defeat by Exeter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/23/bristol-exeter-chiefs-aviva-premiership-match-report>
 and told he was not worth a place in the bottom club’s match-day squad. The 
response of the former England wing, at the age of 31, was not to think of his 
career in the past tense and his hat-trick of tries in the basement battle 
allowed the home side to overcome the early dismissal of Tusi Pisi.

Bristol were 10-3 ahead and looking comfortably superior to Worcester, who 
seemed to play as they had prepared and showed little in the way of thought, 
when Pisi was sent off after 12 minutes. He followed Billy Searle’s high kick 
into the Worcester half and looked as if he would catch the ball without 
leaving the ground, when he noticed Jamie Shillcock jump into the air to get to 
it first. Pisi turned his head and theWorcester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/worcesterrugby> outside-half fell awkwardly 
to the ground, leaving Wayne Barnes with no option under the recent law 
directive on potentially unsafe acts but to reach for his red card.

Vunipola brothers will benefit from injury break, says Saracens’ Marcelo Bosch
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/25/vunipola-brothers-injury-saracens-marcelo-bosch-newcastle>
Shillcock also left the pitch not to return, depriving Worcester of their 
first-choice goal-kicker. He was replaced by the Canadian Connor Braid, who was 
making his first appearance in thePremiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership>, and while the Warriors at no 
point matched Bristol’s hunger at the breakdown and struggled at the lineout 
throughout, their lack of direction at half-back cost them and they woefully 
failed to take advantage of their extra man behind.

Bristol’s first try, when they had 15 players, exposed Worcester’s 
vulnerability. The Warriors were caught out at the back of a lineout when 
Searle ran into space that was there because the visitors made sure they had 
covered Will Hurrell, a volcano of a centre whose relish for the task inspired 
his team-mates. Searle stepped outside rather than inside and Varndell sensing 
an opportunity, provided support to expose a defence that had gone missing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fbristol-worcester-premiership-match-report-rugby%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1051d0bfa0deb12dc2cb98a5eef5b3bccb146363%2F0_0_3720_2232%2F3720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tom%20Varndell%20hat-trick%20sinks%20Worcester%20and%20infuses%20Bristol%20with%20hope&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fbristol-worcester-premiership-match-report-rugby%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tom%20Varndell%20hat-trick%20sinks%20Worcester%20and%20infuses%20Bristol%20with%20hope&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fbristol-worcester-premiership-match-report-rugby%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1051d0bfa0deb12dc2cb98a5eef5b3bccb146363%2F0_0_3720_2232%2F3720.jpg>
 Tom Varndell celebrates a try for Bristol. Photograph: Alex 
James/JMP/REX/Shutterstock 
Varndell finished the afternoon on 89 Premiership tries, one behind the record 
holder Mark Cueto. His second, after Will Cliff’s break from the side of a 
ruck, was down to his determination, getting back up immediately after being 
ankle-tapped by Chris Pennell. His third was created by the full-back Jason 
Woodward, Bristol’s best player, whose influence on the game was as profound as 
that of Worcester’s marquee player, the England centre, Ben Te’o, was muted.

Te’o did set up his side’s first try, breaking tackles and getting close 
enough to theBristol <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bristolrugby> line for 
the second-row Darren Barry to ignore an overlap and reach out to score after 
being tackled by Hurrell, but such was Worcester’s lack of direction, purpose 
and vision that he touched the ball only eight times. Their second try, after 
64 minutes which brought them to within a point of their rivals, showed the way 
the game could be won. Worcester moved the ball quickly from their own 22 for 
Dean Hammond to confuse Woodward and Jack Wallace as they scrambled back and to 
finish off from 60 metres.

Without ideas Worcester had little territory, even against 14 men for so long, 
although parity was restored for 10 minutes towards the end of the first half 
when Barry was sent to the sin-bin for bringing down a maul as it rumbled 
towards Bristol’s line. They looked throughout relegation candidates throughout 
while Bristol, admittedly backed by a vocal crowd of more than 16,500, were 
fuelled by desire; but for Pisi’s red card the Warriors would probably have 
continued their record of conceding a try bonus point every away Premiership 
match this season.

Worcester were never more vulnerable than when they had scored a try. 
Varndell’s second came four minutes after had scored and his third came from 
the restart after Hammond’s break-out. It was Bristol who picked up the 
knock-downs and fumbles and in Searle they had an outside-half who put his team 
in the right areas, although the decision to pull the 20-year old five minutes 
from the end after an ambitious pass nearly resulted in an interception try 
that would have put Worcester in bonus-point territory and a kick away from 
victory, was prudent.

Worcester left with what they deserved: nothing. “Losing Shillcock was crucial 
and we lacked direction and shape,” said their director of rugby, Carl Hogg. 
“We are only halfway through the season and have a number of significant 
players to come back, especially at 9 and 10.” His opposite number, Mark 
Tainton, reflecting on Bristol’s first Premiership victory since they defeated 
Worcester in March 2009, paid tribute to Varndell.

“I sat him down a few weeks ago and told him he was the 24th or 25th man and 
that, if he wanted to get back into the side, he had to show it on the training 
field. He did and I am delighted with a win that showed the character and 
resilience of the players, but we will not get ahead of ourselves.”

Bristol Woodward; Wallace, Hurrell, Pisi, Varndell; Searle (Jarvis, 75), 
Cliff; Bevington (Traynor, 54), Hawkins (Crumpton, 72), Cortes (Ford-Robinson, 
62), Tuohy (Phillips, 62), Glynn (Sorenson, 52), Fenton-Wells, Robinson (capt), 
Eadie.

Tries Varndell 3 Cons Woodward 2 Pens Woodward 3.

Sent off Pisi 12.

Worcester Pennell; Hammond, Te’o, Willison, Vuna (Adams, 68); Shillcock 
(Braid, 12), Dowsett; Leleimalefaga, Bregvadze (Singleton, 54), Schonert 
(Johnston, 75), Scotland-Williamson (Spencer, 52), Barry, Potgieter (capt), 
Lewis, Faosiliva (Dowson, 57).

Tries Barry, Hammond. Cons Pennell 2. Pen Shillcock, Pennell.

Sin-bin Barry 32. Referee W Barnes Attendance 16,552.
 