
British politicians and officials were nervous about being accused of war 
crimes, according to documents released as part of theChilcot report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/iraq-war-inquiry>. Tony Blair and Jack Straw 
knew of warnings about potential breaches of the Geneva and Hague conventions 
from the government’s own lawyers.

The Iraq war inquiry has left the door open for Tony Blair to be prosecuted | 
Joshua Rozenberg
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/06/iraq-war-inquiry-chilcot-tony-blair-prosecute>
As Sir John Chilcot said, it was not his job to judge the legality of the Iraq 
war; but the extensive documentation and testimony viewed by the inquiry may 
well be enough to open up the possibility of prosecution. This evidence is 
considerably more damning thanChilcot’s “headline” conclusions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/06/chilcot-report-crushing-verdict-tony-blair-iraq-war>
.

Geoffrey Robertson rightly argued 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/05/tony-blair-in-the-dock-fantasy-wars-aggression>
 that it is not legally possible to put Tony Blair on trial in the 
international criminal court for a crime of aggression, because aggression was 
not included in the Rome statute that established the ICC.Joshua Rozenberg 
suggested 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2010/nov/11/british-officers-iraqi-abuse> that 
the focus should therefore be on cases against British soldiers for abuse of 
detainees. However, there is an alternative route to take Blair and his 
ministers to the ICC over their war crimes.

Under the Hague and Geneva rules, occupying powers are prohibited from 
fundamentally transforming the economy and political system of a country 
<http://www.iraqinquiry.org.uk/media/246551/the-report-of-the-iraq-inquiry_section-92.pdf>
. Yet this is exactly what happened: the coalition provisional authority (CPA), 
through which the UK and US governed, forced through a series of major 
structural economic reforms, including theremoval of product subsidies and 
protective trade barriers and other tariffs, a flattened tax system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2003/nov/07/iraq.comment> in which the 
richest and the poorest paid the same rate, and economic policies that threw 
Iraqi industry wide open to foreign investors. It also reformed the political 
system root and branch, creating agovernment structure based on sectarian 
identity <http://www.merip.org/mero/mero082003>, which arguably played a key 
role in stimulating the violence that continues to this day.

One Foreign and Commonwealth Office lawyer advised Blair in February 2004 that 
because “the extensive body of CPA legislation dealing with economic reform and 
governance was of questionable lawfulness … the risk of claims against the UK 
could not be ruled out”.

US and Britain wrangled over Iraq's oil in aftermath of war, Chilcot shows
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/07/us-and-britain-wrangled-over-iraqs-oil-in-aftermath-of-war-chilcot-shows>
This issue had been contentious in the days leading up to the invasion. 
Concerns about the legality of the occupation were expressed in writing by 
several officials. In his memo to Blair on 26 March 2003, the attorney general 
Lord Goldsmithhad warned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2003/oct/13/worlddispatch.usa> that 
“wide-ranging reforms of governmental and administrative structures would not 
be lawful”. Meanwhile, Iraqi oil revenues were used to fund reconstruction, the 
majority of it carried out by US and UK contractors. Chilcot noted that by the 
end of the CPA’s first year of occupation, there were more than 60 UK companies 
working in Iraq, on contracts worth an estimated $2.6bn. To the victor, the 
spoils. Over $8bn of that Iraqi oil revenue was lost, unaccounted for in a 
process described thus by Blair’s representative in the CPA, Sir Jeremy 
Greenstock: “A lot of cash was going round 
<http://www.iraqinquiry.org.uk/media/246596/the-report-of-the-iraq-inquiry_section-103.pdf>
 in suitcases to be dispensed to Iraqis, not all of which was accounted for.”

The CPA also laid the groundwork for a fundamental restructuring of Iraq’s 
vast oil industry. While the period formally defined as occupation ended in 
June 2004, British troops remained inIraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> for a further five years. The official 
narrative was that they were there at the invitation of sovereign Iraqi 
governments, but those nominal governments were successively appointed, 
promoted or defined by the US and UK.

Contrary to Blair’s protestations, government documents released this week 
spell out how Iraqi oil was acentral motive behind the war 
<https://www.opendemocracy.net/david-whyte/chilcot-s-oil-blind-spot-in-iraq-war-report>
. Throughout the six years that British troops remained in Iraq, the UK 
consistently maintained two objectives in relation to oil: to transfer oil from 
public ownership to multinational companies, and to ensure BP and Shell got a 
large share of it. While the post-2004 phase may escape the formal legal 
definitions, it raises important political and ethical questions.

The Blair government knew this oil plan was not what Iraqis wanted. A 
September 2004 strategy paper quoted by Chilcot noted that the UK’s oil agenda 
was “politically sensitive, touching on issues of sovereignty”. Without 
recognising any conflict, it recommended that Britain “push the message 
<http://www.fuelonthefire.org/uploads/files/0409_UK_energy_strategy_for_Iraq.pdf>
 on [foreign direct investment] to the Iraqis in private, but it will require 
careful handling to avoid the impression that we are trying to push the Iraqis 
down one particular path”.

Contrary to Blair’s protestations, documents released this week spell out how 
Iraqi oil was a central motive in the war

The question that now must be contemplated is whether the war crimes we have 
described under the CPA constitute “pillage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2003/oct/13/worlddispatch.usa>” – and 
whether, in the terms of the Rome statute, they constitute grave breaches.

After the Chilcot report was launched, the SNP’s Alex Salmond 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/chilcot-report-alex-salmond-tony-blair-legal-action-iraq-war-inquiry-a7122626.html>
 and Labour’s Paul Flynn both stated that a prosecution of Blair was now in 
order. The decisions to reshape Iraq’s economy, especially oil, in UK interests 
may provide the grounds to do so. Certainly there is a great deal of 
incriminating evidence and a serious case to answer.
 