
There are cities and then there are megacities. The most prosaic definition of 
a megacity is one that has more than 10 million inhabitants. Lahore makes it.
London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> doesn’t. This figure, however, 
is fairly arbitrary. The cutoff was once eight million. And who knows, with the 
rate of human multiplication, we might in future have to raise the bar to 15 
million.

Whatever the number, Lagos will always qualify. I grew up in this megacity to 
end all megacities. By the time I finish typing this sentence, the entire 
population of Macclesfield will have arrived in Lagos and been absorbed without 
a trace.


Related: Welcome to Lagos by Chibundu Onuzo review – high hopes, big city 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2017/jan/18/welcome-to-lagos-by-chibundu-onuzo-review>

Yet I don’t think of these places solely as mathematical phenomena. The key to 
the concept is in the prefix. A mega expression of life, where humanity is 
condensed into a few square miles and the force and friction of all this 
jostling generates creativity and destruction in equal measure. Life, death, 
comedy, tragedy, joy and sorrow are all heightened in megacities.


Knowing all this, how did I dare to write a novel called Welcome to Lagos? How 
could I capture the essence of Africa’s largest city in 350 pages? I assembled 
a large cast of characters, I set them on the city boundaries and then I said: 
“Go forth into Lagos and live it.” Did I succeed? Well, you tell me. These are 
my top 10 megacities in fiction.


1. A Tale of Two Cities by Charles Dickens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/sep/16/tale-two-cities-dickens-review>
From an early scene, when a cask of wine breaks open in a Parisian slum and 
bystanders rush to drink every last drop, it is clear that we’re in megacity 
territory. The accuracy of Dickens’s pre-revolution Paris may be held up for 
scrutiny but never its intensity. As for his depiction of London, Dickens 
almost single-handedly created the image of Victorian London that we carry 
still today. Few writers have ever been so powerful. It was the best of times 
for fiction.

2. The Bees by Laline Paull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/may/21/bees-laline-paull-fantasy-novel-review>
The hive is often used as a metaphor for the large city but Paull’s novel 
makes it literal. We follow Flora 717, the lowest class of bee, as she rises 
through the hive and has all the possible and impossible adventures you could 
hope to fit into a bee’s life.

3. Five Star Billionaire by Tash Aw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/feb/24/five-star-billionaire-tash-review>
This is the quintessential megacity novel. Four Malaysians move to Shanghai 
and try to make it big. Busy with bling, hustle and fake designer bags, it’s 
written in a clear, simple prose set at contrast with the razzle it describes. 
Under all this sparkle is the loneliness of a city where a million people live 
a million separate lives.

4. The Horse and His Boy by CS Lewis 
<https://www.gutenberg.ca/ebooks/lewiscs-thehorseandhisboy/lewiscs-thehorseandhisboy-00-h.html>
The protagonists in this childhood favourite are travelling for most of the 
novel, but for a brief interlude they are in Tashbaan, where the plot starts to 
fizz. From afar, this fantastical city is “one of the wonders of the world”. 
Inside, however, are “unwashed people, unwashed dogs, scent, garlic, onions, 
and the piles of refuse which lay everywhere”. An accurate description of many 
megacities I’ve passed through.

5. Saturday by Ian McEwan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/jan/22/bookerprize2005.bookerprize>
One day in the life of central London, including diverted traffic, brain 
surgery and armed robbery. If you wonder how 24 hours in one man’s life could 
be so eventful, you must live in the suburbs. Henry Perowne, neurosurgeon, is 
an intelligent mind wandering through the British capital, and there is little 
he doesn’t pause to ponder on: from the BT Tower, to squash, to the war in 
Iraq. One of my favourite state-of-the-nation novels.
 Lagos without the colour … a still from The Dark Night: Batman (2008) 
directed By Christopher Nolan. Photograph: Allstar/Warner Bros 
6. The Carnivorous City by Toni Kan 
<http://life.guardian.ng/2016/11/the-pulse-of-lagos-carnivorous-city-by-toni-kan/>
This list would be incomplete without a Lagos novel and they don’t get much 
sharper and slicker than this. Abel, a lecturer in the small town of Asaba, 
discovers that his younger brother Soni, a big man in Lagos, has gone missing. 
He travels to the city to unravel the mystery and gets sucked into a 
high-society world of big money, big crime and big secrets. I read this in one 
sitting.


7. Batman, DC Comics <http://www.dccomics.com/characters/batman>
Gotham is Lagos without the colour, the joy, the energy. Never was a grimmer 
more miserable place imagined and for this grim place an equally joyless 
superhero, skulking through the city in tight hosiery and a pointy-eared mask. 
If Lagos had a superhero, she would be called Jollof Woman, riding a danfo, 
dressed in orange and busy redeeming criminals with the healing power of jollof 
rice.

8. Clear Light of Day by Anita Desai 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/clear-light-of-day.html>
This novel is set in old Delhi, in a crumbling family house in retreat from 
the louder, newer city outside. Every family has its own personal version of a 
national crisis and this is the Das family’s Partition story. Novels are not 
history books but there’s an emotional accuracy in this novel that shows how 
cities and countries can split over religious and cultural differences.

9. My Name Is Red by Orhan Pamuk 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/my-name-is-red-2.html>
A miniaturist is murdered in 16th-century Istanbul. Whodunnit is secondary in 
this kaleidoscope of a novel. We move through the city with a catalogue of 
unexpected narrators: a coin, a corpse, the colour red. No object, no person, 
no concept can pass through a megacity and remain unchanged.

10. Everything Good Will Come by Sefi Atta 
<http://www.sefiatta.com/everything.html>
Sheri and Enitan, two young girls, meet in 60s Lagos. The city changes around 
them as their friendship grows and survives a civil war, an oil boom and a long 
string of military dictators. Their central friendship is in some ways a 
literary forerunner of the complicated relationship between Elena and Lila in 
Elena Ferrante’s Neapolitan works. I particularly love this because it is set 
in a Lagos I never saw. A classic.

 * Welcome to Lagos by Chibundu Onuzo is published by Faber, priced £12.99. It 
is available from the Guardian bookshop priced £9.99 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/welcome-to-lagos.html>.
 