
Reading that the decidedly talented Fanning sisters – Dakota and Elle – were 
in talks 
<http://nymag.com/daily/entertainment/2011/03/elle_dakota_fanning_shaggs.html> 
for a movie aboutThe Shaggs <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Shaggs> was 
heartening. The Shaggs – three sisters who, despite not having much in the way 
of musical ability, formed a band because a palm reader told their 
superstitious father they would – released one album in 1969,Philosophy of the 
World <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Philosophy_of_the_World>. It was quite 
universally rubbished, but later achieved cult status. The New York Times said 
that it was "maybe the best worst rock album ever made"; Frank Zappa famously 
said the Shaggs were "better than the Beatles" and Kurt Cobain quite fancied 
them too.

Last week, an unknown 13-year-old American teen, Rebecca Black, was afforded 
similar treatment 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2011/TECH/web/03/15/rebecca.black.friday/>: her song 
Friday, produced by the Arc Music Factory became the latest "YouTube 
sensation". The song, which was to become the subject of online polls such as 
"Is this the worst song in the world?", received millions of hits, and much 
mockery and meme-making ensued. Yet Rolling Stonedeclared 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/why-rebecca-blacks-much-mocked-viral-hit-friday-is-actually-good-20110315>
 that there was something about this strangely intoned bubblegum-ish pop that 
was "uniquely compelling".

In a time of reality TV dross, when one can get famous by eating beetles in 
exotic locales or wearing a wedding dress with disco lights on it, you can 
become immune to the wonder that is the best worst genre. Which is a pity, 
because the unhinged self-belief and the sheer gumption involved in making it 
to the world stage without a scrape of talent is surely an enviable talent in 
itself.

Earlier this month AA Gill reviewed 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/culture/features/2011/04/lami-louis-201104> what he 
officially deemed to be the "worst restaurant in the world". Apparently the
L'Ami Louis <http://www.dininginfrance.com/L%27Ami_Louis.htm> in Paris is not 
only enormously popular but is also the sort of joint that people – celebrities 
even – kept up their sleeve to say imperiously at dinner parties: "Oh, I know 
this great little place in Paris." I took enormous pleasure in reading choice 
phrases such as "intimidatingly gross flabs of chilly pâté", "fetid bladder 
damp" and "gray, suppurating renal brick".

The fact that this restaurant had scaled to such lofty heights is, at first, 
perplexing. But on reflection, it seems that perhaps L'Ami Louis is really 
quite inspired. After all, we're doomed to eat meals with faintly sinister 
sauces, sinewy meat and scaly unidentified objects at some point in our lives. 
You might as well eat something unspeakably awful and brag about it later. It 
won't be easily forgotten. In this disposable fame-guzzling world, the last 
thing you want to be is forgettable. And indeed, while many untalented folk do 
get their moment in the exquisite limelight, many do end up in the forgotten 
bin.

Talent, as many a scholar with a book manuscript in their top drawer or 
aspiring actress pulling pints knows, is certainly not a guarantee for success. 
Any doughy school careers counsellor will assure you that talent is only a 
small part of the equation. The rest is hard work, luck, perhaps an exceptional 
party trick, and just very occasionally capturing the zeitgeist in some 
completely inexplicable way.

In a Melbourne cinema, Tommy Wiseau's 2003 film The Room 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2009/sep/10/cinema-the-room-cult>, 
another candidate for the best worst genre, recently celebrated one year of 
late-night cult screenings. At these weekly screenings, like they do allaround 
the world 
<http://entertainment.timesonline.co.uk/tol/arts_and_entertainment/film/article6067024.ece>
, the audience throw spoons at the screen. This is the sort of community 
building and pop culture-defining exercise that even the most brilliant film 
rarely recreates. And my entire cinema clapped at the end of The King's Speech.

In the hit Chris Lilley mockumentary television series 
<http://www.abc.net.au/tv/heroes/>, We Can Be Heroes, talent, or lack thereof, 
heroism and ambition, is explored in a delightfully cringing way. These 
ordinary heroes of Australia, all of them played by Lilley (who this week 
released a teaser trailer ofhis new show <http://www.abc.net.au/tv/angryboys/> 
Angry Boys, out later this year), had very unique gifts and ambitions. Such as 
the schoolgirl who collected sponsor children, or the lady who rolled from 
Perth to Fremantle. At risk of sounding like an internet guru specialising in 
dynamic self-empowerment, the key to happiness and success is probably to 
either make up a talent that nobody else has or to tell detractors to sod off 
and keep banging on in whatever it is you love doing most.

Florence Foster Jenkins (1869-1944), for whom I have an undimmed soft spot, is 
perhaps the poster girl for this. A self-made opera singer, her strangulated 
cat arias and complete inability to hit a right note, pitch and diction were 
legendary, both in history and in my family who had competitions to see who 
could do the best Florence Jenkins impersonation. In her career she put on 
recitals for hordes of amused fans. Aware of people's unkind views on her 
singing, she once said, "People may say I can't sing, but no one can say I 
didn't sing." Which, surely, is worthy of a standing ovation.
 