
HEINEKEN CUP COUNTDOWN

When Toulon won the Heineken Cup final last May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/may/18/jonny-wilkinson-toulon-clermont-heineken-cup>
, they become the first French club other than Toulouse to achieve the feat 
since Brive in 1997 – and only the third in all.

Given all the fuss made about the free-spending French and the stockpile of 
talent their clubs are able to acquire, it is a modest record, even if 
Toulouse's tally of four victories in the final is a record.

When Toulon and Clermont Auvergne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/clermontauvergne> reached last season's 
Heineken Cup final, coaches and players from both clubs were asked what they 
would, if given a choice, prefer to win – Europe or the Top 14. Both was the 
most popular answer but in France the league has long been king.

The H Cup, as it is known on the other side of the English Channel, is a mere 
pretender. Clubs who in the past have not had the squads to fight on two fronts 
have always put the league first and some have been fined by European Rugby Cup 
Ltd for fielding weakened teams in Europe.

Last season, after giving notice to ERC that they would be withdrawing from 
the Heineken and Amlin Challenge Cups at the end of the season, along with the 
English clubs, France provided both finalists, while Stade Français made the 
Amlin final.

A last hurrah? Toulon begin the defence of their title against Glasgow, the 
unbeaten RaboDirect Pro 12 leaders, at Stade Félix Mayol on Sunday and with 
Exeter and Cardiff Blues making up the pool,they are the favourites to finish 
first and automatically qualify for the quarter-finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/oct/09/heineken-cup-pool-guide-northampton-saracens>
.

Toulon start the European campaign as the Top 14 leaders, ahead of Montpellier 
and Toulouse on points difference and one point ahead of Stade Français, who 
have won a game more. There are, though, signs that the salary cap in France is 
starting to have an effect: only seven points separate Toulon and the champions
Castres <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/castres>, who lie in 11th place, 
three points ahead of newcomers Oyonnax, who have won four of their nine league 
matches. Only Biarritz are marooned.

Toulon <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/toulon> have been formidable at home 
but less impressive on the road where their only victory has been at the bottom 
club Biarritz, although they started with a draw at Montpellier. They have lost 
at Grenoble, Castres and Oyonnax, although they did secure a bonus point each 
time.

Clermont Auvergne remain unbeatable at home, winning their four matches 
comfortably with Toulouse among those roundly beaten, but on the road their 
only success has come at Biarritz. They were the first victims of Oyonnax, 
losing 30-19, and they were beaten by 40 points in Montpellier.

They start at Racing-Métro who, for all their spending, have spluttered in the 
opening two months of the season, thrashed at Toulon and Toulouse and losing at 
home to Grenoble. They lie in eighth but have won the same number of matches as 
Toulon, even if they have only won by a double-figure margin once.

An image of French rugby that playing at home is a significant advantage will 
rarely have been true than the opening nine rounds of the Top 14 this season. 
Excluding the hapless Biarritz, whose only victory came against Montpellier in 
the second round, only three clubs have lost at home and each on one occasion: 
Racing Métro, Bordeaux-Begles and Oyonnax. All three clubs are in the bottom 
half of the table.

In contrast, the Aviva Premiership, in which five rounds have been completed, 
is more open. Four clubs, Gloucester, Harlequins, Newcastle and Worcester have 
lost in front of their open supporters at least twice, while London Irish have 
also lost two matches at home, although the first was againstSaracens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2013/oct/09/saracens-heineken-cup-toulon-mark-mccall>
 at Twickenham.

Toulouse would ordinarily be regarded as likely quarter-finalists, given the 
presence of Zebre and Connacht in their group, even if they finish second 
behind Saracens, but such has been their away form that not even victory at 
Zebre, who have yet to win in front of their own supporters in either the Pro 
12 or the Heineken Cup, can be assumed.

Toulouse have lost all four away matches in the Top 14, although at home no 
one has held them to a single-figure margin. With 13 France internationals, six 
from other countries and seven players who have made more than 50 appearances 
in the Heineken Cup, they should be among the teams to beat but such is the 
jockeying for position in the Top 14 that even the French club that has valued 
the Heineken Cup from the outset may be tempted to reappraise.

French sides have in recent seasons become more adept at winning away from 
home. The former New Zealand No 8, Murray Mexted, revealed in his autobiography 
about how in his time with Agen in the 1980s the club's president, and 
unofficial bankroller, would be so delighted and surprised when the team 
managed to win on the road that players' boots would be stuffed full of notes.

He was one of a few foreigners playing in France then but their influence now 
is widespread and they are, generally, less bothered about whether they are 
playing home or away. Racing have nine Test players from outside, including the 
Ireland outside-half Jonathan Sexton but Toulon boast 20, almost a team of 
exiles.

Perpignan have 11 internationals from overseas, as have Clermont. Montpellier 
and Castres boast eight, while Toulouse have seven. What their purchasing power 
gives the French clubs is strength in depth, reflected on their benches, but 
there were times last season when even Toulon rested players entirely from a 
Heineken Cup match in readiness for a Top 14 encounter the following week, 
usually when playing away.

A great unknown before the start of the Heineken Cup is how the French will 
take it. Northampton, who havewon at Harlequins this season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/sep/13/harlequins-northampton-robshaw-wood>
 anddrawn at Leicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/oct/05/leicester-northampton-premiership>
, will not be fooled by Castres's lowly league position when they face the 
champions on Saturday. It is the fourth successive year the clubs have been 
drawn together in the pool stage and the Saints have lost the last two meetings 
in France.

Castres, like the other French sides in the tournament, are always fired up in 
front of their own. Home is where the hearth is.

• This is an extract from the Breakdown, our free weekly take on the world of 
rugby union. To ensure a copy arrives in your inbox every Thursday, sign up here
 <https://id.theguardian.com/email/subscribe?emailListId=219>.
 