
Russian hackers were able to access thousands of emails from a top-ranking 
Democrat after an aide typed the word “legitimate” instead of “illegitimate” by 
mistake, aninvestigation by the New York Times has found 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/13/us/politics/russia-hack-election-dnc.html?hp&action=click&pgtype=Homepage&clickSource=story-heading&module=a-lede-package-region&region=top-news&WT.nav=top-news>
.

The revelation gives further credence to the CIA’s finding last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/10/cia-concludes-russia-interfered-to-help-trump-win-election-report>
 that the Kremlin deliberately intervened in the US presidential election to 
help Donald Trump. The president-elect has angrily denied the CIA’s assessment, 
calling it “ridiculous”.

In the run-up to the election, the US Democratic National Committee (DNC) 
received numerousphishing emails 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jun/06/how-to-protect-yourself-from-phishing-attacks>
, the paper reported on Tuesday. One of them was also sent to John Podesta, the 
chairman of Hillary Clinton’s campaign. An aide, Charles Delavan, spotted the 
message sent to Podesta’s private account. It asked Podesta to change his 
password.

CIA concludes Russia interfered to help Trump win election, say reports
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/10/cia-concludes-russia-interfered-to-help-trump-win-election-report>
Delavan realised the email was a phishing attack and forwarded it to a 
computer technician. However, he made a typo, writing: “This is a legitimate 
email.” He added: “John needs to change his password immediately.”

The blunder gave Kremlin hackers access to about 60,000 emails in Podesta’s 
private Gmail account. According to US intelligence officials, Moscow then gave 
theemail cache to WikiLeaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/31/the-podesta-emails-show-who-runs-america-and-how-they-do-it>
. The website released them in October, and the email scandal dominated the 
news cycle and was exploited by Trump.

The FBI had known for some time that Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> was making a wide-ranging and 
systematic attempt to hack US political institutions including the White House 
and the State Department, the paper reported. In September 2015 the FBI 
discovered that a cyber-espionage team linked to the Russian government had 
penetrated the DNC.

But instead of sending a top-level delegation and raising the alarm, the FBI 
got a single special agent to make a phone call. The agent, Adrian Hawkins, 
rang the DNC and was put through to the IT helpdesk. He told the tech-support 
contractor on duty, Yared Tamene, that a group called “the Dukes” had hacked 
the DNC’s computer networks.

According to the paper, Tamene thought Hawkins’s message might have been a 
prank call. He googled “Dukes” but found nothing. He then failed to alert 
senior staff after his cursory search of the DNC’s computer system logs 
revealed no obvious sign of an intrusion.

Hawkins rang back repeatedly over the next few weeks. Tamene, however, did not 
respond. “I did not return his calls, as I had nothing to report,” he wrote in 
a memo seen by the New York Times.

The FBI’s laid-back approach meant that Russian hackers were able to roam 
inside the DNC’s computer systems for almost seven months, before Democratic 
officials finally realised the gravity of the attack and brought in external 
cybersecurity experts.

In March 2016 a second Russian hacking group targeted the DNC. It sent 
hundreds of phishing emails, which began: “Someone just used your password to 
try to sign into your Google account.” One of the scam’s victims was Billy 
Rinehart, a former DNC regional field director, who clicked on the “change 
password” message while half asleep.

According to the New York Times, the Obama administration was slow to respond 
to the hacking threat, underestimated its seriousness and fluffed several 
opportunities to stop it. Theresulting email furore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/31/hillary-clinton-latest-emails-explained>
 damaged Clinton’s election prospects and helped Trump to victory, as the 
Kremlin had almost certainly intended.

After the data breach the DNC hired CrowdStrike, a cybersecurity company. It 
quickly established the hack had originated in Russia and identified two groups,
Cozy Bear and Fancy Bear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/29/cozy-bear-fancy-bear-russia-hack-dnc>
. Cozy Bear, linked to Russia’s FSB spy agency, had begun its phishing 
operation in summer 2015, the paper reported.

Fancy Bear joined the attacks in March 2016. The hacking group is linked to 
the GRU, Russian military intelligence. It was Fancy Bear that hacked Podesta’s 
email account, the paper said. The two Kremlin hacking groups were seemingly 
unaware of each other, sometimes stockpiling the same stolen documents.

Dmitri Alperovitch, CrowdStrike’s co-founder and chief technology officer, 
told the paper there was no doubt Russia was responsible. “There’s no plausible 
actor that has an interest in all those victims other than Russia,” he said. 
Additionally, the hacking groups were active at times matching Moscow’s 
timezone, he added.
 