
I first came across 17th-century writer Margaret Cavendish in Virginia Woolf’s 
A Room of One’s Own: “What a vision of loneliness and riot the thought of 
Margaret Cavendish brings to mind! As if some giant cucumber had spread itself 
all over the roses and carnations in the garden and choked them to death.” It’s 
a wonderfully peculiar description and I could never quite shake this image of 
a woman so apparently unruly Woolf felt it necessary to describe her as, 
essentially, a dick among the blooms.


Woolf meant, I suppose, that Cavendish was too much: too eccentric, too 
ambitious, too undisciplined. Indeed, she was notorious for her outfits, her 
poor spelling and awkward behaviour, and, most egregiously, for demanding to be 
taken seriously as a writer and natural philosopher. She was the first woman 
ever invited to the Royal Society of London – and the last, for another 200 
years.

Staring down 2017 – What would a feminist do? podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/audio/2017/jan/03/feminism-in-2017-donald-trump-jessica-valenti-podcast>
I began my novel about Cavendish a decade ago, but her refusal to deny her 
ambitions or silence the worlds inside her – her refusal, really, to be a good 
girl and shut up – has never felt more urgent than now, as a man who has 
repeatedly sought to silence and contain powerful women through degrading 
epithets and scorn prepares to take office as US president.

In her day, Margaret Cavendish was called a whore, a liar, insane. How 
grateful I am to her and mavericks like her, women who’ve refused to diminish 
themselves to make others feel more comfortable, who’ve allowed themselves to 
spread out all over the dang roses even as it meant transgressing social, 
personal and literary boundaries. Here are 10 of my favorite books by and about 
such wild women.

1. The Hearing Trumpet by Leonora Carrington 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/hearing-trumpet.html>
Better known as a surrealist painter, Carrington was equally strange and 
ferocious as a fiction writer. This 1976 novel centres on a band of gutsy old 
ladies as they revolt against the petty despots and quack psychiatrists running 
a bizarro retirement community like something out of Alice in Wonderland. When 
it isn’t weird like a David Lynch movie, it’s sweet like an old-lady buddy 
novel; then it’s a biting satire of power structures; then it’s a mystical 
fable of the occult.

Margaret the First by Danielle Dutton review – portrait of an author ahead of 
her time
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/25/margaret-the-first-by-danielle-dutton-review>
2. The Letters of Mina Harker <http://www.belladodie.com/about/> by Dodie 
Bellamy <http://www.belladodie.com/about/>
In Bram Stoker’s Dracula, Mina is the perfect, passive Victorian wife. Here 
she’s horny and undead in 1980s San Francisco, having possessed Bellamy’s body. 
Epistolary, like Stoker’s original, the novel follows Mina/Dodie’s adventures 
through a city ravaged by Aids. It’s all wildly alive, full of gossip and sex. 
As Eileen Myles put it: “If there’s anything better than literature this is it.”

3. Oreo 
<http://www.newyorker.com/books/page-turner/an-overlooked-classic-about-the-comedy-of-race>
 by Fran Ross 
<http://www.newyorker.com/books/page-turner/an-overlooked-classic-about-the-comedy-of-race>
Published in 1974 and reissued last year to considerably more attention, 
Ross’s parody of the Theseus myths stars a young woman named Oreo who survives 
by her formidable wits. Setting out from her black household in Philadelphia to 
find her deadbeat Jewish father in New York, she proceeds through one of the 
funniest journeys ever, amid a whirlwind of wisecracks in a churning mix of 
Yiddish, black vernacular, and every sort of English. In an afterword,Harryette 
Mullen 
<https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poets/detail/harryette-mullen>
 attributed the book’s poor initial reception to its being “more eccentric than 
Afrocentric”– an odd fit at the height ofthe Black Arts movement 
<https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/text/brief-guide-black-arts-movement>.

4. The Description of a New World, Called The Blazing World  
<http://digital.library.upenn.edu/women/newcastle/blazing/blazing.html>by 
Margaret Cavendish 
<http://digital.library.upenn.edu/women/newcastle/blazing/blazing.html>
Cavendish’s utopia with an empress at its centre reads like a feminist 
response to Francis Bacon’s New Atlantis, which, by contrast, centres on a 
college of learned men. The text sparkles with science-fictional details, from 
vehicles made of air to flaming stars that make the night as bright as day. And 
Cavendish herself makes an oddly metafictional appearance, brought forth into 
this other world as friend and scribe to its empress.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fvideo%2F2010%2Fjun%2F18%2Fsurrealism-leonora-carrington&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F28%2F1422456336538%2FPainting-by-surrealist-ar-006.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Leonora%20Carrington%3A%20Britain's%20lost%20surrealist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fvideo%2F2010%2Fjun%2F18%2Fsurrealism-leonora-carrington>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Leonora%20Carrington%3A%20Britain%27s%20lost%20surrealist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fvideo%2F2010%2Fjun%2F18%2Fsurrealism-leonora-carrington&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F28%2F1422456336538%2FPainting-by-surrealist-ar-006.jpg>
Video: Leonora Carrington: Britain’s lost surrealist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/video/2010/jun/18/surrealism-leonora-carrington>
5. Heroines <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/heroines.html> by Kate Zambreno 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/heroines.html>
This book was born after Zambreno moved from Chicago to Akron for her 
husband’s job: “I am realising youbecome a wife, once you agree to move for 
him. You are placed into the feminine role.” A voraciously researched critical 
work about the “The Mad Wives of Modernism” – Vivienne, Zelda, Jane, et al – 
Heroines also honestly examines Zambreno’s own marriage, career and identity as 
a writer, ploughing straight through any assumed divisions between literature 
and life.

6. Suite for Barbara Loden by Nathalie Léger (translated by Cécile Menon and 
Natasha Lehrer) <http://dorothyproject.com/?book=suite-for-barbara-loden>
Another spectacularly hybrid text – combining film criticism, biography, 
fiction, and memoir – in which Léger tells her own story via an investigation 
of Loden’s 1970 Wanda, a film in which Loden likewise investigatesher story 
through the story of her main character. It’s like an infinity mirror of women 
in pain and seeking. Full disclosure: the press I run, Dorothy, published the 
book in the US. It’s published in the UK by Les Fugitives 
<http://www.lesfugitives.com/books/>.

7. The Descent of Alette by Alice  
<https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poets/detail/alice-notley>
Notley 
<https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poets/detail/alice-notley>
Alette is on a journey deep beneath the city, where spirits ride subways 
forever. Here she meets subterranean figures and faces spiritual 
transformations, all on a quest to destroy an evil, charming man known as the 
Tyrant. This feminist refashioning of the epic form is written in a mesmerising 
verse style that begs to be spoken aloud: “‘I entered’ ‘a cave’ ‘where a woman 
sat’ ‘who looked made of rock’.”

8. Lolly Willowes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/sep/15/100-best-novels-lolly-willowes-sylvia-townsend-warner-robert-mccrum>
 by Sylvia Townsend Warner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/sep/15/100-best-novels-lolly-willowes-sylvia-townsend-warner-robert-mccrum>
This 1926 novel chronicles the life of Laura Willowes, aka Aunt Lolly. We 
begin politely enough: Laura is a good girl who upon her father’s death moves 
into her brother’s home to help care for his children. Decades pass – 
letter-writing, cleaning the canary cage – until one day Aunt Lolly snaps. She 
abandons her life as London spinster and absconds to a hamlet, where she 
transforms herself into a woods-tramping, devil-loving witch.

Top 10 novels about women's political awakening
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/11/top-10-novels-about-womens-political-awakening>
9. Zami: A New Spelling of My Name 
<https://archive.org/details/AudreLORDEZamiANewSpellingOfMyName...SisterOutsider...UndersongChosenPoemsOldAndNew>
 by Audre Lorde 
<https://archive.org/details/AudreLORDEZamiANewSpellingOfMyName...SisterOutsider...UndersongChosenPoemsOldAndNew>
I’m reading this now and find it utterly compelling. Lorde’s “biomythography” 
is a story of growing up black and poor in New York City. It’s about being a 
poet, a daughter, a sister, a lesbian, a friend. “Every woman I have ever 
loved,” she writes, “has left her print upon me”. We see these women take vivid 
shape on the page, from Lorde’s imposing immigrant mother to neighbourhood 
ladies to lovers.

10. A Room of One’s Own 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/05/100-best-nonfiction-books-no-45-a-room-of-ones-own-by-virginia-woolf-shakespeares-sister-seton-beton>
 by Virginia Woolf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/05/100-best-nonfiction-books-no-45-a-room-of-ones-own-by-virginia-woolf-shakespeares-sister-seton-beton>
Despite its mixed review of Cavendish, ARoOO will always be a seminal text for 
me. My copy is hardly legible for all the marginalia I’ve scrawled, including a 
big fat YES by: “This is an important book, the critic assumes, because it 
deals with war. This is an insignificant book because it deals with the 
feelings of women in a drawing room.” It echoes a line in her essay Modern 
Fiction: “Let us not take it for granted that life exists more fully in what is 
commonly thought big than in what is commonly thought small.” It strikes me 
that this list of wild women, often larger-than-life, includes a number of 
books about the so-called smaller things – where, as Woolf makes clear, life 
exists as much as it does anywhere, for anyone.

 * Danielle Dutton is the author of Margaret the First (Scribe, £12.99). The 
book isavailable from the Guardian bookshop for £11.04 including free UK p&p 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/margaret-the-first.html>.
 