
Senior Cuban negotiators say the island will not be cowed by intimidation and 
bluster fromDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, 
despite the incoming US president’s threat to rekindle cold war animosities.

“Aggression, pressure, conditions, impositions do not work with Cuba. This is 
not the way to attempt to have even a minimally civilised relationship withCuba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cuba>,”Josefina Vidal, a foreign ministry 
department head, told the Guardian.

Cuba’s wait-and-see approach is guided by Trump’s unpredictability – and the 
knowledge that all previous 11 US administrations held talks with 
representatives from Havana despite the often hawkish public rhetoric coming 
from Washington.

Related: Spies, artificial insemination and the pope: how Cuba came in from 
the cold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/26/usa-cuba-relations-barack-obama-pope-francis-spies>

Vidal has led the island’s negotiating team with the US since 2013, including 
18 months of secret discussions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/26/usa-cuba-relations-barack-obama-pope-francis-spies>
, facilitated by Canada and the Vatican, that led to the joint announcement by 
Cuban president Raúl Castro and Barack Obama on 17 December 2014 of a 
normalisation of diplomatic relations.

Trump has warned that he is prepared to undo that progress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/28/donald-trump-cuba-sanctions-reforms-fidel-castro-death>
. During the US election campaign, he told an audience of rightwing Cuban 
exiles in Miami: “All of the concessions that Obama has granted the Castro 
regime were done through executive order, which means the next president can 
reverse them and that is exactly what I will do unless the Castro regime meets 
our demands.”

But Cuban officials say that they plan to wait for action rather than words 
because Trump has repeatedly flip-flopped on the issue of rapprochement – and 
also put his business interests above his country’s laws.

During the campaign, it emerged that Trump sent his corporate representatives 
to Cuba in 1998, and again in the 2000s to probe for openings, in violation of 
the US trade embargo. Three months after launching his campaign to become the 
Republican party candidate, Trump was the only GOP contender to express a 
positive opinion of the reopening of bilateral relations, saying “the concept 
of opening with Cuba is fine 
<http://www.cnn.com/2015/09/08/politics/donald-trump-cuba-diplomatic-opening/>”.

Trump’s transition team includes several figures linked to Cuban American 
groups which take a hard line on Cuba, advocating the continuation of the US 
blockade and an end to rapprochement.


For years we have been talking to a sophisticated president. Now we have a 
gentleman who is capable of saying anything
Ricardo Alarcón, Cuban politician 
Dr Yleem Poblete has been named to Trump’s national security council “landing 
team”, lawyer John Barsa to the Department of Homeland Security, and lawyer 
Mauricio Claver-Carone an adviser to the treasury department. Claver-Carone is 
executive director of the US-Cuba Democracy Pac and among the fiercest 
opponents of Obama’s Cuba policy.


But Vidal says it is “‘too early” to predict which path the new administration 
will follow. “There are also other functionaries, businessmen, that Trump has 
named, including in government roles, who are in favour of business with Cuba, 
people who think that the US will benefit from cooperation with Cuba, on issues 
linked to the national security of the US,” she points out.

Her analysis of Trump’s unpredictability – particularly in contrast to Obama – 
is echoed by Ricardo Alarcón, until recently considered the third-most 
influential man in Cuban politics.

“For two years we have been talking to a sophisticated president with an 
intelligent, skillful discourse. Now we have a gentleman who is capable of 
saying anything and nobody is sure what he is going to do,” said Alarcón, who 
spent 30 years representing Cuba at the United Nations and another 20 years as 
president of the country’s national assembly before retiring in 2013.
 Barack Obama and Raúl Castro at a baseball game in Havana, Cuba, in March - 
the first visit by a US president in 88 years. Photograph: Michael Reynolds/EPA 
From the 1970s to the 2000s, Alarcón led secret talks with US officials 
through a backdoor channel that was first opened by Che Guevara in 1961, just 
eight months after diplomatic relations had officially been broken off.

Whether this historical willingness to engage in discussion is continued under 
Trump will depend on whether the new president takes a pragmatic economic 
approach or a confrontational political line.

Related: Donald Trump threatens to freeze US-Cuba thaw days after Castro's 
death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/28/donald-trump-cuba-sanctions-reforms-fidel-castro-death>

Rafael Hernandez, the director of Temas <http://temas.cult.cu/>, an 
influential journal of political and social debate published in Havana, 
believes Trump’s business instincts will prevail over the threats.

“This is all bluff. And we are accustomed to the bluff from the governments of 
the United States,” Hernandez says. “I don’t underestimate Trump’s capacity for 
aggression, I am simply saying that this is a state that is motivated by 
interests and the interests are in favour of business, and in the case of Cuba 
lifting the blockade is nothing more than responding to the interests of 
business.”

There is little appetite in the US Congress for lifting the embargo, but over 
the past two years the Obama White House has passed a number of measures to 
improve ties between the two neighbours.

Listing the fruits of engagement at a conference last month, Vidal noted that 
in addition toObama’s visit to Cuba in March 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/24/barack-obama-cuba-visit-raul-castro-analysis>
 – the first by a US president for 88 years – there have also been 23 
high-level visits, 51 technical meetings and 12 agreements signed in areas 
ranging from cooperation on the environment and air travel to health and the 
fight against drug trafficking. Twelve more were in the pipeline.

There has also been a dramatic spike in the movement of people between the two 
nations. Last week it was revealed that nearly 285,000 US citizens visited Cuba 
in 2016, a growth of 74% on the previous year. Add a similar number of Cuban 
American visitors and over half a million people travelled to Cuba from the US.

Full migration in the opposite direction, however, was disincentivised last 
week, when the White House announcedthe end of the “wet foot, dry foot” 
migration policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/12/obama-ends-cuba-immigration-policy-wet-foot-dry-foot>
, which privileged Cuban arrivals in the US over migrants from other countries, 
granting them automatic residency and citizenship within one year.

Related: Obama’s Cuba visit is latest step towards ‘new alliance of the 
Americas’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/20/obamas-cuba-visit-latest-step-towards-new-alliance-of-americas>

Although commercial ties are minimal and financial restrictions remain in 
place, Obama used his executive powers to grant licences to selected US 
companies to operate in Cuba: six telecoms, four cruises, one hotel, eight 
airlines and two small banks. In mid-December, Google signed a deal with the 
Cuban government to install servers on the island that will speed up access to 
the internet.

On the eve of Trump’s inauguration, the first legal Cuban export to the US in 
more than 50 years will take place, in the form of40 tons of charcoal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/06/cuba-artisanal-charcoal-first-export-us-alan-gross>
 produced in Cuban cooperative farms.

As they wait to see how much of this will be dismantled or continued by Trump, 
Cuban official stress the benefits of closer ties with the US go far beyond the 
island’s borders.

‘These last two years show that many good things have been done not only for 
Cubans and for the Americans, but for others,” Vidal says. “Because when Cuba 
and the US cooperate in confronting drug trafficking, this is an important 
contribution to the region; or when Cuba and the US cooperate in confronting 
[viruses such as] zika <https://www.theguardian.com/world/zika-virus>, dengue 
and chikungunya, as we have been doing recently, we are making an important 
contribution to humanity. When Cuba and the US cooperated in Africa to fight 
Ebola, they made an important contribution to the health of the world.”

But nothing is taken for granted. The Cuban Communist party’s longterm 
development plan circulated for debate after the seventh congress in April 2016 
makes no assumptions about changes in US policy toward Cuba. Raúl Castro has 
asserted the need for “civilised co-existence” with the US, but not at the cost 
of sovereignty and independence.

Dr Helen Yaffe is a fellow in the economic history department at the London 
School of Economics. The Cuban officials cited in the article were interviewed 
during research funded by a Rockefeller-LSE grant. The project is carried out 
with Nick Kitchen, from the US centre at LSE.
 