
Teresa May’s hopes of striking a trade deal with the incoming Donald Trump 
administration <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trump-administration> have 
been given a boost after a leading adviser to the president-elect said a new 
accord could be achieved within six to 12 months.

Anthony Scaramucci, a Wall Street financier and member of Trump’s transition 
team, said at the World Economic Forum inDavos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/davos> that Barack Obama’s successor 
would seek a swift and mutually beneficial agreement.

Interviewed by ITV News, Scaramucci – who has sold his hedge fund so that he 
can take up a job in the White House – said the US would be hoping to finalise 
talks within the “first six months or the first year of the administration”.

Related: Theresa May Brexit speech's shows UK getting 'more realistic', says 
Tusk - Politics live 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2017/jan/17/theresa-may-brexit-speech-pound-steadies-ahead-of-theresa-mays-brexit-speech-politics-live>

Scaramucci said Trump took a different view to a trade deal with Britain to 
Obama, who said during the EU referendum campaign last year that the UK would 
go to the“back of the queue” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/22/barack-obama-brexit-uk-back-of-queue-for-trade-talks>
.

No single country takes a bigger share of UK exports than the US, and 
Scaramucci said Trump would “take the steps necessary to make sure the UK is at 
the front of the line as opposed to the back of the line, on trade deals”.

Later, at a briefing with journalists following May’s Brexit speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/prime-minister-vows-to-put-final-brexit-deal-before-parliament>
, Scaramucci said he was convinced the UK would flourish outside the EU.

“There are two countries I would not bet against – the US and the UK,” Trump’s 
aide said. He added that London had been Europe’s financial capital for 500 
years before the creation of the EU and would continue in that role post-Brexit.

“After the referendum I had conversations with customers who said it was going 
to be a disaster for Britain and the stock market would crash,” Scaramucci 
said. “We know now that the opposite has happened.”

Related: What do business leaders think of Theresa May's Brexit speech? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/17/business-theresa-may-brexit-speech-uk-eu>

Trump’s weekend observations about the probability of other countries 
following Britain and leaving the EU were badly received in Brussels and other 
European capitals.

Scaramucci said the president-elect was making a political observation about 
the remoteness of policymaking inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> in the context of the Brexit 
vote.

“There is a large group of disenchanted people in pluralistic democracies who 
feel like they have been left out,” he said.

“I understand why the EU was created. It has been a success because it has 
kept the peace. But you have a group of people, legislators and bureaucrats, 
making decisions that have an impact on Manchester, Milan or Rome and they may 
not understand the local markets they are making decisions for.”
 