
After 43 years of membership, exiting the EU was never going to be easy. But 
the government’s current tone and approach is making a hard job even more 
difficult. There have been 165 days since the referendum result and there are 
only 118 left until the prime minister’s 31 March deadline to triggerarticle 50 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/jun/29/what-is-article-50-brexit-video-explainer>
. The clock is ticking, but still we do not know thegovernment’s basic plan for 
Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/nov/28/oil-price-opec-saudi-arabia-oecd-mario-draghi-live>
.

We do not have answers to fundamental questions such as the government’s 
position on the customs union, our likely relationship with the single market 
or future contributions to the EU budget. The government has also failed to 
provide much-needed certainty for the 3.5 million EU citizens living in the UK.

This matters, because uncertainty over the government’s plans – and the 
continuing likelihood that it favours ahard Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/28/hard-brexit-would-damage-almost-every-sector-of-uk-economy>
 – is weakening our negotiating position and making it less likely that Britain 
will get the best possible Brexit deal, one that protects jobs, the economy and 
living standards.

Office for Budget Responsibility to tear up forecasts for UK growth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/20/office-of-budget-responsibility-to-tear-up-forecasts-for-uk-growth>
This uncertainty is already feeding through to the economy, with the Office 
for Budget Responsibility 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/20/office-of-budget-responsibility-to-tear-up-forecasts-for-uk-growth>
 revising down business investment by 4.7% this year. Uncertainty over the 
status of EU nationals has also contributed to a surge in applications for UK 
residency from those worried about what the future may bring.

The prime minister, Theresa May, and her Brexit secretary, David Davis, have 
repeatedly said there will be no running commentary on their article 50 plans. 
But in the past few days and weeks, this is precisely what we have seen – a 
running commentary provided by leaked memos, notes caught on camera and the
foreign secretary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/02/boris-johnson-foreign-policy-old-world-order>
’s novel approach to diplomacy.

At the same time, parliament is being sidelined and denied the chance to 
scrutinise the government’s plans on the most important issue facing the 
country for generations. The prime minister should know that without greater 
clarity over the basic terms of her Brexit strategy this speculation and 
uncertainty will persist. And for as long as this is the case, our negotiating 
hand weakens.

During recent visits to Brussels, I have been left in no doubt that our EU 
negotiating partners are deeply concerned that the government’s tone and 
approach are hindering a mutually beneficial Brexit deal.

Instead of providing certainty over the UK’s basic aims, the government has 
put out mixed messages, veering from the extreme version of Brexit suggested by 
the prime minister’s party conference speech to the undefined version of Brexit 
suggested by theNissan deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/27/new-nissan-super-plant-hopes-for-tariff-free-eu-access>
 andDavis’s comments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/01/brexit-secretary-suggests-uk-would-consider-paying-for-single-market-access>
 that EU budget contributions may continue post-Brexit.

Labour will fight for a Brexit deal in the national interest – not for the 52% 
or the 48%, but for the 100%.

We need to end this unnecessary uncertainty. That is why Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> has called an opposition day 
debate in the House of Commons on Wednesday on a motion that calls for the 
government to publish a plan for Brexit before article 50 is invoked.

Labour accepts and respects the referendum result. We recognise Britain is 
leaving the EU and we will not frustrate the process that leads to that.

But we will also fight for a Brexit deal that is in the national interest – 
not in the interest of the 52% or the 48%, but for the 100%.

That means opposing a hard Brexit that risks jobs and our economy and fighting 
to ensure that key protections on workers’ rights and the environment are 
retained and enhanced. It also means holding the government to account every 
step of the way and making sure it has a proper plan to deliver the smart, 
sensible Brexit we need.

Labour’s motion in the Commons on Wednesday is an important step in that 
process. It calls for a basic plan – not the finer detail or minutiae of a 
negotiating position, but a basic plan – for Brexit to be put before the public 
and parliament.

On the defining issue of our time, that surely is not too much to ask.

Keir Starmer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/30/keir-starmer-uk-guarantee-eu-citizens-rights-talks-brexit>
 QC, shadow secretary of state for exiting the EU, is MP for Holborn & St 
Pancras
 