
With joint-second placed teams Roma and Milan squaring off on Monday night, we 
thought we’d hold the main part of theSerie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> blog for Tuesday morning. 
But there was some pretty significant action over the weekend, too, so here’s 
an extended edition of talking points to keep you going until then.

Talking points


• Torino v Juventus is known to fans as the Derby della Mole – a nickname 
referencing theMole Antonelliana 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mole_Antonelliana> which dominates the city’s 
skyline. But in the buildup to Sunday’s showdown, one or two journalists 
suggested a subtle re-ordering of that phrase. The word ‘Mole’ translates to 
‘massive’, or ‘mountain’. This was like to be “una mole di derby” – an absolute 
whopper of a derby.

Juventus’s Gonzalo Higuaín scores twice to earn derby win over Torino
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/11/gonzalo-higuain-juventus-torino-serie-a>
Although Torino <https://www.theguardian.com/football/torino> had beaten their 
neighbours only once in the past 21 years, this year’s team was different. With 
31 goals in 15 games, they were scoring at a rate not seen since Valentino 
Mazzola and Guglielmo Gabetto led the line back in the mid-1940s.

 If the fans wanted to believe victory was possible then Sinisa Mihajlovic 
played to their emotions by inviting an Ultra, together with a club shopkeeper 
and Amos Ferrini – son of the late club captain, Giorgio – to sit with him at 
his pre-match press conference. “Juve will not just be playing against 11 
players,” he said, “but all of Toro’s people.”

 It was not sentiment that gave his team an early lead, but Andrea Belotti – 
who glanced a header past Gigi Buffon. This was the striker’s 11th goal of this 
season (amazingly, he has four with his left foot, three with his right and 
four with his head), and further justification for the club’s decision to write 
a €100m release clause into the new contract he signed at the start of this 
month.

Juventus <https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus>, though, already 
coughed up €90m for a striker this summer, and Gonzalo Higuaín took a little 
step towards repaying it with a brace to turn this game on its head. His second 
goal, in the 83rd minute, was superb – the striker using his strength to hold 
off Antonio Barreca, and his technique to turn and drill the ball into the 
bottom corner from the edge of the box.

Miralem Pjanic later added a third, as Juventus sealed a 3-1 win. Mihajlovic 
was culpable in his team’s collapse – he made an ambitious triple-substitution 
in the moments before Higuaín’s second – but the result was hardly unjust. 
Torino played well, but Juventus possess the greater quality, and it told.


The sight, indeed, of Paulo Dybala returning from injury and playing a 
decisive role in Juventus’s final goal, ought to send a shiver down the spines 
of Juve’s would-be title rivals. They are seven points clear, pending the 
Roma-Milan game, and still have significant margins for improvement.


How a Scottish manager working in Wales ended up in charge of Juventus
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-gentleman-ultra/2016/dec/10/juventus-turin-manager-scottish-billy-chalmers-derby-torino>
• Among the many subplots to the derby was Joe Hart’s duel at a distance with 
Buffon. Each keeper has been public in their admiration of the other,and their 
embrace in the tunnel before kickoff was rather lovely 
<https://twitter.com/TransfersCalcio/status/807947716093444096>. The Italian 
caught the eye with his new Magnum moustache, but it was the Englishman who had 
the more impressive game – despite conceding three times. Hart made a sharp 
reflex stop to keep out a close-range shot from Mario Mandzukic at 0-0, before 
producing a brilliant double save in the buildup to Juve’s third goal. 
Tuttosport were effusive in their praise, labelling him as: “Robin Hood against 
destiny. The miracle man. A sensational last bastion.”


• One man missing from Sunday’s derby was Leonardo Bonucci, sidelined by a 
hamstring injury. Instead he stole the show on social media 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BN4Rml6jPL6/> with a picture of himself and his 
two sons. Lorenzo, the eldest, was wearing a Torino shirt, while Matteo was 
copying dad in Bianconero. As a person who grew up as the lone Juve fan in a 
household full of Inter supporters, we should not be surprised that Bonucci 
would be happy for his kids to make up their own minds. “Each to his own,” he 
wrote, “for respect and love.”

• There was a huge clash at the bottom of the table, too, Crotone beating 
fellow promoted side Pescara 2-1 despite missing a penalty, conceding an 
81st-minute equaliser and holding just 28.1% of possession. I’m not sure that 
ultimately it’s a recipe for survival, but there was something grimly admirable 
in the commitment to breaking play rather than making it.


• Sergio Pellissier scored his 100th Serie A goal as Chievo sank Palermo – a 
feat rendered all the more impressive by the fact that he has grabbed all of 
them for the Flying Donkeys. He played for a few other clubs early in his 
career but, in his 15th season at Chievo, he deserves to be celebrated as one 
of Italy’s few remaining bandiere. This was hardly the trickiest goal of his 
century – laid on generously by Palermo’s Edoardo Goldaniga – but Pellissier is 
a man who recognises his own limitations. “I don’t have the quality to dribble 
past everyone,” he said. “I live off of opportunities and the mistakes of 
defenders. But I have been waiting for this goal for many years, and I have 
suffered a lot to get it … I think I’ve achieved a little something in my 
career and I am so happy.”

• Napoli made light work of Cagliari – thrashing the Sardinians 5-0 – and seem 
to have found their feet again after wobbling in October and November. Dries 
Mertens was electric on his way to a hat-trick and, for all the worry about 
replacing Higuaín and then Arkadiusz Milik, this team has now scored four more 
goals than it had at the corresponding point last season.

• Lazio bounced back from defeat in the derby with an impressive win away at 
Sampdoria, but Atalanta could not do the same following their own loss to 
Juventus. In fairness, there was not a lot you can do about goals as good as 
the one thatSeko Fofana scored to give Udinese their second-half lead in Bergamo
 <https://twitter.com/btsportfootball/status/808006487452880896>. 

• This week in ludicrous kit nonsense: nobody thought to consider that 
Udinese’s black and white stripes might be hard to discern from Atalanta’s 
blue-and-black stripes during a match (and especially when a large part of the 
back of the shirt has been blocked out around the number). As a makeshift 
solution,the Zebrette were obliged to cover up some stripes with white tape 
<http://www.repubblica.it/sport/2016/12/11/foto/udinese_maglie_scotch-153911082/1/#1>
.

Results: Atalanta 1-3 Udinese, Bologna 0-0 Empoli, Cagliari 0-5 Napoli, 
Crotone 2-1 Pescara, Inter 2-0 Genoa, Palermo 0-2 Chievo, Sampdoria 1-2 Lazio, 
Torino 1-3 Juventus


Pos Team P GD Pts 
1 Juventus 16 21 39 
2 Roma 15 19 32 
3 AC Milan 15 8 32 
4 Napoli 16 17 31 
5 Lazio 16 12 31 
6 Atalanta 16 5 28 
7 Torino 16 10 25 
8 Inter Milan 16 3 24 
9 Fiorentina 14 6 23 
10 Chievo 16 0 22 
11 Sampdoria 16 -2 22 
12 Udinese 16 -2 21 
13 Genoa 15 0 20 
14 Cagliari 16 -14 20 
15 Sassuolo 15 -6 17 
16 Bologna 16 -8 17 
17 Empoli 16 -17 11 
18 Crotone 16 -16 9 
19 Pescara 16 -16 8 
20 Palermo 16 -20 6  