
A worrying number of Australians think it would be acceptable for Australian 
soldiers to be tortured for information.

A new study conducted by the Australian Red Cross found 57% believed torturing 
an Australian soldier for information should not be allowed and 23% were 
undecided. But 21% thought it was OK.

When it comes to Australians torturing enemy soldiers for information, 23% 
thought that acceptable – actually more than people from war-afflicted nations 
such as Syria (20%) and South Sudan (18%).

Almost half of Americans see torture as acceptable, Red Cross survey finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/05/torture-survey-red-cross-people-on-war-poll>
The Australian Red Cross chief executive, Judy Slatyer, said most Australians 
care very much about their fellow humans but some need to better understand why 
humanitarian laws and values matter.

“Torture is illegal and unacceptable in any circumstances. It has a 
devastating impact on those tortured as well as our collective humanity,” she 
said in a statement.

The Australian Red Cross survey coincides with release of a global report on 
attitudes to war conducted by the International Committee of the Red Cross.

That survey, in which 17,000 people in 16 countries including Syria, Iraq, 
Afghanistan and South Sudan were surveyed on their attitudes to laws of war and 
humanitarian protection.

Overwhelmingly they supported measures designed to protect civilians and 
healthcare. But the survey did throw up some concerning trends.

Fiji's police and military using torture with 'near impunity', Amnesty says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/05/fijis-police-and-military-using-torture-against-suspected-criminals-amnesty-says>
An increasing number of people are resigned to civilian deaths as an 
inevitable part of warfare, especially those from nations not affected by 
conflict, such as the UK, France, Russia, Chinaand US. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/05/torture-survey-red-cross-people-on-war-poll>

There was also growing indifference to the torture of enemy soldiers, despite 
its absolute prohibition.

“The global results seem to show that people who live in mainly peaceful 
countries need to be more compassionate and understanding. Here in Australia, I 
wonder if we risk becoming numb to the true extent of human suffering and the 
consequences of war and conflict for all of us,” Slatyer said.
 