
Shares in Toshiba fell more than 19% on Thursday, the third day of heavy 
losses after the Japanese tech-to-nuclear conglomeratesaid earlier this week 
that it faced a potential multibillion-dollar writedown 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-12-27/toshiba-says-nuclear-unit-faces-billions-of-dollars-in-charges>
.

 The latest plunge in the shares follows a 20% drop on Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/28/toshiba-shares-fall-20-as-nuclear-writedown-sinks-in>
 and a 12% slide on Tuesday, wiping about $6.5bn (£5.3bn) from the group’s 
stock market value this week.

 Bond yields have also surged and the cost of insuring against its debt has 
soared.

Earlier this week, Toshiba <https://www.theguardian.com/business/toshiba> said 
cost overruns at CB&I Stone & Webster, a US nuclear business it bought from 
Chicago Bridge & Iron last year, meant it could face several billion dollars in 
charges, acknowledging a bruising overpayment.

 Ratings agencies were quick to respond. Late on Wednesday, Moody’s became the 
second agency to downgrade Toshiba 
<https://www.moodys.com/research/Moodys-downgrades-Toshiba-Corp-to-Caa1-ratings-on-review-for--PR_360200>
, pushing its rating deeper into junk, or non-investment grade territory, from 
B3 to Caa1.

 “Although Toshiba is still assessing the exact amount of the impairment loss, 
its financial metrics will likely deteriorate further, potentially resulting in 
a negative equity position,” said Masako Kuwahara, Moody’s lead analyst for 
Toshiba.

 Moody’s said the downgrade also reflected mounting concerns over corporate 
governance, especially in relation to due diligence for acquisitions. It said 
the ratings were under review for another downgrade because of the “potential 
for a further deterioration in Toshiba’s operating and financial performance”.

 The cost of insuring against a Toshiba credit default had soared by late 
Wednesday in the most actively traded London market. Five-year insurance, or 
credit default swaps, were quoted at 437/467 basis points (bps) compared with 
75 bps on Monday.

 The quote suggested it would cost between $437,000 and $467,000 a year for 
five years to insure $10m in bonds.

 Toshiba bond yields have also spiked. The company’s 1.68% bonds due in 2020 
were yielding 5.57% late on Wednesday, up from 1.77% on Tuesday, Thomson 
Reuters data shows.
 