
Britain’s prison population has gone beyond 90,000 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/offender-management-statistics-quarterly-october-to-december-2015>
. This is a massive increase since Margaret Thatcher was prime minister three 
decades ago. In fact, in the 45-year period 1950 to 1995, the numbers in prison 
doubled, before doubling again in less than half that time. Meanwhile, over the 
last 15 years, Britain has increased the lengths of its prison stays by 33%. 
Now, one in seven prisoners serves more than 10 years, while the number of 
lifers and other long termers has doubled to 18% of all prisoners. Lifers’ and 
other long termers’ average lengths of stay have risen from 13 to 17 years in 
little more than a decade.

Prison suicide rate at highest level since 2007, figures show
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jan/22/prison-suicide-rate-82-deaths> 
These are familiar problems to me: I used to run the New York City jail 
system. TheUnited States incarcerates a larger proportion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/sep/20/americas-invisible-incarcerated-millions>
 of its residents than any country on Earth. Almost2.2 million people are 
locked up today <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/blogs-echochambers-27260073>, an 
almost eightfold increase from the 295,000 who were in jails in 1970. That’s 
almost 700 per 100,000 people. At the opposite pole are Finland and Sweden, 
with rates of 57 and 55 per 100,000.

How did we get here? We “got tough” on crime. So tough that over the last four 
decades sentences were dramatically increased and long prison terms required 
for hundreds of crimes; discretion was removed from judges; “second-” or 
“three-strike” laws were mandated, so that decades or life in prison had to be 
served for second or third convictions, even non-violent ones. But we also got 
here by ignoring every piece of evidence about what did and didn’t work to 
reduce crime.

I recognise that some people pose a threat and need to be removed from 
society. But in the US we default to prison for terms so long we now have 
geriatric prisons for people who cannot go to the bathroom by themselves, much 
less pose a safety risk.

Today an almost universal academic and expert consensus has been reached that 
our policies regarding “mass incarceration” have failed. And it is not just 
progressives who have come to that conclusion but conservatives too.

Jail terms in the US are so long we now have geriatric prisons for people who 
cannot go to the bathroom by themselves

So what can Britain, or any country for that matter, learn from us? Above all: 
don’t even think of doing what we did. It is wasteful, unjust, hugely 
expensive, inefficient and diverts funds from other essential areas of 
government such as social services, health and education – all of which can 
have a far greater public safety benefit than more prisons. But, sadly, Britain 
is repeating our disastrous, harmful and failed experiment.

Britain now incarcerates growing numbers of people at a cost of almost £3bn 
annually. No good can come of it – neither for public safety nor for crime 
control. Indeed, 46% of those who leave British prisons are reconvicted within 
a year of their release because incarceration has not remotely addressed issues 
that got them there in the first place – and in all likelihood made them worse.

Yet there is no “easy” solution to downsizing. British prisons will not get 
back to Thatcher-era population levels without tackling the issue of sentencing 
reform and length of stays head on: prison numbers cannot be meaningfully 
reduced merely via simple, politically safe policies such as diverting 
low-level offenders (who stay only briefly and take up little space).

In addition, the Ministry of Justice’s plan to significantly reduce the prison 
population by a reduction in reoffending has almost no chance of success. Most 
research indicates that even the best designed and implemented re-entry and 
rehabilitation programmes achieve only 10-15% reductions. This is important and 
worthwhile but would only reduce the reoffending rate to 41%. In the face of 
the rapid prison growth and increased sentence lengths, such a reduction will 
not have a large impact on numbers.

British prisons are now seriously overcrowded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/08/uk-prison-population-is-biggest-in-western-europe>
, operating at 111% of certified normal capacity on average – some at over 
160%. Alongside this there have been huge cuts in prison officer staffing and, 
most disturbingly, suicides in prisons in England and Wales have skyrocketed, 
along with rates of in-prison homicides and assaults.

Synthetic cannabis 'having a devastating impact in UK prisons'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/01/synthetic-cannabis-having-a-devastating-impact-in-uk-prisons>
The number of suicides is a hugely important indicator of the health of any 
prison system. One with a high rate of suicides invariably manifests problems 
that go beyond the suicides. Andsuicides in English and Welsh prisons have 
almost doubled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jan/22/prison-suicide-rate-82-deaths> 
in just three years.

These statistics are shocking. Both the size of the increase in such a short 
period and the number itself – there were100 suicides 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/519425/safety-in-custody-march-2016.pdf>
 during the 12 months ending March 2016, compared with 52 for the 12 months 
ending March 2013 – means that there is a suicide rate of 117 per 100,000 
prisoners, one of the highest rates in the world. The comparable rate in the US 
– hardly known for its progressive prisons nor for its low number of mentally 
ill prisoners – is 15 per 100,000. India’s rate is 18 per 100,000, and Canada’s 
22. The number in England and Wales suggests a system in massive distress, and 
conditions of confinement that are badly deteriorating.

I am sure Britain’s prison governors and staff are valiantly trying to deal 
with all of this: but the Ministry of Justice’s plan to build prisons to ease 
overcrowding will not happen fast enough. As we in the US well know, you simply 
cannot build your way out of this problem. The US tried that and failed 
miserably.

In one way, it is too late: Britain has started down this road. But in 
another, the scale of imprisonment is geometrically lower in Britain than the 
US and, in a broad historical sense, you are just at the beginning of the 
failed journey we started over 40 years ago. If there is to be a course 
correction in Britain, now is the time.
 