
Regardless of English rugby’s current distractions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/nov/12/england-coach-rugby-union-system-overseas>
, the remorseless northern hemisphere fixture schedule rumbles steadily onwards.

As the new French head coach, Guy Novès 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/31/guy-noves-philippe-saint-andre-france>
, and his unconfirmed English counterpart will shortly discover, this is a salt 
mine of a season: 11 months of hard labour with scant respite. The European 
Champions Cup will be out of reach for anyone whose chain gang lacks the 
requisite character.

On the eve of the 2015-16 kick-off, the haves and the have-nots also remain a 
long way apart in terms of squad depth. Sure, the English salary cap is to be 
raised next season, but across the Channel the euro remains mighty attractive. 
As anyone who saw Toulon’s weekend thrashing of Montpellier will testify, the 
purchasing power of Europe’s market-leaders is now frightening.

Leicester out to set standard as they kick off European Rugby Champions Cup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/12/leicester-tigers-european-rugby-champions-cup-richard-cockerill-stade-francais>
The eye was not merely caught by the new recruit Quade Cooper doing what he 
does – no-look grubbers, sly offloads, daft interception passes – but the 
all-star cast into which he has been propelled. When Ma’a Nonu arrives he will 
compete for the 12 jersey with the outstanding Matt Giteau. Maxime Mermoz and 
Mathieu Bastareaud are also in the mix. Outside them, fitness permitting, will 
be Bryan Habana, Drew Mitchell, Leigh Halfpenny, Delon Armitage, James O’Connor 
and the 21-year-old fast-rising meteor Josua Tuisova. If Juan Smith, Juan 
Martín Fernández Lobbe or Steffon Armitage ever need a breather then Mamuka 
Gorgodze, Samu Manoa or Duane Vermeulen roll off the bench. It is less a rugby 
team than a muscular who’s who.

Toulon do not win every game – their start to the Top 14 season had been 
relatively sluggish before Saturday night – but they are raising the bar for 
all ambitious club owners. In December, once his autobiography has been pushed 
down the publishing slipway,Dan Carter will jet into Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/dec/18/dan-carter-will-leave-new-zealand-for-paris-to-become-rugbys-best-paid-player>
 to join his new club Racing 92. The Top 14 may not be the quickest league in 
the world but it contains a disproportionate number of the world’s best players.

Clearly this has implications for all, not least the Premiership clubs. How 
can they realistically compete for major titles whenToulon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/toulon> are stockpiling so many galácticos? 
Those who have pulled on the red and black jersey sometimes shake their heads 
at the madness of life in the Var, but three successive European titles would 
suggest Mourad Boudjellal is no fool. It is up to the rest to find a way of 
catching up.

The first side to have that chance are Bath, who head to the south of France 
on Sunday seeking to repeat what they achieved so spectacularly away from home 
against Montpellier and Toulouse last season. “They’ve got a fantastic side,” 
confirms Mike Ford, more than happy to be distracted byany subject not 
featuring Sam Burgess 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/10/bath-sam-burgess-george-north>. 
“But we feel there’s an opportunity for us. The ball’s in play 25% less in 
France so if we can play at high tempo and keep the ball in play we think we 
have the attacking shape to cause them problems.”

Without the injured Jonathan Joseph and with continuing back-row issues 
following Burgess’s exit – thenewly-arrived David Denton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/10/bath-david-denton-edinburgh-scotland-rugby-union>
 will not feature this weekend – it will be easier said than done. But France 
hardly enjoyed a stellar World Cup themselves and it may be that one or two 
sides less affected by RWC 2015 hangovers will prosper in the early rounds. If 
they give the ball some air and circumvent the power-strewn Gallic packs, 
fortune could yet favour the tactically brave.

Into that category fall Exeter <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/exeter> 
Chiefs, determined to give Europe a real rip this year despite a menacing pool. 
Somehow they will have to find a way past Clermont Auvergne, Bordeaux Bègles 
and Ospreys but their set piece is stronger and a first appearance in the 
knockout stages is far from impossible.

Saracens, the only unbeaten side in the English Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/07/northampton-saracens-premiership-match-report>
 after four rounds, should also be more than competitive if they avoid a 
first-up defeat to their main pool rivals Toulouse at Allianz Park on Saturday. 
They should be happy enough on Oyonnax’s artificial surface – welcome to the 
most sparsely-grassed pool in European history – and will have a fair idea 
where they stand after the opening two weekends. Mark McCall, Sarries’ director 
of rugby, stresses it will require a collective effort: “This year rotating 
players is more important than it has ever been ... we’ve already used 37 
players in four games.”

It could be a demanding campaign for the Irish representatives, still licking 
their own post-World Cup wounds, as well as the Welsh and Italians. But 
Glasgow, with at least 35 internationals to choose from, could easily enjoy a 
couple of high-profile wins. Saracens,Toulouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/toulouse>, Clermont, Exeter, Racing 92, 
Stade Français, Munster and Toulon are my eight qualifiers but it is going to 
require something special to prevent Boudjellal’s high-rollers adding a fourth 
straight title to their portfolio in Lyon on 14 May.
 