
Hotel workers in Tunisia 'devastated' as Foreign Office tells Britons to fly 
home
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/10/tunisia-hotel-workers-devastated-britons-fly-home-foreign-office>
Hundreds of British holidaymakers have been leaving Tunisia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/tunisia> amid criticism of Downing Street 
from Tunisia’s prime minister, who rejected claims that tourists were at risk 
and said he was doing everything in his power to keep them safe.

Habib Essid said his government would help to evacuate approximately 3,000 
Britons, most of whom were expected to fly home by the weekend. But he told 
Tunisia’s parliament he was dismayed by theadvice from the Foreign Office (FCO) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/09/foreign-office-warns-against-travel-to-tunisia-in-wake-of-attack>
 – issued late on Thursday – that all tourists should leave the north African 
country immediately. There would be repercussions, he warned.

Tunisia’s foreign minister, Taieb Baccouche, said Tunis did not blame London 
for its decision but would nonetheless seek to overturn it. “Little by little, 
we will try to convince them, perhaps, to go back on it,” he said.

The foreign secretary, Philip Hammond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/philip-hammond>, said another attack in 
Tunisia was “highly likely”, though he admitted he had no intelligence 
pinpointing a specific plot. His warning came two weeks after a young Tunisian 
Islamist, Seifeddine Rezgui, shot dead 38 people on a beach in Sousse, 30 of 
them Britons. Three Irish citizens also died.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Ftunisia-gunman-beach-seifeddine-rezgui-sousse-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F7%2F10%2F1436533048908%2FKP_349438_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tunisia%20gunman%20Seifeddine%20Rezgui%20on%20beach%20with%20Kalashnikov%20%E2%80%93%20new%20video%20footage&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Ftunisia-gunman-beach-seifeddine-rezgui-sousse-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tunisia%20gunman%20Seifeddine%20Rezgui%20on%20beach%20with%20Kalashnikov%20%E2%80%93%20new%20video%20footage&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Ftunisia-gunman-beach-seifeddine-rezgui-sousse-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F7%2F10%2F1436533048908%2FKP_349438_crop_640x360.jpg>
 New footage emerges of Seifeddine Rezgui calmly walking along the beach with a 
Kalashnikov assault rifle. 
On Friday, the Irish government adopted the same guidance as the FCO and urged 
its nationals to avoid non-essential travel to Tunisia. This was as a result of 
increased security concerns, it said. Denmark issued similar advice to its 
citizens in Tunisia, but other European countries did not follow suit. Paris 
urged its tourists to be vigilant.

Tunisia beach attack: funeral held in Scotland for Jim and Anne McGuire
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jul/10/tunisia-beach-attack-funeral-held-in-scotland-for-jim-and-anne-mcguire>
The UK government’s decision followed a briefing on Wednesday by the national 
security secretariat 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/national-security>. Officials told 
Hammond and David Cameron that more information had been gathered on Rezgui’s 
accomplices in the 26 June attack. They are still believed to be at large, 
possibly planning further atrocities.

Islamic State <https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> (Isis) claims it was 
behind the Sousse attack and there are indications that Rezgui may have had an 
Isis connection. But analysts say it is premature to declare categorically that 
this was an Isis operation and it may involve other radical groups.

The Tunisian authorities have, in Downing Street’s view, not made a serious 
enough effort to strengthen security arrangements to protect tourists. With 
foreign visitors concentrated in relatively few areas, the UK government 
believes the solution is to increase the number of guards in tourist 
destinations and do more to identify potential attackers.

The Association of British Travel Agents said it hoped all Britons would be 
able to fly home by the end of Sunday.

Holidaymakers returning on an emergency flight from Tunisia to Stansted on 
Friday evening said they had felt safe in the resorts. Chris Lee, 53, from 
Northern Ireland,said he had seen “wall-to-wall security all the way”.

“Tunisia was fantastic,” he said. “I really feel for the staff, they were in 
floods of tears when they heard we were being sent home. They’ll all be laid 
off in the hotel; the tourist trade is murdered. Even when we were there, they 
were cutting down the buffet options, the entertainment.”

Alex Neave-Vince and his girlfriend Amy Robinson, both from Ipswich, were on 
their first holiday together and arrived just after the tragedy.

“They have overreacted a little bit,” Robinson said of the FCO advice. “The 
same thing happened in Paris and no one stopped people flying out there. The 
same thing happened in Kuwait. Why are they eliminating Tunisia compared to all 
these other countries? England are on red alert now, same as Tunisia, but 
people are still flying to England.”


Both said they were frustrated with their treatment on the way home. “We were 
all bundled in a lounge together, we had to fly first to Manchester and then to 
here. No one from the airline told us what was going on. They pushed us to one 
side. We kept going up to ask but were told nothing,” said Robinson.

Gary Carnochan, 24, a painter-decorator from Edinburgh, Scotland, staying with 
his wife at a hotel in Monastir, just south of Sousse, was unhappy to be 
cutting short his holiday by one week, but felt he had no choice.

He said feelings were running high on Thursday night over the future of 
entertainment staff at the hotel. “They called all the British people onto the 
stage,” he said. “We were holding the Tunisian flag, to the soundtrack of 
Michael Jackson song Heal the World.” Some tourists and staff shed tears. The 
“incident (the attack) ... could have happened anywhere inthe world,” he said.

The owner of the same hotel, Zouhaier Chahed, described the situation 
following the change to Britain’s travel advice as “catastrophic”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F09%2Ftunisia-attacks-britons-should-leave-immediately-philip-hammond-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F7%2F9%2F1436477133341%2FKP_348650_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Britons%20should%20leave%20Tunisia%20immediately%2C%20says%20Philip%20Hammond%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F09%2Ftunisia-attacks-britons-should-leave-immediately-philip-hammond-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Britons%20should%20leave%20Tunisia%20immediately%2C%20says%20Philip%20Hammond%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F09%2Ftunisia-attacks-britons-should-leave-immediately-philip-hammond-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F7%2F9%2F1436477133341%2FKP_348650_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Britons should leave Tunisia immediately, says Philip Hammond - video 
The two four-star hotels he owns in the area employed approximately 500 
people. One closed last night, and the other, normally full in high season with 
940 guests, on Friday night had just 54 guests remaining.


He was unsure what deal he would be able to offer his core staff. “Quite 
honestly, everything looks black now,” he said. He was disappointed by the lack 
of immediate reaction by prime minister Essid after the British changed travel 
advice. “He and his diplomats should have pulled out all the stops, put in 
calls, used all their contacts,” to sort out the problem, he said.

The Tunisian government  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/10/uk-tourists-fly-home-tunisia-criticises-travel-advice-sousse>
said the UK was damaging the country’s economy, which is heavily reliant on 
tourism, and may end up inadvertently fuelling poverty and therefore terrorism. 
On Friday, not a single tourist could be seen at Tunisia’s most famous site, 
the ruins of ancient Carthage on the outskirts of the capital.

Soldiers in green uniforms deployed to provide security lolled in the hot sun, 
talking to tour guides with nothing to do. “Friday is normally the day for the 
Anglo-Saxon tourists to come here. Normally it’s so crowded. We also have 
Japanese, Russians, French, but now nobody,” said Kalhoum Aaouni, an 
archaeology professor who has worked for 12 years as a summer-season guide.

Telling British tourists to flee Tunisia rewards terrorism | Simon Jenkins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/10/british-tourists-tunisia-terrorism-philip-hammond>
Oliver Miles <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/olivermiles>, a former UK 
ambassador to Libya and Greece, questioned the wisdom of Hammond’s 
announcement. Miles said he did not believe Cameron was “making up” the 
intelligence risk from terrorism but he found the government’s response 
puzzling.


He said: “The threat from people who are acting in the name of Islamic State 
is different from what we are facing with al-Qaida.Al-Qaida 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/al-qaida> was a kind of command-and-control 
system that tried to operate in different countries at different times. It has 
subsidiary organisations under its control.

“Islamic State is not like that. What they are doing is simply hoisting a flag 
and asking people to join on a quasi-autonomous basis to each other.”

Miles said the next attack was likely to come somewhere else – Morocco, 
Israel, the US or Russia. He described Hammond’s remarks that another attack in 
Tunisia was likely – despite no intelligence warning of one – as “pretty 
contradictory”.

“If the people killed had been Dutch would he be advising all Brits to leave 
Tunisia?” he said, adding that the government may have succumbed to the 
irresistible political urge to be seen to “do something”.

Tunisia faces numerous challenges in its attempt to keep track of homegrown 
Islamist extremists. The biggest is its proximity to Libya, which is in the 
grip of a civil war. Since last year, Isis supporters have been reported to be 
providing basic firearms training at a camp near the Libyan coastal town of 
Sabratha.

Tunisia state of emergency imposed due to fears of further attacks, says 
president
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/08/state-of-emergency-tunisia-fears-further-terrorist-attacks>
Investigators say that Rezgui and another gunman who in March attacked the 
Bardo museum in Tunis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/30/tunisia-beach-attack-seifeddine-rezgui-libya-bardo-museum-attackers>
, killing 20 tourists and a policeman, received weapons training in Libya. On 
Monday night, a group of 33 people aged 16 to 35 slipped out of the southern 
town of Remada and were believed to be heading to Libya. They include two 
serving soldiers and an army deserter.

The government in Tunisia insisted it was taking action to deal with the 
problem. It said it had deployed about 2,000 armed police to beach resorts and 
had arrested 1,000 terrorist suspects since March. It is building a 
115-mile-long (185km) defensive wall on the southern border with Libya. This 
will consist of a trench and a sand embankment in a semi-desert zone 
crisscrossed with smugglers’ tracks.

British officials in Tunisia seem unimpressed by these counter-terrorism 
efforts. In the wake of Tunisia’s 2011 revolution, the UK has taken an EU lead 
in advising the country’s new democratic interior ministry. The ministry 
previously played a key role in enforcing the authoritarian rule of the 
country’s ex-presidentZine al-Abidine Ben Ali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jan/14/tunisia-president-ben-ali-profile>
.

David Hartwell, a Middle East analyst 
<http://www.middleeastinsider.com/mei-blog.html>, said: “The revolution against 
Ben Ali was done to get rid of the security state. There’s a reluctance to go 
back to those days when you literally had a policeman on every corner.

There is a tightrope the government is walking. The security state was focused 
on crushing the political opposition. There is a wariness about returning going 
back to that. They have not yet decided where the dividing line is.”
 