
Toxic nanoparticles from air pollution have been discovered in human brains in 
“abundant” quantities, a newly published study reveals.

The detection of the particles, in brain tissue from 37 people, raises 
concerns because recent research has suggestedlinks between these magnetite 
particles and Alzheimer’s disease <http://www.nature.com/articles/srep24873>, 
while air pollution has been shown tosignificantly increase 
<http://content.iospress.com/articles/journal-of-alzheimers-disease/jad140855> 
the risk of the disease. However, the new work is still a long way from proving 
that the air pollution particles cause or exacerbate Alzheimer’s.


“This is a discovery finding, and now what should start is a whole new 
examination of this as a potentially very important environmental risk factor 
for Alzheimer’s disease,” said Prof Barbara Maher, at Lancaster University, who 
led the new research. “Now there is a reason to go on and do the epidemiology 
and the toxicity testing, because these particles are so prolific and people 
are exposed to them.”

Air pollution is a global health crisis that kills more people than malaria 
and HIV/Aids 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/16/more-people-die-from-air-pollution-than-malaria-and-hivaids-new-study-shows>
 combined and it has long been linked to lung and heart disease and strokes. 
But research is uncovering new impacts on health, including degenerative brain 
diseases such as Alzheimer’s,mental illness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/13/air-pollution-linked-to-increased-mental-illness-in-children?CMP=share_btn_tw>
 andreduced intelligence 
<http://journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/article?id=10.1371/journal.pmed.1001792>.

The new work, published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
<http://www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1605941113>, examined brain tissue 
from 37 people in Manchester, in the UK, and Mexico, aged between three and 92.

It found abundant particles of magnetite, an iron oxide. “You are talking 
about millions of magnetite particles per gram of freeze-dried brain tissue - 
it is extraordinary,” said Maher.

“Magnetite in the brain is not something you want to have because it is 
particularly toxic there,” she said, explaining that the substance can create 
reactive oxygen species called free radicals. “Oxidative cell damage is one of 
the hallmark features of Alzheimer’s disease, and this is why the presence of 
magnetite is so potentially significant, because it is so bioreactive.”

Abnormal accumulation of brain metals is a key feature of Alzheimer’s disease 
and arecent study <http://www.nature.com/articles/srep24873> showed that 
magnetite was directly associated with the damage seen in Alzheimer’s brains. 
Magnetite particles are known to form biologically in human brains, but these 
are small and crystal-shaped, unlike the larger, spherical particles that 
dominated the samples in the new study.

“Many of the magnetite particles we have found in the brain are very 
distinctive,” said Maher. “They are very rounded nanospheres, because they were 
formed as molten droplets of material from combustion sources, such as car 
exhausts, industrial processes and power stations, anywhere you are burning 
fuel.”

“They are abundant,” she said. “For every one of [the crystal shaped 
particles] we saw about 100 of the pollution particles. The thing about 
magnetite is it is everywhere.” An analysis of roadside air in Lancaster found
200m magnetite particles per cubic metre 
<http://www.lancaster.ac.uk/staff/maherb/papers/HalsalletalAtmEnv2008.pdf>.

Furthermore, said Maher: “We also observed other metal-bearing particles in 
the brain, such as platinum, cobalt and nickel. Things like platinum are very 
unlikely to come from a source within the brain. It is a bit of an indicator of 
a [vehicle] catalytic converter source.”

Other scientists told the Guardian the new work provided strong evidence that 
most of the magnetite in the brain samples come from air pollution but that the 
link to Alzheimer’s disease remained speculative.

“This is a very intriguing finding and it raises a lot of important 
questions,” saidProf Jon Dobson <https://www.bme.ufl.edu/people/dobson_jon>, at 
the University of Florida and not part of the research team. But he said 
further investigation was needed: “One thing that puzzles me is that the 
[particle] concentrations are somewhat higher than those previously reported 
for the human brain. Further studies [are needed] to determine whether this due 
to regional variations within the brain, the fact that these samples are from 
subjects who lived in industrial areas, or whether it is possibly due to [lab] 
contamination.” The researchers said they had gone to great lengths to avoid 
contamination.

Air pollution was linked to a significant increase in the risk of Alzheimer’s 
disease 
<http://content.iospress.com/articles/journal-of-alzheimers-disease/jad140855> 
by a major study published in 2015, while other research showedbrain damage 
related to Alzheimer’s disease in children 
<http://content.iospress.com/articles/journal-of-alzheimers-disease/jad110722> 
and young adults exposed to air pollution. Air pollution has also beenlinked to 
dementia in older men <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3094421/> and
women <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22332151>. 

“We have not demonstrated a causal link between these particles and 
Alzheimer’s disease but when you consider that magnetite has been found in 
higher concentrations in Alzheimer’s brains and you know that magnetite is 
pernicious in its effect on the brain, then having a direct [air pollution] 
source of magnetite right up your olfactory bulb and into your frontal cortex 
is not a great idea,” said Maher.

Prof David Allsop, an Alzheimer’s disease expert 
<https://www.alzheimers.org.uk/site/scripts/documents_info.php?documentID=1120> 
at Lancaster University and part of the research team, said: “There isno 
blood-brain barrier with nasal delivery 
<http://intranasal.net/Peer%20Reviewed%20literature/Talegaonkar,%20Intranasal%20delivery%20-%20An%20approach%20to%20bypass%20the%20blood%20brain%20barrier,%20I%20J%20Pharm%202004.pdf>
. Once nanoparticles directly enter olfactory areas of the brain through the 
nose, they can spread to other areas of the brain,including hippocampus and 
cerebral cortex 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0378517313004080> – regions 
affected in Alzheimer’s disease.” He said it was worth noting that animpaired 
sense of smell is an early indicator of Alzheimer’s disease 
<http://www.the-scientist.com/?articles.view/articleNo/37603/title/Smell-and-the-Degenerating-Brain/>
.

Air pollution linked to increased mental illness in children
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/13/air-pollution-linked-to-increased-mental-illness-in-children>
“Knowledge is power,” Maher said. “So if there’s at least a possibility that 
exposure to traffic pollution is having even worse health impacts than were 
previously known, then take the steps you can to reduce your dose as far as you 
can.”

“What this is pointing towards perhaps is there needs to be a major shift in 
policy and an attempt to reduce the particulate matter burden on human health.” 
Maher said. “The more you realise the impact this is having, the more urgent 
and important it is to reduce the concentrations in the atmosphere.”

Dr Clare Walton, research communications manager at the Alzheimer’s Society 
<https://www.alzheimers.org.uk/>, said: “This study offers convincing evidence 
that magnetite from air pollution can get into the brain, but it doesn’t tell 
us what effect this has on brain health or conditions such as Alzheimer’s 
disease. Further work in this area is important, but until we have more 
information people should not be unduly worried. There are more practical ways 
to lower your chances of developing dementia such as regular exercise, eating a 
healthy diet and avoiding smoking.”
 