
Egyptian air accident investigators have revealed that traces of explosives 
were detected on the remains of victims of theEgyptAir flight from Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/05/cockpit-voice-recorder-fire-on-board-egyptair-flight-ms804-crash>
 that crashed in the Mediterranean sea in May.

The claim by Egypt’s civil aviation investigation committee suggests that the 
crash, which killed all 66 people on board, was caused by a bomb, although it 
does not solve the mystery of where a device might have been smuggled on board 
- or who was responsible.

The disappearance of the EgyptAir flight came only months after a Russian 
airliner flying from Sharm el-Sheikh wasbrought down by a bomb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/31/russian-plane-crashes-in-sinai-egyptian-pm-says>
 over the Sinai Peninsula – killing 224 people. That attack was claimed by the 
local affiliate of Islamic State.

“The central directorate of aircraft accident investigation received reports 
from the forensic medicine authority indicating traces of explosive materials 
found in some of the remains of the victims’ bodies,” the ministry stated on 
Thursday.

The months-long investigation into the disaster has been hampered by 
disagreements between French and Egyptian experts and a dispute over the return 
of the bodies of French passengers. The Airbus A320 had been carrying 40 
Egyptians, 15 French people, two Iraqis, two Canadians and one passenger each 
from Algeria, Belgium, Britain, Chad, Portugal, Saudi Arabia and Sudan.

An Egyptian source familiar with the matter said Cairo had informed France 
months ago of its findings but French investigators had requested more time to 
study them.


“That is why it took so long to make an announcement,” the source said, 
declining to be named as the investigation is continuing. Following the 
announcement on Thursday,Egypt <https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> said 
it would be launching a criminal investigation into the crash.


France’s air safety agency, BEA, and the plane manufacturer, Airbus, both 
declined to comment on the announcement, which comes while Cairo is still 
investigating the October 2015 crash of the Russian passenger plane in Sinai.

If a bomb is established as the cause of the May crash, investigators will 
have to determine whether a device could have been smuggled onboard a flight 
taking off from France’s busiest airport, Paris Charles de Gaulle. The plane 
had also visited Tunisia and Eritrea in the days before it went down.

Coming just months after the Russian plane crashed, the EgyptAir disaster led 
to widespread flight cancellations and dealt a major blow to Egypt’s vital 
tourism sector, already weakened by years of unrest unleashed by the 2011 
uprising that toppled Hosni Mubarak.

In recent months Egypt has spent millions of dollars trying to restore 
international confidence in its airport security measures. Russia suspended all 
flights to the country after the October crash, while Britain cancelled flights 
to Sharm El-Sheikh, the Red Sea resort from which the airliner took off.

The EgyptAir plane had been flying from Paris to Cairo when it disappeared 
from radar over the Mediterranean. Investigators determined that a fire had 
broken out in or near the cockpit before it crashed between Crete and the coast 
of northern Egypt.


The word “fire” was audible 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/17/word-fire-heard-on-cockpit-voice-recorder-from-crashed-egyptair-804>
 on the plane’s cockpit voice recorder shortly before it crashed, the Egyptian 
investigative committee said in July.

The black box, retrieved from the crash site by a specialist diving vessel, 
also confirmed that smoke alarms had been triggered onboard, while recovered 
wreckage had indications of soot.

The Airbus A320 had broadcast a number of fault messages before contact was 
lost, indicating that smoke had entered the nose of the aircraft where 
sensitive avionics control systems are housed. Flight data, however, suggested 
that rather than exploding in mid-air, the plane had flown into the sea.
MS804 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/05/debris-confirmed/giv-12515yhRDxbG9LwgM/>
Egyptian investigators have confirmed the aircraft made a 90-degree left turn 
followed by a 360-degree turn to the right before hitting the sea.

Since the crash, small pieces of the wreckage and human remains have been 
recovered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/20/egyptian-military-says-debris-from-egyptair-flight-ms804-found-in-sea>
, while the bulk of the plane and the bodies of victims are believed to be in 
the water.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fegyptair-flight-ms804-search-location-found-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Main%20locations%20of%20EgyptAir%20wreckage%20identified%20by%20deep%20ocean%20vessel%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fegyptair-flight-ms804-search-location-found-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Main%20locations%20of%20EgyptAir%20wreckage%20identified%20by%20deep%20ocean%20vessel%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fegyptair-flight-ms804-search-location-found-video&media=>
Main locations of EgyptAir wreckage identified by deep ocean vessel – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/jun/15/egyptair-flight-ms804-search-location-found-video>
In September, French investigators were reported to have found trace levels of 
the explosive TNT on recovered debris but claimed they were prevented from 
further examining it. Egyptian officials denied the claim.

While some speculation had originally focused on the crew being overcome in 
the cockpit as the cause of the disaster, the new evidence has put the emphasis 
back on a deliberate explosion.

Egypt’s aviation minister, Sherif Fathy, had said previously a terrorist 
attack was the most likely cause of the crash. The chances of an attack were 
“higher than the possibility of a technical [failure]”, Fathy said in May 
following the crash.

However, two anonymous western sources briefed on the latest turn in the 
investigation expressed reservations to Reuters about the explosives findings 
and suggested a technical problem remained a likely cause. Aviation experts 
have said there is little chance that a mechanical fault was responsible.

The latest announcement came as it was disclosed that the families of five 
French victims had launched a petition to recover the remains of those lost on 
the flight, saying it had been seven months since they had been killed. The 
Egyptian authorities had promised to return the bodies weeks ago but the 
process had inexplicably halted, perhaps because of the discovery of the 
explosive residue.

Isis has carried out several attacks in recent years, mainly in Sinai, where 
it is based, but also on the Egyptian mainland. The group claimed 
responsibility for asuicide bombing at a Cairo church 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/11/egypt-bomb-blast-cairo-cathedral>
 on Sunday, which killed at least 24 people – mainly women – and wounded nearly 
50.


 