
Tottenham has much to recommend it but also some stubborn problems, including 
a lingering reputation, vastly unfair on most of its people, for violent 
disorder and crime. What is the best way for its Labour-run local authority to 
change what is bad without losing what is good? How can it effect change when 
its powers and budgets are increasingly limited by central government? How do 
local people feel about its strategy? I spent some time in the area last week 
with student film makerMax Curwen-Bingley 
<https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCaodBfeFkhz1SaMNumIVy3A>, gathering a range 
of insights and views. We hope you find them enlightening. The film is 
11-and-a-half-minutes long.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNHOajLxSK5E&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNHOajLxSK5E>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNHOajLxSK5E&media=>
 Transforming Tottenham film by Max Curwen-Bingley. 
Many thanks to all those who found time to talk to us. For more on Haringey 
Council’s regeneration plans for Tottenham seehere 
<https://tottenham.london/about/20-year-plan-tottenham> and for a full (and 
generally sceptical) assessment of its approach to redevelopment by the 
Observer’s architecture critic Rowan Moore from May 2015, seehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/mar/22/tottenham-regeneration-londons-most-deprived-spurs-stadium>
. The results of the council’s consultation with residents of the Love Lane 
estate and other people in the High Road West regeneration area arehere 
<https://tottenham.london/sites/default/files/2014_high_road_west_consultation_feedback_report_2014_pdf_21mb.pdf>
 and the website of the estate’s residents’ association ishere 
<https://tottenham.london/sites/default/files/2014_high_road_west_consultation_feedback_report_2014_pdf_21mb.pdf>
. Activist groups and others unhappy with the council’s regeneration policies 
set out their alternative positionhere <http://ourtottenham.org.uk/about/>. You 
can learn more about the Ada National College for Digital Skillshere 
<http://www.adacollege.org.uk/> and more about Tottenham Hotspur’s new stadium 
here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gallery/2016/dec/21/tottenham-hotspur-new-stadium-changing-face-white-hart-lane-in-pictures>
. Your constructive comments are, as ever, welcome.
 