
Hunkering down under a sliver of shade along Cau Giay Street, west of Hanoi’s 
city centre, Ha Van Son reclines on the seat of his motorbike taxi. The tree 
overhead offers little respite from the blistering sun, but he needs to earn a 
living, so he lowers his kickstand to the pavement and waits. Across the 
street, some new competition is being built. T-shaped beams tower above the 
narrow, clogged road: the beginnings of Vietnam’s first metro system.

The thirty-something driver isn’t worried about job security, though. Like so 
many of his compatriots, he has accustomed to flitting from one job to the 
next, according to the whims of the nation’s rapidly growing economy. “IfVietnam
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/vietnam> wants to develop, we should get 
the metro,” he says. “It will reduce vehicles on the roadsand make our society 
more modern.”

Hanoi, a city with more motorbikes than households 
<https://www.researchgate.net/publication/286354178_Motorbike_Madness_Development_and_Two-Wheeled_Mobility_in_Hanoi>
, has to contend with heavy congestion and frequent traffic accidents. In 
recent years,studies have named it among the worst cities in Asia for air 
pollution 
<http://www.vacne.org.vn/capitals-air-still-worst-in-se-asia/e1467.html>. In 
May this year,Vietnamese media 
<http://tuoitrenews.vn/society/33579/record-pollution-in-hanoi-instills-fear-in-locals>
 reported that the US embassy’sair quality monitor 
<https://vn.usembassy.gov/embassy-consulates/embassy/air-quality-monitor/> in 
Hanoi registered a “hazardous” spike in particulate matter, reportedly reaching 
a level seven times that recommended by the World Health Organisation.

Though the government hopes the metro can tackle both traffic and 
environmental issues at once, the project has faced numerous delays and 
setbacks. What’s more, convincing Hanoians to give up their motorbikes could 
turn out to be the biggest challenge yet.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Flong-wait-hanoi-metro-vietnam-motorbike%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d879df281f33b3a14f29f04c8e485a18fa47a42%2F0_192_3728_2237%2F3728.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Transforming%20a%20motorcycle%20city%3A%20the%20long%20wait%20for%20Hanoi's%20metro&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Flong-wait-hanoi-metro-vietnam-motorbike%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Transforming%20a%20motorcycle%20city%3A%20the%20long%20wait%20for%20Hanoi%27s%20metro&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Flong-wait-hanoi-metro-vietnam-motorbike%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d879df281f33b3a14f29f04c8e485a18fa47a42%2F0_192_3728_2237%2F3728.jpg>
 A girl cycles through smoke created by burning waste in a street in Hanoi, 
where air pollution has reached dangerous levels. Photograph: Luong Thai 
Linh/EPA 
In 2008, more than 80% of journeys 
<http://www.academia.edu/12278774/Building_a_Public_Transportation_System_in_Hanoi_Between_emergency_and_constraints>
 in the city were carried out by motorbikes and scooters – and a fast-growing 
share of the population is opting for cars. Currently there are roughly 4.9 
million motorbikes and scooters on Hanoi’s roads. The use of bicycles, once the 
dominant transport mode in the city, decreased dramatically as motorbikes and 
cars became more popular: in 1995, 47% of journeys were made by bicycle; in 
2008, the figure had dropped to only 3%.

Hanoi’s Transport Plan aims to increase 
<http://english.vietnamnet.vn/fms/society/155345/hanoi-s-transport-plan-falls-short.html>
 the share of public transport from the current low figure of 9% of trips, to 
above 60% by 2030, by which time Hanoi is slated to have six new metro lines 
and three Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) lines. But the ambitions get even steeper. 
Last month, Hanoi’s Party Committee outlined plans toban motorbikes from the 
downtown area 
<http://www.thanhniennews.com/society/hanoi-considers-motorbike-ban-to-solve-traffic-crisis-63552.html>
 by 2025, in line with improved public transport. A total downtown ban of the 
vehicles would require a huge lifestyle shift for most residents – and put an 
enormous amount of pressure on the new metro system. None of the locals I speak 
to regard the 2025 plan as feasible.

Ho Chi Minh City is planning a metro project of its own 
<http://saigoneer.com/saigon-development/7010-the-state-of-the-metro-an-update-on-saigon-s-subway-construction>
, with two of the eight planned lines currently under construction and the first
due to open in 2020 
<http://hcmcmetroline1-scc.com.vn/page/tien-do-thi-cong-tong-the-cap-nhat-thang-122015.html>
. Both the Ho Chi Minh City and Hanoi projects have been described as Vietnam’s 
first metro systems, but which network will open first remains to be seen. In 
Hanoi, a 12.5km line connecting the Nhon area to the downtown railway station 
was supposed to be operational by December 2016, but the expected completion 
date has been pushed back to 2020.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Flong-wait-hanoi-metro-vietnam-motorbike%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d8cbdc28b019cc80b098dbf908904b611f05f36%2F0_351_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Transforming%20a%20motorcycle%20city%3A%20the%20long%20wait%20for%20Hanoi's%20metro&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Flong-wait-hanoi-metro-vietnam-motorbike%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Transforming%20a%20motorcycle%20city%3A%20the%20long%20wait%20for%20Hanoi%27s%20metro&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Flong-wait-hanoi-metro-vietnam-motorbike%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d8cbdc28b019cc80b098dbf908904b611f05f36%2F0_351_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 More than 80% of trips in Hanoi are made by motorbikes and scooters. 
Photograph: Alamy 
According to the Asian Development Bank (ADB), a funding source of the 
project, about 15% of construction had been completed by the end of 2015. The 
line, which will be partially underground, will have 12 stations and is 
expected to accommodate 754,000 passengers a day by 2030.

Hanoi-based urban planner Floriane Ortega, who worked on the planning of metro 
lines one and two, says the project has faced delays for several reasons. For 
one, there are resettlement and compensation issues involved in the 
construction project, and Vietnam lacks an overarching transport authority to 
streamline efforts. Hanoi Metropolitan Railway Management Board, the 
governmental body that oversees the metro project, did not respond to requests 
for comment.

In 10 years, I think Hanoi will be like Bangkok. There will be more cars and 
fewer motorbikes
Nguyen Xuan Gioi 
A line being constructed by Chinese contractor China Railway has encountered 
deadline delays, funding shortages and safety problems 
<http://english.vietnamnet.vn/fms/business/152068/chinese-contractor-s-money-issues-put-hanoi-metro-line-on-the-ice.html>
 from falling construction debris. Ortega explains that overall coordination 
between the contractors on different lines – French, South Korean, Japanese and 
Chinese firms – is lacking. There are issues with contractors wanting to use 
different ticketing systems, as well as a lack of consensus on how to best 
integrate stations, which could force pedestrians to exit one station and enter 
another if the problem is left unresolved, she says.

If these obstacles are overcome “the metro will dramatically change the notion 
of public space in this country,” Ortega says, explaining that public spaces 
and pavements are currently used more for motorbike parking than for 
pedestrians. But once the metro opens, commuters who walk from stations to 
their destinations could force the pavements to be used for their intended 
purpose once again.

But there’s one more caveat to a thriving public transport system: Vietnam 
must first conquer its car problem.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Flong-wait-hanoi-metro-vietnam-motorbike%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09df922b7765dae2866a4534d9ae8008d572d0c0%2F49_0_3402_2042%2F3402.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Transforming%20a%20motorcycle%20city%3A%20the%20long%20wait%20for%20Hanoi's%20metro&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Flong-wait-hanoi-metro-vietnam-motorbike%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Transforming%20a%20motorcycle%20city%3A%20the%20long%20wait%20for%20Hanoi%27s%20metro&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Flong-wait-hanoi-metro-vietnam-motorbike%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09df922b7765dae2866a4534d9ae8008d572d0c0%2F49_0_3402_2042%2F3402.jpg>
 The rise of cars in Vietnam’s capital has exacerbated congestion issues on the 
streets. Photograph: Kham/Reuters 
The country has agreed to eliminate all import duties by 2018 on cars 
originating from the 10 nations within the Asean Economic Community, of which 
it is a member. In addition, a reduced luxury tax on cars, which went into 
effect on 1 July this year, slashed the price tag for vehicles with engines of 
less than 1.5 litres. “The Vietnamese have a huge demand for cars, especially 
family cars,” says salesman Nguyen Xuan Gioi, who works in a Toyota dealership 
near the Cau Giay metro line. “In 10 years, I think Hanoi will be like Bangkok. 
There will be more cars and fewer motorbikes.”

Hanoi’s urban layout begs to differ. Many streets, especially around the 
expansive West Lake, can only accommodate one vehicle at a time, forcing 
drivers on to pavements. In one neighbourhood, paths have been torn out and the 
roads widened to meet anticipated demand from car drivers once a nearby housing 
development is constructed.

Jason Rush, communication specialist for ADB’s south-east Asia branch, says 
the car craze is problematic for a city trying to sell the virtues of public 
transportation. “Hanoi over the past 10 years has gone through somewhat of a 
car renaissance,” he says. “A lot of people are purchasing automobiles for the 
first time who were never able to afford them in the past.”

Currently, less than 10% of Hanoians use public transportation. The public bus 
is cheap, but petrol to fill up a motorbike is even cheaper. Some residents are 
questioning whether an unspoken motivation for the metro project and the 
planned motorbike ban is to clear bikes off the streets to make room for more 
cars.

Steve Jackson, head of communications for an international NGO who has lived 
in Hanoi since 2004, says the transition to cars has made him nostalgic for the 
waning days of the motorbike. At least traffic moved before cars came around, 
he muses. “It’s great if comfortable affordable public transport can be 
provided for the less well off – but not if it means the aim is to leave the 
roads for the wealthy and their cars,” he says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Flong-wait-hanoi-metro-vietnam-motorbike%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc669e99bfc13997ba06a017f5c980ca10b5c042f%2F0_146_3775_2266%2F3775.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Transforming%20a%20motorcycle%20city%3A%20the%20long%20wait%20for%20Hanoi's%20metro&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Flong-wait-hanoi-metro-vietnam-motorbike%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Transforming%20a%20motorcycle%20city%3A%20the%20long%20wait%20for%20Hanoi%27s%20metro&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Flong-wait-hanoi-metro-vietnam-motorbike%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc669e99bfc13997ba06a017f5c980ca10b5c042f%2F0_146_3775_2266%2F3775.jpg>
 Scooters are part of daily life for most Hanoians. Photograph: Hemis/Alamy 
It’s hard to envision a Vietnamese city without motorbikes. It’s not uncommon 
for locals to drive to the bakery at the end of their alley or to “walk” their 
dogs while steering their bikes with one hand, canines trotting alongside.

Part of that attachment is driven by notions of economic progress. “It 
represents freedom, it represents status sometimes, and it’s hard to convince 
people to make the switch from that to public transport,” Rush says.

ADB’s marketing efforts will focus on changing public sentiment about mass 
transportation. They are taking a page from the metro systems in Seoul,Los 
Angeles 
<http://thecityfix.com/blog/transit-agencies-need-to-invest-in-marketing-a-lesson-from-los-angeles/>
 and Bangkok, all of which marketed the metro as trendy and increased the 
number of discretionary riders.

Inside Hanoi's gated communities: rich enclaves where even the air is cleaner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/jan/21/inside-hanoi-gated-communities-elite-enclaves-air-cleaner>
At the end of the day, Rush says, whether or not people use the metro depends 
on several factors: accessibility, affordability, aesthetics and amenities. The 
system should have accommodating parking lots, Wi-Fi and inviting and 
accessible spaces surrounding metro stations, he says. Another approach is to 
market the metro as a lifestyle choice. One idea being tossed around is to 
issue multipurpose metro cards, allowing electronic payments to be made at 
businesses around the city, similar toHong Kong’s octopus card 
<http://politicsandpolicy.org/article/introducing-octopus-card-how-hong-kong-beating-us-contactless-payment-game>
.

This change won’t happen overnight, and ADB will conduct studies over the next 
12 to 18 months to determine which demographics are most likely to use the 
metro and for what reasons. Convincing residents to take the metro will likely 
get easier in time, once the system is more far-reaching.

“It’s easier to do when you have a big vibrant train system that penetrates 
every neighbourhood,” Rush says. “Obviously in Hanoi there’s only going to be a 
few lines initially, so you have to have a medium-term trajectory for this.”

For now, Hanoians will just have to keep donning their traffic fatigues – 
face masks and Hello Kitty helmets – and battling it out for their spot on the 
streets.

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 