
The value of shares in travel and leisure companies have dropped sharply in 
the immediate aftermath of the explosions in Brussels. Fears that tourists 
would be reluctant to travel after the terrorist attacks, as well as the 
prospect of increased security measures, made investors nervous.

Most shares had recovered from their worst levels by the end of trading on 
Tuesday, but Tui, the owner of Thomson holidays, still lost 2.7%, while rival 
Thomas Cook fell by 4%.British Airways 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/britishairways> owner International 
Airlines Group dropped 1.5%, and Ryanair was 2.6% lower. EasyJet initially lost 
4%, but recovered during the day, while Lufthansa lost 1.3%. and Air France 
fell nearly 4%.

The cruise operator Carnival <https://www.theguardian.com/business/carnival> 
closed down 1.5%, while InterContinental Hotels and Merlin, the international 
theme park operator, fell 1.6% on concerns that visitor numbers could dry up.

Thomas Cook <https://www.theguardian.com/business/thomascookgroup> had 
previously warned in a trading update on Tuesday morning that summer bookings 
were down 2% as holidaymakers worried about growing risks. The company said: 
“Bookings continue to be disrupted by a volatile geopolitical backdrop as some 
customers postpone their holiday decisions.”

The European Stoxx 600 travel and leisure index lost 1.7%, but overall markets 
held steady despite the attacks, with the FTSE 100 finishing up 0.1% and 
France’s Cac and Belgium’s BEL 20 indices marginally higher on the day.

Jasper Lawler, market analyst at CMC Markets, said: “Markets recovered some of 
the losses as the afternoon came around. The sad reality is that the more 
frequent these kinds of events become, the more markets become immune, and the 
response in prices becomes less dramatic.


“The explosions are bad news for airlines, which have just started to see 
passenger demand pick up again after a slump in the wake of multiple terrorist 
incidents at the end of last year, including the attack on Paris. The response 
from authorities is likely to be another extension of security controls, which 
make travel even less attractive for tourists.”

The pound fell about 1 cent to $1.4202, and 1% against the euro to £1.27 – 
partly on suggestions that the attacks could strengthen the campaign for 
Britain to leave the EU. Gold and silver gained ground as investors sought 
traditional havens amid the uncertainty.
 