
Travel company shares have fallen sharply after Britain suspended flights to 
the Egyptian resort of Sharm el-Sheikh. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/04/egypt-flights-held-back-bomb-may-have-caused-russian-crash>


The move came amid fears that the crashed Russian airliner flight 9268 may 
have been brought down by a bomb planted by Islamic State.

Egypt plane crash likely to have been caused by bomb, says David Cameron
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/05/egypt-plane-crash-likely-to-have-been-caused-by-bomb-david-cameron>
Thomas Cook’s share price lost around 7% on Thursday, closing at 112p, wiping 
more than £135m off its stock market value, while shares for Tui, whose brands 
include Thomson, fell about 1% to £11.52. Analysts said the cost of refunding 
passengers and finding alternative holidays would hit company profits, although 
they said Tui routinely set aside provisions for such disruption, so was less 
likely to face unexpected losses.

Abta, the travel agents’ trade body, estimated there were about 9,000 UK 
customers on holiday at the popular Egyptian destination.

Thomas Cook <https://www.theguardian.com/business/thomascookgroup> has about 
1,700 people in Sharm at the moment, with Egypt accounting for around 4% of its 
total business, analysts believe. The percentage for Tui is thought to be 
similar.

Both companies said they had cancelled all flights and holidays to Sharm until 
12 November. They said customers who were booked to fly out during the flights 
suspension would be refunded.

Thomas Cook said in September it had seen a significant increase in the number 
of customers travelling toEgypt <https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> after 
a period of unrest during which the country became a less popular holiday 
destination.

Greg Johnson, an analyst at Shore Capital, said the latest disruption could 
cost the companies about £20m or so each, based on previous situations such as 
the terrorist attacks in Tunisia. But he added: “It really depends on how long 
it goes on for.”

If the situation went back to normal after 12 November the impact would 
probably be manageable, he said. “The issue would be if Egypt was off the 
agenda for, say, the winter, they would have to find short-term accommodation 
elsewhere and hoteliers would put up their prices, which would hit their 
margins.”

But even if it cost Thomas Cook £20m, a £135m fall in its market value seemed 
“a bit extreme”, said Johnson.
 