
Militant attacks on beaches, museums or monuments could happen in any country 
but international tourism, and the economic benefits it offers developing 
countries, will suffer more if governments introduce travel restrictions that 
stifle peoples’ desire to visit other places, the head of the global tourist 
body says.

Despite headline-grabbing attacks from Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/20/bataclan-witnesses-recount-horror-paris-attacks>
 tothe Sinai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/06/putin-suspends-russian-flights-to-egypt-after-sinai-plane-crash>
, the number of international touristsrose by 4.4% worldwide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/jan/19/tourism-worldwide-reaches-record-levels-in-2015-in-defiance-of-terrorism-threat>
 in 2015 to a record1.18 billion 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Internet%20Downloads/UNWTO_Barom16_01_January_Statistical_Annex_en.pdf>
 – the sixth consecutive year of above-average growth since the economic crisis 
of 2008, according to the Madrid-basedUN World Tourism Organisation 
<http://www2.unwto.org/>. 

Growth of 4% is expected this year, but for UNWTO’s secretary general, Taleb 
Rifai, the biggest danger to an industry that accounts forone in 11 jobs 
<http://www2.unwto.org/content/why-tourism> could lie in kneejerk government 
reactions to attacks – rather than the attacks themselves.

“Our concern is not so much for the effect of security issues on the ground 
because we know these things can happen anywhere around the world. No country 
is immune,” the former Jordanian tourism minister said. His real worry is 
“panicky reactions” from governments.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjan%2F28%2Ftravel-celebration-life-under-threat-un-tourism-head-militant-attacks-tunisia-kenya%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa74793c21dcdfb38f44e22335f100a1cd48459d0%2F0_0_3000_1839%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Travel%20as%20a%20'celebration%20of%20life'%20is%20under%20threat%2C%20says%20UN%20tourism%20head&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjan%2F28%2Ftravel-celebration-life-under-threat-un-tourism-head-militant-attacks-tunisia-kenya%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Travel%20as%20a%20%27celebration%20of%20life%27%20is%20under%20threat%2C%20says%20UN%20tourism%20head&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjan%2F28%2Ftravel-celebration-life-under-threat-un-tourism-head-militant-attacks-tunisia-kenya%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa74793c21dcdfb38f44e22335f100a1cd48459d0%2F0_0_3000_1839%2F3000.jpg>
 A shopkeeper looks out for customers near rows of closed shops in the Khan 
el-Khalili market, Cairo. Photograph: Amr Abdallah Dalsh/Reuters 
“In Europe, we are seeing some closures of borders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/20/the-guardian-view-on-eu-border-controls-after-paris-more-cooperation-not-less>
, checkpoints … some calls to revise theSchengen zone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/25/refugee-crisis-schengen-area-scheme-brink-amsterdam-talks>
, which is the most important achievement that European societies have come to 
for a long time. In the US, we are seeing a call forbans on entries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/08/house-visa-waiver-program-bill-restrictions>
 and some restrictions that are unprecedented,” he said.

“Any slowdown, any restriction on the flow of people means loss of jobs, loss 
of income,” said Rifai, noting that tourism accounts for9% of the world’s gross 
domestic product 
<http://media.unwto.org/en/press-release/2012-12-12/international-tourism-hits-one-billion>
 and30% of trade in services <http://www.intracen.org/itc/sectors/tourism/>. 
Tourism’s economic potential and its role as a “celebration of life” are why it 
is targeted, he said.

“Those forces of darkness, those terrorists … they know it hurts both 
economically and politically,” he said.

Tunisia: 'Nothing’s changed since the revolution' – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2016/jan/14/tunisia-nothing-changed-since-revolution-ben-ali-in-pictures>
Tunisia has been particularly affected by attacks. The number of international 
visitors toTunisia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/tunisia> fell to 5.2 
million last year, from 7.2 million in 2014, UNWTO said. Tourism arrivals to 
north Africa overall fell by 8%.

This week, Thomas Cook <https://www.theguardian.com/business/thomascookgroup> 
cancelled all British bookings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/26/easyjet-revenues-paris-terror-attacks>
 to Tunisia until November following the worst social unrest in the country 
since the 2011 revolution. The company made its decision in response to Foreign 
Office advice against all but essential travel to Tunisia.

Sherine El Taraboulsi, a research fellow at the Overseas Development Institute 
<http://www.odi.org/>’s humanitarian policy group, said she noticed a decline 
in tourism when she stayed in Tunisia following an attack on theBardo museum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/21/bardo-museum-attacks-tunisia-investigation>
 in March. There was another devastating attack, on abeach resort in Sousse, in 
June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/26/tunisia-tourist-hotel-reportedly-attacked>
.

“Tourism is highly dependent on perceptions; not only the perceptions of the 
tourists, but the perceptions of the manpower within the industry. The general 
perception was … that they were not ready to receive tourists, they were very 
unsure about the measures in place,” she said, citing popular unease about how 
security forces were reacting to the militant threat.

After the 2011 uprising, there had been hopes the economy would pick up, with 
tourism one of the key drivers, she said. Now, mounting frustration and an 
unemployment rate of 15% threaten thefragile gains that followed the Arab spring
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/19/guardian-view-killing-tunisia-arab-spring-success-needs-support>
.

The frustration was apparent when rioters and police clashed 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-tunisia-protests-idUKKCN0UZ1PW> in the 
central town of Kasserine this month during protests over jobs. Last week, the 
government imposed anationwide overnight curfew 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/22/tunisia-unrest-government-imposes-night-curfew-unemployment-protests-attacks>
 because of the unrest.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjan%2F28%2Ftravel-celebration-life-under-threat-un-tourism-head-militant-attacks-tunisia-kenya%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fccbc70a9fca93edbcc6970419d06355d18bd880a%2F0_0_3500_2334%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Travel%20as%20a%20'celebration%20of%20life'%20is%20under%20threat%2C%20says%20UN%20tourism%20head&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjan%2F28%2Ftravel-celebration-life-under-threat-un-tourism-head-militant-attacks-tunisia-kenya%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Travel%20as%20a%20%27celebration%20of%20life%27%20is%20under%20threat%2C%20says%20UN%20tourism%20head&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjan%2F28%2Ftravel-celebration-life-under-threat-un-tourism-head-militant-attacks-tunisia-kenya%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fccbc70a9fca93edbcc6970419d06355d18bd880a%2F0_0_3500_2334%2F3500.jpg>
 Kenya’s tourism minister, Najib Balala, comes in to land after skydiving in 
the coastal town of Watamu in a stunt to attract foreign visitors. Photograph: 
Stuart Price/Make it Kenya/Reuters 
“My Tunisian friends tell me that it feels like 2011,” says Taraboulsi. “There 
isn’t a serious attempt to fuse life into an already dead economy … that has 
created a number of marginalised groups. The more young people are 
marginalised, the more likely they are to join Isis or other radical groups.”
Tunisians make up the largest contingent of foreign fighters in Isis 
<http://soufangroup.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/12/TSG_ForeignFightersUpdate4.pdf>
 (pdf).

Another country grappling with the fallout from terrorism is Kenya. Visitor 
numbers dropped 12% in the first 11 months of last year to nearly 691,000 
<http://af.reuters.com/article/kenyaNews/idAFL8N1520KH>, the Kenya tourism 
board said, after western governments issued travel warnings triggered by a 
spate of attacks by Somali militants over the past two years.

As part of a campaign to woo back visitors, tourism minister Najib Balala went 
skydiving on the coast of the Indian Ocean 
<http://www.standardmedia.co.ke/article/2000188598/najib-balala-skydives-10-000-feet-to-promote-tourism>
 this month. Balalatold Reuters 
<http://af.reuters.com/article/kenyaNews/idAFL8N1520KH> it would take two years 
for the sector to recover but said investments in security, as well as policies 
to cut costs and raise standards, are paying off.

Global development podcast: what role can tourism play in development?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/audio/2011/apr/28/focus-podcast-tourism-development>
Rifai said Kenya’s approach was positive. “They are doing it in such a way 
that [is] not so aggressive because you don’t want to embark on security 
measures that end up killing the very industry you are trying to protect.”

The wealth-creating potential of tourism is acknowledged in the sustainable 
development goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive>
, the global blueprint for eradicating poverty and inequality that wasadopted 
in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/sep/25/global-goals-summit-2015-new-york-un-pope-shakira-malala-yousafzai>
.


Rifai said the tourism industry in developing countries should receive more 
donor assistance: it gets0.09% of international aid 
<http://www.e-unwto.org/doi/pdf/10.18111/9789284417124> (pdf). “Tourism is not 
seen as an area that the donor community would like to help the developing 
world with … they miss the point: if they extend technical assistance to 
projects connected to tourism, they would be more effective in creating jobs, 
accelerating development, building infrastructure and so on,” said Rifai.

“We must share our experiences. It’s the only way to deal with these forces of 
darkness because the alternative is to panic and start taking measures that end 
up achieving exactly what they want to achieve … They want us to panic, and 
close our borders, and hate each other. We should never allow them to do this.”
 