
Take me there: the Eden Valley, Cumbria

Why go? Skirting the eastern edge of the Lake District National Park and 
meandering northwards to Carlisle, this beautiful river valley offers a less 
touristy alternative to the honeypots of Windermere and Coniston. It's heaven 
for hikers, especially in October, when the autumn colours are at their richest.

What to do Explore the market towns of Penrith and Appleby-in-Westmoreland, 
whose 12th-century castle recently opened its gates to the public for the first 
time (applebycastle.co.uk <http://applebycastle.co.uk/>). Combine a boat trip 
on nearby Ullswater (ullswater-steamers.co.uk 
<http://www.ullswater-steamers.co.uk/>) with a stroll around the lake shore. 
Take a ride on the scenic Settle to Carlisle Railway (settle-carlisle.co.uk 
<http://www.settle-carlisle.co.uk/>). You can download eight new car-free 
trails and cycle tours for free atnurtureeden.org <http://nurtureeden.org/>.

Where to stay Askham Hall, a 12th-century peel tower 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peel_tower> near Penrith, has been reinvented as 
a country house hotel, with 13 bedrooms and a restaurant (B&B from £150 a night,
askhamhall.co.uk <http://www.askhamhall.co.uk/>). In the grounds you'll find 12 
acres of gardens and the Kitchen Garden Café serving pizza from a wood-fired 
oven.

Places to eat The George and Dragon in Clifton serves up posh pub food using 
locally sourced rare-breed meat and veg (georgeanddragonclifton.co.uk 
<http://www.georgeanddragonclifton.co.uk/>). Choose from 40 flavours of 
home-made Jersey ice cream at Abbott Lodge, a working dairy farm (
abbottlodgejerseyicecream.co.uk <http://abbottlodgejerseyicecream.co.uk/>).

Insider tip Lindsey Robinson, events assistant at Askham Hall, recommends 
picking up a posh hamper from the deli at J&J Graham, a Penrith institution 
dating back to 1793 (jjgraham.co.uk <http://jjgraham.co.uk/>), and heading to 
Aira Force (nationaltrust.org.uk/aira-force-and-ullswater 
<http://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/aira-force-and-ullswater/>) for a picnic. 
"It's one of the most dramatic waterfalls in the Lake District."

Pedal power: Electric bike hire is taking the toil out of touring

 Pedal power: why electric bike tours are catching on. Photograph: Michael 
Danner 
I once had to cut short a 15-mile bike tour of the Cambridgeshire Fens because 
I found the hills too challenging (sadly, this isn't a joke). So the 
proliferation of electric-bike hire centres at national parks and tourist hot 
spots is great news for people like me who love the idea of a cycling holiday 
but are somewhat lacking in pedal power.

From London to Edinburgh, and the South Downs to the Lake District, there are 
dozens of places where you can rent an e-bike, with prices starting from around 
£20 a day. The Electric Bicycle Network was created two years ago to promote 
this form of sustainable, low-carbon travel by bringing together hire centres, 
charging points and local tourist attractions to create a seamless experience 
for visitors. This summer saw the launch of networks in the Chilterns, the 
Forest of Bowland in Lancashire and the Cairngorms National Park, bringing the 
total to nine.

Tour operators are now cottoning on and offering electric-bike upgrades on 
cycling holidays. Headwater (headwater.com <http://www.headwater.com/>) has 
introduced this option in Portugal, Austria and Switzerland next year for a 
supplement of around £50pp . Other tour operators offering e-bike holidays 
include Freedom Treks (freedomtreks.co.uk <http://freedomtreks.co.uk>) and 
Wheel2Wheel Holidays (wheel2wheelholidays.com <http://wheel2wheelholidays.com>).

After the Fens debacle I swore I'd never get on a bike again, but the prospect 
of a battery-powered tour might just tempt me back into the saddle.

The stylish side of… Tenerife

 Tropical haven: Hotel Rural el Patio. 
Hotel Rural el Patio, near Garachico This 16th-century hacienda surrounded by 
banana plantations is the perfect antidote to the package hotels of Playa de 
las Americas. The bedrooms were refurbished this summer, but the old-fashioned 
charm remains intact, with tiled floors, beamed ceilings and shuttered windows. 
Relax in the shady courtyard or tropical gardens and enjoy a swim in the pretty 
pool. From £60 a night (hotelpatio.com <http://hotelpatio.com>)

Canarian cottage, Tegueste A sweet little casa for two tucked away in a 
peaceful valley in the north of the island. The decor is typically Canarian, 
and the patio has views of the Mesa Mota valley. Bajamar beach, with seawater 
swimming pools, and the Anaga Rural Park are nearby. There's a bus stop close 
to the house with connections to the rest of the island. From £35 a night (
airbnb.co.uk/rooms/1253853 <http://airbnb.co.uk/rooms/1253853>)

La Malvasia, Arico Viejo Finding stylish accommodation in the south of 
Tenerife is not easy, but this new trio of self-catering cottages hits the 
spot. They are luxurious, with walled gardens and a shared pool area and sun 
terrace. The hamlet of Arico Nuevo (home to one of the island's best 
restaurants, El Pimenton) and beaches of Poris de Abona are nearby.From £122 
for a cottage sleeping four to six (i-escape.com/la-malvasia 
<http://i-escape.com/la-malvasia>)
 