
Mexico City rooftops – azoteas – are usually flat. A parapet wall encloses the 
roof area, creating a kind of open-air patio, less visible to neighbours than 
the common interior patios of colonial and neocolonial buildings, and not 
easily accessed by visitors.


The rapidly expanding city of the 1920s housed its working classes either in 
these small rooftop rooms (cuartos de azotea), or in the more well-known 
vecindades, Mexico’s version of tenement buildings. Brought to Mexico during 
the conquest in the 16th century, but transformed into the sort of living 
quarters we know today during the mid-19th century, the vecindades were the 
typical dwelling space for working-class families, and in them the urban lumpen 
were crammed into small rooms that surrounded a common patio. While these were 
occupied by members of the working classes whose jobs did not provide room and 
board, such as factory workers, builders, or street-vendors, the cuartos de 
azotea were occupied by maids and servants, usually migrants from the 
provinces, who worked for the family that lived downstairs.


Unlike the vecindades, which remained segregated and were always a space for 
the working classes and urban lumpen — even if they were appropriated as icons 
and romanticised by the middle and upper classes — the azoteas began to be 
inhabited by members of the middle-class intelligentsia during the early 20th 
century. All over downtown Mexico City — which the middle and upper classes had 
begun to abandon in order to move to wealthier, more moderncolonias nearby — 
artists, writers and intellectuals started renting or simply occupying small 
rooftop rooms. Alfonso Reyes, for example, lived and worked in a rooftop room 
in Avenida Isabel la Católica around 1908. From there, he wrote one the 
earliest “panoramic” portraits of the city seen from an azotea:


“Come Sundays, and the high windows, what with the red light that they 
reflect, look like entrances to burning furnaces; just when the sun becomes 
more endurable and drags its horizontal rays across the city, the people of 
Mexico appear on the rooftops and give themselves to contemplating the streets, 
to looking up at the sky, to spying on the neighbouring houses, to not doing 
anything (…)

It is then when the bored emerge to the rooftops, men who spend long hours 
reclined on parapets, looking at a tiny figure that moves around in another 
rooftop, on the horizon, as far as sight can carry. Other times it is groups of 
young men who improvise platforms upon the irregular surfaces of the rooftop 
and talk and laugh with sonorous cries, feeling perhaps, at this height, 
somewhat liberated from the burdensome human environment, and whose demeanour 
is tinged with familiarity by their moving around in shirtsleeves – as on a 
rooftop no one is ashamed of exhibiting themselves dressed like this.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Ftrespassers-on-the-rooftops-secret-history-mexico-city-cultural-revolutionaries%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe93a6e7969d4fb7bbf9209ae061fb0c4fe04aa69%2F0_383_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trespassers%20on%20the%20rooftops%3A%20a%20secret%20history%20of%20Mexico%20City's%20cultural%20revolutionaries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Ftrespassers-on-the-rooftops-secret-history-mexico-city-cultural-revolutionaries%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trespassers%20on%20the%20rooftops%3A%20a%20secret%20history%20of%20Mexico%20City%27s%20cultural%20revolutionaries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Ftrespassers-on-the-rooftops-secret-history-mexico-city-cultural-revolutionaries%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe93a6e7969d4fb7bbf9209ae061fb0c4fe04aa69%2F0_383_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 View from the rooftop of Brasil 42 today. In the 1920s it was home to poets 
Salvador Novo and Xavier Villaurrutia. Photograph: Santiago Arau 
It would take at least another decade before rooftop living consolidated as a 
common model among the urban middle-class. But by the early 1920s, it was clear 
that rooftops had been taken over. Among the known trespassers of the city’s 
rooftops of those years are the American anthropologist and editor Frances 
Toor, Italian photographerTina Modotti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2000/aug/19/weekend.lindsaybaker>, 
American photographerEdward Weston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/aug/18/edward-weston-photography>
, Mexican painter Dr Atl, the painter, poet and model Nahui Ollin, muralist and 
painter Roberto Montenegro, Mexican poets Xavier Villaurrutia and Salvador 
Novo, or the painter Joaquín Clausell.

They were all trespassers in the sense that they crossed the boundary of rigid 
social-class demarcations and occupied the space of the lower classes. But 
also, in the sense that they crossed over the line of the acceptable literary 
and visual culture and brought the Mexican modern movement into being. What was 
it about rooftops that made them so attractive to this young, national and 
international, modernist intelligentsia? Were these bohemian rooftop-dwellers 
merely “ur-hipsters”, or antediluvian beatniks, allured by the aesthetics of 
self-induced poverty? Or did the appeal of the almost invisible “upstairs” and 
the appropriation of azoteas by the middle-class have deeper social causes?

What follows is a kind of “map” of the cuartos de azotea, in or near downtown 
Mexico City, in which writers, painters, photographers, translators and editors 
lived and worked during the 1920s. Their old rooftop addresses head each of the 
sections – so that the curious Mexico Cityflâneur may visit them and perhaps, 
if he or she is lucky, even climb up to the top.

Uruguay 170 And 5 De Febrero 18: Dr Atl And Nahui Ollin


Some of the most intriguing rooftop images of the early 1920s are anonymous, 
and were taken in the former convent La Merced, when Dr Atl moved into its 
rooftop room in 1920. In the above picture of him sitting on the border of the 
rooftop, legs dangling in the heights, we can see his cuarto de azotea at the 
back, with itstinaco (water tank) on top. Beyond the room, to the left, we see 
a series of church cupolas — the highest structures in the Mexico City of the 
early 1920s.


Dr Atl is better known for his work as a landscape painter who portrayed the 
horizons of the valley of Mexico. In earlier days, however, he was also heavily 
invested in revolutionary politics, and among other things had recruited men to 
fight in the Batallones Rojos – troops formed of workers which supported the 
constitutionalist government during the Mexican revolution (1910-1920). He 
later served President Carranza in his unsuccessful struggle against Alvaro 
Obregón – as he recalls in his autobiographical novel Gentes Profanas en el 
Convento, when Carranza was killed in 1920, Dr Atl was imprisoned briefly but 
managed to escape and hide, living as a homeless man in the streets of Mexico 
City’s downtown neighbourhood La Merced, barely surviving on rotten fruit which 
the gangs of street children had taught him to find and pick.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Ftrespassers-on-the-rooftops-secret-history-mexico-city-cultural-revolutionaries%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc253eb97879fef468783019d11c72f5b9670c585%2F0_386_5757_3454%2F5757.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trespassers%20on%20the%20rooftops%3A%20a%20secret%20history%20of%20Mexico%20City's%20cultural%20revolutionaries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Ftrespassers-on-the-rooftops-secret-history-mexico-city-cultural-revolutionaries%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trespassers%20on%20the%20rooftops%3A%20a%20secret%20history%20of%20Mexico%20City%27s%20cultural%20revolutionaries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Ftrespassers-on-the-rooftops-secret-history-mexico-city-cultural-revolutionaries%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc253eb97879fef468783019d11c72f5b9670c585%2F0_386_5757_3454%2F5757.jpg>
 The rooftop of former convent La Merced, where Dr Atl lived in the 1920s. 
Photograph: Santiago Arau 
The story of how Dr Atl finally arrived at La Merced is narrated in detail, 
though perhaps with some poetic licenses, in Gentes Profanas. Apparently one 
day, while he was loitering on a street corner, a man recognised him and asked 
if he was the same person who, a decade earlier, had recruited him to fight in 
the revolution. Dr Atl confirmed. The man, who later introduced himself as 
Ángel, put himself at his service, saying he was forever in debt to Dr Atl for 
having given him the opportunity to fight for his country.


Dr Atl, who could barely walk by then – worn down as he was from fatigue and 
starvation – asked if the man could find him food and a place to stay. It just 
so happened that Ángel was theportero (doorman) of the half-abandoned La 
Merced; he told him that there were plenty of rooms in the former convent to 
choose from. Ángel suggested the rooftop – the rest of the rooms, he said, were 
haunted by the fearsome ghosts of monks. (Ángel and his family lived in the 
room closest to the front door on the ground floor, precisely for fear of these 
ghosts.)


Among the recollections that Dr Atl describes in detail is his first rooftop 
bath, after months of not having washed himself:


“Isn’t there a place to have a bath here?”

“Sir, there’s nothing here but the big water depository, which is over there, 
on the edge of the rooftop …”

I waited no longer. In an instinctive impulse I parted from my guardian and 
walked toward a square tank filled with water, and quickly started to strip 
myself from my poor vestments.

“No!” he shouted. “That’s the cistern that supplies water to the entire 
neighborhood!”

That whole maneuver, which had lasted a good amount of time, caught the 
attention of the people that lived in the houses around the rooftop, and some 
women started to direct insults at me.

“Pig!” they called out. “How are we to drink now from that filthy water? 
Pervert!”

Me, a pervert? What could be immoral in a skeleton that exhibits its bones in 
the rooftop of a convent, under the light of the sun?

Atl is the Nahuatl word for “water”, but Dr Atl’s real name was Gerardo 
Murillo (he gave himself the name “Atl” in 1902, while living in Paris). This 
peculiar form of linguistic transvestism – replacing a Spanish name with a name 
in Nahuatl – could be seen either as a pretentious affirmation of peculiarity 
or as a playful slap in the face of the elite, which treated Mexico’s 
indigenous past (and present) with either contempt and shame or paternalistic 
inclusion.

 Dr Atl and Nahui Ollin on the rooftop of La Merced, circa 1922. Photograph: 
Anon/INBA 
Dr Atl dedicated his time in the azotea of the ex-Convento de La Merced to two 
fundamental things: cupolas and copulation. From his azotea, the monotony of 
the rather low and flat cityscape around him was interrupted only by successive 
church cupolas, as can be seen in the picture of Atl sitting on the inner 
border of his rooftop. It was perhaps while looking at the city from his 
rooftop that he came up with the idea of dedicating an entire book to just 
surveying and studying church cupolas. But the latter was also indeed a large 
part of his life during this rooftop period. In those same years, the poet, 
model and painter Nahui Ollin (sometimes spelled Olin) moved in with Dr Atl, 
while still married to another man. They had a short but passionate love 
affair. As he recounts in his autobiographical novel, she spent the days with 
him painting, writing and sunbathing naked in their azotea, to the 
consternation and repugnance of the same ladies who had called the then 
skeletal Dr Atl an immoral pig.

In another anonymous photograph, Dr Atl reads the newspaper and Ollin stands 
at the threshold of their rooftop room, the age difference between them 
flagrant. She is wearing an almost infantile white dress, but dark high-heeled 
shoes and dark tights. Their modest but to a degree fashionable appearance 
contrasts with the ruinous surroundings: the uneven brick floor, the frail 
ladder, the mossy walls, the broken windows.


Ollin and Dr Atl had met at a dinner party, while she was married to the 
painter Manuel Rodríguez Lozano, whom she repeatedly accused of homosexuality 
during their marriage, and with whom she had a child in France, who had died in 
early infancy. She left Rodríguez Lozano to live with Dr Atl in La Merced, 
causing a public scandal second in rumpus only to the scandal caused by their 
separation, two years later, which included loud public screaming, buckets of 
cold water thrown at each other, death threats, and defamatory pamphlets pasted 
on the doors of the ex-convent.


In 1926, after leaving Dr Atl, Ollin moved into another cuarto de azotea, in 
the second block of the street Cinco de Febrero, number 18. She lived there 
until 1932. She received visitors such as Tina Modotti, Edward Weston, Jean 
Charlot andAnita Brenner 
<https://www.google.co.uk/?gws_rd=ssl#q=anita+brenner%2BGuardian>, who wrote 
about the space in her diaries, saying: “Nahui lives there, she has a 
Spanish-type picturesque little house in the rooftop. Flowers, a parrot, dogs, 
cats, art, and a lot of sunlight … a wonderful place, perhaps too cute. Tina 
was enchanted.”


It was in this room that Ollin painted some of her more well-known 
self-portraits. In these portraits she usually appears naked, sometimes alone 
and sometimes with a lover, always looking at the viewer directly with enormous 
cat-like eyes, the tangled city below her. It is interesting that the way in 
which Mexico City appears below her could easily be any European city, and 
perhaps particularly Paris. But it is very clearly Mexico City. To the left of 
the naked bodies is the Paseo de la Reforma, leading to the Chapultepec Castle, 
the president’s house. Also visible from the rooftop is the Rueda de la Fortuna 
(fortune wheel) of the Chapultepec Park.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Ftrespassers-on-the-rooftops-secret-history-mexico-city-cultural-revolutionaries%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5be87418d8fb4c9fcd735b2f116baa0eee767b2%2F0_0_1250_1709%2F1250.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trespassers%20on%20the%20rooftops%3A%20a%20secret%20history%20of%20Mexico%20City's%20cultural%20revolutionaries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Ftrespassers-on-the-rooftops-secret-history-mexico-city-cultural-revolutionaries%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trespassers%20on%20the%20rooftops%3A%20a%20secret%20history%20of%20Mexico%20City%27s%20cultural%20revolutionaries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Ftrespassers-on-the-rooftops-secret-history-mexico-city-cultural-revolutionaries%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5be87418d8fb4c9fcd735b2f116baa0eee767b2%2F0_0_1250_1709%2F1250.jpg>
Nahui Ollin and Matías Santoyo , by Nahui Ollin, circa 1928. The city in the 
background is clearly Mexico City. Illustration: INBA 
More well-known than her self-portraits, however, are the nude photographs 
that Antonio Garduño took of her 
<https://historia.fundacionmapfre.org/historia/es/fotografia/desnudo-de-nahui-olin-en-el-sillon-ii.jsp>
 in the mid-to-late 1920s. There were hundreds of these, and in September 1927, 
Ollin showed a selection of them in a public exhibition at her new cuarto de 
azotea. She was praised by many but also criticised harshly as a result of this 
exhibition, as her unapologetic nudity was seen by many as downright profane.


Ollin and Dr Atl are an early example of a kind of social and cultural 
transgression. Living in a space designated for servants, their appropriated 
Nahuatl names, their scandalous love affair and days dedicated to painting and 
writing under the sun was by no means acceptable under the code of conduct of 
thegente decente (decent people). These gente profana, as the title of Dr Atl’s 
autobiographical novel boasts, were in a way the foundational couple of rooftop 
trend, the perverse Adam and Eve of the azoteas. They were among the first in 
the city to use a rooftop as both an alternative dwelling space, and a space 
for creative production that contested the moral standards of the times.


The peculiar visibility-invisibility of the rooftop allowed this: removed from 
the scrutiny of their own social class, they offered an unworried spectacle to 
the servants of neighbouring houses. At a remove from the city, they seized the 
freedom to experiment. Liberated from the life of middle- and upper-class 
interiors, with all its codes of conduct and formalities, they gave new names 
to each other, and pushed the limits of the dominant morality.


Brasil 42: Salvador Novo, Villaurrutia and Ulises


In a letter dated 14 March 1927, the poet José Gorostiza writes to his fellow 
poet Carlos Pellicer: “In the building of our poetry [you are] the window: the 
large open window that looks onto the fields … We are – you know this – the 
interior rooms, Xavier the dining room. The rest, bedrooms. The one at the very 
back is Jaime Torres Bodet … Salvador Novo? The rooftop. Linen out in the open.”


The expression trapos al sol, only half-accurately translatable as “(dirty) 
linen out in the open”, can mean several things. But in this particular context 
the expression relates to what is made public, but should probably have 
remained private. Gorostiza is comparing Novo to an azotea, where linen hangs 
out in the sun to dry; a space where private garments are made public – at 
least to those who live in other azoteas.


But what is this exposed linen referring to? In 1925, Nahui Ollin’s former 
husband, Manuel Rodríguez Lozano, painted a portrait of a young Salvador Novo, 
sitting cross-legged, swathed in a blue robe, looking sideways, as if conscious 
that he is being looked at by us. What is Novo doing at night, in a taxi, 
dressed only in a robe? He was parading trapos al sol, no doubt, as Gorostiza 
had written in his letter to Pellicer.

Ta x i, by Manuel Rodríguez Lozano, 1924. Illustration: Museo Nacional de 
Arte, Mexico City. 
Although the painting is titled Taxi, and indeed a taxi door divides the 
interior space we see from the city outside, the perspective used is hardly one 
that we would see from the vantage point of a taxi on a street. We see the city 
from above: its cars and streetlights, its tram, its colonial buildings, its 
rising moon. The corner depicted is recognisable: the building in the 
background is the Palacio de Correos, by the architect Adamo Boari. The 
portrait was painted in Lozano’s studio, possibly on a low rooftop in a 
building on the street then called San Juan de Letrán (most buildings then were 
no higher than three or four storeys). The particular corner is not just any 
corner in the city – asCarlos Monsiváis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jun/24/carlos-monsivais-obituary> 
describes it in La Mano Temblorosa de una Hechicera:


“San Juan de Letrán was, back then, not a mere street, it was the center of 
life in the capital, of the life that was worth living (…) there began and 
ended the world of the prohibited, of that which only had a place in the
sobremesa of solitary men (…) In that street walked drivers and politicians, 
hookers and women of high society, machos and sissies … I think it was in San 
Juan de Letrán where gays started coming out of their holes to start moving 
about, unhindered, and go after whomever allowed it.”


As a young man Novo, later considered one of the major poets of the 
Contemporáneos generation (the Mexican modernist poets), lived a double, 
liminal existence between his family’s regime of typical gente decente and the 
forbidden underworlds of homosexual men in the still highly reactionary 1920s.


In his autobiography, La Estatua de Sal, Novo recounts how, in search of 
better light for studying, he would often climb up to the rooftop of his 
uncle’s house, where he lived in the early 1920s. To get to the rooftop, he 
first had to climb a stairway that led up to a room where the family’s 
chauffeur, Emilio, had his living quarters. He then had to cross that room — 
“full of oil cans” — and walk through another door that led to the open azotea.

One day, Novo walked into the room and found Emilio napping on his bed. He 
silently walked past him and out through the other door to the azotea, where he 
leaned on the parapet, looking down toward the streets. “Lost in the pleasant 
absorption of that silence,” Novo recounts, “of the panorama of rooftops 
sprinkled here and there with the yellowing treetops at sundown,” he suddenly 
felt Emilio approaching from behind. Emilio embraced him and pressed his body 
against Novo’s back. They exchanged a few words and caresses, and Emilio led 
him back to the room.


On that bed, in Emilio’s rooftop room, the young Novo discovered a kind of 
pleasure that would lead him, over the years, to seek out more encounters with 
chauffeurs, of whom he particularly cherished the smell of gasoline. Years 
later, for example, he would fall in love with Arturito, a driver who drove one 
of the first passenger buses in Mexico City, from downtown to the colonia Roma. 
Novo would sit next to him on the bus and “inhale, with a retrospective and 
promissory delight, the emanations of gasoline next to his body”.


Fortunately, Novo’s fetish for drivers was stronger than his infatuation with 
gasoline. In 1923, he started writing for the newspaper El Chafirete (Chilango 
slang for chauffeur), destined for the guild of drivers and written in the 
particular urban jargon that they used. “Some of the best skins around came to 
me, lured by El Chafirete,” Novo recalls. Indeed, his collaborations in El 
Chafirete earned him a passport to Mexico City’s gay underworld – or, to be 
more precise, Mexico City’s upper world: its sordidly thrilling rooftops.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Ftrespassers-on-the-rooftops-secret-history-mexico-city-cultural-revolutionaries%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c9362cf2a2d7b927482b5d9fe9a2dc107fe9321%2F0_386_5757_3454%2F5757.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trespassers%20on%20the%20rooftops%3A%20a%20secret%20history%20of%20Mexico%20City's%20cultural%20revolutionaries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Ftrespassers-on-the-rooftops-secret-history-mexico-city-cultural-revolutionaries%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trespassers%20on%20the%20rooftops%3A%20a%20secret%20history%20of%20Mexico%20City%27s%20cultural%20revolutionaries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Ftrespassers-on-the-rooftops-secret-history-mexico-city-cultural-revolutionaries%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c9362cf2a2d7b927482b5d9fe9a2dc107fe9321%2F0_386_5757_3454%2F5757.jpg>
 The stairway leading to the azotea at Brasil 42, as it looks today. Salvador 
Novo wrote about life on the rooftop in his autobiography, La Estatua de Sal. 
Photograph: Santiago Arau 
Novo went to school with the city’s intellectual elite in the Escuela Nacional 
Preparatoria, but, while the other poets of his generation read the French 
symbolists and drank tea in French-like salons, he frequented the azoteas and, 
on occasions, the vecindades. In his memoir, he recalls the extravagant 
nicknames of some of thelocas and transvestites whom he frequented: like their 
cross-dressed bodies, their names were a sort of parodic translation of their 
caricatured identity. A priest is renamed Mother Demon, the short and squat 
Carlos Meneses is a “Bottled Fart”, a man is called “Chucha” (female dog), and 
an aspiring opera singer is Anetta “Gallo” (literally “cock”, but also meaning 
“false note”).


One of the young poets who eventually crossed over and trespassed with Novo, 
from the well-to-do world of the urban intelligentsia to the world of theazoteas
, was Xavier Villaurrutia. They had met in the Escuela Nacional Preparatoria, 
and had discovered they shared literary affinities, among other things. Novo 
introduced him to French and American poets – as well as to La Virgen de 
Istambul, with whom Villaurrutia had a short affair.


In 1924, Novo decided to rent a cuarto de azotea in the rooftop of an old 
colonial house in the calle Brasil #42. The room was near the Preparatoria, and 
also conveniently – for Novo – located near the transit department, always 
replete with drivers and chauffeurs acquiring or renovating their licenses. 
Shortly after, Xavier Villaurrutia joined him in another studio in the same 
rooftop, and later came the painters Roberto Montenegro and Agustín Lazo. In La 
Estatua de Sal, Novo recounts their collective experiments with sex and drugs, 
a possibility to which their rooftop studio had opened a door. They hosted 
drivers, cadets, construction workers, other poets, painters and professors 
alike. They tried the then-demonised marijuana — Novo remembers only that he 
immediately passed out. They indulged more frequently in cocaine, which was 
available by prescription in local pharmacies.


Among the cultural and social transgressions led by Novo and Villaurrutia, a 
less scandalous but in the long-term more subversive (or 
establishment-irritating) event took place: Ulises, the first modernist 
journal, was born.Ulises had nothing to do with the kind of state-sponsored 
projects going on at the time; it did not advance the revolutionary cause. Much 
more elitist in its content and target audience, it paid little or no attention 
to the political struggles of the times. Novo and Villaurrutia publishedUlises 
between May 1927 and February 1928; it was a precursor to the more well-known 
Contemporáneos, where the first renderings into Spanish ofLangston Hughes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/langston-hughes>’s poems, as well as TS 
Eliot’s The Waste Land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2014/apr/17/ts-eliot-waste-land-radical-text-wounded-culture>
, appeared in the late 1920s.

 Ulises No.1 (contents page), May 1927. 
Upon close inspection of the magazine’s masthead, one crucial piece of 
information, normally ignored, is apparent. Ulises’s postal address reads 
“Brasil #42-10”. The magazine, it turns out, had its headquarters in one of the 
rooftop rooms that its editors had been renting since 1924. They met regularly 
in this cuarto de azotea, withGilberto Owen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/may/06/valeria-luiselli-faces-crowd-review>
 too, interrupting their sessions only to eat hot-cakes in a nearby joint 
called Quick-lunch – an American-style eatery quite different to the 
French-style salons where other intellectuals gathered, and also radically 
different to thecantinas and pulquerías that Novo visited in his nightly 
excursions.


If political heterodoxy had initially marginalised Dr Atl into the space of 
the azotea, and torrid romances had kept him there, then sexual difference had 
drawn poets such as Novo and Villaurrutia to rooftops. In a society where there 
was no moral and physical place for difference, other spaces have to be 
invented.


In the context of an intensely nationalist and reactionary Mexico, obsessed 
with the figure of the “macho” and with nation-building discourses and 
programmes, rooftops appear as heterotopic in the sense that the cultural 
activities that took place in them both did and did not lie under the umbrella 
of the state’s nation-building cultural programmes. They were somewhere 
in-between: Ulises was (secretly) funded by the minister of education, yet 
criticised heavily by many members of the establishment.


Rooftop rooms were a sort of urban and architectural “absence”, a space of 
relative invisibility, originally conceived to hide servants from the life of 
the ruling classes, to conceal them from the rest of the city. They became, 
with time, a space of transgression for the middle-classes and a certain 
intellectual bourgeoisie. Magazines such as Ulises perhaps could not have been 
possible were it not for the freedom conferred by the city’s rooftops. These 
spaces may have begun as ones for experimentation with drugs and with sexual 
practices, but they became the sites of alternative modes of cultural 
production.


Veracruz Esq. Mazatlán: Edward Weston and Tina Modotti


Some of the most well-known rooftop photographs of the Mexican 1920s were 
taken inEdward Weston’s azotea 
<http://socalarchhistory.blogspot.mx/2011/06/edward-weston-remembers-tina-modotti.html>
, upon his arrival in Mexico City in 1922. For some time he shared this space 
with Tina Modotti, his lover, apprentice and, eventually, co-worker. Like Dr 
Atl and Nahui Ollin, Modotti and Weston’s transgressive rooftop relationship 
was something of a public scandal. They were not married to each other, had an 
“open” relationship, and spent long hours experimenting on their rooftop, 
either with their cameras, with each other, or with other people.


The historian Mauricio Tenorio-Trillo has fittingly referred to international 
communism, though we could well extend it to international modernism, as “an 
erotic mess whose scenarios were Berlin, Moscow, and, of course, Mexico City”. 
And indeed, the 1920s in Mexico are a period of intense sexual exploration 
among the intelligentsia, to which Weston surely contributed, but which he also 
captured and aestheticised through his lens.


The iconic figure of this period of Weston’s work is the nude Tina en la Azotea
 
<http://3.bp.blogspot.com/-VgiNOl2Tdkc/Tgz1PO1-LrI/AAAAAAAAC0I/VuqdLiZkQJM/s1600/004+%25281%2529.jpg>
. In this photograph – of which there exist a few other versions, each only 
subtly different from the other – Modotti lies horizontally on ajerga. Her body 
is freely and sensually spread out, gleaming in the sunlight; her feet are full 
of mud.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Ftrespassers-on-the-rooftops-secret-history-mexico-city-cultural-revolutionaries%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf01f7a2252ae09a0fbf601909c2854f1634fd0f%2F0_386_5757_3454%2F5757.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trespassers%20on%20the%20rooftops%3A%20a%20secret%20history%20of%20Mexico%20City's%20cultural%20revolutionaries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Ftrespassers-on-the-rooftops-secret-history-mexico-city-cultural-revolutionaries%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trespassers%20on%20the%20rooftops%3A%20a%20secret%20history%20of%20Mexico%20City%27s%20cultural%20revolutionaries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Ftrespassers-on-the-rooftops-secret-history-mexico-city-cultural-revolutionaries%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf01f7a2252ae09a0fbf601909c2854f1634fd0f%2F0_386_5757_3454%2F5757.jpg>
 Veracruz/Mazatlan, where photographers Edward Weston and Tina Modotti shared a 
rooftop space in the 1920s. Photograph: Santiago Arau 
Criticism has often focused on Modotti’s naked body itself, as an object of 
study in the context of Weston’s transgressive photographic work. However, upon 
closer inspection, one notices that her body creates a peculiar shadow. That 
shadow bears a subtle but clear similarity to the silhouette of one of Mexico 
City’s volcanoes, theIztaccihuatl 
<https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iztacc%C3%ADhuatl> – also known as La Mujer 
Dormida (“The Sleeping Woman”). The Iztaccihuatl and its couple-volcano, the 
Popocatépetl, were visible from rooftops; it is impossible to know if the two 
photographers were playing on this resemblance intentionally, but the 
photograph of a napping Modotti can indeed be read as a sort of translation of 
the view they saw from their rooftop, which they were mapping back on to the 
floor of their azotea: Modotti, a human-scale copy of La Mujer Dormida.


Tina on the Azotea was shown in Weston’s first solo exhibition in Mexico, in a 
gallery on calle Madero, in downtown Mexico City. The exhibition must have been 
a success, as an entry in Weston’s diary on 23 September 1923 states that: “The 
negatives with Tina as a subject have been a good investment.” Among the 
Mexican intellectual elite that attended the exhibition were José Vasconcelos 
andDiego Rivera <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/diego-rivera>, who 
acquired a copy and later used it as a model for one of the female nudes in the 
Chapingo murals, in the National School for Agriculture. Vasconcelos, on the 
other hand, who at the time was the minister of education, is reticent about 
Tina’s freedom and independence. In the third volume of his memoirs, titledEl 
Desastre, he pejoratively nicknames her La Perlotti, and recounts:


“La Perlotti, let us call her thus, practiced the profession of vampire, but 
without commercialism à la Hollywood and [instead] by a temperament insatiable 
and untroubled. She was seeking, perhaps, notoriety, but not money. Out of 
pride, perhaps, she had not been able to derive economic advantages from her 
figure, almost perfectly and eminently sensual. We all know her body because 
she served as an unpaid model for the photographer, and her bewitching nudes 
were fought over.”(trans. Patricia Albers)

In just a few lines, Vasconcelos labels Modotti a vampire, proud, 
attention-seeking and a quasi-prostitute (“gratuitous model”). The only quality 
she seems to have, in his eyes, is a sensual body. Modotti must have been 
viewed in this same way by many other men and women of the time. Like Nahui 
Ollin, she was transgressive: her beauty, her nudity, her sexual freedom was 
intolerable for the machos of the revolution – unless they could paint them, as 
did Rivera; unless they could paint them nude, as also did Rivera, on his 
luckier days.


In the rigid cultural codes of the early 20th century in Mexico, it was 
impossible to accept Modotti’s behaviour and to “translate” her into into 
palatable terms. Modotti, Ollin and, to a lesser degree, Novo (who was 
ultimately a man and therefore less irritating to those in power), were cast 
aside and belittled by those who had it in their power to do so.


Abraham Gonzalez 31: Tina Modotti and Frances Toor: Aesthetics Of Revolution?


After Weston’s departure from Mexico, Modotti moved into a building called 
Edificio Zamora, on the corner of calle Atenas and calle Abraham González, 
which was so crooked and downtrodden that its residents called it the “Tower of 
Pisa”. As one of her biographers, Margaret Hooks, writes: “Taking the elevator 
to the top was likened to riding a cable car up a mountain slope! [Tina’s] love 
of rooftops led her to turn a servant’s room there into a simple studio, giving 
her dominion over the azotea with its wonderful views of the volcanoes.”


The other resident of the top floor was the American anthropologist, 
translator and editor Frances Toor, also known asPaca Toor. She had arrived in 
Mexico City as one of the American students attending the Escuela de Verano, 
where Salvador Novo taught. This was a very successful project that linked the 
National University with American universities such as Columbia or Harvard, and 
brought students to Mexico to study Spanish but also anthropology, literature, 
architecture or history.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Ftrespassers-on-the-rooftops-secret-history-mexico-city-cultural-revolutionaries%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c0a2009750bf7f54d2f608afa5363ee9df746a4%2F0_0_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trespassers%20on%20the%20rooftops%3A%20a%20secret%20history%20of%20Mexico%20City's%20cultural%20revolutionaries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Ftrespassers-on-the-rooftops-secret-history-mexico-city-cultural-revolutionaries%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trespassers%20on%20the%20rooftops%3A%20a%20secret%20history%20of%20Mexico%20City%27s%20cultural%20revolutionaries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Ftrespassers-on-the-rooftops-secret-history-mexico-city-cultural-revolutionaries%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c0a2009750bf7f54d2f608afa5363ee9df746a4%2F0_0_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 View of the rooftop at Abraham Gonzales 31, where Modotti moved after Weston 
left Mexico. Residents used to call the dilapidated building the ‘Tower of 
Pisa’. Photograph: Santiago Arau 
Unlike most students arriving from Columbia or Harvard to spend a summer in 
Mexico, Toor stayed on, transforming her sojourn into a life-long project. She 
became one of the “pensadores rubios”, as Novo used to call, tongue-in-cheek, 
members of the American intelligentsia who were always “discovering” Mexico. In 
Del Pasado Remoto, collected in his book Poemas Proletarios (1934), he writes:


“They came in airplanes, the great blond thinkers.

Comfort, said one of them,

Is harmony between man and his surroundings. The Indians, by the door of their 
huts,

Are more comfortable, bare-foot, Than Anatole France shoe-clad

Or Calvin Coolidge sipping on a Coca-Cola In a salon at the Waldorf Astoria.”

Just as Novo and Xavier Villaurrutia edited Ulises on the rooftop of a 
building, Toor edited Mexican Folkways in her own azotea between 1925 and 1937. 
As she states in her editor’s forward to the first issue, Toor decided to 
publish a bilingual journal because she intended the magazine to be read by 
“high school and University students of Spanish … as well as to those who are 
interested in folklore and the Indian for their own sakes.” She adds: 
“Moreover, much beauty is lost in translating.”


Toor presents herself as a competent cultural translator, should there be any 
doubt on the part of her readership. In her editor’s forward in the first 
issue, she states: “Mexican Folkways is an outgrowth of my great enthusiasm and 
delight in going among the Indians and studying their customs. I have gone 
alone among them, under circumstances that even my cultured Mexican friends 
consider dangerous, and in spite of the Indians’ just mistrust of the white 
stranger, I have never had occasion not to feel safe and at home.”

 Mexican Folkways 2 (cover), 1926. 
Unlike Novo and Villaurrutia, who saw themselves as members of the 
international modernist circuit — looking beyond their azotea to London, Paris, 
Rome and of course New York – Toor’s project perpetuated a version of Mexico as 
a non-western, exotic society. So it may seem curious that Tina Modotti became 
one of Mexican Folkways’s official photographers. Modotti’s early work had 
stood out precisely because she preferred documenting the Mexico of the urban, 
technological revolution to the folkloric representation of Mexico, filled with 
cacti and the barefooted people. But, especially toward the end of the 1920s, 
her personal and political project as a photographer committed to bringing to 
public attention the causes of socially and politically marginalised groups, 
perhaps met up with Frances Toor’s own version ofindigenismo.


In 1927, moreover, Modotti joined the Mexican Communist party, and also 
started publishing her work in cultural magazines with political commitments 
and agendas — radical publications such as El Machete. What Modotti brought to 
Mexican Folkways was her radically modernist eye, now focused more on the 
working classes than on buildings and technology.


Manifestación de Trabajadores, one of Modotti’s most emblematic pictures of 
the period, is possibly taken from a rooftop, judging by its angle. If so, it 
may be the rooftop she shared with Frances Toor on calle Abraham González, 
where she was living at the time. It combines her typically modernist 
aesthetics – clean lines, patterns, a certain remove – with her growing 
interest in revolutionary politics. We don’t see any of the workers’ faces, 
only identical white hats.


The photograph, thanks to the particular distance and angle that the azotea 
offers, is a sort of abstraction of a march or parade. Modotti had found a way 
of looking through her camera at the social and political consequences of the 
Mexican revolution, and in doing so created a modernist aesthetics of the 
post-revolution.


Rooftops retrouvé

During the early 1920s in Mexico, as the revolutionary government settled into 
power, the Mexican state and its associated artists and intellectuals began to 
search for new forms in architecture, literature and art that would represent 
Mexico and “Mexicanness”, whatever that meant. The state’s “official artists”, 
such as muralists Rivera, Siqueiros and Orozco, sung the praises of the 
revolutionary government; architects such as Manuel Amabilis and Obregón 
Santacilia designed buildings that captured the nation’s “spirit”; and writers 
such as Manuel Maples Arce represented the cusp of the much sought-after 
synthesis of modernity and tradition. All of them advanced and upheld (for a 
time, at least) the causes of the revolutionary government – which in 1946 
would crystallise into the Partido Revolucionario Institucional, or 
Institutional Revolutionary Party, an oxymoron that explains far too many 
things about Mexico.


The “rooftop bohemia”, in turn, did not always comply to the standards of the 
government’s plans and programmes – rooftops often engendered a poetics of 
transgression. Indeed, in the late 1920s and early 30s, during the period known 
as the “Maximato” – when Pascual Ortiz Rubio became president but, de facto, 
the authoritarian Plutarco Elías Calles controlled the government – many of 
these rooftop dwellers came to be seen not only as transgressive, but downright 
unwelcome in the country.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Ftrespassers-on-the-rooftops-secret-history-mexico-city-cultural-revolutionaries%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27d7e3e4d99570a3cf45820971c2fd309435a5bd%2F0_386_5757_3454%2F5757.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trespassers%20on%20the%20rooftops%3A%20a%20secret%20history%20of%20Mexico%20City's%20cultural%20revolutionaries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Ftrespassers-on-the-rooftops-secret-history-mexico-city-cultural-revolutionaries%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trespassers%20on%20the%20rooftops%3A%20a%20secret%20history%20of%20Mexico%20City%27s%20cultural%20revolutionaries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Ftrespassers-on-the-rooftops-secret-history-mexico-city-cultural-revolutionaries%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27d7e3e4d99570a3cf45820971c2fd309435a5bd%2F0_386_5757_3454%2F5757.jpg>
 Brasil 42 as it is today. Rooftop dwellers played a part in the making of 
international modernism in Mexico. Photograph: Santiago Arau 
Modotti was expelled from the country in 1930 for her communist affiliations, 
and under the false accusation that she had been involved in an attempt against 
President Rubio. Carlton Beals, a journalist and contributor to Mexican 
Folkways, was also expelled. Frances Toor, whose work had always been supported 
or at least tolerated by successive governments, began to fear that the new, 
highly conservative and anti-left government would close down her Mexican 
Folkways, as El Machete had been closed down by the government in 1929 (though 
it continued to be published, illegally, from 1929 to 1934).


Rooftops and their dwellers were not necessarily divorced from what was 
happening within the other layers of the city, but they offered the possibility 
of contesting and inverting what took place in “real” or “official” sites. And, 
in doing so, they allowed their inhabitants to enact a kind of modernist utopia 
in which gender restrictions were challenged, sexual norms transgressed, moral 
codes broken, aesthetic principles overturned, and intellectual affiliations 
reinvented. What is at the heart of the matter is that rooftops allowed a 
peculiar distance from which a kind of strangeness is established with the 
city, and from which the city could be viewed, inhabited and ultimately 
represented and aestheticised.

 If we think of Mexico City in terms of its many horizontal layers – ground 
floor, first floor, second floor – then the layer that in the 1920s stretched 
out horizontally at about 15 metres above the ground, can be thought of as a 
kind of semi-invisible, experimental laboratory for modernist creativity and 
its shifting of moral parameters. The relative invisibility, both physical and 
cultural, of rooftop rooms allowed an alternative way of life and, 
concomitantly, a form of cultural production that pushed the boundaries of 
Mexican literary and visual culture.

Although the new azotea trespassers, these middle-class transplants to 
rooftop-dwelling, could not actually see each other from their respective 
rooftops, the fact that a group of diverse but to a degree like-minded people 
were living and producing work at that particular level, at that particular 
height of the cityscape, must have had an effect on how they all imagined their 
place in the city. Even if Modotti, Weston and Toor, Novo and Villaurrutia, Dr 
Atl and Ollin may not have always crossed ideological and aesthetic paths, they 
knew each other and of one another, and each knew that the other was playing 
out their daily life at a similar height, in similar spaces.


The Guardian in Mexico City: how to follow our stories and get involved
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/nov/04/guardian-mexico-city-live-how-follow-stories-get-involved>
For minds that are habituated to thinking of living in terms of its 
possibilities of representation – narrative, poetic, pictorial, photographic – 
space is more than just the barren grounds in which daily life and daily work 
happen be. Thus, at least in a purely symbolic plane, these rooftop dwellers 
may well have imagined themselves as intermediaries, placed as bridges between 
the “inside” and the “outside” of the city. Their work – modernist journals, 
translation magazines, photographic or pictorial portraits, events depicted in 
abstracted photographs of the city below – responded to the condition of the 
liminal place they chose to inhabit, both physical and intellectual.


In this sense, rooftop-dwellers can be seen, too, as translators: bridging the 
gap between inside and outside, between the English and the Spanish-speaking 
world, between the Mexican indigenous population and the Mexican elite, between 
the local and the foreign. Whatever their own particular endeavours, together 
they played a part in the making of international modernism in Mexico.


Valeria Luiselli 
<https://twitter.com/ValeriaLuiselli?ref_src=twsrc^google|twcamp^serp|twgr^author>
 was born in Mexico City in 1983. Her novels and essays have been published in 
magazines and newspapers including the New York Times, Granta, and McSweeney’s. 
In 2014, she wasnamed as one of the 20 best Mexican writers under 40 and 
received a National Book Foundation award.
 