
Prosecutors at the international criminal court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/18/state-impunity-international-criminal-court-african>
 at The Hague are due to present their case on Monday against a child soldier 
turned militia leader from northern Uganda accused of committing war crimes 
including rape and murder.

Dominic Ongwen, once a feared commander of the Lord’s Resistance Army, 
appeared last month before the court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/06/dominic-ongwen-the-hague-trial-war-crimes-lra-uganda>
 to plead not guilty, saying that as a child soldier taken by force from his 
home by the organisation he was a victim of its atrocities, not a perpetrator.

The trial of is one of the most momentous in the ICC’s 14-year history, and 
raises difficult questions of responsibility and blame.

Ongwen, who is 41, was abducted by the LRA at the age of 10. He is the first 
former child soldier to face trial at the institution and the first defendant 
to be both alleged perpetrator and victim of the same crimes.

 He told the court in December that he was “one of the people against whom the 
LRA committed atrocities” and should not be on trial.

Related: Child soldier to war criminal: the trial of Dominic Ongwen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/mar/27/dominic-ongwen-war-crimes-trial-former-child-soldier-icc-uganda>

“In the name of God, I deny all these charges… I am not the LRA … It is the 
LRA who abducted people in northernUganda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/uganda>. It is the LRA who killed people,” 
Ongwen said, speaking through an interpreter.

But Fatou Bensouda, who will lead the prosecution team, told the court at the 
earlier hearing that past victimisation as a child might be a mitigating factor 
in sentencing but was not a defence of Ongwen’s alleged decision to 
“wholeheartedly” embrace violence.

“Ongwen was directly involved in many attacks on civilians … He knew that the 
crimes he committed were part of widespread and systematic attacks … He played 
a crucial role in the abduction of children in order to maintain the fighting 
strength of the LRA,” she told the court.

The trial may last many years, officials have warned. The prosecution alone 
has signalled it will call more than 70 witnesses.

The charges against Ongwen include murder, attempted murder, torture, rape, 
sexual slavery, the alleged conscription of children under the age of 15 into 
an armed group and, for the first time, “forced pregnancy” and “forced 
marriage”.

If convicted, Ongwen faces up to 30 years in prison, or a life sentence could 
be imposed.

Led by Joseph Kony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/02/life-after-joseph-kony-uganda-women-rebuilding-lives-child-soldiers>
, a former rebel leader who claimed to be religiously inspired, the LRA waged 
war across five countries in east and centralAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> for nearly 30 years.

The group has been blamed for the deaths of about 100,000 people and the 
abduction of 60,000 children. It relied on the abduction of largely defenceless 
villagers and refugees, including children, to provide labour and combatants. 
Girls were forced into sexual and domestic slavery while boys were forced to 
take up arms.

Most of the charges against Ongwen focus on attacks on refugee camps between 
2002 and 2005. One of the worst involved a four-day raid by the LRA on camps in 
north-eastern Congo in December 2009, in which about 350 civilians were killed 
and another 250, including at least 80 children, were abducted.
 People watch a screening of the start of the trial of Dominic Ongwen in 
Lukodi, Uganda, in December. Photograph: Isaac Kasamani/AFP/Getty Images 
Defence lawyers will argue that much of the evidence against Ongwen is 
unreliable and say their client was brutalised and traumatised after being 
abducted.

“He was tortured … forced to watch people being killed, used for fighting as a 
child soldier. Even the prosecution have said that what he went through is a 
serious mitigating factor,” Thomas Obhof, a US lawyer based inUganda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/uganda> and part of the defence team, said 
in December.

Ledio Cakaj, the author of When the Walking Defeats You, which documents the 
experiences 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/09/scars-body-soul-joseph-kony-bodyguard-when-the-walking-defeats-you-ledio-cakaj-book-extract>
 of a bodyguard toKony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/mar/08/joseph-kony-child-soldiers>, 
said the trial raised a very tricky issue as “a lot of these people of the LRA, 
who are considered as the bad guys, were in some sense victims in the first 
place”.

Of the five senior LRA leaders indicted by the ICC more than a decade ago, 
only Ongwen andKony <https://www.theguardian.com/world/joseph-kony> are still 
alive. Despite a $5m (£3.5m) reward for information leading to his capture, 
Kony remains elusive.

The case is important for the embattled ICC, which was founded in 2002 to 
bring to justice perpetrators of crimes that local criminal systems cannot deal 
with.

The institution has repeatedly faced criticism by some in Africa who see it as 
a racist or imperialist. Nine out of the 10 cases being investigated by the ICC 
involve alleged crimes inAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, 
where several countries have announced their withdrawal from the court.

Defenders say the majority of the investigations have followed an explicit 
request or grant of jurisdiction from the government in the country where the 
crimes were committed, as in the case of Uganda.

The trial of Ongwen has been hailed by human rights campaigners 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2016/12/05/icc-first-lords-resistance-army-trial-begins>
 as a “significant first on justice for LRA atrocities”.
 