
On 24 October 1667, Samuel Pepys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/samuelpepys>, arriving in Charing Cross too 
late for the theatre, went instead to visit some friends. There he saw “a 
Frenchman, Monsieur Prin, play on the Trump Marine”, an instrument which “doth 
so far out-do a Trumpet” and is “most remarkable; and at first was a mystery to 
me that I should hear a whole concert of chords together at the end of a pause”.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgJnWa03V9dc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgJnWa03V9dc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgJnWa03V9dc&media=>
 Video:hear Clare Salaman play the tromba marina 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gJnWa03V9dc> 
Almost extinct today, Pepys’s trump marine is more commonly known as the 
tromba marina <http://bit.ly/2dD0Qm3>. It is indeed a most remarkable instrument
 <http://www.trombamarina.com/instruments/tromba-marina>. It can be over 2m 
tall, and has one long, thick playing string which is bowed, and a host of 
sympathetic (resonating) strings. Melodies are produced by touching the 
harmonic nodes of the playing string with the thumb.

By the 17th century, the tromba marina had been around for at least 500 years 
and had grown from a simple monochord held horizontally to a tall, stately 
instrument with a buzzing foot-like bridge and sympathetic strings. Many 
surviving instruments were found in convents – it seems that tromba marinas 
were a staple of the northern European nun’s music box. Wind instruments would 
have been off-limits for women then, so it’s possible that tromba marinas were 
used as substitutes for trumpets.
 The tromba marina can be 2m long. 
As the 17th century wore on, the instrument began to appear in secular public 
music-making, culminating in performances by the late 17th-century virtuoso 
Jean-Baptiste Prin, son of Pepys’s Frenchman, who entertained English audiences 
with his huge collection of tromba marinas and producing a treatise on how to 
play the instrument. This was its heyday – by the end of the 18th century it 
had all but disappeared from view.

Like a trumpet, the tromba marina has a limited number of “good” harmonic 
notes. But, unlike a trumpet, the harmonics can’t be adjusted, which leads to a 
scale at odds with the various tuning temperaments of the day. Perhaps this is 
why it fell into obsolescence – the instrument simply didn’t fit with most 
other 18th-century instruments. In fact, maybe it only survived as long as it 
did because of its magical sonic and visual qualities.

 * Clare Salaman plays the tromba marina at Spitalfields Music’s winter 
festival in London on 8 December 
<https://www.spitalfieldsmusic.org.uk/events/sound-house/> as part of Sound 
House by the Society of Strange and Ancient Instruments.Sound House tours 
throughout 2017 
<http://www.strangeandancientinstruments.com/page7/page68/index.html>. 
 