
Donald Trump is not what he seems. The supposed master of media manipulation 
stumbled so often athis first press conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/donald-trump-media-cnn-buzzfeed-intelligence-agencies>
, it is hard to recall why anyone thought the TV star was good at this stuff in 
the first place.

Donald Trump lashes out at media and intelligence agencies over Russia claims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/donald-trump-media-cnn-buzzfeed-intelligence-agencies>
If the potentially explosive story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/10/fbi-chief-given-dossier-by-john-mccain-alleging-secret-trump-russia-contacts>
 embroiling him weren’t so salacious, you might say this is a case of the 
emperor’s new clothes. Instead, it’s safe to say the Trump presidency is 
already in shambles. And it has yet to reach its official start.


For a showman who promised to restore the Reagan era – and even ripped off 
Reagan’s slogan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/how-did-donald-trump-win-analysis>
 – this is just one of the most surprising revelations of the past few days.


Reagan and his advisers knew how to project a sunny image that kept the 
presidency separate from whatever the pesky media wanted to focus on, such as 
high unemployment or secret gun-running to enemy states.


Judging from Wednesday’s trainwreck press conference – the first since July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/31/donald-trump-press-pool-mar-a-lago-new-years-eve>
 – Trump and his handlers have no self-discipline and no strategy to deal with 
the Russian crisis that has been simmering for the best part of the past year.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdonald-trump-press-conference-president-elect-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20attacks%20media%20and%20intelligence%20community%20in%20press%20conference%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdonald-trump-press-conference-president-elect-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20attacks%20media%20and%20intelligence%20community%20in%20press%20conference%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdonald-trump-press-conference-president-elect-video&media=>
Trump attacks media and intelligence community in press conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/11/donald-trump-press-conference-president-elect-video>
They also have no sense of irony or, apparently, reality. The press conference 
opened with Sean Spicer, the incoming press secretary, condemning the media 
coverage of Trump’s compromised relationship withRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> as “frankly outrageous and highly 
irresponsible”.


It seems churlish to have to recall this tweet 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/781788223055994880> from Trump in 
the closing phase of the recent election: “Did Crooked Hillary help disgusting 
(check out sex tape and past) Alicia M become a US citizen so she could use her 
in the debate?”

This kind of thing makes it hard for the new White House to pass the laugh 
test, never mind the smell test. It’s heartwarming to know that the 
president-elect is so concerned about how fake news can destroy real people. If 
only he had the self-awareness and self-discipline to live by his own words.


Trump's conflicts of interest: a visual guide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2016/dec/01/donald-trump-business-interests-conflicts>
In any crisis you generally try to deflect attention from your own misconduct. 
Instead, Team Trump seems happy to shine a bright light on its own monumental 
mistakes.


That included the wonderful personal testimony from the incoming 
vice-president, Mike Pence, who introduced his boss by assuring us that he was 
full of what he called “energy”. Perhaps Pence has been spending too much time 
with someone who liked to criticize his primary opponents for having low energy.


Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> is full of many 
things, but his energy levels are neither relevant nor particularly reassuring 
at this point.


Besides, if you need your vice-president to attest to your character, you’re 
such damaged goods that your executive position is already in jeopardy.


Pence’s introduction recalled 
<https://partners.nytimes.com/library/politics/camp/030400wh-dem-gore2.html> Al 
Gore’s sad pep rally on the south lawn of the White House defending Bill 
Clinton as “one of our greatest presidents” in the late desperate stages of the 
Monica Lewinsky scandal.

In many ways, Trump has snowballed all the Clinton scandals into one 
shock-and-awe transition. He has somehow combined all the anti-Clinton 
accusations of foreign influence and financial irregularity in the 1996 
re-election, with the dubious personal morality of the Lewinsky affair and the 
never-ending tendency towards cronyism. Only it took the Clintons decades to 
accrue these kinds of entanglements.


We could compare the relative importance of being Putin’s poodle versus sex 
with an intern, but what’s the point? After all, Trump can make the case better 
than any of us.


Without any sense of shame or patriotism, the president-elect celebrated the 
Russian hacking of the DNC and all those leaked emails. He even bragged about 
his closeness to the Russian president before claiming – somehow – that Hillary 
Clinton was the real poodle.


If this is Trump’s playbook for crisis management, his political opponents 
should sit back and enjoy the show.

“If Putin likes Donald Trump, guess what folks, that is called an asset, not a 
liability,” Trump said. “Do you honestly believe that Hillary would be tougher 
on Putin than me? Give me a break.”

Yes, Mr President-elect. The intelligence reports are indeed calling you an 
asset in the context of Russia. You may keep using that word but,as in the 
Princess Bride <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G2y8Sx4B2Sk>, I do not think it 
means what you think it means.

Trump will never learn from his mistakes. Suspecting the recent Russia 
revelations are the work of the intelligence agencies, Trump continues to wage 
war on his own spies. He could offer no proof of such a betrayal but continued 
to trash the CIA in public all the same.

This kind of struggle does not end well for sitting presidents, as Richard 
Nixon discovered. Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein’s biggest source, known as 
Deep Throat, was in fact the deputy director of the FBI.

You might think that the main purpose of Trump’s press conference was to 
squash the Russia dossier news. But no – that was just the first few minutes of 
the affair.

After a rambling introduction about carmakers, veterans affairs and his 
inaugural celebrations, Trump finally arrived at his desired topic of the day: 
the non-resolution of the conflicts of interest that will embroil his 
presidency from now until he leaves the Oval Office.

 A table stacked with yellow envelopes was supposed to represent all the 
documents Trump signed to disentangle his business affairs from his presidency, 
by passing management control of the Trump Organization to his sons.

Rather like a suitcase supposedly full of cash, it was hard to tell if any of 
the documents were real without, you know, releasing them to the press like his 
tax returns. Instead, we were forced to listen to his personal attorney 
assuring us there was a wall being built between the presidency and the Trump 
Organization.

That wall is about as solid as Trump’s other proposed wall on the southern 
border, given that there is no divestment. Why not? As the Trump attorney 
explained, a fire sale of Trump assets would be unfair to the president-elect 
and it was impossible to find an independent trustee competent enough to do so 
anyway.

Oh yes, and such a divestment would involve a lot of third-party debt, despite 
Trump’s claims that he has no debt.

 The more details that emerge from Team Trump, the worse Trump looks. Of 
course the Russian dossier couldn’t be true, said the president-elect: “I’m 
also very much a germophobe, by the way.”

If this is Trump’s playbook for crisis management, his political opponents 
should sit back and enjoy the show. Like a dog that returns to his vomit, this 
president-elect just can’t help himself. Let the follies begin.
 