
Donald Trump’s national security adviser has been in regular contact with 
Russia’s ambassador to the US, it emerged on Friday, as the controversy around 
Trump’s ties toRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> showed no 
signs of abating.

The White House is aware of phone calls between retired lieutenant-general 
Michael Flynn and ambassador Sergey Kislyak, a senior US official told the 
Associated Press.

It is not clear how the current administration learned of the contacts, 
although the AP noted that US monitoring of Russian officials’ communication 
within America is known to be common.

Russia dossier: what happens next – and could Donald Trump be impeached?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/12/donald-trump-russia-dossier-what-happens-next>
The disclosure came after a week dominated by the release of a dossier, 
prepared by 
<https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/12/world/europe/christopher-steele-trump-russia-dossier.html>
 a former British intelligence officer, alleging that Russia collected 
compromising information about Trump and that there had been secret 
communications between them. The president-elect fired off a fresh round of 
tweets about the Russian connection that continues to overshadow the buildup to 
his inauguration a week from now.


Flynn’s contacts with Kislyak reportedly included several calls on 29 
December, the day on which Barack Obamaannounced the expulsion 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/obama-administration-announces-measures-to-punish-russia-for-2016-election-interference/2016/12/29/311db9d6-cdde-11e6-a87f-b917067331bb_story.html?utm_term=.512c117393be>
 of 35 Russian officials, as well as other measures in retaliation for Russian 
interference in the election. The official said Flynn and Kislyak have also 
been in contact at other times, according to the AP.

Sean Spicer, spokesman for the Trump transition, said Flynn and Kislyak spoke 
on the phone around the time of the sanctions announcement, although he claimed 
the conversation happened a day earlier, on 28 December.

“The call centred around the logistics of setting up a call with the president 
of Russia and the president-elect after he was sworn in, and they exchanged 
logistical information on how to initiate and schedule that call,” Spicer told 
reporters on Friday. “That was it, plain and simple.”

The call followed text message exchanges initiated by Flynn on Christmas Day, 
in which he wished the ambassador a merry Christmas and said he looked forward 
to “touching base with you and working with you”, Spicer added.

Flynn’s contacts with Kislyak, who has served as Russia’s ambassador since 
2008, were first reported byWashington Post columnist David Ignatius. 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/why-did-obama-dawdle-on-russias-hacking/2017/01/12/75f878a0-d90c-11e6-9a36-1d296534b31e_story.html?utm_term=.1ee6cebab15b>
 “What did Flynn say, and did it undercut the US sanctions?” he wrote.

Asked if the administration was bothered by the reports, John Earnest, the 
White House press secretary, said: “I’ve read some of these reports and I think 
to answer your question as bluntly as I can: depends on what he said. I know 
that some members of the president-elect’s transition team have tried to 
describe those conversations. Obviously I have zero insight into what may have 
been communicated back and forth.

“So I’d refer you to General Flynn himself or spokespeople for the transition 
who may be able to provide additional insight into the nature of those 
conversations and why those conversations were initiated.”

Asked about the report on MSNBC, Democratic senator Al Franken said: “I’m 
concerned with all of this, of course. This was a very big part of what 
happened in this election. This is unprecedented, this kind of foreign 
interference, and the Trump team’s relationship I think is of import.”

Flynn has previously appeared 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/checkpoint/wp/2016/08/15/trump-adviser-michael-t-flynn-on-his-dinner-with-putin-and-why-russia-today-is-just-like-cnn/?utm_term=.caa1d590d2e3>
 on the Russia Today channel and attended a gala dinner it hosted in Moscow 
along with Putin. He has spoken with other foreign officials since Trump won 
the presidential election last November, as have incoming White House senior 
advisers Steve Bannon and Jared Kushner, Trump’s son-in-law.

The Russian deputy foreign minister, Sergei Ryabkov, said in November that the 
Russian government was in touch with members of Trump’s political team during 
the US election campaign and knew most of his entourage.

Trump has repeatedly called for warmed US relations with Russia. “If Putin 
likesDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, I consider 
that an asset, not a liability, because we have a horrible relationship with 
Russia,” he told a press conference this week.


Donald Trump’s alleged ties with Russia overshadow confirmation hearings
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/12/mike-pompeo-cia-nominee-senate-hearing-trump-russia>
But his nominee for defence secretary, James Mattis, and other cabinet picks 
undergoing Senate confirmation hearings struck a more sceptical note, 
potentially putting them at odds with the new commander-in-chief.

US intelligence heads have said they are still investigating the material 
authored by a former British counter-intelligence official, Christopher Steele, 
originally as opposition research during the presidential election campaign.

As the controversy raged on, Trump hit back on Twitter again. “It now turns 
out that the phony allegations against me were put together by my political 
opponents and a failed spy afraid of being sued …”

He continued: “Totally made up facts by sleazebag political operatives, both 
Democrats and Republicans – FAKE NEWS! Russia says nothing exists. Probably 
released by ‘Intelligence’ even knowing there is no proof, and never will be. 
My people will have a full report on hacking within 90 days!”
 