
The timing could hardly be better. In six months time, the annual festival of 
globalisation takes place inDavos <https://www.theguardian.com/business/davos>, 
the small town in Switzerland where the World Economic Forum holds its annual 
meeting. The helicopters and the limos will bring the bigwigs up from Zurich 
into the high Alps for four days, when they will talk about the need for 
inclusive growth and a capitalism that works for everybody. At the end of the 
week, the choppers and the limos will take them back down the mountain and 
nothing will change.


Next year might be different though. By chance, the Friday of Davos week in 
2017 falls on 20 January, the day when the next US president will be sworn in. 
It could beDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>.

As a businessman, Trump would fit in well at Davos. He is a billionaire who 
likes to cut a deal, andDavos <https://www.theguardian.com/business/davos> is 
full of filthy rich people who hoof it to Switzerland each January not just for 
the skiing and the fondue but to closet themselves in a quiet room well away 
from the TV cameras to do some business.


The economists' guide to choosing between Trump and Clinton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/30/trump-clinton-economy-policies-sanders-supporters>
As a president, though, Davos would have some issues with Trump. The WEF 
priesthood adheres to an orthodox creed: a belief in free markets, open borders 
and liberalised trade. Its dream is to create a tech-savvy, barrier-free, 
global village.

As far as one can tell from his various and often contradictory policy 
statements, Trump is running for office on a completely different ticket. He is 
a throwback to a different era, when the US was protectionist and isolationist, 
which it was for much of its history. It has only been since the end of the 
second world war that it has championed free markets and taken on the role of 
global policeman. No question,Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> would be much more to 
Davos’s taste.

To say Trump’s economic policies are a work in progress is something of an 
understatement. It is not clear how he squares promises of tax cuts three times 
bigger than those offered by George W Bush with his insistence that the US 
national debt is too high. Like Bush and Ronald Reagan, he seems to set great 
store by the idea, popularised by the economistArthur Laffer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/jun/27/laffer-curve-tax-cuts-rich-funny>
, that tax cuts generate higher levels of growth and so pay for themselves. 
This has not, however, worked in the past.

Why even Donald Trump wants to raise the federal minimum wage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/29/donald-trump-federal-minimum-wage-prices-2009-2016>
Trump has also equivocated about the minimum wage. At one time, he said 
setting the rate should be left to individual states. More recently he has 
proposed that he would raise the national minimum wage. As far as Wall Street 
is concerned, Trump has been more like a traditional Republican, saying he 
would repealthe Dodd-Frank Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/19/two-cheers-dodd-frank-act-wall-street-culture-radical-change>
, which sought to curb the excesses of the financial sector. This looks curious 
for someone trying to surf a tidal wave of populist anger against the bankers.

According to the traditional rules of politics, Trump should not have a 
prayer. He is loud and obnoxious. He seems to enjoy insulting large sections of 
the US electorate, women and the Hispanic community in particular. As Russell 
Jones said in a recent note forLlewellyn Consulting 
<http://www.llewellyn-consulting.com/>, his inventory of policy proposals are 
striking for their naivety and incoherence. “It is a litany of simplistic 
ideas, with no guiding principle, little clear direction and no overarching 
notion of how these various initiatives might fit together to deliver 
short-term macro-economic stability, or improved long-term growth potential and 
flexibility.”

The Labour peer, Meghnad Desai, offered a more positive appraisal in an 
analysis for theOMFIF <http://www.omfif.org/> thinktank. If he became 
president, Trump would be the first occupant of the White House since 
Eisenhower not to have held elected office, although Ike did of course 
mastermind the invasion of France in 1944.

Fact checking Trump's Republican convention speech: what was true?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/22/fact-check-donald-trump-republican-convention-speech>
Desai envisages Trump doing what Eisenhower did in the 1950s, with a big 
programme of investment in the country’s old and decaying public 
infrastructure. With interest rates so low, Desai says a capital spending 
programme of 5% of US GDP would raise $900bn (£680bn), draw in private 
investment and go a long way to fulfilling Trump’s goals of boosting growth and 
raising living standards.


So could he really win? You only have to look at the way Clinton has been 
forced to take a tougher line on trade and promise her own infrastructure 
package to receive the answer. Few US political experts gave Trump a prayer of 
securing the Republican nomination when he first announced his run. They take 
him a lot more seriously now, as well they should, because if the opinion polls 
are right he will give Clinton a real run for her money.

Trump’s core economic message is simple. If globalisation is such a great 
idea, why is it that only 15% of the additional growth the US has generated 
since the 1970s has gone to the workers? The other 85% has boosted corporate 
income, which helps to explain why the pressure for free trade deals is coming 
from the boardroom rather than the factory floor.

What’s the problem with protectionism?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/15/whats-the-problem-with-protectionism>
Clearly, there is an element of nostalgia to this, but Trump’s appeal is not 
just about nostalgia. The fact is that the US middle class, which in Britain we 
would call the working class, really did enjoy more rapid increases in living 
standards and a much higher degree of job security three or four decades ago. 
It is also true that the offshoring of production has brought benefits through 
cheaper imports, but these gains tend to seem more nebulous than lost jobs and 
year after year of flat or falling pay.

A quick look at what has been happening to the US economy in recent years 
sheds light on the problem. As in Britain, jobs have been created but 
productivity has been exceptionally weak. One reason is that companies have not 
been investing. Rather executives have been borrowing money cheaply for share 
buyback schemes that boost the value of the equity they hold in their own 
companies. They have gorged themselves at the expense of the widerUS economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/useconomy> and been able to do so because 
organised labour is so weak. There is no chance Trump will be championing new 
rights for unions, but he is the beneficiary of a raw form of populist politics.


Parallels can be drawn with the great recession of 2008 and 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/aug/07/global-financial-crisis-key-stages>
, the buildup to which was a prolonged affair. Asset bubble followed asset 
bubble. Financial crisis followed financial crisis. There were opportunities to 
change course after the peso crisis in Mexico, after the Asian financial crisis 
and after the dotcom bubble collapsed. The warnings were not heeded and the 
disease worked its way from the periphery of the global economy to its American 
core. Politics is following the same pattern. Trump could win.

 