
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> has given his 
first response to Khizr Khan, the father of a Muslim American soldier who died 
to protect his unit. Khan addressed the Democratic national convention this 
week, rebuking Trump as unpatriotic and selfish as he did so.

Fallen Muslim American soldier's father scolds Trump: 'have you even read the 
constitution?'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/29/khizr-khan-democratic-convention-constitution-trump>
In an interview 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/30/opinion/trumps-thunderbolts.html?rref=collection%2Fcolumn%2Fmaureen-dowd&action=click&contentCollection=opinion&region=stream&module=stream_unit&version=latest&contentPlacement=1&pgtype=collection>
 with the New York Times opinion writer Maureen Dowd, Trump’s only comment was: 
“I’d like to hear his wife say something.”

The Republican nominee also gave an interview with ABC 
<http://abcnews.go.com/Politics/donald-trump-father-fallen-soldier-ive-made-lot/story?id=41015051>
, in which he suggested that Hillary Clinton’s speechwriters scripted Khan’s 
speech, which Khan has said he wrote with his wife, Ghazala Khan.

“If you look at his wife, she was standing there,” Trump said. “She had 
nothing to say. She probably, maybe she wasn’t allowed to have anything to say. 
You tell me.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fabcn.ws%2F2aCMdNp&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fabcn.ws%2F2aCMdNp> 
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fabcn.ws%2F2aCMdNp&media=>
 Donald Trump responds to Muslim father’s DNC speech in aninterview with ABC’s 
This Week 
<http://abcnews.go.com/Politics/donald-trump-father-fallen-soldier-ive-made-lot/story?id=41015051>
In a statement released later on Saturday, Trump then praised Mr Khan’s son, 
who was killed serving in Iraq.

“Captain Humayun Khan was a hero to our country and we should honor all who 
have made the ultimate sacrifice to keep our country safe,” the statement said.

On Saturday, Clinton said in a statement: “This is a time for all Americans to 
stand with the Khans, and with all the families whose children have died in 
service to our country.”


 Making no mention of Trump, the former secretary of state said she was moved 
by the way Ghazala Khan spoke about her son, who Clinton said represents “the 
best of America”.

Clinton is on a three-day bus tour through Pennsylvania and Ohio with her 
running mate, Tim Kaine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/23/tim-kaine-vice-president-hillary-clinton-2016-campaign>
. During a stop at a wire product manufacturer in Johnstown, Pennsylvania, she 
told a roomful of union workers that she was sorry for the current state of 
political discourse in America.


“We’re living in a time of really hot politics. People say all kinds of things 
– hateful things, insulting things,” Clinton said. “I’m sorry about that.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Fdonald-trump-muslim-father-khizr-khan-democratic-convention-speech%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F200ba6eb050499d51ef12460eb7171e9cf07b257%2F31_143_4339_2603%2F4339.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20attacks%20Muslim%20father's%20Democratic%20convention%20speech&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Fdonald-trump-muslim-father-khizr-khan-democratic-convention-speech%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20attacks%20Muslim%20father%27s%20Democratic%20convention%20speech&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Fdonald-trump-muslim-father-khizr-khan-democratic-convention-speech%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F200ba6eb050499d51ef12460eb7171e9cf07b257%2F31_143_4339_2603%2F4339.jpg>
 Donald Trump has suggested Clinton speechwriters wrote Khan’s speech. 
Photograph: Evan Vucci/AP 
Later in her remarks, Clinton defended retired four-star Gen John Allen, who 
Trump said “failed” in the fight against Isis.


“Gen Allen is a distinguished marine, a hero and a patriot,” she told the 
crowd. “Donald Trump called him a failed general. Why? Because he does not 
believe Donald Trump should be commander-in-chief. Well, I’d say that proves 
it. Our commander-in-chief shouldn’t insult and deride our generals, retired or 
otherwise.”

On Thursday, Khan stunned a national audience 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/29/khizr-khan-democratic-convention-constitution-trump>
 with a speech directly confronting Trump, who hascalled for a ban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/27/donald-trump-muslim-ban-deny-changing-stance>
 on Muslims entering the US. At the climax of the speech, Khan, a 
Harvard-educated lawyer, pulled a small constitution from his jacket pocket and 
held it above his head.

“Have you even read the United States constitution?” he asked of Trump.


“Have you ever been to Arlington cemetery? Go look at the graves of the brave 
patriots who died defending America – you will see all faiths, genders and 
ethnicities. You have sacrificed nothing and no one.”


Khan also noted that Trump’s proposals, which include a return to torture and 
the killing of families whose relatives are suspected of terrorism, would 
violate basic principles of the constitution. The immigration ban would have 
prevented his family from settling in the US, he said, and his son from joining 
the army.

That was “only half” of the speech, Khan said on Friday night on MSNBC’s The 
Last Word. “The other half is addressed to Senate majority leader Mitch 
McConnell –what a patriot, decent human being, what a leader he is – and then 
Paul Ryan, the speaker of the House.

“But isn’t this the time to repudiate Trump? What he has said, what he has 
threatened to do – this is moral imperative for both leaders to say to him: 
‘Enough.’ You are about to sink the ship of the patriotRepublicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans>.”

On Saturday, a spokeswoman for Ryan’s office said: “The speaker has made clear 
many times that he rejects this idea, and himself has talked about how Muslim 
Americans have made the ultimate sacrifice for this country.”

But neither McConnell and Ryan, despite criticism of Trump’s comments, have 
rescinded their endorsements of him, resulting inan awkward and often tense 
alliance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/26/donald-trump-republican-party-mitch-mcconnell>
. Ryan has called some of his remarks “textbook racism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/07/paul-ryan-donald-trump-textbook-racism>
” and McConnell hassaid he disagrees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/05/donald-trump-muslim-judges-face-the-nation>
 with some of the candidate’s statements.

Khan praised the Republican party even as he warned of the consequences of 
shortsighted politics. “Republicans are as patriotic asDemocrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> are,” he said. “They are half 
of the goodness of this beautiful country. Half of this political process the 
rest of the world watches enviously, learns from it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Fdonald-trump-muslim-father-khizr-khan-democratic-convention-speech%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F416ca339f40b354fb52b3b9dfdb7007d9a77652c%2F267_394_3233_1939%2F3233.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20attacks%20Muslim%20father's%20Democratic%20convention%20speech&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Fdonald-trump-muslim-father-khizr-khan-democratic-convention-speech%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20attacks%20Muslim%20father%27s%20Democratic%20convention%20speech&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Fdonald-trump-muslim-father-khizr-khan-democratic-convention-speech%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F416ca339f40b354fb52b3b9dfdb7007d9a77652c%2F267_394_3233_1939%2F3233.jpg>
 Hillary Clinton has apologised for the ‘hateful’ and ‘insulting’ political 
discourse in the US. Photograph: Aaron P Bernstein/Reuters 
Trump represented a threat to that democracy, Khan said. “If your candidate 
wins, and he governs the way he has campaigned, my country, this country, will 
have constitutional crises that [have] never before [happened] in the history 
of the country.”

“There comes a time in the history of a nation when an ethical, moral stand 
has to be taken, regardless of the political response,” he concluded. “The only 
reason they’re not repudiating his behavior, his threat to our democracy, our 
decency, our foundation is just because of political consequences.”

Ghazala Khan stood at her husband’s side at the convention, and during the 
interview on Friday explained that she could hardly bear the emotions of grief 
that she felt during the tribute for her late son, Humayun, who was 
posthumously awarded a bronze star and purple heart for his heroism in Iraq, 
where he died in 2004.

She said she felt “very nervous, because I cannot see my son’s picture – I 
cannot even come in the room where his pictures are”.

“So when I saw the picture on my back,” she said, referring to the large 
photograph of her son projected over the stage, “I couldn’t take it, and I 
controlled myself at that time. So it is very hard.”

Her husband said he could not have carried out the speech without his wife’s 
help, as “coach” and partner.

Donald Trump and Russia: a web that grows more tangled all the time
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/30/donald-trump-paul-manafort-ukraine-russia-putin-ties>
“I am much weaker than she is in such matters,” he said. “Forty years of 
marriage [have] brought us in a position where we are a strength for one 
another, so her being there was the strength so that I could hold my composure.”

Nonetheless, Khan apologized for his emotions during the interview. “We are 
private, ordinary American citizens,” he said. “My conscience compels me under 
these very difficult circumstances. I am a very composed person. I don’t become 
that emotional in public discourse. But there is so much at stake.”

Capt Humayun Khan was killed by a car bomber 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/national/khizr-khans-loss-a-grieving-father-of-a-soldier-struggles-to-understand/2016/07/28/18e8139a-552d-11e6-bbf5-957ad17b4385_story.html?tid=a_inl>
 in Iraq on 8 June 2004, four months after arriving there and after four years 
of service in the US army. His mother told MSNBC that, before her son left for 
war, she said: “’Don’t become [a] hero for me. Just be my son. Come back as a 
son.’ He came back as a hero.”

Trump insisted to ABC: “I think I’ve made a lot of sacrifices.” He cited his 
“millions of dollars” in donations for veterans, although the businessman was 
found to have donated only after theWashington Post found he gave far less than 
he boasted he had 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2016/05/24/four-months-later-donald-trump-says-he-gave-1-million-to-veterans-group/>
 over several months.
 