
He has only a few weeks left to find a dozen more cabinet secretaries and 
4,000 appointees to staff his White House and the rest of his government.


He is paying out $25m to settle 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/19/us/politics/trump-university.html> claims 
that he defrauded students with a sham university, while facing intense 
pressure to rid himself of business interests that may conflict with the 
country’s.

Five ways Trump flips presidential transition norms upside down
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/18/donald-trump-presidential-transition-norms>
Yet US president-elect Donald Trump made time over the weekend to post a 
series of complaints 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/19/mike-pence-booed-at-hamilton-performance-then-hears-diversity-plea>
 online about the the country’s most acclaimed musical, after its cast dared to 
ask Trump’s administration to “work on behalf of all of us” despite his racist 
rhetoric.

“The cast and producers of Hamilton, which I hear is highly overrated, should 
immediately apologize toMike Pence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/mike-pence> for their terrible behavior,” 
Trump said on Twitter on Sunday morning.

It was his fourth separate condemnation of the Broadway sensation since the 
curtain call of Friday evening’s performance, when a lead actor read a 
statement from the stage to Pence, Trump’s vice-president-elect, who was booed 
by members of the audience as he took his seat.

“We, sir, are the diverse America who are alarmed and anxious that your new 
administration will not protect us,” said Brandon Victor Dixon, who plays 
vice-president Aaron Burr and is one of several black actors in the cast. “But 
we truly hope this show has inspired you to uphold our American values and to 
work on behalf of all of us.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fmike-pence-told-at-hamilton-we-are-anxious-you-will-not-protect-us-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mike%20Pence%20booed%20at%20Hamilton%20musical%3A%20'We%20are%20anxious%20you%20will%20not%20protect%20us'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fmike-pence-told-at-hamilton-we-are-anxious-you-will-not-protect-us-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mike%20Pence%20booed%20at%20Hamilton%20musical%3A%20%27We%20are%20anxious%20you%20will%20not%20protect%20us%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fmike-pence-told-at-hamilton-we-are-anxious-you-will-not-protect-us-video&media=>
Mike Pence booed at Hamilton musical: ‘We are anxious you will not protect us’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/19/mike-pence-told-at-hamilton-we-are-anxious-you-will-not-protect-us-video>
Trump’s decision to lash out, even as his transition team reels from chaotic 
infighting, was widely ridiculed. But some White House veterans said it was a 
deliberate attempt to distract Americans from corporate misdeeds that are 
unprecedented for an incoming president.

“The controversies will divert you from the scandals,” warned David Frum, a 
former speechwriter to president George W Bush.

Dan Pfeiffer, a former senior aide to Barack Obama, said: “If your media 
outlet is focused on Trump vHamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/hamilton> instead of Trump’s $25m fraud 
settlement, you are a sad pawn in Trump’s game.”

Trump has agreed to pay $25m to settle lawsuits from thousands of students who 
alleged they weretricked into paying up to $35,000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/31/donald-trump-university-playbook-real-estate-courses>
 to learn Trump’s “real estate secrets” at Trump University. Had the lawsuit 
continued, attorneys could have forced Trump to become the first sitting 
president to testify in open court.

He has also immediately violated a promise to separate his business activity 
from the presidency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/20/mike-pence-reince-priebus-trump-business-children>
, prompting suggestions that he will violate the US constitution, which bans 
public officials from receiving payments from foreign states, the moment he is 
inaugurated.

Dozens of foreign diplomats were last week invited to a corporate sales pitch 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/capitalbusiness/2016/11/18/9da9c572-ad18-11e6-977a-1030f822fc35_story.html>
 at Trump’s new hotel in Washington DC. He allowed his daughter Ivanka, a 
senior executive in his corporation, to join his meeting with Japanese prime 
minister Shinzo Abe. And hemet Indian business partners in Trump Tower 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/20/us/politics/donald-trump-pauses-transition-work-to-meet-with-indian-business-partners.html>
 between interviewing potential cabinet appointees.

Trump’s remarks on Hamilton did overshadow coverage of his corporate affairs 
in many US media outlets on Sunday. The remarks also featured the type of 
falsehoods that have come to define his public statements since he began his 
campaign for the presidency in June 2015.

He accused the musical’s cast of being “very rude” to Pence, the 
ultra-conservative governor of Indiana, and of harassing him from the stage.

While Pence was booed earlier by other members of the public at Manhattan’s 
Richard Rodgers Theatre, Dixon actually twice urged the crowd not to boo while 
he read his statement, and thanked Pence emphatically for attending the show.

In one of Trump’s four tweets about the show, he mocked Dixon for reading the 
statement from a prepared card. “Couldn’t even memorize lines!” he said. Trump 
subsequently deleted this tweet.

Pence himself played down the commotion when interviewed on Sunday. “I wasn’t 
offended by what was said,” he told Fox News. He praised the show and said he 
and his family enjoyed it.

Addressing the request at the heart of the cast’s statement, Pence said that 
he understood this was “a very anxious time” for people who had opposed Trump, 
and promised he would work on uniting a divided country.

“He is preparing to be the president of all of the people of the United States 
of America,” said Pence.

Lin-Manuel Miranda: the bard behind Broadway's Hamilton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/nov/20/lin-manuel-miranda-musicals-hamilton-broadway-disney-hiphop>
Hamilton, which won 11 Tony awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/13/tony-awards-2016-winners-hamilton-the-humans-broadway>
, a Grammy and a Pulitzer prize, has also received plaudits for its 
multi-racial casting and diverse musical heritage. It was conceived by 
Lin-Manuel Miranda, a Puerto Rican American dramatist.

Miranda supported Hillary Clinton, Trump’s Democratic opponent, and hosted a 
special performance of Hamilton in July to raise money for her campaign. “Are 
you going to vote for the guy who wants to build a wall, or for someone who’s 
building bridges?” he asked.

Previews for a London staging of the show, which is sold out in New York until 
the end of the summer, are expected to begin in October 2017.
 