

Besieged with questions 
<https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/26/us/politics/donald-trump-international-business.html>
 about foreign influence and conflicts of interest, President-elect Donald J 
Trump has insisted that he is free to mingle his private business with the 
nation’s public policy. As Trumpexplained in his press conference on Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/donald-trump-conflicts-of-interest>
: “I have a no-conflict situation because I’m president … it’s a nice thing to 
have.”

Except that this assertion is dead wrong, and none of the reform proposals 
that Trump announced on Wednesday fixes the problem.

It is widely 
<https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/15/us/politics/donald-trump-holdings-conflict-of-interest.html>
 recognized that Trump, by virtue of his ownership stake in the Trump 
Organization, stands to benefit personally from decisions made by governments 
worldwide – while also serving as president and representing America abroad.

This is a stark conflict of interest, and a dangerous state of affairs: 
Trump’s tangled web may lead foreign leaders and US officials to view the 
interests of Trump, the presidency and the Trump Organization as one and the 
same, impeding US policy objectives.

The framers of our constitution recognized this possibility and sought to 
prevent it through the foreign emoluments clause, which prohibits the president 
(among others) from accepting any “present” or “emolument” of “any kind 
whatever” from any “foreign State”. Asmany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/27/donald-trump-conflicts-interest-constitutional-crisis>
legal 
<https://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2016/12/trump-could-be-in-violation-of-the-constitution-his-first-day-in-office/509810/>
experts 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/jurisprudence/2017/01/donald_trump_appears_determined_to_violate_the_constitution_on_day_one.html>
have 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/view/articles/2016-11-21/trump-s-hotel-lodges-a-constitutional-problem>
noted 
<https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/12/gs_121616_emoluments-clause1.pdf>
, Trump’s conflicts place him in direct violation of this rule.

The proper remedy is for Trump to divest himself of ownership interests in the 
Trump Organization and place his assets into a true blind trust.

On Wednesday, however, Trump refused to take those steps, which his lawyer 
cursorily dismissed as impracticable. Instead, Trump announced the following 
plan: he will resign from his positions in the Trump Organization; his two 
adult sons, joined by an executive, will manage the company; no foreign deals 
will be made during his presidency; all new domestic deals will be subjected to 
(unspecified) ethics review and payments to his hotels by foreign governments 
will eventually be donated to the US treasury.

Related: Donald Trump will violate the US constitution on inauguration day | 
Laurence H Tribe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/19/donald-trump-violate-us-constitution-inauguration-day>

This is meant to sound impressive. Indeed, Trump introduced this plan by 
asserting, with a straight face: “I could actually run my business and run 
government at the same time.” Determined to prove his generosity, Trump also 
bragged that, just this past weekend, he declined a $2bn deal in Dubai – as if 
he should be congratulated for taking a break from his presidential transition 
to discuss, and then turn down, a private venture in the Gulf.

But Trump’s new plan falls woefully short 
<http://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2017/01/trump-business-ethics-eisen-painter-tribe-214619>
. His continued ownership interest in the Trump Organization will keep his 
financial welfare tied to the business. And nobody seriously believes that the 
affairs of the company will truly become mysterious to Trump.

To the contrary, he generally will know exactly what assets the company holds 
and how they will be helped or hindered by his actions. Foreign powers, too, 
will act with awareness (or at least suspicion) that benefits conferred on 
Trump enterprises – if not in the form of deals, then in a thousand other forms 
– may elicit favor or wrath from President Trump.

Notably, the Trump Organization simply cannot turn over to the US treasury all 
profit from interactions with foreign powers. For example, consider the 
significant benefit conferred by a foreign state that decides to host a series 
of widely advertised functions at a local Trump hotel, greatly increasing the 
property’s cultural cachet and thus markedly boosting its profit margins and 
those of other properties branded “Trump”.

For these and other reasons, Trump will remain in violation of the emoluments 
clause even if he adheres to this plan. While his lawyer denied that the clause 
applies to “fair value exchanges” – presumably as distinguished from sweetheart 
deals – that conclusion defies common sense.

Related: Trump's trainwreck press conference ushers in a clueless presidency | 
Richard Wolffe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/11/trumps-trainwreck-press-conference-ushers-in-a-clueless-presidency>

Why should an otherwise forbidden foreign payment to the president be allowed, 
butonly if the president gives that foreign government its money’s worth in 
services, advancing interests that may be contrary to our own?

Trump’s promised ethics checks are also far weaker than they appear. 
Critically, we still do not know what standard will be applied to evaluate 
domestic deals and whether the public will be informed about those decisions. 
And it is extremely doubtful that promised bans on discussion between Trump and 
his own children can effectively be enforced – especially given that power, 
business and family have long flowed together for Trump.

In fact, Trump made clear on Wednesday that he plans to return to the Trump 
Organization, and that he cares how it is managed in his absence: “I hope at 
the end of eight years I’ll come back and I’ll say: ‘Oh, you did a good job,’” 
he said. “Otherwise, if they do a bad job, I’ll say: ‘You’re fired.’” 
Statements like these hardly inspire confidence that Trump will divorce himself 
from private motives while in office.

Trump has been honored with the awesome responsibility of the presidency. In 
exchange, the very least he can do is honor that trust bytruly ridding himself 
of private interests, leaving no doubt that he acts only for the greater good 
of the American people.
 