
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> doesn’t 
appreciate the NFL’s “soft” rules on concussion – despite repeated blows to the 
head being linked to serious brain injury.

Tom Brady refuses to answer question on friend Trump's genital grabbing talk
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/12/tom-brady-refuses-locker-room-talk-question-donald-trump>
During a Trump campaign stop in Florida on Wednesday, a woman in the crowd 
fainted. She was treated for heat exhaustion and then returned to the rally. On 
stage, Trump was struck by her toughness, and boasted of how resilient his 
supporters were – tougher, even, thanNFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl>
 players.

“That woman was out cold, and now she’s coming back,” Trump said from the 
podium. “See, we don’t go by these new, and very much softer, NFL rules. 
Concussion … ‘Uh oh, got a little ding on the head? No, no, you can’t play for 
the rest of the season.’ Our people are tough.”

Michael Kaplen, a George Washington University law professor specializing in 
brain injury,told the New York Daily News 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/news/politics/trump-mocks-serious-nfl-concussion-problem-florida-speech-article-1.2828660>
 that Trump’s comments were “demeaning” to the nearly two million Americans who 
sustain such injuries every year.

“Donald Trump, in a matter of seconds, has managed to disparage each and every 
one of these individuals,” Kaplen said. “This just demeans and disparages 
people with brain injuries, and disparages the whole movement of concussion 
awareness, concussion protocol. All concussions are brain injuries with 
potential lifelong consequences. It’s tragic the way a candidate for the 
highest office talks about this devastating injury. A brain injury is not a 
joke.”

Trump’s remarks come at a time of intense pressure on the NFL over player 
safety. Thousands of former football players launched a class-action lawsuit 
against the league, claiming the NFL hid known concussion risks, leading to 
high rates of dementia, depression and even suicides.

The NFL settled out of court in a deal worth a potential $1bn, but some of the 
players have asked the supreme court to block the payout because it does not 
provide adequate compensation for all neurological disorders.
 