
The dramatic, chaotic and enforced U-turn on disability cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/21/stephen-crabb-government-u-turns-disability-cuts-leaves-budget-disarray>
 might suggest to the idle reader that things are getting better for people 
with disabilities: one small cheer, perhaps? Sadly, not true: Iain Duncan Smith 
might have forced his successor,Stephen Crabb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/mar/21/tory-turmoil-cameron-ids-osborne-back-after-ids-resignation-by-backing-compassionate-conservatism-politics-live>
, to do the right thing for once, on the narrow issue of personal independence 
payments (PIP), but that is only a small part of the story. This government, 
for all its boasts about compassion, is doing less for disabled people than any 
government in recent history.

That’s the inescapable conclusion of a new parliamentary select committee 
review into how theEquality <https://www.theguardian.com/society/equality> Act 
is being enforced when it comes to helping those with disabilities. It makes 
bleak reading and led one of the committee, Baroness Jane Campbell, who is 
herself disabled, to ask: “Do we have such low value that it is easy to ignore 
our legislative right to be part of society?”

Forget the gossip about IDS and Osborne. Disability cuts are devastating 
families | Aditya Chakrabortty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/22/sick-man-benefit-hell-suicide-tory-cuts-devastating-families>
Let’s be clear, we are talking here about more than 11 million people who have 
some form of disability 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/disability-facts-and-figures/disability-facts-and-figures>
 and, as we all live longer, that number is increasing. Already, disabled 
people make up just under 20% of our population: a sizeable mass of potential 
voters, you might think. But depressingly, recent changes to equality laws have 
seen disabled people lose out.

To understand the context of all this, we need to look at the history. During 
the 1970s, the Race Relations Act and the Sex Discrimination Act set a legal 
framework to promote equal treatment on the grounds of race and gender.

It took another 20 years for similar laws to be introduced to help disabled 
people, and only after a huge battle. I know, because my late father,Jack Ashley
 <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jack_Ashley%2C_Baron_Ashley_of_Stoke>, first a 
Labour MP then a peer, along with his good friendAlf Morris 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alf_Morris>, were at the forefront of this 
campaign. More than 100,000 people were involved in demonstrating in support of 
this act, and many people in wheelchairs memorably chained themselves to the 
gates of Downing Street before the government of the day would listen.

The pleasures most of us take for granted are still denied to disabled people

The 1995 Disability Discrimination Act 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Disability_Discrimination_Act_1995> made it 
unlawful for employers and suppliers of goods and services to discriminate on 
the grounds of disability, and stipulated that “reasonable adjustments” should 
be made in businesses of more than 20 people. That meant, in essence, that 
ramps should be made available for wheelchair users, that disabled toilets 
should be installed in large buildings, and that rails should be put up where 
necessary to help those with mobility problems. They were not huge, nor costly 
changes, but began to transform lives.

Ten years later, another act 
<http://www.justice.ie/en/JELR/DisabilityAct05Guide.pdf/Files/DisabilityAct05Guide.pdf>
 established a positive duty to have regard to the needs of people with 
disabilities, in other words to be more proactive. So far so good; the laws 
passed have all been excellent. The problem lies in the enforcement of the law, 
and here it’s clear that the government couldn’t really give a damn.

Try standing next to someone in a wheelchair trying to flag down a taxi, and 
watch one cab after another drive past, only to stop 50 yards on to pick 
up someone else. Surely this is discrimination and there must be a law against 
this? Well, there is, but the government is unwilling to enforce the law on the 
carriage of wheelchairs in taxis.

Similarly, a tenant who needs adjustments made to the common parts of a 
building – say a stair lift, for example, for which he is prepared to pay – 
cannot compel the landlord to do this, even though the law is there. It is 
simply not enforced.

More alarmingly, the select committee concludes that the government’s red tape 
challenge 
<http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20150522175321/http://www.redtapechallenge.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/home/index/>
 is being used as a pretext for removing protections for disabled people. Under 
the guise of lifting burdens on business, it imposed burdens on those with 
disabilities by postponing “reasonable adjustments” that make life possible.

The pleasures most of us take for granted are still denied to disabled people. 
Restaurants, pubs and clubs often fail to adapt their entrances to allow 
wheelchair access, or refuse to install disabled toilets. If they don’t comply, 
nothing much happens, but it would be very easy to add a line to the Licensing 
Act, which would make refusing to comply with equality legislation a ground for 
refusing a licence.

Sports grounds, too, should be more accessible to disabled people. The House 
of Lords passed a bill recently to make Premier League football clubs devote a 
small proportion of their vast resources to making the necessary changes to 
their grounds. When, two weeks ago, the bill reached the Commons, the 
government blocked it.

Laws against discrimination are of no use at all if they are not enforced, but 
that requires political will. Not only is the government refusing to enforce 
the law, but it is making it more difficult for individuals to take action. 
Fees for employment tribunals andlegal aid cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/jun/10/legal-aid-fees-to-be-cut-by-875-confirms-ministry-of-justice>
 have meant a sharp reduction in the number of cases being pursued.

For the majority of those who gave evidence to the select committee, the 
joining together of sex, race, age, sexuality, religious and disability 
discrimination issues into one single law – the Equality Act, and one 
commission – has been a disaster for disabled people. They found life was much 
easier when there was a dedicated Disability Discrimination Act and a single 
body to deal with – theDisability 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/disability> Rights Commission. In part 
this is because there is a crucial distinction with disabled people: often they 
need not just equality but different treatment to be able to play a full part 
in society.

Take another look at the disability debate. Who’s missing? | Frances Ryan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/22/disability-debate-disabled>
In recent years the increasing number of “scroungers” stories in the press has 
led to a reduction in sympathy for people with disabilities. The impression is 
given of malingerers in wheelchairs, secretly running marathons at the weekend 
while pocketing a fortune in benefits.

Luckily, the furore over PIP payments has made us realise that most people 
don’t think like that. They are aware that as we age, mobility problems, 
hearing problems, sight problems and indeed mental health problems can hit any 
one of us, or our relatives.

It’s a rare stroke of luck for the disability world that this particular 
government crisis landed where it did. But strokes of luck aren’t enough. We 
need to refire the anger and energy of previous decades to put right what now 
seem gross injustices. Have you noticed, Stephen Crabb?
 