
The world’s biggest travel company, Tui, has warned that UK holidaymakers will 
have to pay higher prices next summer due to the pound’s tumble following the 
Brexit vote.

The group stuck to its full-year profit forecast as it sold more package 
holidays to Spain, Greece and long-haul destinations, offsetting a sharp drop 
in tourism to Turkey and north Africa.

Tui, which owns Thomson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/gallery/2016/jul/12/tui-travel-thomson-skytours-holiday-brochures-phased-out>
 and First Choice, said UK revenues and bookings for this summer were up 6%, 
with “no apparent slowdown in bookings as a result of the EU referendum”.

Pound falls below $1.30 after Brexit vote hits house prices – business live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/aug/11/uk-house-prices-brexit-vote-bond-yields-business-live>
Friedrich Joussen, the chief executive, said: “We haven’t seen a change in 
booking patterns since the referendum.”

However, he noted that sterling had lost 9% of its value against the euro, and 
said if this continued it would push up the cost of holidays next summer. He 
said: “Yes, you will see some price increases but in the last three years you 
didn’t see price increases.”

Joussen noted that 60% of holidays sold in Britain were packages.

Tui has sold 89% of its summer holidays in the UK, beating last year’s 
figures. Long-haul bookings are up 16%,with Mexico, the Dominican Republic and 
Jamaica popular, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/31/tui-travel-reports-strong-uk-demand-despite-terrorism-and-weaker-pound>
 as well as new destinations such as Costa Rica. UK bookings for the winter are 
up more than 20%, mainly to the Caribbean, Mexico, Thailand and Mauritius, as 
well as the Canaries and Cape Verde. Bookings for next summer have also got off 
to a good start.

Tui, based in Hanover, Germany, reported underlying earnings before interest, 
tax and amortisation (EBITA) of €180m (£155m) for its third quarter to 30 June, 
up 1.1%. Sales dropped 5.7% to €4.6bn, as demand dropped following the 
attempted coup and terrorist attacks in Turkey and a spate of other attacks in 
Europe.

Like its rival Thomas Cook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/thomascookgroup>, Tui has switched 
holiday packages from the eastern to the western Mediterranean. Joussen said 
about 2 million customers had altered their travel plans, with bookings to 
Turkey down 40%. Egypt has also suffered while UK tour operators stopped 
offering package holidays to Tunisia for summer 2016.

“When you have a lot of incidents, that affects the industry,” Joussen said. 
“It’s like a rollercoaster, up and down,” pointing to the failed coup attempt 
in Turkey and attacks in Nice, Paris and Brussels. However, he insisted that 
people were still travelling, albeit to other destinations.

He was confident that customer numbers would be up from last year, and that 
Tui was on track to deliver at least 10% growth in underlying EBITA this year. 
Tui launched two cruise ships this summer and opened five hotels, with a 
further cruise ship due to join its UK fleet next summer.

Thomas Cook has been hit more by the slump in travel to Turkey. The company 
lowered its full-year profit forecast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/28/thomas-cook-profit-warning-terror-attacks-turkey-egypt-tunisia>
 last month, when it revealed a £25m pretax loss on operations in the three 
months to June.
 