
Strong demand among British holidaymakers for trips to Spain, Mexico and 
Jamaica has helped the owner of holiday brands Thomson and First Choice to 
compensate for reduced bookings to Turkey and north Africa.

Tui Travel <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tuitravel> said revenues for 
the summer, when it makes all its profit, are up 3% and bookings are up 2%. 
Demand in the UK is strong with revenues up 8% and bookings registering a 9% 
rise, Tui said in a trading statement.

The company said it moved quickly to switch customers to mainland Spain and 
the Spanish islands aftera string of deadly terrorist attacks in Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/19/istanbul-hit-by-deadly-bomb-attack>
, traditionally one of Tui’s most popular destinations. Flights to Sharm 
el-Sheikh have been cancelled since aRussian passenger plane was downed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/01/metrojet-ordered-suspend-all-flights-egypt-air-crash-russia-sinai>
 in October, probably by a bomb, after leaving the Egyptian resort.

Tui said customers are also opting for long-haul trips to Mexico, Dominican 
Republic and Jamaica, and are booking cruises. It has sold 47% of summer 
holidays, in line with last year, beating its rival Thomas Cook, which reported 
a fall in summer bookings last week.

Tui’s chief executive, Friedrich Joussen, said: “We remain pleased with our 
summer 2016 trading performance, with both revenue and bookings ahead of last 
year. The UK continues to demonstrate a strong bookings performance. Demand and 
pricing have remained resilient overall despite the impact of geopolitical 
events.”

The company’s upbeat trading statement suggests there is little sign of 
British customers being put off from travelling abroad by thefall of the pound 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/17/bank-of-england-blames-falling-pound-on-brexit-fears>
 because of concerns about the EU referendum. Low oil prices have put more 
money in the pockets of UK consumers who arespending the extra cash on leisure 
experiences instead of goods on the high street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/24/uk-retail-spending-experiences-biggest-slump-since-1991>
.

Tui said it expected underlying earnings to increase by at least 10% in the 
current financial year. The company is phasing out the Thomson and First Choice 
brands to operate under the Tui name.
 