
Tui, owner of Thomson Holidays, and the travel industry put customers at risk 
by “practically hiding” Foreign Office terrorism warnings on brochures and 
booking forms, a pre-inquest hearing on theSousse attacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/26/tunisia-tourist-hotel-reportedly-attacked>
 in Tunisia has heard.

Lawyers representing the families of 16 British citizens killed in the 
atrocity in June last year alleged at the Royal Courts of Justice that Tui did 
not pass on Foreign Office advice to customers before the attack warning of a 
“high threat from terrorism, including kidnapping. Attacks could be 
indiscriminate including places visited by foreigners.”

 The personal injury law firm Irwin Mitchell alleged Tui was still encouraging 
customers to holiday in Sousse this year, with up to 40% reductions despite the 
Foreign Office advising against all but essential travel.

 The gun attack on 26 June 2015 by Seifeddine Rezgui at the Riu Imperial 
Marhaba hotel and the adjoining beach at the Port El Kantaoui resort left 38 
people dead, including 30 Britons. Many more suffered gunshot wounds and other 
serious injuries.

The attack came less than two years after a suicide bomb attack in Sousse and 
three months after aterrorist attack at the Bardo museum in Tunis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2015/mar/18/terror-attack-tunisia-bardo-museum-live-updates>
 that resulted in the death of 20 foreign tourists.

 Andrew Ritchie QC, representing the families – most of whom were in court – 
alleged Tui adopted a “three-limbed approach” that included: “practically 
hiding and keeping out of the limelight” Foreign Office warnings about 
terrorism in Tunisia; selling customers travel insurance that excluded 
cancellation cover caused by terrorism risks; and, before the Sousse attacks, 
discouraging cancellation by penalising customers up to the full cost of their 
booked holidays if they chose to cancel as a result of learning of terrorist 
activities or risks.

 Howard Stevens QC, on behalf of Tui, told the hearing that the allegations 
fell into a “contentious area” and were disputed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fsousse-attacks-hearing-tui-hid-foreign-office-terrorism-advice-customers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c14aefc241d6ac6e82578f1ed078685d222ffff%2F0_120_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tui%20hid%20terrorism%20advice%20from%20customers%2C%20Sousse%20attacks%20hearing%20told&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fsousse-attacks-hearing-tui-hid-foreign-office-terrorism-advice-customers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tui%20hid%20terrorism%20advice%20from%20customers%2C%20Sousse%20attacks%20hearing%20told&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fsousse-attacks-hearing-tui-hid-foreign-office-terrorism-advice-customers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c14aefc241d6ac6e82578f1ed078685d222ffff%2F0_120_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 A memorial last July at the scene of the attack in Sousse. Photograph: Chedly 
Ben Ibrahim/Demotix/Corbis 
 Judge Nicholas Loraine-Smith, the coroner, refined the scope of the full 
inquest, scheduled for 26 January 2017. He said it would cover security 
arrangements at the beach and hotel immediately before the Bardo museum attack 
and any changes following that assault.

Loraine-Smith said the inquest would also take in the preparations by the 
gunman and potentially others behind the hotel shootings, the emergency 
response by the authorities and the hotel, forensic evidence and the adequacy 
of advice from the Foreign Office and travel companies.

Suzanne Richards, from Wednesbury in the West Midlands, who lost her son, 
brother and father in the Sousse attack last year, said: “We were left 
distraught and heartbroken following the tragic events inTunisia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/tunisia> and I think it is likely we will 
never fully come to terms with what happened.

“We just hope the inquest process can shed some light on exactly what happened 
so that my family and all the grieving families can begin to understand how 
their loved ones died and whether more could have been done to protect them. 
Nothing can turn back the clock but it is important to us to find out if any 
lessons can be learned to try to prevent similar heartbreaking devastation in 
future.”

The court heard how the Metropolitan police are building a 3D model of the 
attack site that would allow families to follow a reconstruction. The Met said 
it continued to receive material from Judge Lazhar Akremi, who is leading the 
investigation in Tunisia.

Lawyers advising the coroner said the Met held copies of data from 
approximately 40 electronic devices, including computers and mobile phones, 
amounting to 4.6 terabytes of data. It would take five full-time officers and 
about six months to view the material and many years to translate it, so 
officers would have to take a “proportionate” approach, the court heard.

The hearing on Tuesday was the second pre-inquest review, with two more 
scheduled before the full inquest.
 