
A policeman has been shot dead by two attackers on a motorbike on the 
outskirts of Sousse, the Tunisian coastal city where a jihadi gunman killed 38 
tourists in June. Three officers were targeted in the shooting, one of whom was 
hit and later died, according to the Tunisian interior ministry.


The officers are believed to have been shot at with a rifle while they were 
waiting for transportation to the nearby town of Kairouan from the low-income 
neighbourhood of Hay Zohour.

Rafik Chelly, secretary of state for national security, said: “Unknown 
assailants fired on three policemen on a road. One of them was hit and died in 
hospital.” He added that an investigation was under way but was not able to 
clarify if the attack was the work of jihadi. An interior ministry spokesman 
said the two other policemen were unharmed, contrary to an earlier report from 
Wataniya-1 television.

The attack comes less than two months after a gunman killed 30 Britons and 
eight other foreign tourists at the Mediterranean resort of Port El Kantaoui in 
Sousse, an attack for which the Islamic State jihadi group claimed 
responsibility.

Counter-terrorism officers from Scotland Yard said earlier this month they had 
linked that attack by Seifeddine Rezgui withthe March attack on the Bardo museum
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2015/mar/18/terror-attack-tunisia-bardo-museum-live-updates>
 in the country’s capital, in which 21 tourists and a policeman were killed. 
Commander Richard Walton, head of Scotland Yark’s counter-terrorism command, 
said: “We are now linking evidentially the Bardo museum investigation inTunisia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/tunisia>, that attack, with the Sousse 
investigation. We have written to the coroner advising him of the connection 
between the two.”

Survivors reveal heroism of Sousse hotel staff as Tunisia attack unfolded
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/27/tunisia-attack-survivors-reveal-heroism-hotel-staff>
Tunisian authorities have arrested 159 people in relation to the 26 June 
shooting, with 15 charged with terrorism-related offences. The Tunisian 
president, Beji Caid Essebsi,decreed a state of emergency in the country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/08/state-of-emergency-tunisia-fears-further-terrorist-attacks>
 after the incident, with Tunisia’s prime minister, Habib Essid, telling 
parliament: “We are engaged in a ferocious war against terrorism to protect 
lives and property, defend the republican regimes. We would not have felt 
obliged to decree the state of emergency if we were not convinced that our 
country was facing numerous terrorist plans to destabilise the country.”

Since its 2011 revolution, Tunisia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/tunisia> 
has faced an upsurge in jihadiviolence that has cost the lives of dozens of 
soldiers and police. As many as 3,000 Tunisians are feared to have gone to 
Iraq, Syria and Libya to fight with militant groups, raising fears of returning 
jihadis plotting attacks on home soil.
 