
The first cruise ship to visit Tunisia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/tunisia> since 59 tourists were killed in 
two terrorist attacks last year docked this week in La Goulette, the port of 
the capital, Tunis.

The arrival of MS Europa has boosted hopes for a revival of the country’s 
tourism industry, which nosedived following thedeadly beach attack in the 
resort of Sousse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/26/tunisia-resort-gun-attack-britons-believed-to-be-caught-up-in-incident>
 in June 2015 in which 38 holidaymakers died, and another attack in March 2015 
when21 tourists were killed by gunmen at the city’s Bardo museum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/18/eight-people-killed-in-attack-on-tunisia-bardo-museum>
, one of the country’s main draws for foreign visitors.


The ship, carrying more than 300 passengers, mostly Germans, was greeted on 
Thursday by musicians, dancers, camels and Tunisia’s minister for tourism, 
Selma Elloumi Rekik. Local traders presented disembarking holidaymakers with 
garlands of jasmine.


Security was tight for the visit, with armed police and soldiers visible 
around the city’s medina, a Unesco-listed world heritage site, and other 
tourist attractions.


Tunis was a regular stop on the Mediterranean cruise schedule until the 2011 
revolution, which sparked the wave of uprisings across the Middle East known as 
the Arab spring. Last year’s attacks, which Islamic State said it carried out, 
were a further blow for the struggling sector.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Ftunisia-welcomes-first-cruise-ship-since-2015-terror-attacks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd23e766b974dfe90004c29a581b2ffe12020df8%2F0_274_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tunisia%20welcomes%20first%20cruise%20ship%20since%20last%20year's%20terror%20attacks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Ftunisia-welcomes-first-cruise-ship-since-2015-terror-attacks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tunisia%20welcomes%20first%20cruise%20ship%20since%20last%20year%27s%20terror%20attacks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Ftunisia-welcomes-first-cruise-ship-since-2015-terror-attacks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd23e766b974dfe90004c29a581b2ffe12020df8%2F0_274_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 A welcome party including musicians and dancers greeted the tourists at the 
cruise liner terminal. Photograph: Mohamed Messara/EPA 
Before 2011, the tourism industry contributed 7% of Tunisia’s GDP and directly 
employed 400,000 people. Dozens of beach resorts have closed since the Sousse 
attack after European countries warned citizens to stay away. Tour operators 
and charter airlines struck the north African country off their destination 
lists.


The British Foreign Office still advises 
<https://www.gov.uk/foreign-travel-advice/tunisia> against all but essential 
travel, saying the “threat from terrorism in Tunisia is high. Further attacks 
remain highly likely, including against foreigners.”


Malek Ghanemi, the head of La Goulette’s cruise liner terminal, told Agence 
France-Presse: “The arrival of the liner Europa does not in itself signal the 
resumption of cruise liner activities in Tunisia. But it’s very important 
because it sends out a positive and reassuring message.”


Some politicians have argued that Tunisia needs to develop a new tourism 
strategy, targeting wealthy visitors rather than offering cheap, resort-based 
holidays.


A cruise operator registered in Switzerland is planning a stopover in Tunis in 
January, according to the tourism ministry.

 