
At least 20 people have been killed in Tunisia after two gunmen stormed the 
Bardo National Museum – one of the country’sleading tourist attractions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/mar/18/tunisia-tunis-besieged-bardo-museum-site-of-ancient-treasures>
 in the capital, Tunis – sparking a three-hour siege and hostage situation.

Tunisia’s prime minister, Habib Essid, said on Wednesday that 17 of the dead 
were foreigners, five from Japan, four from Italy, two from Colombia, two from 
Spain, and one each from Australia, Poland and France. The nationality of one 
was not released after an attack he described as a cowardly assault targeting 
the economy. He said police were searching for two or three of the attackers 
who remained at large.

Essid said two Tunisian nationals also were killed by the militants. At least 
44 people were wounded, including 13 Italians, seven French, four Japanese, two 
South Africans, one Pole, one Russian and six Tunisians. He did not provide any 
information regarding the nationalities of the other wounded.

Two Britons were “caught up in” the shootings, the UK Foreign Office said. 

“I want the people of Tunisia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/tunisia> to 
understand firstly and lastly that we are in a war with terror, and these 
savage minority groups will not frighten us,” said newly elected president Beji 
Caid Essebsi in an evening address to the nation. “The fight against them will 
continue until they are exterminated.”

Tunisia's clear and present danger
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/18/tunisias-clear-and-present-danger>
Three hours after the attack started at about midday local time (1100 GMT), an 
interior ministry spokesman said two gunmen had been killed, as well as one 
security officer, and that all hostages had been freed.

Poland’s foreign ministry said that three Poles were among the six wounded. 
Spain’s foreign minister, José Manuel García-Margallo, said two Spaniards died 
in the attack. He told El País that they were a retired couple from Catalonia 
who had arrived in Tunis on a cruise. About 90 Spaniards from two cruises were 
in Tunis on Wednesday.

The first Italian victim to be named was Francesco Caldara, a 64-year-old 
pensioner from the northern Italian city of Novara, according to La Stampa. It 
reported that Caldara was killed in a spray of bullets while he sat on a bus 
that had been parked outside the Bardo museum.

 He was visiting Tunis as part of a Costa cruise, which was touring the 
Mediterranean for seven days. His partner, Sonia Reddi, was also wounded in the 
attack and both were taken to hospital, where Caldara died.


Tunis museum attack – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2015/mar/18/tunis-museum-attack-in-pictures>
“Sonia called me at 12:30. She was crying and desperate,” Reddi’s sister Wanda 
told the Italian newspaper Il Venerdì. “She told me that she was injured in her 
arm but that she feared that Francesco was dead. She called back at one o’clock 
and talked to my daughter Milena. She was in shock and said her partner had 
been seriously injured.”

Reddi said the call then ended. The couple had left Italy on Sunday, according 
to Reddi’s family. They were on holiday to celebrate Reddi’s birthday. Their 
next destination was supposed to be Mallorca.


A single muffled detonation signalled the end of the siege, with reports 
filtering through to crowds gathered outside the gates in the bright sunshine 
that the attackers were dead.

White ambulances with lights flashing drove in a slow convoy inside the 
gardens of the palace grounds. Minutes later police pushed open the big iron 
entrance gates, and black armoured vehicles of the special forces – their task 
seemingly complete – came out, inching through the thick crowds outside.

The spectators burst into cheering and applause and a black-clad helmeted 
soldier peering from the turret of one vehicle punched the air with both fists 
in response.


More than 100 European tourists freed at the end of the siege were driven out 
of the museum gates, their faces showing a mixture of anxiety and relief. The 
tourists – men and women, young and old – stared into space, some smiling at 
the crowds. One young woman inside the first bus grinned and waved her hand. 
Dozens of armed police and troops remained inside the museum complex sealed off 
from the city.

We are very sad for these tourists. They visit our country and it is so, so, 
sad to see them die. Our hearts are black

Relief that the siege was over was mixed with dismay among those watching. 
“This is a black day for Tunisia,” said Karim Ben Sa’a, a manager in the 
tourism industry. “We are very sad for these tourists. They visit our country 
and it is so, so, sad to see them die. Our hearts are black.”


Elsewhere in Tunis there was shock and dismay that terrorists had managed to 
launch an attack at the very heart of the capital, at a museum that shares the 
Bardo palace complex with the national parliament. Police set up checkpoints 
and a policeman with a machine gun was posted outside the office of the British 
Council.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmar%2F18%2Feight-people-killed-in-attack-on-tunisia-bardo-museum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8ccfe31d75a2ad5d45c5f67305c9acb995e2a279%2F0_0_2273_1365%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tunis%20museum%20attack%3A%2020%20people%20killed%20after%20hostage%20drama%20at%20tourist%20site&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmar%2F18%2Feight-people-killed-in-attack-on-tunisia-bardo-museum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tunis%20museum%20attack%3A%2020%20people%20killed%20after%20hostage%20drama%20at%20tourist%20site&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmar%2F18%2Feight-people-killed-in-attack-on-tunisia-bardo-museum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8ccfe31d75a2ad5d45c5f67305c9acb995e2a279%2F0_0_2273_1365%2F2000.jpg>
 An image grab taken from the Tunisia 1 TV channel shows people escaping from 
the museum during the attack. Photograph: AFP/Getty Images 
During the hostage crisis, black-clad police snipers were on the rooftops and 
bastions of the ancient Bardo castle, which forms part of the complex housing 
the museum.


A helicopter thundered low overhead making circles over the museum. Several 
hundred people gathered outside the gates of the complex, as the air echoed to 
the sirens of police cars and ambulances.

The attack came a day after Tunisia announced a major seizure of weapons from 
jihadi groups, triggering speculation that the museum attack may have been 
launched in revenge.

In a defiant tweet one MP, Sayida Ounissi, said: “We are not afraid”, adding 
that Tunisia’s parliament had been evacuated.

The attack came days after the death of Ahmed Al-Rouissi 
<http://www.lemonde.fr/libye/article/2015/03/18/un-responsable-tunisien-de-l-etat-islamique-en-libye-tue_4595652_1496980.html>
, a Tunisian also known as Abu Zakariya Al-Tunisi, who led a contingent of 
Islamic State (Isis) fighters in Libya. He was killed in clashes with Libyan 
troops near the town of Sirte, a stronghold of followers of Muammar Gaddafi, 
the late Libyan strongman.

Tunisian commentators speculated there may be a connection between his death 
and Wednesday’s deadly attack, which could badly damage tourism, on which the 
country relies heavily.

Pro-Isis Twitter accounts hailed the attack as “ghazwat Tunis” or the “raid of 
Tunis” (ghazwa is the description given to the early Islamic battles) and have 
cheered on the attackers. A purported Isis video from last December threatened 
attacks on Tunisia.


Last month, Tunisia arrested more than 30 suspected militants – some of whom 
returning from fighting in Syria – who were planning attacks, officials said at 
the time. Interior ministry officials said counter-terrorism forces had 
prevented attacks against vital installations, including the interior ministry 
and civilian buildings in Tunis.

Sayida Ounissi (@SaidaOunissi) 
Nous n'avons pas peur. We are not afraid. مناش خائفين #TnArp 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/TnArp?src=hash> #Bardo 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Bardo?src=hash> #Tounes 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Tounes?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/SaidaOunissi/status/578178982165753856> March 18, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/SaidaOunissi/status/578178982165753856> 
The assault on the museum poses an early and severe challenge for the new 
secular-Islamist coalition cabinet, which took office last month. It already 
faces the problem of a proliferation of armed groups that emerged after the 
2011 uprising that overthrew Zine El Abidine Ben Ali.

Essebsi said measures were being taken to prevent further attacks.

“The authorities have taken all measures to ensure that such things don’t 
happen again,” Essebsi told Agence France-Presse as he visited victims of the 
attack in a Tunis hospital.

Philip Stack, of British risk-analyst Maplecroft, said: “This attack is 
certain to have an effect on the tourism industry which the authorities have 
worked hard to rebuild after the 2011 revolution. The principal targets of 
terrorism in Tunisia in the last couple of years have been the security forces. 
By targeting foreign tourists at a prestigious city centre site, the terrorists 
have changed their tactics and raised the stakes.”


The Bardo killings come amid mounting anxiety that jihadi violence is spilling 
over Tunisia’s border from neighbouringLibya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya>. Troops are deployed on the Libyan 
border to interdict what the authorities believe are terrorist groups bringing 
in men and equipment.

Tunisia has seen the democratic revolution of 2011 bear fruit, celebrating 
trouble-free national elections held in December. But the country has also seen 
thousands of young men head to Syria and Libya to join Isis units, triggering 
fears some will return to mount attacks back home.

Tunisia is a major source of fighters travelling to Syria, with the number of 
Tunisians fighting there estimated at about 3,000. A few hundred have returned 
to Tunisia and many have been tracked down and arrested.
 