
The chairman of the foreign affairs select committee has questioned official 
advice telling British tourists to leaveTunisia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/tunisia> and said he would still go on 
holiday to the country.

The foreign secretary, Philip Hammond, said on Thursday that another terrorist 
attack in Tunisia was highly likely, though there was no evidence of a specific 
plot. His warning came after 38 tourists, including 30 Britons, were shot dead 
on a beach in Sousse last month.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F11%2Ftunisia-tory-mp-and-tourists-question-uk-travel-warning%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34e50990853434c8ecf83349f0273d5e699bb30d%2F692_0_1577_2364%2F1577.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tunisia%3A%20Tory%20MP%20and%20tourists%20question%20UK%20travel%20warning&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F11%2Ftunisia-tory-mp-and-tourists-question-uk-travel-warning%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tunisia%3A%20Tory%20MP%20and%20tourists%20question%20UK%20travel%20warning&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F11%2Ftunisia-tory-mp-and-tourists-question-uk-travel-warning%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34e50990853434c8ecf83349f0273d5e699bb30d%2F692_0_1577_2364%2F1577.jpg>
 Crispin Blunt. Photograph: Anthony Devlin/PA 
Crispin Blunt, the chairman of the foreign affairs select committee and a 
former Conservative minister, said he would question Hammond about the 
decision. “It’s obviously a matter of judgment rather than crystal clear,” he 
told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme on Saturday. “But on the basis of what I 
know, would I be prepared to go myself? Yes.


“The government stood with the people of Tunisia in the immediate wake of the 
gun attack and didn’t immediately change the travel advice when you might have 
expected them to do so.


 “It’s not clear from the detail of Philip’s statement, and it may not be 
possible that he can say more, but this may be an opportunity for the foreign 
affairs select committee to ask him these questions when we are going to have 
him in front of us on 21 July”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Ftunisia-gunman-beach-seifeddine-rezgui-sousse-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F7%2F10%2F1436533048908%2FKP_349438_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tunisia%20gunman%20Seifeddine%20Rezgui%20on%20beach%20with%20Kalashnikov%20%E2%80%93%20new%20video%20footage&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Ftunisia-gunman-beach-seifeddine-rezgui-sousse-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tunisia%20gunman%20Seifeddine%20Rezgui%20on%20beach%20with%20Kalashnikov%20%E2%80%93%20new%20video%20footage&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Ftunisia-gunman-beach-seifeddine-rezgui-sousse-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F7%2F10%2F1436533048908%2FKP_349438_crop_640x360.jpg>
 New footage has emerged of Seifeddine Rezgui walking along the beach with a 
Kalashnikov assault rifle. 
Blunt said the Foreign Office advice put holidaymakers in an impossible 
situation. “No one can get insurance, the major tour operators are forced to 
evacuate their people there, it becomes very difficult for individuals then to 
exercise their own individual judgment.”


On Friday the Irish government followed the UK’s lead by urging its nationals 
to avoid non-essential travel to Tunisia, but other EU countries, including 
France, have simply advised tourists to be vigilant.

Telling British tourists to flee Tunisia rewards terrorism | Simon Jenkins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/10/british-tourists-tunisia-terrorism-philip-hammond>
The Tunisian prime minister, Habib Essid, said he was dismayed by the British 
decision, but would help people to evacuate. “Little by little, we will try to 
convince them, perhaps, to go back on it,” he said.


The row over Hammond’s intervention has sparked anger among many holidaymakers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/10/tunisia-hotel-workers-devastated-britons-fly-home-foreign-office>
 who said they felt safe in the country.


Heidi Barlow, 34, said: “We would actually be happy to stay in the current 
situation because we feel so safe. It’s very quiet. And you can’t imagine that 
anything could happen.


“On every single entrance to the hotels there’s a guard. There’s armed guards 
on the beaches. It’s extremely secure and probably more secure than a lot of 
places you could go at the moment.”


Another woman told Sky News: “They phoned us this morning at 5.55am and said: 
‘You’ve got 10 minutes to pack, be down in the lobby because the coach is 
waiting’.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Ftunisia-tourists-fly-home-from-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F10%2F1436534108413%2FTurkey-tourist-airport-ar-001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=UK%20tourists%20fly%20home%20from%20Tunisia%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Ftunisia-tourists-fly-home-from-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=UK%20tourists%20fly%20home%20from%20Tunisia%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Ftunisia-tourists-fly-home-from-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F10%2F1436534108413%2FTurkey-tourist-airport-ar-001.jpg>
 British tourists fly home from Tunisia 
Amy Robinson, who was on her first holiday with her boyfriend and arrived just 
after the shootings, said she thought the Foreign Office had overreacted.


“The same thing happened in Paris and no one stopped people flying out there. 
The same thing happened in Kuwait. Why are they eliminating Tunisia compared to 
all these other countries? England are on red alert now, same as Tunisia, but 
people are still flying to England.”

Downing Street said it believed the Tunisian authorities had not taken enough 
measures to protect tourists. With foreign visitors concentrated in a small 
number of areas, the British government said the solution was to increase the 
number of guards in tourist destinations and do more to identify potential 
attackers.

The Association of British Travel Agents said it hoped all Britons would be 
able to fly home by the end of Sunday.

Islamic State <https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> has claimed 
responsibility for last month’s shootings in Sousse, but analysts say it may 
have involved other radical groups and that it may be premature to label it 
categorically as an Isis attack.



 