
Political turmoil in South Korea, where President Park Geun-hye is facing 
noisy calls for her impeachment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/20/choi-gate-prosecutors-accuse-south-korean-president-of-collusion>
, comes at a particularly sensitive moment for security in east Asia, where 
North Korea’s menacing nuclear weapons and missile development programmes are 
advancing unchecked.

World leaders to seek pointers from Shinzo Abe meeting with Donald Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/17/world-leaders-to-seek-pointers-from-shinzo-abe-meeting-with-donald-trump>
The rogue regime in Pyongyang led by the youthful dictator, Kim Jong-un, 
conducted another illegal missile test shortly before the US presidential 
election on 8 November.

While reportedly unsuccessful, it was the regime’s fifth ballistic missile 
firing <http://edition.cnn.com/2016/10/19/asia/north-korea-missile-launch-fail/>
in two months, and followed its fifth and biggest nuclear test explosion in 
September. South Korea’s army chiefs responded angrily, indicating they were 
ready to hit back.

“Our military strongly condemns North Korea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/north-korea> for continuously conducting 
illegal provocative acts and are thoroughly prepared for any possibility of 
additional provocation,” an official statement said.

But concern is growing that, at this critical juncture, South Korea’s foremost 
ally is at best distracted, or at worst, may not longer be reliable.

Like their counterparts in Japan, South Korea’s leaders have been un-nerved by 
statements byDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, US 
president-elect, that the two countries should pay more for their own defence.

South Korea <https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-korea> pays about $860m a 
year towards the cost of stationing 28,000 American troops. Under a bilateral 
security treaty, Japan, where 50,000 US personnel are based, pays about $2bn a 
year.

Like some kind of mafia chieftain running a protection racket, Trump appears 
to be demanding money with menaces 
<http://www.japantimes.co.jp/news/2016/05/05/national/politics-diplomacy/trump-urges-japan-pay-maintain-u-s-military-bases/#.WDM1zKKLR-U>
.

Trump also suggested at one point in the presidential campaign that South 
Korea and Japanacquire their own nuclear weapons 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/donald-trump-japan-south-korea-might-need-nuclear-weapons/>
 to deter North Korea. This idea runs directly contrary to years of global 
counter-proliferation efforts. It is also deeply offensive to Japanese people, 
the only victims to date of a nuclear attack.

What Trump may do, in practice, about North Korea is unknown. But the Obama 
administration is not waiting to see. Earlier this month, John Kerry, the US 
secretary of state, pledged to deploy a defensive missile system known as Thaad 
(terminal high altitude area defence) in South Korea “as soon as possible”.

Thaad is designed to shoot down incoming ballistic missiles. Japan is upping 
its game 
<http://www.japantimes.co.jp/news/2016/02/15/national/politics-diplomacy/japan-upgrade-missile-defense-considers-acquiring-three-tier-system/#.WDMju6KLR-U>
, too. Earlier this year Tokyo said it was planning to acquire a wider range of 
ship-borne interceptors, upgrading two of its maritime self-defence force’s six 
Aegis frigates and building two more. It may also deploy the Thaad system.

Unsurprisingly, North Korea has condemned these developments – but so, too, 
has China. It says the anti-missile systems will disturb the regional balance 
of power and could be used to undermine its own defences.Russia has made 
similar objections 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/russia-moves-nuclear-capable-missile-system-toward-polish-border-1475868395>
regarding Nato missile deployments in Poland, and has responded in kind in 
Kaliningrad.

China’s displeasure may stoke wider tensions with the US and its regional 
allies. Washington has been critical of Beijing’s failure to rein in North 
Korea. Although China has supported UN sanctions against Pyongyang and 
condemned its nuclear explosions, it has not applied its unique economic 
leverage to make Kim back off.

Donald Trump to 'withdraw from Trans-Pacific Partnership' on day one
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/21/donald-trump-100-days-plans-video-trans-pacific-partnership-withdraw>
It is likely that Xi Jinping, China’s president, views the North Korean 
conundrum in the broader context of his efforts to thwartObama’s so-called pivot
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/25/obama-failed-asian-pivot-china-ascendant>
to Asia and assert Chinese regional dominance at US expense.

One front in this escalating war for power and influence is the South China 
Sea, where China is building military bases on disputed islands despite a UN 
court ruling that its activities are illegal. Another potential flashpoint is 
Taiwan. Xi is squeezing the island’s newly-elected president whom he suspects 
of pursuing a pro-independence agenda.

China is also challenging Japan is a separate island dispute in the East China 
Sea. Shinzo Abe, Japan’s conservative prime minister who is frequently assailed 
by official Chinese media, last weekbecame the first foreign leader to meet 
Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/18/japan-confidence-trump-president-shinzo-abe>
. Abe wanted to gauge the election victor’s intentions in east Asia. He 
declared afterwards that Trump could be trusted.

But Abe’s verdict will not prevent supporters of moves to “re-interpret” the 
post-war pacifist constitution and expand Japan’s independent defence 
capabilities from using current tensions with China and North Korea, and 
continuing doubts about Trump, to justify accelerated Japanese rearmament.

Shigeru Ishiba, a former defence minister who is tipped as a possible 
successor to Abe, suggested on Monday it was not unreasonable for Trump to want 
Tokyo to do more to render the US-Japan alliance more effective 
<http://hosted.ap.org/dynamic/stories/A/AS_JAPAN_US_MILITARY?SITE=AP&SECTION=HOME&TEMPLATE=DEFAULT&CTIME=2016-11-21-10-00-38>
. “In the future, this structure should change,” he said. In Japan’s cautious 
political parlance, that amounts to a call to arms.
 