
Liam Fox would break the law if he did his job

After he took the role of international trade secretary, Fox boasted that he 
would have “about a dozen free trade deals outside the EU” ready for when 
Britain left. But it is illegal for Britain, as an EU member state, to 
negotiate bilateral trade deals. Fox later quietly backtracked on his promise. 
No one knows what he’s doing with his time at the moment.

Theresa May’s promises on food labelling are straight outta Pyongyang 

In a speech at the Conservative party conference, May promised that Britain 
would now control how it labels food 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/02/brexit-theresa-may-prioritises-immigration-curbs-over-free-movement>
. But these rules have nothing to do with the EU. They come from ageneral code 
at the World Trade Organisation (WTO) 
<https://www.wto.org/english/thewto_e/whatis_e/tif_e/agrm4_e.htm>. For May to 
deliver on this promise, she would have to adopt the North Korean model of 
total isolation. She either didn’t know what she was saying was nonsense, or 
didn’t care.

Eczema sufferers should worry

If you want to sell pharmaceuticals in Europe, they have to have been cleared 
by European regulators. While we’re in the EU, that’s the case for the UK too. 
But what happens after we leave? Will a British regulator take up the slack? A 
fast, hard Brexit of the type being demanded by some Tory MPs would leave a 
window between leaving the EU and setting up our own regulators. During that 
period, drug firms wouldn’t be able to get their products authorised for the UK 
market, so, for a while, there would be no new eczema creams, asthma inhalers 
or any other new treatments available to British patients.

Holidays, equal pay – Brexit threatens these rights. We are fighting to keep 
them | Jason Moyer Lee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/06/holidays-equal-pay-brexit-rights-union-iwgb>
The government is pretending bad news doesn’t exist

Directors of trade bodies – many of them facing economic and regulatory 
disaster – went in to brief David Davis when he was made Brexit secretary. But 
before they got to his office they were taken to one side by civil servants and 
advised to go in saying Brexit was full of “opportunities”. Anyone who didn’t 
tended to be asked to leave after five minutes.

Most people aren’t that fussed about freedom of movement

If there’s one thing everyone accepts the Brexit vote demonstrated, it’s that 
people want to end freedom of movement. Except this isn’t true.Poll after poll 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/dont-control-eu-immigration-at-the-expense-of-losing-single-market-access-poll-brexit-europe-7127626.html>
 taken during and after the campaign found that between 20% and 40% of leave 
voters either support immigration or prioritise the economy over reducing it – 
or just want to remain in the single market.

We need an army of trade negotiators. We barely have a platoon

Or at least we didn’t when we voted to leave Europe. Whitehall is now on a 
massive recruitment drive. We urgently need an army of general trade experts 
and ones with specialist knowledge in areas such as intellectual property law. 
The costs are painfully high. Some are quoting day rates of £3,000 to do 
consultancy work for the UK government. If they are hired full-time, their 
salaries will be lower – probably around the £100,000 mark.

Banks will have a good excuse to sack people 

City bankers don’t have time to sit around waiting to find out what May’s 
Brexit plan is. In order to avoid losing passporting rights in Europe, they 
have to register an office with regulators on the continent – a process that 
could take years. They are therefore likely to make “no regret” decisions, 
meaning they will do things they wanted to do anyway. In this case, that means 
moving back-office administrative staff to locations with cheaper rents and 
lower salaries, such as Warsaw. The less you earn, the more likely you are to 
be affected.

The frontline of Britain’s battle with Europe could move from Brussels to 
Geneva

Brexiters argue that if we don’t get a good deal from the EU, we can fall back 
on WTO rules. They couldn’t be more wrong. The EU is a member of the 
Geneva-based WTO too. If the UK tries to unilaterally separate its trade 
arrangements from the EU without getting its agreement first, Brussels can 
trigger a trade dispute. For Britain to secure a decent relationship with theWTO
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/wto>, it needs to make sure it is on good 
terms with the EU.

There are no rules for what Britain is doing because no one has been stupid 
enough to try it

If Britain does pursue a hard Brexit, things get murky. There are no rules on 
how an existing WTO member leaves a customs union, because no one has ever been 
crazy enough to try it. Lawyers at the organisation are trying to sort out how 
this works and what the process will be.

Britain is going to pretend it’s still in the EU (don’t tell anyone) 

If Britain is to going to ensure stability during its transition from the EU 
to independent membership of the WTO, it will have to replicate all the EU’s 
tariffs (charges on imports and exports). This makes a mockery of everything 
Brexit stands for, of course, but if we changed any tariff, it would trigger an 
avalanche of trade disputes and lobbying operations. If Britain was to raise 
tariffs on ham, for instance, it would trigger protests and formal dispute 
claims from not just European ham producers, but those all over the world.

The UK steel industry could collapse overnight

There’s an EU agreement at the WTO preventing China from dumping cheap steel 
in Europe. Without it, plants such as Port Talbot would collapse as Chinese 
product flooded the market. When Britain leaves the EU, it will claim that it 
is still a signatory to this agreement and the Chinese will object. This 
dispute is likely to last for years. If Britain loses, it will likely lose its 
domestic steel industry.

You can’t just copy and paste EU law 

Ministers want to transfer all EU laws into Britain using the so-called great 
reform bill. The trouble is, they don’t know where to find them. The Equalities 
Act, for instance, is a messy mixture of EU and UK legislation. In every area 
of law, there are bits and pieces of EU directives. Good luck tracking them all 
down.

Article 50 isn’t actually a trade deal

Leaving the EU involves three things: an administrative divorce, the 
untangling of British and EU law, and (probably) a new trade deal. But only the 
first aspect is dealt with in article 50. The rest is up to Europe’s 
discretion. If they want to just talk admin, we can’t do much about it.

British divorcees in Europe may become half-married

If European countries don’t like the way article 50 talks go, they could 
decide to not recognise legal decisions from London. At a snap, British 
divorcees who live in Europe would suddenly find themselves in a state of 
marital limbo – with their home country recognising their divorced status, but 
their adopted country considering them married.

Britain (and its tabloids) could end up demanding a hard border with Ireland

Britain and Ireland enjoy legal protections against EU immigration law which 
allow them to “continue to make arrangements between themselves relating to the 
movement of persons between their territories”. This should prevent Brussels 
imposing a hard border for people in Ireland. But there are no protections 
against tabloid scare stories. After Brexit, we can expect campaigns about 
Polish plumbers crossing into England from Ireland to work. It will be nonsense 
– Polish people could just as easily use tourist visas – but it could be 
politically effective. If a hard border returns toIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>, it will be because of Britain, not 
the EU.

Screwing up trade with Europe = screwing up trade with the world 

Leaving the single market will sever Britain’s relationship with its largest 
trading destination, but the problems don’t end there. Europe also has 
agreements with other major economies such as the US and Japan allowing it to 
transport goods without expensive and slow border checks. If Britain leaves the 
single market, we’ll lose these too. Oops.

What’s good for the burger lover isn’t good for the beef farmer …

A bilateral trade deal with the US would see cheaper burgers in the UK. The 
Americans have lower animal-welfare standards, use growth hormones in their 
meat and have larger farms. This won’t be good news for British farmers, who 
will also be facing sky-high export tariffs and a possible end to subsidies. 
And it won’t be good news for animal rights campaigners. But burger lovers 
might be pleased.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Ftwenty-reasons-brexit-trickier-than-we-thought%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37caebabdbfd2dc45e99572ea6e463622202b13d%2F0_0_4278_2567%2F4278.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Twenty%20reasons%20why%20Brexit%20will%20be%20even%20trickier%20than%20we%20thought&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Ftwenty-reasons-brexit-trickier-than-we-thought%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Twenty%20reasons%20why%20Brexit%20will%20be%20even%20trickier%20than%20we%20thought&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Ftwenty-reasons-brexit-trickier-than-we-thought%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37caebabdbfd2dc45e99572ea6e463622202b13d%2F0_0_4278_2567%2F4278.jpg>
 Looking bad for cows … if not the people who eat them. Photograph: Australian 
Scenics/Getty Images 
… not to mention British vets, who don’t enjoy watching cows being slaughtered 

EU law insists on an independent veterinary presence in abattoirs. The problem 
is that 95% of the vets doing this job in Britain are European – most of them 
from Spain. The problem is one of demand. British vets study for years to cure 
family pets, not watch cows being slaughtered. But Europeans have less of a 
cultural hang-up about that type of thing and are also willing to accept the 
lower wages involved. If Britain doesn’t train up more domestic vets for the 
abattoirs, it won’t be able to sell meat to Europe or properly check it for 
disease.

Our battered fish isn’t actually our battered fish

British fishermen want the UK to prise open the incredibly complex European 
system for allocating national quotas of fish stocks and renegotiate the whole 
thing. That will take a long time and a lot of manpower. If they get it wrong, 
the UK could face problems. The type of white meat we like for fish and chips 
doesn’t actually come from the UK – most of it comes from the seas around 
Norway and Iceland.

Britain may be about to adopt lower US standards on … everything

The Americans have lower consumer standards than Europe on pretty much 
everything, from chemical safety to data protection. A bilateral trade deal 
will see them demand we lower our standards so their products can enter our 
market more freely. Given how desperate we’ll be, we’re likely to comply.

Brexit: What the Hell Happens Now?  
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/brexit-what-the-hell-happens-now-everything-you-need-to-k.html>
 by Ian Dunt (Canbury) is out now
 