
Twickenham may play host to the Bledisloe Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bledisloe-cup> between Australia and New 
Zealand after the Australian Rugby Union admitted it is exploring options to 
take the match abroad while Sydney’s ANZ Stadium undergoes redevelopment.

Twickenham to host Argentina v Australia Rugby Championship clash
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/05/argentina-australia-twickenham-rugby-championship>
With an alternative venue in Sydney unavailable, the ARU is considering taking 
the fixture elsewhere in Australia but the union’s general manager, Rob Clarke, 
confirmed that playing at Twickenham, in what be a money-spinning repeat of the 
2015 Rugby World Cup final, is a viable option.

Last week the ARU announced a loss of A$9.8m (£5.35m) for 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/12/aru-announces-heavy-loss-unveils-blueprint>
 but at the same time outlined a five-year plan for growth and the appeal of 
staging the match at Twickenham, where demand would be high among antipodean 
expats, as well as domestic interest in watching the top two teams in the world 
rankings, is obvious.

“It is a wonderful ground and I think it would be a huge hit. We would be 
open-minded to that if the RFU were interested in having a discussion,” Clarke 
toldAustralia’s Daily Telegraph <http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/sport>. “That 
said, we have to balance that against rewarding our fans here in Australia and 
giving them top-class rugby content. So we wouldn’t make that decision lightly, 
but it is certainly part of the framework.”

Earlier this month the RFU confirmed that Twickenham would host Argentina’s 
‘home’ Rugby Championship match against Australia in October ina rerun of the 
World Cup semi-final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/05/argentina-australia-twickenham-rugby-championship>
 and, given the potential financial boon, the governing body is likely to be 
similarly willing to enter discussions with the ARU.

The ANZ Stadium, built to host the athletics events and the opening and 
closing ceremonies at the Sydney 2000 Olympics, is due to be redeveloped in 
2018 but a move to Twickenham would be unlikely to take place before 2020 as the
Rugby Championship <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rugby-championship> in 
2019 will be truncated due to the World Cup in Japan and the Wallabies host 
only one Bledisloe Cup fixture the year before.

It would not be the first time the Bledisloe Cup has been staged abroad – two 
matches have been played in Hong Kong and one in Tokyo – and while it has 
proved lucrative for the ARU in the past, on each occasion it was an additional 
fixture to the traditional three-match series format.

ARU announces heavy loss, but unveils plan to grow rugby union
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/12/aru-announces-heavy-loss-unveils-blueprint>
Clarke also admitted the ARU is looking into hosting the fixture in New York 
where Saracens and London Irish recently contested the first ever Premiership 
match played on foreign soil. New Zealand are also due to face Ireland at 
Chicago’s Soldier Field in November.

“We are a global game so global opportunities will present themselves,” Clarke 
continued. “Argentina are playing their home game against us at Twickenham in 
the Rugby Championship this year, so there is a precedent there.

“We have to balance that against rewarding our fans here in Australia and 
giving them top-class rugby content. So we wouldn’t make that decision lightly, 
but it is certainly part of the framework.

“Even a city like New York, where there is a strong Australian and New Zealand 
expat presence, have expressed interest in getting more international rugby 
content. It is a consideration for us, certainly.”
 