
Twickenham will stage a Rugby Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rugby-championship> Test match between 
Argentina and Australia later this year.

The tournament organiser, Sanzaar, has confirmed Saturday 8 October as the 
date for a fixture that will make history as the first Rugby Championship match 
to be played outside any of the competing nations – Australia, Argentina, New 
Zealand and South Africa.

Australia’s Adam Ashley-Cooper sees off Argentina with hat-trick
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/25/argentina-australia-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
The game, which counts as a home fixture for Argentina, will conclude this 
year’s competition, which starts on 20 August and also incorporates venues such 
as Sydney, Wellington, Buenos Aires and Brisbane.

It means that Argentina and Australia will be back at Twickenham almost a year 
after they met each other on the same ground in a World Cup semi-final thatthe 
Wallabies won 29-15 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/25/argentina-australia-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
.

The Sanzaar chief executive, Andy Marinos, said: “While we witness the daring 
and exciting brand of rugby played by southern hemisphere teams on a regular 
basis, last year’s Rugby World Cup well and truly showcased that skill and 
flair to the rest of the world.

“Now, we are thrilled to announce that two of our national teams, Argentina 
and Australia, will be returning to the United Kingdom some 12 months later to 
contest what will be a historic chapter of the Rugby Championship.”

Tickets, which start at £45 for adults, will go on general sale later this 
week. TheRugby Football Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rugby-football-union> chief executive, Ian 
Ritchie, added: “We’re delighted to have the Rugby Championship coming to 
Twickenham Stadium this October, the first time that one of its matches has 
been played in England.

“After welcoming so many teams and fans here during the Rugby World Cup, it’s 
fantastic to be able to open our doors again. We were treated to a great match 
between these two teams in the Rugby World Cup and I am sure that it’s set to 
be another high-octane encounter in the autumn.”
 