
Depending on your personal view, Aleppo has now fallen, or been retaken, or 
been liberated. But my interest is not with any political side. It’s with 
victims of state terror, and all the civilians whose lives have been shattered 
by a war that has been raging for more than five years. It is the most cynical 
conflict I have seen in 25 years of war reporting. Both the regime and 
opposition areguilty of war crimes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/syria-russia-war-crimes-inquiry-john-kerry>
, though one much more than the other.

Aleppo’s people are being slaughtered. Did we learn nothing from Srebrenica? | 
Nedžad Avdić
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/13/aleppo-people-slaughtered-srebrenica-genocides-atrocities-syria>
What I’m considering now, from the comfort of my Paris home, is how a city 
falls. I am thinking of people cowering in basements and struggling with 
whether they flee from their city now, or wait. Who is coming to save them, or 
kill them? I know how that scenario goes. I lived throughSarajevo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/apr/03/life-and-death-in-sarajevo> 
during the Bosnia war, and was inGrozny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/sep/30/second-chechen-war-teenagers-diary>
 when it fell to (or was “liberated” by) Russian forces. I remember hiding in 
those basements waiting for the Russian tanks to come into the village, and 
wondering if I would be dead in a few hours.

I am thinking about the civilians – all of those people with whom I sat for 
hours while writing my book, or writing reports for theUN high commissioner for 
refugees <http://www.unhcr.org/uk/> – and what they are doing to survive.

My agonised frustration from watching the fall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/12/syria-assad-forces-close-to-capturing-east-aleppo>
 of Aleppo (or “retaking” it, in the words of the Syrian government) in real 
time was vented in a tweet I wrote: “Today I feel like a failure. Nearly 25 
years reporting war crimes has added up to nothing. We said ‘never again’. What 
happened? #Aleppo”.

I use Twitter every day, but usually by re-posting articles of interest, and 
basically I only read tweets and articles on social media that are written 
about my region of speciality, the Middle East and north Africa. So whenmy tweet
 <https://twitter.com/janinedigi/status/808570013670141952> went viral I 
realised how many people misunderstood the Syrian conflict.

The response was a lesson in public awareness, and the failure of the 
international community – and our leaders – not only to do more to end the war, 
but to communicate this brutal crisis accurately. The war in Syria is not 
simply a war against terrorists –Isis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/12/syrias-ancient-city-palmyra-under-control-of-islamic-state-again-video>
 andal-Nusra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/28/al-qaida-syria-nusra-split-terror-network>
, the al-Qaida franchise in Syria – although this is the narrative the Russian 
Federation and its allies want us to believe. It started as a peaceful 
insurrection in 2011, an uprising in the long chain of theArab spring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/15/arab-spring-badly-wrong-five-years-on-people-power>
, which turned to arms, and then turned into acivil war and a humanitarian 
catastrophe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/14/syria-civil-war-five-years-guardian-reporting>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Faleppo-syria-assad-war-crimes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd142b7797fbda24555c2f31cef3fd72a79ff5d4d%2F0_47_1343_806%2F1343.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Twisted%20narratives%20won%E2%80%99t%20spare%20Aleppo%20a%20moment%20of%20its%20agony%20%7C%20Janine%20di%20Giovanni&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Faleppo-syria-assad-war-crimes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Twisted%20narratives%20won%E2%80%99t%20spare%20Aleppo%20a%20moment%20of%20its%20agony%20%7C%20Janine%20di%20Giovanni&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Faleppo-syria-assad-war-crimes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd142b7797fbda24555c2f31cef3fd72a79ff5d4d%2F0_47_1343_806%2F1343.jpg>
 The US journalist Steven Sotloff in Bahrain. ‘I loathe Isis – they beheaded my 
friend Steve Sotloff, a journalist just doing his job.’ Photograph: Mazen 
Mahdi/EPA 
While many wrote to me to express their horror at the plight of the thousands 
of civilians who aretrapped in Aleppo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/13/mps-to-debate-how-uk-can-help-civilians-trapped-in-aleppo-hellhole>
 and suffering untold horrors, many replied to say I was “terrorist scum”, a 
“terrorist lover” and that “Aleppo is now cleansed”.

One tweeter <https://twitter.com/Partisangirl/status/808643891985403904>, 
called Partisan Girl, wrote: “You started supporting Al Qaeda and regime change 
wars. Abject failure.” So, she thought I supported al-Qaida? And she attributed 
this so-called support to the fact that I wrote about war crimes in Syria, from 
both sides? If my reading of her response is correct, then it has verified for 
me the twisted narrative that has been applied to the crisis.

Another tweeter wrote: “When I served in the US military, al Qaeda was the 
enemy, not the ally of our illegally baked regime change proxies.” Who, I want 
to ask, is backing al-Qaida? Not me, and not civilians who just want to get on 
with their lives and live in peace.

I want to write back to the trolls who are now calling me “terrorist scum” 
that I loathe Isis – they beheaded my friendSteve Sotloff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/02/isis-video-steven-sotloff-beheading>
, a journalist just doing his job, in 2014. I equally loathe al-Nusra. Both 
unleashed untold murderous brutality throughout Syria.

But terrorists are not civilians, as our leaders have led us to believe by 
failing to act because they thought it was too “complicated”.Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> has become a proxy war, but it could 
have been stopped long ago. Now, however, all the countries that have a stake 
in this war are more concerned with their vested interests than with the fate 
of people starving to death or being told: “Surrender or die.”

How Britain and the US decided to abandon Srebrenica to its fate
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/04/how-britain-and-us-abandoned-srebrenica-massacre-1995>
The international community has a lot to answer for. President Obama checked 
out, morally and otherwise, after the2013 Ghouta chemical attacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/16/syrian-chemical-attack-sarin-says-un>
 on rebel-held areas of Damascus – which the UN confirmed was the worst 
chemical weapons attack in 25 years. He ruled out any kind of US-led ground 
invasion because: the war had become too messy; the rise of Isis; his own 
concerns over his domestic optics. He left a void that was filled, too quickly, 
by other world leaders, such as Vladimir Putin.

Except Obama missed the point. It wasn’t just another Middle Eastern war. The 
sorrow of Syria has now spread its web across the region, and into Europe. 
Aside from themillions of refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jul/09/syria-refugees-4-million-people-flee-crisis-deepens>
, the thousands of homes destroyed, the millions of children who are 
uneducated, the millions whose lives were cut in half – and the roll call of 
the dead – you will now have the anger of Muslim people around the world who 
believe Aleppo was left to rot.

The difference with Sarajevo is that my journalist colleagues and I were able 
to make a difference, somehow, on policy (though our warnings aboutSrebrenica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/04/how-britain-and-us-abandoned-srebrenica-massacre-1995>
 went unheeded until it was too late). Throughout this war my sense was that 
Barack Obama and David Cameron (and now Theresa May) were never listening.
 