
Twitter <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> has blocked federally 
funded “domestic spy centers” from using a powerful social media monitoring 
tool after public records revealed that the government had special access to 
users’ information for controversial surveillance efforts.

The American Civil Liberties Union of California discovered 
<http://www.aclunc.org/docs/20160315_dataminr_email_to_jric.pdf> that so-called 
fusion centers, which collect intelligence, had access to monitoring technology 
from Dataminr, ananalytics company 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/09/twitter-surveillance-fbi-cia-privacy-dataminr>
 partially owned by Twitter. The ACLU’s records prompted the companies to
announce <http://www.aclunc.org/docs/20161212_twitter_letter_to_aclu.pdf> that 
Dataminr had terminated access for all fusion centers and would no longer 
provide social media surveillance tools to any local, state or federal 
government entities.

ACLU finds social media sites gave data to company tracking black protesters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/11/aclu-geofeedia-facebook-twitter-instagram-black-lives-matter>
The government centers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/dec/29/fbi-coordinated-crackdown-occupy>
 are partnerships between agencies that work to collect vast amounts of 
information purportedly to analyze “threats”. The spy centers, according to the 
ACLU, target protesters, journalists and others protected by free speech rights 
while alsoracially profiling 
<https://www.aclunc.org/our-work/legal-docket/gill-v-doj-challenge-federal-suspicious-activity-reporting>
 people deemed “suspicious” by law enforcement.

“These are massive hubs for information collection and monitoring and 
surveillance of individuals,” said Nicole Ozer, technology and civil liberties 
policy director at the ACLU ofCalifornia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california>. “The information they collect 
is often about innocent people.”

The revelations about the potential collaboration between the government 
centers and private technology companies are particularly alarming given 
heightened concerns aboutmass surveillance under President-elect Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/17/muslim-americans-donald-trump-hate-crimes-surveillance>
.

Records <http://www.aclunc.org/docs/20160315_dataminr_email_to_jric.pdf> that 
the ACLU obtained uncovered that afusion center 
<https://www.jric.org/?AspxAutoDetectCookieSupport=1> in southern California 
had access to Dataminr’s “geospatial analysis application”, which allowed the 
government to do location-based tracking as well as searches tied to keywords. 
That means the center could use Dataminr to search billions of tweets and 
monitor specific demographics or organizations.

In one email, Dataminr told Los Angeles police that its product could be 
customized to track protests, adding: “Twitter owns part of Dataminr (5%) so 
our access to their data is unmatched – no other company ingests the full 
firehouse of 500 million tweets in real-time … Twitter has been very clear with 
my CEO: ‘Dataminr is the only company with full, unrestricted access.’”

These are massive hubs for information collection … The information they 
collect is often about innocent people
Nicole Ozer, ACLU of California 
A Dataminr brochure 
<http://www.aclunc.org/docs/20161215_dataminr_geospatial_analysis_app_brochure.pdf>
 touted the use of the company’s geospatial analysis application to monitor a 
student demonstration in South Africa by tracking hashtags and keywords.

Although Twitter has since cut off the spy centers’ access, some have argued 
that social media companies should have had stronger protections in place so 
that this kind of partnership and data sharing doesn’t happen in the first 
place.

By giving government agencies access to these tools, Dataminr was also clearly 
violatingTwitter’s policy 
<https://blog.twitter.com/2016/developer-policies-to-protect-people-s-voices-on-twitter>
 prohibiting the use of its data for surveillance, according to the ACLU.

“It’s really even more important now than ever that the companies have strong 
policies in place and that they have the right auditing and enforcement to make 
sure those rules are followed,” Ozer said.

In October, the ACLU obtained government records 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/11/aclu-geofeedia-facebook-twitter-instagram-black-lives-matter>
 revealing that Twitter, Facebook and Instagram had provided users’ data to 
Geofeedia, a software company that aids police surveillance programs and has 
targeted protesters of color. The revelations prompted all three companies to 
remove access to certain data streams.

In the spring, Twitter also blocked US national security agencies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/09/twitter-surveillance-fbi-cia-privacy-dataminr>
, including the FBI and CIA, from buying bulk data on its users from Dataminr.

The announcement on Thursday applies to all 77 fusion centers 
<https://www.dhs.gov/fusion-center-locations-and-contact-information> in the 
US. Ozer said she hoped other companies would follow suit, noting that 
Dataminr’s technology “is probably not the only type of tool that fusion 
centers may have access to. It’s really important for other companies to be 
taking action to protect their users.”

Spokespeople for Twitter and Dataminr pointed to their letter to the ACLU 
<http://www.aclunc.org/docs/20161212_twitter_letter_to_aclu.pdf> this week, 
which noted that Dataminr only received public Twitter data. The letter also 
said Dataminr had “refined” its product for public sectors, focusing on a 
“breaking news alert” that helps first responders learn about events as quickly 
as possible.

“Dataminr is committed to privacy and civil liberties protections,” the 
company said in a statement. “We have worked closely with Twitter to modify our 
product and incorporate feedback that ensures the strongest safeguards are in 
place for people who use Twitter.”
 