
The two largest law enforcement agencies in Kern County, California, labelled 
the deadliest police departments in Americafollowing a Guardian investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/01/the-county-kern-county-deadliest-police-killings>
, will be investigated by state authorities, California attorney general Kamala 
Harris announced on Thursday.


The County: the story of America's deadliest police
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/01/the-county-kern-county-deadliest-police-killings>
The Bakersfield police department and the Kern County sheriff’s office killed 
people at a higher rate than departments in any other county in America during 
2015 and have been criticised for a culture ofviolence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/04/the-county-kern-county-california-deputies-tactics>
,corruption 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/08/the-county-kern-county-california-sexual-assault-secret-payoffs>
 andimpunity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/10/kern-county-california-police-killings-misconduct-district-attorney>
 unearthed by the Guardian.

Harris, the US senator-elect for California 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california> who will step down as attorney 
general at the end of the year, said the decision to open the investigations 
was driven by media reports and community complaints alleging “use of excessive 
force and other serious misconduct”, which her department had been examining 
for over a year.


A source familiar with the investigations said the Guardian reports were 
reviewed before the decision to commence with proceedings was made.

The “patterns and practices” investigations will probe for civil rights 
violations at both department, Harris said in a statement, adding: “Excessive 
use of force and police misconduct erode and undermine the public’s trust in 
our law enforcement agencies.

“These investigations will objectively, impartially and thoroughly examine 
whether the Kern County sheriff’s office or the Bakersfield police department 
engaged in a pattern or practice of excessive force or other civil rights 
violations.”

In 2015, 14 people were killed by law enforcement in Kern County, a 
jurisdiction with a population of just under 875,000. In the same time frame, 
10 people were killed by the New York police department in the five counties of 
New York City, which is populated by nearly 10 times as many people and has 
about 23 times as many law enforcement officers.

The rate of killings has significantly declined in Kern County in 2016. 
Earlier in December, however, a Bakersfield police officer shot deadan unarmed 
73-year-old man suffering from dementia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/13/bakersfield-police-francisco-serna-shooting>
.

That shooting prompted further complaints of violent misconduct 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/13/bakersfield-police-francisco-serna-shooting>
. The Bakersfield police departmenthas requested  
<http://www.latimes.com/local/lanow/la-me-ln-serna-bakersfield-police-fbi-investigation-20161219-story.html>
that the FBI review the incident.

In a series of five extended reports, entitled The County 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/04/the-county-kern-county-california-deputies-tactics>
, the Guardian examined how Kern County and law enforcement agencies reviewed 
fatal encounters involving police, revealing that the vast majority of 
investigators at the district attorney’s office were former police officers 
with the departments they were tasked to investigate.

The series also revealed that the Kern County sheriff’s office offered morally 
dubious cash payments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/08/the-county-kern-county-california-sexual-assault-secret-payoffs>
 to a number of women who had been sexually assaulted by sheriff’s deputies, in 
exchange for their right to sue. In some cases such payments were as low as 
$200.

The County: what happens after police kill someone you love?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2015/dec/11/kern-county-california-victims-police-killings-justice-video>
Bakersfield police chief Lyle Martin said in a statement the department would 
fully cooperate with the review, and planned to meet state officials in January 
to discuss the scope and timing of the investigation.

“The trust and confidence of the public is vital to the credibility and 
effectiveness of the Bakersfield police department,”Martin said 
<http://www.turnto23.com/news/local-news/bakersfield-police-department-releases-statement-on-doj-investigation-into-civil-rights-violations>
.

A spokesman for the Kern County sheriff’s office said it would “fully 
cooperate” with the investigation. The county sheriff, Donny Youngblood, was 
unavailable for comment.


The separate investigations could take up to two years to complete.


“We look forward to working collaboratively with the sheriff’s office and the 
police department,” Harris said, “as well as with the community, to address any 
civil rights violations or other issues that we may find during these 
investigations.”

 