
Britain’s relationship with China remains “golden”, Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> has said, as she opened talks 
aimed at bringing billions of pounds in Chinese investment to the north of 
England.

The prime minister and Philip Hammond, the chancellor, are meeting Ma Kai, one 
of China’s vice-premiers, and other senior Chinese officials. The two-day visit 
by Ma is seen as an opportunity to put UK-Sino relations on an even keel after 
therow over Hinkley Point C 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/08/china-warns-uk-relations-historical-juncture-hinkley-point-liu-xiaoming>
.

Using the “golden era” phrase coined by David Cameron and George Osborne in 
theirattempts to woo the Chinese 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/oct/18/britian-has-made-visionary-choice-to-become-chinas-best-friend-says-xi>
, May said on Thursday: “I am determined that as we leave the European Union, 
we build a truly global Britain that is open for business.

Hammond suggests Trump's protectionism would damage prosperity - Politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/nov/10/may-hails-golden-era-in-relations-with-china-politics-live>
“As we take the next step in this golden era of relations between the UK and 
China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>, I am excited about the 
opportunities for expanding trade and investment between our two countries.”

Hammond will attempt to secure Chinese investment in more than £5bn worth of 
infrastructure and property schemes across the north of England, including 
plans to double the size of theBBC’s MediaCityUK in Salford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/01/salfords-mediacityuk-gets-1bn-expansion>
.

The portfolio is similar to the Northern Powerhouse Investment Pitchbook 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/464356/Northern.pdf>
 Osbornelaunched in September last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/21/george-osborne-uk-should-do-more-business-with-china>
 during a trip to Chengdu, the capital of Sichuan province in China.

It is unclear what Chinese investment followed the then chancellor’s £24bn 
pitch, but at least three of its projects also featured in Hammond’s portfolio 
launched on Thursday.

The 13 projects on offer to the Chinese include plans to build 1,000 homes in 
Liverpool, theUK’s biggest potash mine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/25/australias-richest-woman-gina-rinehart-invests-245m-in-uks-biggest-potash-mine>
 in the North York Moors national park and a regeneration project that promises 
to bring 6,000 jobs to Doncaster.

While Osborne’s pitchbook was heavy on projects in the major northern cities 
of Manchester, Sheffield, Leeds and Newcastle upon Tyne, Hammond will attempt 
to secure investment for other urban areas including Sunderland, Stockport and 
Ellesmere Port.

Steve Tsang, a professor of contemporary Chinese studies at Nottingham 
University, said China’s interest in the northern powerhouse was limited, but 
Ma’s visit was more significant givenDonald Trump’s election in the US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/anti-donald-trump-protests-new-york-chicago-san-francisco>
 on Wednesday.


“I don’t think the Chinese are bothered with the northern powerhouse at all. 
That is a British agenda. They are listening, but no more than that,” he said. 
“They’re interested in making money and will only do it [invest] if they see 
the British proposals being put on the table as offering something for them.

“The visit becomes more useful now because of the US election result. Even 
though the Chinese preferred Trump to win over [Hillary] Clinton, they are also 
aware that Trump is likely to take a more unpredictable and strong position on 
Chinese economic ties, investment and capital flow.

“That being the case, what the UK is proactively engaging with the Chinese on 
– trade, investment and economic cooperation – becomes more attractive.”

Liam Fox <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liamfox>, the international 
trade secretary, confirmed that the government was working with 15 Chinese 
investors on property development and infrastructure projects in the north of 
England, although officials have not given details of the schemes.

“Attracting trade and investment is the foundation of our strong economy, 
helping to create local jobs, build local businesses and contribute to our 
national wealth,” he said.

“These real-time and market-ready projects will build on the successes of the 
northern powerhouse region, which has for centuries been a global hub of 
commerce, science, technology and innovation. Setting out opportunities like 
these show to Chinese investors, and to the world, that the UK remains open for 
business.”
 