
Only a handful of the 1,000 survivors of torture or violence who have arrived 
in Britain under the government’s Syrian vulnerable refugee resettlement 
programme have received specialist help, charities have told MPs.

Tortured Syrian refugees need specialist help | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/19/tortured-syrian-refugees-need-specialist-help>
MPs on the Commons public accounts committee said it was “a stark fact” that 
more than half of the refugees resettled in Britain by the end of June last 
year had suffered torture or violence and it was critical that such people 
received specialist support.

Britain pledged to take 20,000 of the most vulnerable Syrian refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/07/uk-will-accept-up-to-20000-syrian-refugees-david-cameron-confirms>
 from camps in the Middle East by 2020 after David Cameron and Theresa May 
refused to take part in the European Union’s plans to relocate thousands of 
Syrian refugees who had crossed the Mediterranean and reached Europe.

The MPs say in their report, published on Friday, that there are enough 
indicative pledges of support from local authorities around Britain to meet the 
20,000 target but say it is essential these are turned into firm offers of 
resettlement places for the scheme to succeed.

The committee commended the Home Office, local authorities and others for 
their efforts on delivering the scheme: “After a concerted effort to resettle 
1,000 before Christmas 2015, the programme sensibly took a step back in early 
2016 to redesign a more sustainable programme. However, meeting the overall 
target to resettle 20,000 of the most vulnerable Syrian refugees in the UK by 
May 2020remains a significant challenge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/03/uk-unlikely-to-reach-target-of-resettling-20000-syrian-refugees-by-2020>
.”

The MPs have called on the Home Office and the local authorities involved to 
undertake a full review of how torture victims on the scheme are being 
identified and supported.

The committee concluded the review was necessary because “it is not clear that 
survivors of torture are receiving the specialist support and treatment they 
need”.

Scotland welcomes 1,000th Syrian refugee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/01/scotland-celebrates-arrival-of-1000th-syrian-refugee>
They reached this conclusion after being told by Freedom from Torture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/torture>, the only organisation dedicated to 
the treatment of torture survivors in Britain, that “just a handful of Syrians” 
had been referred to them for help and their offers to assist on a bigger scale 
had so far been overlooked.

Lucy Gregg of Freedom from Torture said: “We know that over half of those 
being resettled in the UK as part of this programme are survivors of torture or 
violence. Yet on arriving in this country, there are serious gaps in the 
process of identifying them and making sure they have access to the specialist 
services they desperately need to recover from their traumatic experiences.”

The Home Office told the MPs that it was up to local authorities to make sure 
the relevant support and services were in place and that it could be difficult 
to identify whether refugees were survivors of torture before they arrived in 
Britain because of their concerns about revealing their experiences to a 
stranger.

Meg Hillier, Commons public accounts committee chair, said: “Syrians now make 
up the largest refugee population in the world and the UK is playing its part 
in helping people who are truly desperate. While the programme team was right 
to take a fresh look at the programme last year, more work is needed to make it 
sustainable in the longer term.”



 