
Food prices will rise unless the government ensures EU citizens can work in 
the UK after Brexit, according to industry groups representing the major 
supermarkets and food manufacturers, including the owner of Marmite.

EU workers in food and drink industry need assurance over Brexit | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/08/eu-workers-in-food-and-drink-industry-need-assurance-over-brexit>
The open letter to the government is signed by 30 food and drink industry 
bodies, including the Food and Drink Federation, which represents major 
suppliers, including Marmite maker Unilever and Mr Kipling owner Premier foods; 
the British Retail Consortium, which counts Tesco, Sainsbury’s, Asda and 
Morrisons among its members, and the National Farmers Union.

The letter, published in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/08/eu-workers-in-food-and-drink-industry-need-assurance-over-brexit>
, says: “Workers from the European Union, some of whom are already leaving the 
UK, play a significant role in delivering affordable and high-quality food and 
drink.” It says they provide “an essential reservoir of skilled, semi-skilled 
and unskilled labour.”

Any points-based permit system for immigrants should place the food and drink 
supply chain on a par with financial services and the automotive sector, the 
industry leaders say. “All options should be explored, including a workable 
points-based system for shortage occupations, sector-based and seasonal/guest 
worker schemes and effective transitionary arrangements. If it is not, the UK 
will face less food choice and higher food prices.”

The letter, which is also signed by the heads of the British Beer & Pubs 
Association, the British Growers Association and the British Soft Drinks 
Association, claims that some EU workers have already begun to leave the UK in 
the wake of the Brexit vote which has led to a fall in the value of the pound. 
“The government can address this issue directly. It should offer unambiguous 
reassurance to EU workers throughout our supply chain about their right to 
remain here,” it said.

Employment agencies have warned that the UK’s food industry is facing the 
worst labour shortage for at least 12 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/02/worker-shortages-for-uk-food-industry-at-12-year-low>
.

The Association of Labour Providers (ALP), whose employment agency members 
supply 70% of the temporary labour used by the food and drink industry, 
recently said responses to job ads had slumped by up to 70% as workers from the 
EU – who account for 90% of jobs in the sector – avoid coming to the UK.

The NFU has said farmers have seen a shortfall in EU workers, exacerbated by 
the drop in the pound against the euro, which has diminished the value of the 
money they are sending home.

Nearly 4 million people are employed in growing, harvesting, producing, 
packaging, selling and serving food and drink in the UK, a large proportion of 
whom are EU nationals.

Although food prices continue to fall amid heavy competition between the major 
supermarket chains and fast-growing discounters Aldi and Lidl, rising costs are 
expected to drive up inflation in the coming months.

A string of major food brands have sought increased cost prices from 
supermarkets as the fall in the pound has driven up the cost of importing 
ingredients and other essentials, such as packaging.

Unilever, which also owns Ben & Jerry’s and Dove; Typhoo; Birds Eye and 
Walkers are embroiled in an industry-wide battle over price increases caused by 
the15% drop in the value of the pound against the euro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/03/uk-stocks-rally-as-brexit-fears-fade>
 and 18% against the dollar since the UK voted to leave the European Union.

The lower value of the pound is also expected to increase exports, potentially 
making it harder for UK companies to source home-grown ingredients. For example,
the price of British butter has soared 80% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/15/cost-of-cake-set-to-rise-says-mr-kipling-maker>
, partly because processors have found exporting easier.

Food and drink is the UK’s biggest export, worth £18bn, led by Scotch whisky, 
chocolate, beer and salmon. Despite its relatively low profile, food 
manufacturing is worth more to the UK economy than the automotive and aerospace 
sectors combined.
 