
British companies are lining up to reassure staff and shareholders following 
the market turmoil sparked by the UK’s vote to leave the European Union, 
although SirRichard Branson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/richard-branson> is warning that 
“thousands of jobs” have been put at risk.

The Virgin Group founder said Chinese business partners were already pulling 
investment from the UK after theEU referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>. 

“I met with a group of Chinese businessmen yesterday morning who have invested 
heavily in England and who are now going to stop investing and withdraw 
investments they’ve already made,” he said, adding: “The last two days has been 
absolute pandemonium worldwide in the markets, the pound crashing, the stock 
markets crashing, and we are heading rapidly towards a recession again. It’s 
just too sad, so so sad.”

Sir Richard Branson: Chinese investors quitting UK over Brexit vote - business 
live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/jun/28/brexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live>
However, the engine maker Rolls-Royce, the insurer Legal & General and the 
bailed-out banksRoyal Bank of Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/royalbankofscotlandgroup> and Lloyds 
Banking Group issued reassuring statements.

Rolls-Royce, which wrote to staff in the run-up to the referendum to say it 
wanted to remain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/15/rolls-royce-backs-remain-in-eu-vote>
, said: “Although this is not the outcome the company would have chosen, 
Rolls-Royce remains committed to the United Kingdom where we are headquartered, 
directly employ over 23,000 … workers and where we carry out a significant 
majority of our research and development.”

It said the referendum result would have no immediate impact on Rolls’ 
day-to-day business, while the longer-term impact would “depend upon the 
relationships that are established between the UK, the EU and the rest of the 
world over the coming years”.

Legal & General – which also named the former Treasury mandarin Sir John 
Kingman as it chairman – said long-term trends, such as ageing populations and 
globalisation of asset markets, were “substantially unaffected by the EU 
referendum result”.


The company said it had been planning for a 50-50 probability of a vote for 
the UK to leave, and had removed risks from its portfolios, for example by 
reducing its exposure to European banks’ subordinated debt. As a result, its 
balance sheet had “demonstrated its resilience to market volatility”.

It added: “We have not taken any action as a result of the downgrade of UK 
sovereign debt by Moody’s, Standard & Poor’s and Fitch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/27/property-and-financial-shares-slide-as-referendum-fallout-hits-stock-markets>
 because we had already treated UK sovereign debt as AA-rated in our internal 
model.”

The Shore Capital analyst Eamonn Flanagan said the insurer had issued a 
“pretty robust statement in response to the market turmoil following the Brexit 
vote”.

RBS and Lloyds targeted their staff. Ross McEwan, chief executive of RBS, sent 
a memo to the bank’s 90,000 employees following the turbulence it its share 
price on Monday, when at its worst it was down 25% to levels not seen since the 
financial crisis.

“Despite the noisy fallout from the vote, many of the fundamentals remain 
true. Our view as a bank is that the UK remains a large, well-developed economy 
with good long-term prospects. It’s our home market and our job as a leading 
bank here is to help it succeed,” he said.

A New Zealander, McEwan said: “As someone born outside the UK, I see one of 
this country’s biggest strengths as its openness to the rest of the world and 
the people of it. As a major employer and backer of the economy we have a duty 
to ensure that we reflect that. The diversity of those who make up this bank at 
every level is key to our success. In uncertain times I want to ensure that 
everyone understands that.”

He told staff that RBS had made contingency plans: “Our day one plan worked, 
but of course the result of the vote carries with it a range of unknowns about 
the short, medium and long-term prospects for the UK and its economy,” he said. 
“Added to this we now have a period of political uncertainty.”

Before the vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/12/eu-referendum-uncertainty-could-slow-down-banking-rbs-chief-warns>
, McEwan was one of the first bankers to warn that Brexit would slow down 
banking.

 António Horta-Osório, chief executive of Lloyds, told staff the bank’s 
strategy – to be a UK-focused, low risk retail and commercial bank – remained 
unchanged.

“I know that the referendum result has had an impact on the share price of 
many companies, including ours, but I believe the fundamentals of the group are 
strong and that is a testament to the hard work all of us have done over the 
last few years,” he said.
 