
European plane maker Airbus is to install technology built by British firm 
Inmarsat <https://www.theguardian.com/business/immarsat> that will render the 
black box virtually obsolete and could prevent air disasters.

Inmarsat <https://www.theguardian.com/business/immarsat>, the satellite 
company thathelped Malaysia Airlines pinpoint the likely flight path 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/24/flight-mh370-inmarsat-aaib-analysis>
 of the downed MH370 airliner, said the technology was a “gamechanger” for 
airline safety.

It beams flight information via a satellite to an airline’s control centre 
within seconds, capturing real-time data about what is happening onboard the 
plane.

This is particularly important if an aeroplane crashes into the sea, because 
signals sent by aflight recorder, or black box 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/31/airplane-black-box-flight-recorders-investigators>
, typically stop within weeks as its batteries run down.

This leaves investigators unable to access crucial data about the cause of an 
accident, as in the case ofMH370 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia-airlines-flight-mh370>, whose black 
box has yet to be found.

Inmarsat said the new technology – called SwiftBroadband-Safety (SB-S) and 
dubbed the “black box in the cloud” – could prevent a crash by speeding up 
communication between the cockpit and the ground in the event of a mechanical 
problem or terrorist incident.

Airbus <https://www.theguardian.com/business/airbus> will fit SB-S technology 
in A320 single-aisle planes and A330 wide-body aircraft from 2018 if it gets 
regulatory approval.

British defence firm Cobham <https://www.theguardian.com/business/cobham> was 
selected by Airbus to build the onboard equipment that will be fitted on the 
planes and connected to Inmarsat’s satellite network.

A former pilot, captain Mary McMillan, who is Inmarsat’s head of safety, said 
SB-S technology could not only help identify the cause of accidents but could 
even prevent them.

“This is a gamechanger for safety,” said McMillan, a 30-year veteran of the 
aviation industry with more than 12,000 hours of flight time under her belt. “I 
was flying on 9/11 and the difficulty of getting information back and forth was 
one of the issues of that time.

“There is a limited capability for aircraft to stream data depending on links 
they are using. The difference in being able to send a small amount of data is 
you have to pick and choose what you send.

“The ability to stream large amounts of data will give us an awareness in real 
time of a developing situation about what’s taking place on an aircraft.”

She said the technology could allow staff on the ground to intervene to 
prevent an accident, “whether it’s a response to a mechanical problem or a 
terrorist situation”.

Aircraft are already capable of sending live information, but the data is 
often incomplete and takes longer to send due to slow speeds.

Inmarsat said SB-S was a “paradigm shift” in aviation safety “due to its 
unprecedented speed and capacity, which are several orders of magnitude greater 
than cockpit communications systems in the market today”.

Industry sources said Hawaiian Airlines has already tested the SB-S technology 
and that it has worked well.

Inmarsat was instrumental in determining the flight path of MH370, which 
crashed on 8 March 2014 with 239 on board while flying from Kuala Lumpur to 
Beijing.

The cause of the crash has never been identified, leaving air safety firms, 
pilots and conspiracy theorists to speculate on the events leading up to its 
disappearance.
 