
Britain’s home secretary is being urged by MPs to allow refugees from the 
Yazidi community, a minority Iraqi group persecuted byIslamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis>, to enter the UK under the same rules 
that allow entrance to vulnerable Syrian refugees.


In a letter to Amber Rudd 
<https://gallery.mailchimp.com/cbe8d3ab1c3cb6ca29607bbe2/files/1611_Iraqi_Religious_Minorities_Letter.pdf>
 (pdf), a cross-party group of MPs has said that many Yazidi refugees from Iraq 
satisfy the “vulnerability criteria” of Syrian refugees due to thesexual 
violence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/oct/19/yazidi-survivors-isis-torture-rape-need-support-uk-promised>
 they have experienced. However, their needs are at risk of being forgotten 
amid the humanitarian crisis caused by the military offensive in Mosul, the MPs 
warned.

Yazidi survivors of Isis torture and rape need the support the UK promised | 
Lara Whyte
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/oct/19/yazidi-survivors-isis-torture-rape-need-support-uk-promised>
The UN has condemned the murder, rape, torture and sexual slavery of Yazidis 
in Syria and Iraq, perpetrated by Isis, asgenocide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/16/un-condemns-isis-genocide-against-yazidis-in-iraq-and-syria>
.

The UK’s current vulnerable persons resettlement scheme 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/publications/written-questions-answers-statements/written-statement/Commons/2016-04-21/HCWS687/>
 (VPRS), which allows for 20,000 Syrians from neighbouring countries to enter 
Britain by 2020, “fails to account for the systematic persecution” of Yazidis, 
90% of whom are Iraqi, said MPs from the all-party parliamentary group for 
international freedom of religion or belief.

The letter, which was also sent to Priti Patel, the international development 
secretary, calls for UK government departments to work together to provide 
Yazidi women and girls, who have suffered appalling sexual violence, with 
“adequate psychiatric support”. The letter cites aresettlement scheme in Germany
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/02/germany-opens-doors-yazidi-women-children-northern-iraq-enslaved-isis>
 that has offered specialist care to survivors.

A second letter 
<http://www.parliament.uk/documents/commons-committees/international-development/Chair-to-Home-Sec-Iraqi-minorities.pdf>
 (pdf), sent to Rudd this month by the chairman of the international 
development committee, echoes MPs’ concern over Yazidis. Stephen Twigg 
highlighted the “worrying gap in UK support” to Yazidi and Christian 
communities who, having fled the Iraq conflict, have been unable to access the 
UK’s resettlement programme. Thousands of Yazidis are believed to be living in 
and around UN camps, in Turkey and Greece, according to MPs.

Iraq’s ethnic and religious minorities in Syria and Iraq have been targeted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/aug/03/yazidis-sinjar-iraq-one-year-anniversary-isis>
 by Isissince August 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/07/who-yazidi-isis-iraq-religion-ethnicity-mountains>
. Many thousands have been murdered, maimed, raped or abducted, with women and 
children forced into sexual enslavement.

In his letter, Twigg said the attacks had “left many minority communities on 
the verge of disappearance in Iraq”.

The Christian population, which before 2003 numbered 1.4 million 
<http://www.ohchr.org/en/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=14956&LangID=E>
, is now estimated at 250,000, Twigg said, and women have been exchanged by 
fighters as gifts and repeatedly raped.

Although some Yazidis taken by Isis have been rescued, an estimated 3,600 
people remain missing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/22/we-usually-cry-when-we-watch-the-news-anguish-of-iraqs-yazidi-families>
, mainly women andchildren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/22/we-usually-cry-when-we-watch-the-news-anguish-of-iraqs-yazidi-families>
. Hundreds were thought to be held captive in Mosul but, asanti-Isis forces 
make headway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/17/battle-for-mosul-iraq-asks-for-uk-help-to-get-thermobaric-weapons>
 in the Iraqi city, families and activists fear Isis will take them to Syria.

Germany opens its doors to Yazidi women and children enslaved by Isis | Lara 
Whyte
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/02/germany-opens-doors-yazidi-women-children-northern-iraq-enslaved-isis>
Twigg said that while he recognised the difficulty in dealing with 
religion-based asylum cases, he was troubled by a gap between policy and 
practice. He cited areport 
<https://freedomdeclared.org/media/Fleeing-Persecution-Asylum-Claims-in-the-UK-on-Religious-Freedom-Grounds.pdf>
 by the all-party parliamentary group suggesting that Home Office officials 
were guilty of “poor credibility assessment and weak analysis” of well-founded 
fears of persecution among asylum seekers.

“The current military situation in Mosul has increased the urgency of this 
matter,” Twigg wrote. “I ask that you urgently review the support the UK 
provides to Iraqi minorities and the barriers to their access to the UK’s 
resettlement programme. There is a clear case for humanitarian pathways for 
admission, such as a medical evacuation scheme, for Iraqi minorities who have 
been subjected to such appalling atrocities, which have been described by my 
colleague on the international development committee Fiona Bruce as ‘so 
unspeakable that their evil seems almost fictional. But it is not.’”

The current VPRS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/04/david-cameron-syrian-refugees-uk-will-take-thousands-more>
, announced by David Cameron in 2015, is open only to Syrian refugees 
registered inJordan, Lebanon, Iraq, Egypt and Turkey 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=0ahUKEwjh2N_EocTQAhUlBcAKHZjLDt0QFggbMAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fresearchbriefings.files.parliament.uk%2Fdocuments%2FSN06805%2FSN06805.pdf&usg=AFQjCNGnoK_6BWqwB8uY_Yf1LFtNwIbSmw&sig2=ZCQl44v9jVh_8rPOnBzNEA&bvm=bv.139782543,d.ZGg>
. An average of248 Syrian refugees 
<https://www.nao.org.uk/press-release/the-syrian-vulnerable-persons-resettlement-programme/>
 were resettled each month between the end of September 2015 and the end of 
March 2016.

A Home Office spokesperson said that while the VPRS was open only to Syrian 
nationals, Iraqi refugees may qualify for other resettlement schemes.

The spokesperson said: “We remain very concerned about the appalling crimes 
committed against Christians, Mandeans, Yazidis and other minorities, as well 
as the majority Muslim population, in Iraq and Syria. We are working closely 
with the government ofIraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> and 
announced £90m of humanitarian assistance this year.

 “There are several UK resettlement programmes which Iraqi refugees may 
qualify for, such as Gateway, Mandate and the Vulnerable Children’s 
Resettlement Scheme. However only Syrian nationals qualify for the Syrian VPR.”

The Syrian VPR scheme, which prioritises people needing urgent medical 
treatment, survivors of violence and torture, and women and children at risk, 
hasresettled about 2,900 refugees 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/immigration-statistics-april-to-june-2016/asylum#resettlement>
.


Every year, the Gateway scheme 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/gateway-protection-programme-information-for-organisations/gateway-protection-programme>
, open to any nationality, resettles 750 refugees who have little prospect of 
being able to return home. TheMandate scheme 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/mandate-refugees-process>, also 
open to any nationality, is for people recognised as refugees by the UN High 
Commissioner for Refugees who also have a close family member in Britain.

The UNHCR estimates that more than 1.1 million refugees require resettlement 
<http://www.unhcr.org/news/latest/2016/6/575e79424/unhcr-report-sees-2017-resettlement-needs-119-million.html>
, but the number of places available in countries with annual programmes means 
less than one in 10 people will actually be found a home elsewhere. Thetop five 
countries 
<http://www.irinnews.org/analysis/2016/06/16/resettlement-10-percent-refugees-pipe-dream>
 for resettling refugees in 2015 were the US (82,491), Canada (22,886), 
Australia (9,321), Norway (3,803) and the UK (3,622).
 