
Britain’s statements around severing of aid to middle-income countries 
including China andIndia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> created the 
impression that it had stopped all funding to the countries, when in fact the 
government is still giving both nations millions of pounds.

A review by the watchdog scrutinising taxpayer-funded UK aid said that the 
Department for International Development (DfID) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/department-for-international-development-dfid>
 had given the impression that “all aid was being phased out”.

China, Brazil and India still need British aid, say MPs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/feb/02/china-brazil-india--british-aid>
“The UK may no longer have a traditional aid relationship with these countries 
but it is spending [official development assistance] in Brazil, India and China 
– and it is rather diffident about admitting this” the review by theIndependent 
Commission for Aid Impact <http://icai.independent.gov.uk/> (Icai) found. Such 
“obfuscating” about “perfectly legitimate activities in these countries” had 
given opportunities for criticism, it said.

Critics of UK aid often point out that India and China, which receive some UK 
aid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/feb/02/china-brazil-india--british-aid>
, have active space exploration programmes. The government maintains that 
developing countries still need help to combat extreme poverty and that the 
majority of the British public support foreign aid.

Overall, Icai <http://icai.independent.gov.uk/>, which examined relations with 
seven recipient countries, graded DfID’s approach to ending bilateral aid or 
transitioning to new development partnerships as amber-red: requiring 
“significant improvement”.

The curtailment of Britain’s traditional aid relationships with China, India 
and South Africa was weakened by poor communication and relations that, in some 
cases, threatened to undermine past investment, the review found 
<http://icai.independent.gov.uk/report/transition/>.


The report 
<http://icai.independent.gov.uk/wp-content/uploads/ICAI-Review-When-aid-relationships-change-DFIDs-approach-to-managing-exit-and-transition-in-its-development-partnerships.pdf>
 (pdf), also criticises DfID for “significant shortcomings” in the way it plans 
for change in its aid relationships with countries.

DfID did not have a standard procedure for phasing out bilateral aid, nor for 
sharing lessons learned, the report said, which weakened performance overall. 
In several cases, the department had not specified clear objectives for its new 
development partnerships or any detail of how they would work, it said.

Planning for transition and effective communication is a key part of the 
changing landscape of DfID’s work. The UK government launched anew aid strategy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/03/britain-development-aid-strategy-priorities>
 last year following bitter criticism of aid spending, including money given to 
middle-income countries India and China, which signalled a shift towards a more 
results-focused direction and a renewed emphasis on Britain’s national interest.

UK development minister challenged over ‘wasted aid’ claim
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/14/uk-development-minister-challenged-over-wasted-aid-claim>
Francesca Del Mese, the Icai commissioner who led the review, said: “Managing 
the transition from traditional aid to new kinds of development partnerships is 
increasingly important for DfID in the current aid landscape. This review 
stresses the importance of clear objectives, effective planning and strong 
communication.

“Without a robust process, there is the risk of misunderstanding and 
miscommunication about what remains as part of the UK’s aid relationship, both 
in the countries themselves, and with the UK public.

“DfID must strengthen how it plans for change in its aid relationships with 
countries, and ensure it communicates to UK taxpayers clearly to avoid the risk 
of confusion.”

The report said: “While DFID’s public statements on the subject have been 
accurate, the earlier publicity given to exit fromChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> and India potentially created an 
impression that all aid was being phased out. Against that background, the 
reasons for continuing and then scaling up assistance have not been clearly 
communicated to the UK public.”

The government pledged, in public statements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/jan/08/uk-mps-dfid-end-aid-india-south-africa>
, to stop financial aid to India by the end of 2015-16. But it continued to 
give indirect aid to India, including £30m for technical assistance and £40m 
for “development capital investment”, Icai found. Britain’s aid to India has 
been £283m since 2011. In China, DfID has continued to spend £8m-10m a year 
supporting development, with further money being spent in the country through 
the Prosperity Fund.

Vietnam was held up as a good example of how to change an aid relationship, 
with DfID producing clear objectives, planning effectively and taking care to 
ensure the benefits of historical programmes were not lost.

Everything you need to know about UK aid and the 0.7% spending pledge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/13/everything-you-need-to-know-about-uk-aid-spending-pledge>
 But in China, South Africa, India and Indonesia, the picture was “less 
positive”, Icai found. In three of the four cases, with the exception of 
Indonesia, where the new partnership focused on climate change, DfID did not 
articulate what the new partnership should look like or how it would be 
developed, it found.

The review also highlighted where DfID gave “insufficient attention” to 
ensuring that country teams had the necessary skills in place to support the 
exit or transition process. In a series of recommendations, it said that the 
department should articulate clearer objectives, be transparent and accountable 
to UK taxpayers with regard to transition. It should also assess the likely 
consequences for local civil society partners, and decide whether to support 
them through the process, it said.

In a statement, DfID described the review as inaccurate and said that it was 
disappointed that Icai had rushed to publication.

A DfID spokesperson said: “DfID is a world leader in helping countries leave 
aid dependency behind and stand on their own two feet, building a safer, more 
prosperous world.

“We are disappointed that Icai has rushed the publication of this inaccurate 
report that simply does not tell the whole story.

 “As countries build upon their economic development, Britain is determined to 
strengthen strategic partnerships that facilitate trade, boost business and 
combat poverty. DfID’s work supports these partnerships in a manner that 
provides value for money, always helps the world’s poorest and is open and 
transparent to the British public.”

Amy Dodd, of UK Aid <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/aid> 
Network, emphasised that the transition to new development partnerships should 
be managed more effectively. “As this review highlights, there are clearly some 
important lessons to be learned about how to do aid exit and transition better 
to make sure that we can build better post-aid relationships and secure the 
development impact of UK aid.


“Putting at risk development gains – potentially achieved over decades – is 
not good value for money nor does it live up to our commitments and 
responsibilities to partner countries.

“It was also concerning to see the confirmation of the impact this can have on 
local civil society – both in terms of limiting influence and support to 
maintain vibrant civic space. Civil society plays a vital role in 
accountability, as a watchdog, helping people to hold their governments to 
account, which can underpin better governance and is another way to help hold 
on to development wins.”

Aaron Oxley, executive director of Results UK, said: “While everyone wants 
transition, the Icai report highlights that this is hard to do, and to do it 
well takes longer than the political timeframes that sometimes guide these 
decisions allow. It is crucial to recognise that transition is also donor 
withdrawal, and with donor withdrawal we have a duty of care to ensure that 
hard-won gains for vulnerable people are not lost by withdrawing too quickly or 
without sufficient planning and coordination.”

Oxfam’s head of government relations, Tim Livesey, said: “Today’s report 
highlights that DfID needs to learn its lessons to ensure the world’s poor 
aren’t denied vital support because of decisions about how to end aid to middle 
income countries. Oxfam continues its work to tackle poverty in these countries 
where that overseas aid is still a lifeline for many.”
 