
Future British governments must make a greater effort to assess the number of 
civilians being killed and injured during their military operations, the 
Chilcot report says, after theIraq war inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/iraq-war-inquiry>’s series of damning 
conclusions about the loss of life following the 2003 invasion.

Sir John Chilcot believes that at least 150,000 Iraqis were killed during the 
invasion and subsequent instability, but that the true figure is probably much 
higher. “The people ofIraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> have 
suffered greatly,” he says.
explainer: what is the Chilcot report 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/06/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=what_is_chilcot>
He adds that while Tony Blair <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> 
repeatedly stressed the need to minimise civilian casualties during the 
planning for war, ministers and senior military figures:

 * Failed adequately to assess the likely level of civilian casualties before 
the invasion began.

 * Failed to count the numbers of civilians being killed and injured once 
hostilities were under way.

 * Spent more time squabbling about which department was responsible for 
recording civilian casualties than actually counting them. 
In a conclusion 
<http://www.iraqinquiry.org.uk/media/246676/the-report-of-the-iraq-inquiry_section-170.pdf#search=%22low%20hundreds%22>
 that may – if accepted – have far-reaching implications for future military 
planning, Chilcot says: “The inquiry considers that a government has a 
responsibility to make every reasonable effort to identify and understand the 
likely and actual effects of its military actions on civilians. That will 
include not only direct civilian casualties, but also the indirect costs on 
civilians arising from worsening social, economic and health conditions.”

Chilcot recounts the way in which a few weeks before the invasion Admiral Lord 
Boyce, then chief of the defence staff, advised Blair that the number of 
civilian casualties was likely to be in the “low hundreds”.

Help us report on the 2.6m word Chilcot report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/06/we-need-your-help-reporting-on-chilcot>
Blair made a number of public statements in which he suggested that the number 
of civilians who would die should be set in the context of the numbers who had 
been killed by Saddam Hussein’s government. A few hours before the invasion 
began, he told parliament that Saddam “will be responsible for many, many more 
deaths even in one year than we will be in any conflict”.

Chilcot recognises the difficulties in compiling accurate statistics for 
civilian casualties in Iraq. One World Health Organisation study, based on a 
survey of 9,345 households, concluded that there had been 151,000 Iraqi deaths 
between March 2003 and June 2006. Another survey, by the Johns Hopkins 
Bloomberg School of Public Health, which has been the subject of some 
criticism, concluded that there had been 601,027 violent deaths of Iraqis over 
the same period.

The Iraq Body Count project says it can conclude with certainty that there had 
been at least 156,531 deaths by April 2016.

As the death toll mounted, and the British government came under pressure in 
parliament to provide figures for civilian casualties,Geoff Hoon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/geoffhoon>, then defence secretary, told 
MPs: “We have no reliable means of ascertaining the numbers of civilians killed 
by United Kingdom forces since the conflict ended.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fuk-must-do-more-assess-civilian-casualties-wars-chilcot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F407377b117962c7532362c597aaf947136c24045%2F0_33_1639_983%2F1639.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=UK%20must%20do%20more%20to%20assess%20civilian%20war%20casualties%20in%20future%2C%20says%20Chilcot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fuk-must-do-more-assess-civilian-casualties-wars-chilcot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=UK%20must%20do%20more%20to%20assess%20civilian%20war%20casualties%20in%20future%2C%20says%20Chilcot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fuk-must-do-more-assess-civilian-casualties-wars-chilcot%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F407377b117962c7532362c597aaf947136c24045%2F0_33_1639_983%2F1639.jpg>
 Geoff Hoon, then defence secretary, and Jack Straw, foreign secretary, in 
2003. They spent more time arguing about who should be responsible for 
statistics on civilian deaths than counting them, says Chilcot. Photograph: Dan 
Chung for the Guardian 
However, one official at the Foreign Office then informed another: 
“Notwithstanding this answer, records are kept of all significant incidents 
involving UK forces. A significant incident would include … a soldier wounding 
or killing a civilian. At present, this information is not collated, although 
PJHQ [Permanent Joint Headquarters] accept that it could be.”

In November 2003, amid media and NGO reports on civilian casualties, Jack Straw
 <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jackstraw>, then foreign secretary, 
asked Hoon whether it would be possible to gather data on civilian casualties. 
“We need to find ways of countering the damaging perception that civilians are 
being killed needlessly, and in large numbers, by coalition forces,” he wrote. 
Hoon replied the following day, saying he shared Straw’s desire “to be able to 
refute some of the more wild speculation”.

Subsequently, Chilcot concludes, “The government’s consideration of the issue 
of Iraqi civilian casualties was driven by its concern to rebut accusations 
that coalition forces were responsible for the deaths of large numbers of 
civilians, and to sustain domestic support for operations in Iraq.”

Twelve months later, the Foreign Office and the Ministry of Defence were still 
arguing about which department should shoulder the responsibility for collating 
the statistics. “More time was devoted to the question of which department 
should have responsibility for the issue of civilian casualties than it was to 
efforts to determine the actual number,” Chilcot says.

Ministers also asked legal advisers, who said there was a responsibility prior 
to any attack to assess likely casualties, but no obligation in law to assess 
casualties after the event, or to count the total numbers killed or injured in 
the conflict as a whole.

Chilcot’s report contains a case study of one air attack on houses in a 
residential area of Basra in April 2003, in which 10 members of one family were 
killed.

Chilcot report: the still unanswered questions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/07/chilcot-report-the-still-unanswered-questions>
Towards the end of the battle for control of the city, the British military 
wanted to bomb a house in which they believed Saddam’s cousin,Ali Hassan 
al-Majid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jan/25/ali-hassan-al-majid-chemical-ali-obituary>
, a military commander, was sheltering. A “rapid collateral damage assessment” 
concluded that seven other houses would be damaged, with about 39 to 51 
casualties, not including the people in the targeted house.

Hoon gave permission to go ahead. US forces dropped seven bombs, of which two 
missed the target. When Abed Hassan Hamoudi subsequently complained that 10 
members of his family had been killed, MoD officials decided that he was not 
entitled to compensation, as the attack had been legitimate.

Al-Majid escaped, but was subsequently captured, tried and hanged. The Hamoudi 
family received a number of letters from Adam Ingram, the armed forces 
minister, which expressed sorrow at the deaths, but said that the attack was 
entirely lawful.
 