
Plans for a dramatic increase in the amount of aid that can be channeled 
through the CDC Group, the government’s controversial private equity arm, have 
moved closer to fruition after crucial legislation passed through the Commons 
on Tuesday.

The commonwealth development corporation bill 
<https://www.parliament.uk/business/news/2016/november/commons-commonwealth-development-corporation-bill/>
, which will allow the government to lift the cap on aid funds spent through 
the CDC from £1.5bn to £6bn, was approved by MPs despite criticism of the 
organisation.


The bill allows for increases of up to £12bn without new primary legislation.

The vote followed a parliamentary debate that exposed the stark political 
divisions about the future direction of aid spending.

UK accused of lack of transparency over rise in aid funding to private sector
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/22/uk-accused-of-lack-of-transparency-over-rise-in-aid-funding-to-private-sector>
Development minister Rory Stewart said Britain had a “moral obligation” to 
invest in the CDC, which he described as a proven development model.

“CDC investment combines the rigour of the private sector, the focus on 
markets, the values of the public sector [that] reflect the values of the 
British public, reflect the British public that cares about poverty,” said 
Stewart.

But the CDC – formerly the Commonwealth Development Corporation – which is 
wholly owned by the Department for International Development (DfID), was 
attacked for its lack of transparency, itsuse of offshore tax havens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2013/aug/14/cdc-aid-tax-havens> 
and the focus of its investments, which continued to favour wealthier countries 
at the expense of poorer ones, critics argued.

Kate Osamor, the shadow international development secretary, cited a finding 
by the National Audit Office that the CDC wasunable to demonstrate adequately 
its ultimate objective of creating jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/28/uk-aid-watchdog-calls-for-clearer-picture-of-how-investments-benefit-poor>
 and making a lasting difference to people’s lives in some of the world’s 
poorest places.

“In spite of CDC’s very welcome improvements, the NAO’s recommendations show 
that we should not forget that it remains very much a work in progress for this 
organisation to demonstrate transparently and robustly that it is achieving its 
objectives,” she said.

Labour MP Stephen Doughty, who tabled a series of amendments to the bill, said 
many unanswered questions about the CDC needed to be addressed before such a 
major increase in investment from DfID could be countenanced.

Priti Patel gives UK aid suppliers 30 days to provide details of spending
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/dec/19/priti-patel-gives-uk-aid-suppliers-30-days-to-provide-details-of-spending-international-development>
“This, fundamentally, is about choices, about where we spend those precious, 
relatively small amounts of development assistance,” Doughty said.

He pointed out that the overall proportion of CDC spending going to the least 
developed countries was still significantly less than that going to 
middle-income nations.

Stephen Twigg, the chairman of the Commons international development 
committee, said the CDC had become more transparent, but that more needed to be 
done to ensure money was being spent as it should be.

“One way this could be achieved would be to allow the Independent Commission 
forAid <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/aid> Impact to play a 
bigger role – for example, carrying out a regular assessment of CDC’s 
investments,” Twigg said.


The CDC’s current investment plan has now expired, and Twigg said MPs had yet 
to see proposals for the period 2017 to 2021. He criticised the government for 
bringing forward moves to increase the investment threshold before that had 
happened.


Tory MP Flick Drummond said that, while a cross-party consensus often reigned 
when it came to development matters, on this occasion there was a broad 
division.

Defending the CDC’s use of offshore tax havens, she said: “The purpose of the 
CDC is to go into places where conventional investors fear to tread. I hope 
that there will be a time when the regulatory system will be robust enough so 
that we will not have to use offshore centres, but we are not at that point 
yet.”

The bill will now proceed to the House of Lords.
 