
The UK must launch an independent investigation into its alleged role in the 
CIA torture programme, according to the United Nations legal expert who 
unearthed evidence that the British territory ofDiego Garcia was used as a 
“black site” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/13/diego-garcia-cia-us-torture-rendition>
 to hold detainees.

Professor Manfred Nowak <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/manfred-nowak>, 
who between 2004 and 2010 served as the UN special rapporteur on torture, told 
theObserver that the publication earlier this month of a 500-page US Senate 
report into the CIA’s torture programme meant the role played by EU member 
states would finally come out.

“For a long time, European states have argued that they are not able to reveal 
any information because they have promised full confidentiality to the US,” 
Nowak said. “Since these 500 pages have been released, this argument no longer 
holds true.”

Nowak said the UK, like other European states, would have no choice, 
ultimately, but to acknowledge the role it had played in the programme when the 
US eventually published the full 6,000 or so pages examined by the Senate 
intelligence committee in preparation for the report’s publication. “The time 
will come for the US to release the full report,” he said. “European states 
such as Poland, Romania, Lithuania, Germany or UK that were one way or the 
other cooperating with theCIA <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/cia> will 
have to carry out independent investigations.”

His comments came as the Crown Prosecution Service confirmed that it was now 
in possession of enough material to consider whether charges should be brought 
in the case of two men rendered to Libya with the apparent help ofMI6 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/mi6>.

Nowak said that, in addition to further criminal cases on the back of the 
report’s publication, he anticipated that a flurry of civil cases would be 
launched. “Then we will see to what extent President Obama would still be 
willing to use the state secrecy privilege to stop the civil litigation,” he 
said.

In his role for the UN, Nowak gathered evidence that the US held detainees on 
the British overseas territory of Diego Garcia. This contradicts repeated 
assurances given by both the Labour and coalition governments that the 
territory was used only as a refuelling site by CIA rendition planes on two 
occasions.

“We had clear indications that it was more than just refuelling, that people 
had been held there,” Nowak said. “Some people [who were interviewed] were 
talking about ships and others about Diego Garcia itself.”

He expressed frustration that the Senate report contained no references to 
Diego Garcia and said that the UK government should not renew an agreement 
allowing the US to use the Indian Ocean atoll as a military base until the full 
facts of what had happened there had been established.

“It is a very good argument that what happened should be made transparent 
before these political decisions are taken,” Nowak said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2014%2Fdec%2F20%2Fuk-cia-torture-links-report-probe-un%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F20%2F1419097907711%2F754014c4-2dc9-41ed-9023-de63c877350b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=UK%20must%20probe%20its%20role%20in%20CIA%20torture%2C%20says%20UN%20legal%20expert&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2014%2Fdec%2F20%2Fuk-cia-torture-links-report-probe-un%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=UK%20must%20probe%20its%20role%20in%20CIA%20torture%2C%20says%20UN%20legal%20expert&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2014%2Fdec%2F20%2Fuk-cia-torture-links-report-probe-un%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F20%2F1419097907711%2F754014c4-2dc9-41ed-9023-de63c877350b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Senator Diane Feinstein talks with reporters on the release of the Senate CIA 
report on 9 December: she has met British officials regularly. Photograph: The 
Washington Post/Getty Images 
There is speculation that the Senate committee omitted relevant sections 
relating to Diego Garcia following lobbying from UK government officials. In an 
email, a spokesman for the committee chair, Senator Dianne Feinstein, told the
Observer: “Senator Feinstein, individually and with the intelligence committee, 
has met many times in recent years with British government officials, including 
multiple meetings with the British intelligence and security committee of 
parliament. These meetings are part of the close intelligence and 
national-security relationship that our nations have. These meetings did not 
focus on the content or process of the committee’s investigation of the CIA 
detention and interrogation program and the topic rarely if ever came up. I can 
add that Diego Garcia does not appear in the report, including redacted 
portions of the report.”

However, the Senate committee considered more than 6,000 pages before deciding 
what could be published, raising questions about whether entire sections 
relating to the CIA’s torture programme in overseas territories were excluded 
to protect the confidentiality of US allies.

When pressed on whether the committee discussed Diego Garcia with British 
officials or MPs and whether references to the territory were then pulled from 
what was eventually published, the spokesman for Feinstein responded: “What I 
sent earlier is the only comment I have.”

It has been alleged that the US – with MI6 help – sought to render a Libyan 
dissident,Abdel Hakim Belhaj 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/30/abdel-hakim-belhaj-court-kidnap-mi6-cia-torture>
, an opponent of Colonel Muammar Gaddafi via Diego Garcia in 2004.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2014%2Fdec%2F20%2Fuk-cia-torture-links-report-probe-un%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F20%2F1419098113792%2F1208d023-6e8a-472a-baac-653035b03a4b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=UK%20must%20probe%20its%20role%20in%20CIA%20torture%2C%20says%20UN%20legal%20expert&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2014%2Fdec%2F20%2Fuk-cia-torture-links-report-probe-un%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=UK%20must%20probe%20its%20role%20in%20CIA%20torture%2C%20says%20UN%20legal%20expert&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2014%2Fdec%2F20%2Fuk-cia-torture-links-report-probe-un%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F20%2F1419098113792%2F1208d023-6e8a-472a-baac-653035b03a4b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Abdel Hakim Belhaj, leader of Libya’s Al-Watan party (Homeland Party), has 
claimed UK involvement in his torture. Photograph: Mahmud Turkia/AFP/Getty 
Images 
A Metropolitan police investigation, codenamed Operation Lydd, has been 
investigating the alleged role played by British officials in the operation. 
Now it has emerged that the investigation has taken a significant step forward.

A Crown Prosecution Service spokesman said: “On 16 December 2014, the CPS 
received a file of evidence from the Metropolitan police investigating two 
specific cases of alleged rendition of named individuals to Libya and their 
alleged ill-treatment. There are a small number of further investigative tasks 
which require completion, but we are now in a position to begin considering the 
material with a view to making a charging decision in due course.”

Detectives handed the CPS some initial material in June but this was not 
sufficient for prosecutors to decide whether anyone should be charged. The CPS 
spokesman said: “The police investigation has lasted almost three years and has 
produced a large amount of material. These are complex allegations that will 
require careful consideration, but we will aim to complete our decision making 
as soon as is practicably possible.”
 