
Businesses have urged the government to resist propping up failing firms or 
blocking foreign takeovers, in a raft of submissions on the UK’s industrial 
strategy.

The business, enterprise and industrial strategy <http://www.parliament.uk/bis>
 committee called for comments from dozens of businesses and trade bodies on 
how to come up with a coherent blueprint for British industry.

Those who submitted evidence raised a wide range of concerns including a 
skills shortage, uncertainty about the impact of Brexit and the need to promote 
growth outside London and south-east England.

But among the most common concerns was that a government-led industrial 
strategy should see the state meddling where it is not wanted or lacks 
competence.

Submissions from business lobby groups the Institute of Directors 
<http://data.parliament.uk/WrittenEvidence/CommitteeEvidence.svc/EvidenceDocument/Business,%20Innovation%20and%20Skills/Industrial%20strategy/written/38837.html>
 and theRoyal Academy of Engineering 
<http://data.parliament.uk/WrittenEvidence/CommitteeEvidence.svc/EvidenceDocument/Business,%20Innovation%20and%20Skills/Industrial%20strategy/written/39292.html>
 cautioned against the government expanding its powers to block foreign 
takeovers.

Engineer Rolls-Royce 
<http://data.parliament.uk/WrittenEvidence/CommitteeEvidence.svc/EvidenceDocument/Business,%20Innovation%20and%20Skills/Industrial%20strategy/written/39297.html>
 agreed, saying: “A closed approach to foreign takeovers will generally deter 
investment unless the criteria that would trigger intervention are clear and 
consistent.”

The RAE said the government should focus instead on making sure that British 
ideas and innovation are commercialised in the UK, rather than being developed 
abroad.

Tata Steel UK 
<http://data.parliament.uk/WrittenEvidence/CommitteeEvidence.svc/EvidenceDocument/Business,%20Innovation%20and%20Skills/Industrial%20strategy/written/39520.html>
, which has become the poster child for thesteel industry’s woes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/11/hopes-rise-for-tata-steel-rescue-deal>
, said the government should provide support to see it through until conditions 
improve.

It cited state help to deal with the British Steel pension scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/12/tata-steel-uk-rescue-deal-pension-protection-fund>
, which has become a sticking point in efforts to put together a rescue deal 
for thePort Talbot steelworks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/gallery/2016/mar/30/port-talbot-a-community-forged-in-steel-in-pictures>
 in South Wales.

But the IoD said a strategy that “props up uncompetitive industries in the 
long-term is unsustainable, bad for the economy, and doomed to failure”.

The IoD and firms including Heathrow 
<http://data.parliament.uk/WrittenEvidence/CommitteeEvidence.svc/EvidenceDocument/Business,%20Innovation%20and%20Skills/Industrial%20strategy/written/39041.html>
 and technology conglomerateSamsung 
<http://data.parliament.uk/WrittenEvidence/CommitteeEvidence.svc/EvidenceDocument/Business,%20Innovation%20and%20Skills/Industrial%20strategy/written/39289.html>
 also told the government it should not back certain firms or industries at the 
expense of others.

“There is a danger that an industrial strategy which intervenes to pick 
‘winners’ that are not the market’s choice could be damaging for the UK and 
lead to a number of unintended consequences,” said Heathrow.

Several submissions highlighted a skills shortage in the UK, with too few 
graduates coming through the education system with qualifications in science, 
technology and engineering.

Many urged swift action to clear up uncertainty about the terms of Brexit to 
prevent investment by companies being postponed or cancelled.

The Trades Union Congress 
<http://data.parliament.uk/WrittenEvidence/CommitteeEvidence.svc/EvidenceDocument/Business,%20Innovation%20and%20Skills/Industrial%20strategy/written/39045.html>
 called tariff-free access to the single market the “single most important 
step” that could be taken to support British business.

The Food and Drink Federation 
<http://data.parliament.uk/WrittenEvidence/CommitteeEvidence.svc/EvidenceDocument/Business,%20Innovation%20and%20Skills/Industrial%20strategy/written/39281.html>
 said 29% of 400,000 staff in the industry were non-UK EU nationals and said 
the £22bn industry needed continued access to those workers.

It also stressed the importance of being part of the single market, saying the 
addition of import tariffs would pose a “grave threat” to the industry.
 