
Railways

Union: RMT <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/rmt> 


Company: Southern rail

Reason: Ongoing dispute over safety on the railways and the role of guards.

How many workers: 320 guards were balloted. Other staff may join the action.

When: Monday and Tuesday this week with further action planned for the new 
year, when the drivers’ union Aslef is due to strike.

Impact: Disruption across the Southern rail network is likely to be less 
severe thanlast week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/16/drivers-strike-halts-all-southern-rail-services-for-third-day>
 as drivers are not striking. However, the dispute will meanfurther misery for 
the 300,000 daily passengers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/13/my-life-shouldnt-be-dictated-by-southern-rail-strikes>
 travelling between London and the south coast.

Post Office

Union: CWU

Company: Post Office


Reason: Closure or outsourcing of up to 300 crown post offices – some of the 
bigger high street branches as well a dispute over pay and pensions.


How many workers: CWU said around 3,500 staff would be involved.

When: On Monday, Tuesday and Saturday Post Office counter staff will on strike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/12/post-office-workers-to-stage-five-days-of-strikes-next-week>
. On Thursday and Friday supply chain members who deliver cash to post offices 
will take action.

Impact: Action will be focused on 300 of more than 11,000 post offices across 
the country and bosses say the effect for customers will be minimal. However, 
these crown post offices are often the bigger high street outlets and if Royal 
Mail staff such as postal workers refuse to cross picket lines the impact could 
be more extensive.

Chris Grayling: Tory in combative mood to deal with rail union bosses
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/19/chris-grayling-tory-combative-mood-deal-with-rail-union-bosses>
Cabin crew

Union: Unite <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/unite>

Company: British Airways

Reason: Union says crew on mixed fleets – those who operate on both short- and 
long-haul flights – are being paid less than those on other flights, leading 
some to take second jobs to make ends meet.

How many workers: BA employs around 16,000 cabin crew.

When: Christmas Day and Boxing Day.

Impact: Both sides are at Acas on Monday and there are hopes of a settlement. 
If the strike goes ahead it is likely to have a widespread impact on hundreds 
of BA flights.

Baggage handlers

Union: Unite

Company: Swissport

Reason: Long running dispute over pay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/17/baggage-handlers-down-suitcases-as-britons-get-ready-for-wave-of-strikes>
.

How many workers: 1,500 check-in staff, baggage handlers and cargo crew.

When: 23 and 24 December.

Impact: Airports including Gatwick 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/topic/gatwick-airport>, Heathrow 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/topic/heathrow-airport>, Stansted 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/topic/stansted-airport>, Luton 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/topic/luton-airport>, Aberdeen, Belfast, Birmingham, 
Bristol, Bournemouth, Cardiff, Doncaster, East Midlands, Edinburgh, Glasgow, 
Leeds/Bradford, Manchester, Newcastle and Southampton will be affected.

Pilots

Union: Professional Pilots’ Union (PPU)

Company: Virgin Atlantic 

Reason: Dispute over whether the company recognises the union.

How many workers: PPU represents the majority of Virgin pilots.

When: “Pilot goodwill” will be removed from 23 December.

Impact: PPU said some flights would be cancelled. Virgin said it did not 
expect flights to be affected.
 