
Government responsibility for alleged torture, rendition and illegal detention 
of jihadi suspects will finally be decided by the UK’s highest court in a 
series of judgments that may define the extent of human rights protections 
overseas.

One of the six cases to be decided, that of the Libyan dissident Abdel Hakim 
Belhaj 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/nov/01/cps-decision-abdel-hakim-belhaj-rendition-case-legal-challenge-ddp-mi6-libya>
, has been under consideration for 15 months – the longest the supreme court 
has ever taken to deliver a ruling.


If on Tuesday the justices find against the Ministry of Defence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ministry-of-defence>, other departments or – in 
one case – former Labour foreign secretary Jack Straw, any resulting 
compensation payments could provoke widespread political resentment.

Related: Libyan dissident wins right to sue UK government over rendition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/17/libyan-dissident-abdel-hakim-belhaj-wins-right-to-sue-uk-government-over-rendition>

Ministers have already signalled the military could opt out of the European 
convention on human rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/03/plan-uk-military-opt-out-european-convention-human-rights>
 in future conflicts to prevent what it describes as “vexatious claims” against 
soldiers.


The six cases involve claims brought by four suspects – Belhaj, Yunus 
Rahmatullah, Serdar Mohammed and Abd Ali Hameed Ali Al-Waheed. They involve 
events that span the years between 2004 and 2010. Rahmatullah and Waheed were 
detained by British forces in Iraq, Mohammed was captured inAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> and Belhaj was abducted in 
Malaysia.

 The supreme court delayed delivering piecemeal judgments on the closely 
related cases and grouped them together so they could grapple with the 
underlying legal principles.

 One recurring issue is whether claims should be barred under the doctrine of 
“foreign act of state”, which says that courts will not intervene in the acts 
of a foreign government. Several of the claimants were handed over after 
detention, variously to American, Afghan and Libyan authorities.


Belhaj, a prominent opponent of Muammar Gaddafi, and his wife were abducted in 
February 2004 from Malaysia and flown to Libya where he claims he was detained, 
tortured and sentenced to death.Belhaj’s claim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/11/rendition-victims-mi6-officer-judicial-review-mark-allen-abdel-hakim-belhaj>
 is formally against Straw, Sir Mark Allen, MI6’s former head of 
counter-terrorism, MI6, MI5, the FCO and the Home Office. Straw, Allen and the 
government agencies all deny any wrongdoing.

MI6’s involvement in the rendition was confirmed after the collapse of the 
Gaddafi regime in 2011 when fax messages from Allen were discovered in Tripoli 
that suggested a “joint penetration operations” be conducted against the Libyan 
Islamic Fighting Group, of which the exiled Belhaj was a member.

Belhaj is seeking nominal damages of £1 and an apology from the British 
government. Speaking to the Guardian from Libya two years ago, after winning an 
earlier round in his legal challenge,he said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/30/abdel-hakim-belhaj-court-kidnap-mi6-cia-torture>
: “I’m not interested in taking revenge for the past. I want to build relations 
with the UK afresh. It’s natural for people to want to have justice to right 
their wrongs … I feel I am getting closer to realising justice in my case.”

British troops captured Mohammed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/jul/30/british-forces-illegally-detained-afghan-suspect-court-of-appeal-rules>
, a suspected Taliban leader, in Helmand province, Afghanistan, in April 2010, 
and held him for interrogation until the following July, although regulations 
required his transfer within 96 hours. He was then handed over to the Afghan 
authorities, who held him for a further four years. Mohammed is seeking damages 
under the Human Rights Act 1998, alleging breaches of the European convention 
on human rights.

British armed forces captured Waheed, an Iraqi citizen, in Basra in February 
2007 and held him until the end of the following month. His case is amongst 
several hundred brought before the UK high court in which Iraqi civilians have 
sought damages for their allegedly unlawful detention and, in some cases, 
allegedly unlawful treatment by British forces.

In the case of both Mohammed and Waheed, the court will be deciding whether 
the UK’s obligation to tackle terrorism, under a 2003 UN security council 
resolution, prevails over article 5 of the ECHR, which protects individuals’ 
rights to liberty.

Rahmatullah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/oct/31/yunus-rahmatullah-unlawful-detention>
 was detained by UK armed forces in Iraq in 2004 and subsequently transferred 
to the custody of American forces. He was detained in US custody for more than 
10 years without charge or trial during which time he alleges he was subject to 
torture and serious mistreatment in Iraq’s Abu Ghraib jail. He was eventually 
released in Pakistan in June 2014. He is claiming damages under the Human 
Rights Act.
 