
The number of children and men who fall prey to traffickers is rising, a UN 
study <http://www.unodc.org/unodc/data-and-analysis/glotip.html> has found, 
with the global movement of refugees and migrants a major contributory factor.

Although women and girls account for more than 70% of human trafficking 
victims, the largest increase in the number of refugees and migrantssince the 
aftermath of the second world war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/22/one-million-migrants-and-refugees-have-reached-europe-this-year-iom>
 has left children and men more vulnerable to exploitation, according to the 
report.

Yury Fedotov, head of the UN Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), the UN body 
charged with tackling the problem, warned that the average number of 
convictions for the crime remains low.

Human traffickers 'using migration crisis' to force more people into slavery
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/19/human-traffickers-using-migration-crisis-to-force-more-people-into-slavery>
“As this crisis has unfolded, and climbed up the global agenda, there has been 
a corresponding recognition that, within these massive migratory movements, are 
vulnerable children, women and men who can be easily exploited by smugglers and 
traffickers,” wrote Fedotov in a foreword to the study.

Children account for almost a third of all human trafficking victims 
worldwide, according to the UNODC’sglobal report on trafficking in persons 
<http://www.unodc.org/documents/Global_Report_on_TIP.pdf> (pdf), with the 
number rising to about two-thirds in regions such as sub-Saharan Africa, and 
Central America and the Caribbean.

While women and girls tend to be trafficked for marriage or sexual slavery, 
the report found that men and boys are typically exploited for forced labour in 
the mining sector and also as porters, soldiers and slaves.

The number of men detected among trafficking victims globally rose from 13% in 
2004 to 21% in 2014. The number of trafficking victims pressed into forced 
labour also rose, accounting for 38% of all trafficked people identified in 
2014 (as opposed to 32% in 2007). Of that 38%, almost two-thirds were male.

The flow of trafficking victims from sub-Saharan Africa and east Asia was more 
globally dispersed than elsewhere, for instance in eastern Europe and Central 
Asia, South America and south Asia. However, most trafficking flows are largely 
a regional and local phenomenon rather than a global one.

When it comes to trafficking into key destinations such as richer European 
countries, flows from the continent’s south-eastern regions were the most 
prominent for a number of years and continued to increase.


Fedotov said there had been a “huge improvement” in the number of countries 
criminalising human trafficking, which has increased from 18% to 88% since 
2003. But conviction rates remain far too low, he said, with victims not always 
receiving the protection and services countries are obliged to provide.


Fedotov added that people escaping from war and persecution are particularly 
vulnerable to trafficking: “The rapid increase in the number of Syrian victims 
of trafficking in persons following the start of the conflict there, for 
instance, seems to be one example of how these vulnerabilities play out.”

 