
The UN’s world heritage body has made an urgent intervention to stop the 
construction of a coal power station inBangladesh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bangladesh>.

Unesco <https://www.theguardian.com/world/unesco> said the plant could damage 
the world heritage-listed Sundarbans mangrove forest, which houses up to 450 
Bengal tigers.

A fact finding mission, published by Unesco and the International Union for 
the Conservation of Nature (IUCN) on Tuesday 
<http://whc.unesco.org/en/documents/148097>, found that the proposed site of 
the Rampal coal power plant, which is 65km north of the Sundarbans world 
heritage area, would expose the downriver forests to pollution and acid rain.

Ships carrying coal and other material for the plant’s functioning will move 
through the mangrove reserve, requiring dredging and dumping of 32.1 million 
cubic metres of river bottom at first and further annual dredging. This 
threatens the breeding grounds of the endangered Ganges and Irrawaddy river 
dolphins.

Fresh water supply to the mangroves, already stretched by agriculture, must 
not be placed under any more stress, the observers said.

Their report concluded that the power station posed “a serious threat to the 
site”.

“The mission recommends that the Rampal power plant project be cancelled and 
relocated to a more suitable location,” saida Unesco statement 
<http://whc.unesco.org/en/news/1573> on Tuesday.

Thousands to march against coal plant threat to Bangladesh's Sundarbans forest
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/02/thousands-to-march-protest-coal-plant-threat-bangladeshs-sundarbans-forest>
The statement also warned Bangladesh that the Sundarbans forest reserve would 
be considered for possible inscription on the list of world heritage in danger 
at the next meeting of the World Heritage Committee in 2017. This listing is 
used as a diplomatic stick for countries seen to be failing their commitment to 
protect world heritage sites.

The Sundarbans straddle the delta of the Ganges, Brahmaputra and Meghna rivers 
and are one of the world’s largest surviving mangrove forests. These liminal 
ecosystems arealready greatly threatened 
<https://www.iucn.org/sites/dev/files/import/downloads/aquatic_botany_mangrove_article2008.pdf>
 by rising sea levels which threatens to drown the fragile trees.

Payal Parekh, a programme director at the NGO 350.org said there were 
alternatives available to provide electricity to Bangladeshis.

“Solar panels already provide affordable, reliable energy to 18 million people 
in the country, and other renewable energy options like wind power can be 
harnessed instead of condemning the Bangladeshi people to the toxic impacts 
from the 4.7 million tonnes of coal Rampal is set to burn every year,” she said.

The Rampal station is financed by the Indian government. The Unesco/IUCN team 
noted that inadequate environmental assessments had been conducted prior to the 
initial land purchase for the plant.

Also on Tuesday, the Economic Times reported 
<http://energy.economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/power/indo-bangla-forum-writes-to-pm-against-proposed-power-plant/54920409>
 that an Indian-Bangla people’s movement had written to the Indian prime 
minister Narendra Modi, urging him to rethink the development.

“40% of the Sundarbans is in India and any damage to that will have 
devastating impact on thousands of fishworkers and forest dwellers depending on 
it, apart from the damage to the natural protection from natural calamities 
like tsunami and cyclones,” said the All India Union of Forest Working People 
and National Alliance of People’s Movements (NAPM).

India’s National Thermal Power Corporation, which owns the proposed plant, has 
been contacted for comment.

A second coal plant, the Orion power station, is also scheduled for 
construction near the site. Unesco officials questioned Bangladeshi assertions 
that the plant had been cancelled, given it remained apparently active on the 
Orion website.
 