
More than 5.5 million people have only minimal access to water supplies in the 
Damascus area owing to fighting between the Syrian government and opposition 
groups, the UN has said, warning that targeting water sources constitutes a war 
crime.

Water from rebel-held Wadi Barada, which supplies Damascus, has been cut off 
since 22 December. The government has been using tankers to transport supplies 
to the city, but city authorities said the water had been contaminated with 
diesel. Most residents no longer have water coming from household taps.

The UN’s humanitarian adviser for Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>, Jan Egeland, said his team was being 
prevented from travelling to the Barada valley north of Damascus, making it 
impossible to tell if disruption to water supplies had been caused by Syrian 
government bombardment or rebel sabotage. Either way, he said, “to deprive 
water is, of course, a war crime since it is civilians who are affected”.

Egeland said there was no sign yet of disease in the city and efforts were 
being made to ensure water continued to be supplied to schools and hospitals, 
but he warned that the risk of the supply being poisoned was real.

Government forces, backed by Lebanon’s Hezbollah group, are fighting to 
recapture the area north west of Damascus, despite a nationwide ceasefire.

Syria's food production edging nearer to collapse, UN warns
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/15/syrias-food-production-edging-nearer-to-collapse-un-warns>
The cessation of hostilities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/29/syrian-government-and-rebels-have-signed-ceasefire-agreement-says-putin>
, brokered by regime-backer Russia and rebel-sponsor Turkey, is due to pave the 
way for peace negotiations later this month in Kazakhstan’s capital Astana. But 
Turkey has warned that the talks will be in jeopardy unless Iran brings 
Hezbollah under control. Iran, by contrast, blames Turkey for failing to 
control the rebel groups.

Egeland also revealed that a total of 400,000 people had been displaced from 
Aleppo, Syria’s second city, and that his UN team had described “devastation 
beyond belief” there.

He said the displacement in a city of 1.5 million would take a long time to 
rectify, owing to the dangers posed by unexploded bombs and unsafe buildings.

UN efforts to provide humanitarian relief throughout Syria remained blocked by 
a web of obstruction, Egeland added, including the need for permits from the 
ministry of foreign affairs, local governors and armed groups. Turkey andRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, as guarantors of the ceasefire, had 
not been able to improve the UN’s access.

Egeland said: “Russia and Turkey <https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> 
both said … that indeed they will facilitate humanitarian access to all 
civilians as part of the cessation of hostilities agreement that they function 
as guarantors for, and we will actively hold them accountable for their promise 
to help us.”

Syrian rebels freeze peace talks after Assad abuses ceasefire
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/02/syrian-rebels-freeze-peace-talks-after-assad-abuses-ceasefire>
The UN risks being sidelined in Syria, as Russia and Turkey take charge of the 
diplomatic process. However, the UN special envoy for Syria, Staffan de 
Mistura, said he regarded the Astana talks as a way of consolidating the 
ceasefire and preparing the ground for UN talks he plans to convene in Geneva 
in February.

De Mistura said the UN would be attending and contributing to the Astana 
negotiations. He disclosed that thenew UN secretary general, António Guterres 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/01/will-antonio-guterres-be-the-uns-best-ever-secretary-general>
, was involved in an internal UN brainstorming session for a new Syrian 
strategy.

That session will inevitably focus on the role of a US administration led by 
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, plus the 
increasing likelihood that Syrian president Bashar al-Assad will remain in 
power and the possibility that Turkey, by forging a closer alliance with 
Russia, will make the role of the US largely irrelevant.

Turkey said on Thursday it had the right to close a key air base used by the 
US-led coalition to strike jihadis in Syria.

Presidential spokesman Ibrahim Kalin said closing Incirlik air base in Adana 
province, southern Turkey, was part of Ankara’s sovereign powers. “We always 
have in our hands the right to say ‘we will close it’, but as I said, the 
conditions will be assessed,” Kalin told the 24 TV channel.
 