
Camden may be one of London’s most instantly recognisable neighbourhoods, but 
Londoners can be a little snobby about the place. The area has a distinct 
character, which you notice as soon as you leave the tube and head past 
colourful facades adorned with garish murals and enormous three-dimensional 
signs. It’s no longer as cool as it was, but most Londoners will admit to 
having hung out here at some point, watching gigs at sticky-floored clubs and 
mooching round the markets. Come to Camden and you know what you will get: 
market stalls, music, Italian goths, tattoos and T-shirts of dubious taste.

The area was part of the first wave of London gentrification, starting in the 
1960s, with the opening of theRoundhouse as a performance venue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/sep/09/the-gig-venue-guide-roundhouse-london>
, followed swiftly by the arrival ofCompendium Books 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/dec/09/guardianobituaries.booksobituaries>
, which sold political and avant garde literature. These gave the place a 
countercultural buzz and new residents were enticed by the stirrings of 
coolness, cheap housing and proximity to central London.

As industry started to leave the area, opportunities arose. An old timber yard 
by the canal was taken over in 1972 by a group of craftspeople, and on 30 March 
1974 they opened the first Camden Lock market, with 16 stalls. The first food 
stall arrived shortly after, opened by June Foulds, a former Olympic silver 
medallist who began selling cakes and pies from a dilapidated old tea stall. 
Soon other markets opened nearby – Union Street, Stables Market and the Canal 
Market.

Camden became increasingly fashionable during the punk era: The Clash were 
based nearby and visited regularly

The markets rapidly expanded as Camden’s new arrivals began decking out their 
Victorian homes with antiques and crafts. The area became increasingly 
fashionable during the punk era: The Clash were based nearby and regularly 
visited Compendium, while the Roundhouse andDingwalls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/mar/10/the-gig-venue-guide-dingwalls-london>
 hosted scene-defining gigs. By the 1980s Camden’s markets were a London 
fixture: a fresher alternative to Portobello Road, with the music scene giving 
them a youthful, anti-establishment feel.

“The accent throughout is on the young, fashionable and wild” read a typical 
listing in a London guidebook as tourists flocked to Camden Lock. Drawn by the 
area’s young vibe, MTV moved into Terry Farrell’s old, postmodernTV-am 
<http://www.tv-am.org.uk/> building overlooking Camden Lock in 1993 – but by 
now Camden’s star was starting to wane, its veneer of cool fading as the high 
street succumbed to commercialisation. When Compendium closed in 2001 – having 
survived punk, Britpop, and the pop-up shopPrince opened nearby in 1994 
<http://www.kentishtowner.co.uk/2014/02/05/day-prince-opened-shop-chalk-farm-road/>
 – it felt like the end of an era. It was replaced by a shop selling DM boots.
 Boots over books? A stall in Camden Market. Photograph: Johannes 
Eisele/AFP/Getty Images 
But still Camden Lock market prevails. Located between Chalk Farm Road and 
Regent’s Canal, it is said to attract 28 million tourists a year, who stream 
towards the canal from the tube station in a multilingual torrent, oblivious to 
Camden’s diminishing reputation and happy to take in the colourful atmosphere. 
Camden Lock still features a number of craftsmen and women among the 
higgledy-piggledy selection of stalls, shops, bars and restaurants that spill 
across cobbled yards and old warehouses.

28 million tourists a year arrive in a multilingual torrent, oblivious to 
Camden’s diminishing reputation

It feels timeless, but change is coming. Across the road from Camden Lock, a 
pair of cranes tower over a derelict Victorian terrace behind which the Canal 
Market once stood. This is the first stage of a redevelopment project by 
landowners Market Tech, who areplanning to transform Camden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/marketforceslive/2014/dec/22/camden-market-owner-sees-shares-jump-on-first-day-of-aim-dealings>
, market by market. At Camden Lock, stallholders are worried. Will the new 
changes kill the place stone dead?

“I’m not against change, it’s the way it’s being carried out,” says Bill (not 
his real name – all the traders interviewed wished to remain anonymous for fear 
of upsetting Market Tech). “A market requires people to help each other out – 
if somebody runs out of pound coins or runs out of gas, they know they can turn 
to somebody for help. That’s going out the window because the people at the top 
don’t support us. We don’t know who to contact when we have a problem. We send 
an email but never get any response. People are starting to assume the worst.”
 Market Tech’s designs for its Camden Market project. Illustration: Mace 
Numerous stallholders expressed similar grievances, worried about Market 
Tech’s plans for their previously independent space. When would the new 
development begin, and what would it mean for their current businesses? Would 
more brands appear at the market? Why the obsession with food and 
entertainment? And why are traders insisting that nobody from Market Tech 
sufficiently appreciates their concerns?

In response, Market Tech issued a statement insisting that its market manager 
enjoys a “regular and positive dialogue” with traders, and the company is 
“fully committed to building and maintaining Camden’s rich heritage and unique 
markets, to develop a vibrant and creative atmosphere and a place for 
independents, start-ups and small businesses to grow”.

The entity we call Camden Market is actually several markets in the area. In 
2014, Market Tech began buying four of the sites – Camden Lock, Canal Market, 
Stables Market and Union Street Market – uniting them under a single owner for 
the first time. Market Tech, owned by Israeli businessman Teddy Sagi, has 
bought other Camden sites, including a stretch of high street, the Barfly club 
and the Open University building. Sagi made his fortune through online gambling 
company Playtech, which he founded in 1999 following a short spell in an 
Israeli prison for manipulating bond prices.

It is Market Tech’s cranes that loom over Chalk Farm Road, where they are in 
the process of redeveloping the old Canal Market into Hawley Wharf. This will 
be completed in 2018 and will feature a new market, shops, 195 private and 
affordable homes, a cinema, open spaces, refurbished railway arches and a 
primary school. At Union Street, the long-term plan is to sweep away the 
ramshackle old market and construct a new, two-storey market block with 
boutique hotel.
 ‘There had been a drain of craftspeople from Camden Market.’ Photograph: Mike 
Kemp/Corbis via Getty Images 
Traders at Camden Lock are eyeing the schemes with concern. In February, 
Market Tech secured planning permission to replace a two-storey block from the 
1990s with new retail and office units, adding a new bridge and improving 
access from the high street. These are, the company said, “focused on a 
sensitive approach to improving access to the market and the canalside, with a 
design that will preserve and enhance the fantastic heritage of its surrounds, 
which is integral to its appeal.”

It also promised to resurrect a long-disused stretch of covered canal known as 
Dead Dog Basin, as well as the miles of tunnels collectively known as the 
Camden Catacombs. Since then, however, everything has gone quiet.

“There’s no communication about the plans, no reassurances or explanations 
about what is happening,” says Jill, a longtime trader, who points out that 
several traders will lose their shops in this development. “It’s a disparaging 
way of treating tenants.”

The food market in the cobbled West Yard has been managed by street-food 
specialists Kerb since the summer, when the market’s existing food stalls were 
given notice or invited to re-apply at increased rates. Kerb says that after a 
rigorous consultation process, more than half of previous traders were offered 
a space in the food market, or an alternative Camden location.

“This space is basically being sublet to Kerb,” says Felix, who has worked at 
the market since the 1980s. “That indicates to me how [Market Tech] want to run 
the market – they will franchise out different bits so they become somebody 
else’s responsibility. I never liked the food offering because it doesn’t mix 
well with retail. It’s a better set-up now, not as cramped – but it’s still 
poorly managed, and they treated people so badly.”
 A Camden market-stall selling bootleg cassette tapes in the 1980s. 
Photograph: Alan Reevel 
Most traders agree that Camden Lock needed to change. Its popularity can make 
it uncomfortable, with crowds jostling in cramped yards and spilling over the 
towpath, causing occasional conflict with cyclists and joggers.

Camden Lock has traditionally fostered a separate and somewhat more refined 
identity to the neighbouring Stables Market, but now they are under the same 
ownership those lines are blurred. Older traders decry the arrival of stalls 
selling touristy tat, while pointing out the idiosyncratic delights still to be 
found among the alleys and passages. There’s a shop specialising in leather 
bags and belts, another selling vintage board games, several record shops, 
clothes shops, antiques stalls and jewellers selling handmade designs.

Tourists soak up the atmosphere, eat some food but don’t actually buy anything 
…

But into this tight network have recently encroached brands such as Storm and 
Irregular Choice. Traders fear this will change the nature of the market and 
lead to rent increases. “What they are trying to do is open up the market to 
the high street, and that’s a good idea in principle,” says Bill. “But you 
don’t want the market tobecome the high street – it’s a different beast.”

Another concern is the increased focus on food and the night-time economy, 
with parts of the market area being regularly fenced off for events. “They said 
they wanted to open it up, make the market less claustrophobic, encourage 
craftspeople to return and make it more attractive to Londoners,” says Felix. 
“But it needed something: tourists soak up the atmosphere and eat some food, 
but they don’t actually buy anything. There had been a drain of craftspeople 
because the previous management let the quality of goods decline.” (There have 
been whispers that remaining craftsmen and women will be transferred to “glass 
boxes” in the proposed new building, so tourists can ogle them working “like 
monkeys in a cage”.)

Market Tech is also trying to persuade traders to sign up to its own 
electronic point-of-sale (Epos) system. “It’s going to be written into our 
contracts that we have to use a tablet they provide that will be connected to 
their system, so they know the details of every transaction,” explains Jill. 
“They are also proposing we use their payment system – this is how shopping 
centres are run: they take a cut of turnover rather than rent.” Market Tech 
says the Epos system is provided at zero cost, and will improve the experience 
of shoppers by allowing them to pay for anything by card. Traders, though, fear 
they will be selected for their turnover rather than the quality of their 
products.

Related: From punk to pop-up: share your memories of Camden Market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/nov/15/share-memories-photos-stories-camden-market-london>

“They want us to do things that only small chains can do, like marketing 
ourselves online,” complains Roger, a craftsman based in the covered Market 
Hall. “We don’t have time to do this sort of thing. This new payment system – 
it works for the new businesses they are bringing in, the small chains, but not 
us. It is very difficult for us.”

Of course, all of these fears could be groundless. Market Tech’s plans do not 
entail such a radical restructuring of Camden Lock that it will be wiped from 
the map. But it will be changed irrevocably.

Traders claim that nobody at Market Tech answers emails or holds group 
meetings, and that with such a high turnover of staff, stallholders have no 
idea who to talk to. Market Tech insists there has been “extensive consultation 
with existing traders, the local community, interest and conservation groups, 
and visitors to the area” – but the five traders interviewed said that 
communication was virtually nil.

“That’s been a deliberate break with the past; we always had regular meetings 
before,” says Bill, before hitting on the issue that seems to be at the heart 
of the Camden Market controversy. “People who have worked here for 15 or 20 
years deserve more credit and respect.”

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 