
The Coptic church is Egypt’s oldest living religion. Its unique artistic 
tradition stretches right back into antiquity and stands as a rebuke to the 
murderers who killed 25 worshippers in a chapel next to Cairo’s main cathedral
on 11 December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/11/egypt-bomb-blast-cairo-cathedral>
.

For the legacy of Coptic art proves that people of this faith are in a direct 
line from the ancient Egyptians themselves and to protect their culture, 
beliefs and lives is to defend the very identity ofEgypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt>.

Egypt: three days of mourning declared after 25 people killed in Cairo bomb
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/11/egypt-bomb-blast-cairo-cathedral>
Christianity is not some “western” or “European” import in Egypt. The Coptic 
faith evolved in ancient Egypt centuries before it was conquered by Islam. The 
name “Copts” derives from the ancient Greek word for Egyptians, reflecting a 
recognition by the ancients that Coptic Christianity was the continuation of 
the earliest Egyptian culture. In fact there are striking parallels between 
Christian and pagan Egyptian beliefs. The entire culture of ancient Egypt was 
centred on the idea of life after death. The EgyptianBook of the Dead 
<https://blog.britishmuseum.org/2010/09/22/what-is-a-book-of-the-dead/> sets 
out how theka – or soul – of the departed is judged on a scales before being 
allowed to progress towards the Western Lands. If that resembles the Christian 
preoccupation with heaven and hell, the god Osiris was also similar to Christ 
in that he was a god who died, and could intercede for mortals in the next life.

The god Horus is often depicted in ancient Egyptian art as a child 
<https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/9/91/Egyptian_-_Isis_with_Horus_the_Child_-_Walters_54416_-_Three_Quarter_Right.jpg>
 (or at least a small man) in the arms of his mother, Isis. This prefiguring of 
the Christian image of Christ in the arms of Mary cannot be coincidental. In
Coptic art <http://www.touregypt.net/featurestories/copticmuseum1.htm>, such 
fusions of ancient Egyptian and Christian imagery proliferate. Wall paintings 
preserved in the Coptic Museum in Cairo show the infant Christ in Mary’s lap, 
just like Egyptians had been portraying Isis and Horus for thousands of years.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fcoptic-christianity-artistic-tradition-pop-culture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3788f947b9c4f7b9db4360d7a620952b2dbd1bc0%2F558_0_3552_2131%2F3552.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Under%20threat%20from%20terrorism%2C%20Coptic%20culture%20remains%20eternally%20powerful&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fcoptic-christianity-artistic-tradition-pop-culture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Under%20threat%20from%20terrorism%2C%20Coptic%20culture%20remains%20eternally%20powerful&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fcoptic-christianity-artistic-tradition-pop-culture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3788f947b9c4f7b9db4360d7a620952b2dbd1bc0%2F558_0_3552_2131%2F3552.jpg>
 A stone sculpture on show at the Coptic Art Revealed exhibition in Cairo in 
2010. Photograph: Khaled Desouki/AFP/Getty Images 
Yet it is not only ancient Egypt that survives in Coptic art. This Egyptian 
version of Christianity was born when Egypt was part of the Roman empire and 
under the sway of Greek culture. Images of grapes, cupids and other attributes 
of the classical god Bacchus – whose association with Christ would also appeal 
to Renaissance artists likeTitian 
<https://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/paintings/titian-bacchus-and-ariadne> – are 
common inancient Coptic art 
<http://copticartrevealed.coptic-cairo.com/tour/survival/survival.html>.

For all its echoes of the ancient Egyptian gods and the classical world, there 
is something raw and primitive about Coptic art that makes it wildly original 
and compelling. All the cultures of the ancient world – Egyptian, classical, 
Persian – were controlled from above. Christianity invented popular culture. 
Coptic art has crude, liberating qualities totally different from the smooth 
accomplishments of classicism. People inCoptic paintings 
<https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coptic_art#/media/File%3AMenas.jpg> and 
sculpture have big eyes and bold gazes. The effect is intense and direct, an 
unabashed emotional engagement of the onlooker.

This is the beginning of a new kind of art that was not interested in 
aesthetic refinement but human feeling. Coptic art is truly popular, accessible 
and passionate, and it has helped to sustain this ancient church into the 21st 
century. The ancient quarter known as Coptic Cairo haschurches 
<https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coptic_Cairo#/media/File%3AKairo_Hanging_Church_BW_1.jpg>
 that go back to the third and fourth centuries AD. This is one of the world’s 
most enduring and remarkable cultures, connecting us with a past older than 
Christianity and Islam. An Egypt without its Coptic tradition would no longer 
be Egypt.
 