
Evictions of DIY spaces have soared in cities across the US, threatening to 
inflict long-term damage on an underground art scene still reeling from the 
devastating losses in theOakland <https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/us-news/oakland> 
“Ghost Ship” fire.

The 2 December warehouse fire 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/us-news/2016/dec/03/oakland-warehouse-party-fire-deaths>
, whichkilled 36 people 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/us-news/2016/dec/05/oakland-california-ghost-ship-fire-victims-list>
, has led to a wave of crackdowns on communal housing spaces and unpermitted 
music venues in more than a dozen cities, prompting accusations that officials 
and landlords are engaged in a “witch hunt” that will rapidly accelerate 
gentrification and displacement.

“They used the Oakland tragedy to start a war,” said Ryan Pelham, a 
31-year-old Nashville musician who was forced toshut down <> his house shows at 
the Glass Menage after the Ghost Ship fire. “We had these little parties and 
shows to help struggling musicians … We had something special here.”

Underground artists fear Oakland fire will spur a wave of mass evictions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/07/oakland-fire-ghost-ship-artist-evictions-baltimore-bell-foundry>
There have been similar reports of shutdowns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/07/oakland-fire-ghost-ship-artist-evictions-baltimore-bell-foundry>
, eviction threats and city investigations in California inOakland 
<http://www.mercurynews.com/2016/12/28/omni-commons-experience-highlights-oaklands-heavy-handed-approach-for-artist-spaces/>
,San Francisco 
<http://sanfrancisco.cbslocal.com/2016/12/08/sf-crackdown-illegal-warehouse-habitation-ghost-ship-fire/>
,Richmond 
<http://www.eastbayexpress.com/oakland/burnt-ramen-punk-house-residents-thought-city-of-richmond-would-help-instead-they-got-evicted/Content?oid=5064033>
,Emeryville 
<http://www.sfgate.com/bayarea/article/Emeryville-film-show-latest-event-shut-down-after-10803684.php>
,Fresno <http://www.fresnobee.com/entertainment/article123987609.html> and Los 
Angeles 
<http://www.laweekly.com/music/after-the-ghost-ship-fire-underground-venues-in-la-are-getting-shut-down-7715893>
, along withDenver 
<http://www.westword.com/music/rhinoceropolis-diy-venue-shut-down-by-denver-fire-department-for-code-violations-8580550>
,Colorado Springs 
<http://www.westword.com/music/colorado-springs-fire-department-shuts-down-diy-venue-flux-capacitor-8610219>
,Portland 
<http://www.opb.org/news/article/oakland-warehouse-fire-portland-prevent/>, 
Baltimore 
<http://www.baltimoresun.com/news/maryland/baltimore-city/bs-md-ci-bell-foundry-20161205-story.html>
,New York <http://gothamist.com/2016/12/20/aviv_greenpoint_airbnb.php> and 
Dallas 
<https://ww2.kqed.org/news/2016/12/26/ghost-ship-update-why-warehouse-was-invisible-trolls-target-diy-spaces/>
.

Punitive municipal inspections and surprise evictions have been particularly 
concerning for artist communities in cities already struggling withhousing 
crises 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/05/oakland-warehouse-fire-ghost-ship-housing-crisis>
 where a lack of affordable spaces have forced many to perform in unregulated 
venues and live in substandard conditions.

In some cases – such as the Bell Foundry in Baltimore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/07/oakland-fire-ghost-ship-artist-evictions-baltimore-bell-foundry>
, where artists and activists lived – city officials have “red tagged” 
buildings and directly evicted tenants, citing safety concerns.

Tenant activists have also alleged that profit-driven property owners are 
exploiting the Ghost Ship fire as an opportunity to redevelop old warehouses 
and attract higher-paying residents.

“Every landlord in the area has an incentive to evict their tenants so they 
can increase rent, sell it for more money or turn it into condos,” said Braz 
Shabrell, housing attorney with the East Bay Community Law Center, who is 
assisting Oakland tenants facing evictions after Ghost Ship.Oakland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/31/oakland-eviction-notices-affordable-housing-crisis-rent-bay-area>
,San Francisco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/05/high-house-prices-san-francisco-tech-boom-inequality>
 and the surroundingSilicon Valley region 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/21/silicon-valley-eviction-facebook-trion-properties>
 have seen rapidly rising rents in recent years, in part due to the booming 
tech industry.

Users of 4chan, a notorious online messaging board 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/22/alt-right-supporters-donald-trump-backlash-disavow-reddit-4chan>
 that attractswhite supremacists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/04/4chan-website-financial-trouble-martin-shkreli>
 and trolls, have also reportedly exacerbated the problem byorganizing a 
campaign to report DIY spaces 
<https://thump.vice.com/en_ca/article/4chan-trolls-diy-spaces-oakland-fire> to 
cities in hopes of shutting down venues that attract progressive crowds and 
queer people.

Instead of working with venues to improve safety conditions and bring them up 
to code, some fire and building officials have responded to these kinds of 
anonymous complaints with immediate shutdowns – a tactic that some fear could 
discourage people from reporting legitimate fire hazards.

Adam Mena, co-founder of a shuttered Fresno venue 
<http://www.fresnobee.com/entertainment/article123987609.html> called Arthouse, 
said the gallery organizers had been working to address fire concerns in the 
warehouse space and had gone through previous inspections without facing 
closure.

“We wanted to provide a space that was accessible to up-and-coming artists,” 
he added.

(A Fresno fire department spokesman said the venue must remain closed until it 
fixes all violations and declined to comment further.)

It’s ridiculous that this is supposed to be in name of safety. You don’t need 
to make people homeless to keep them safe
Warren Bedell 
The eviction threats are particularly painful for venues that cater to 
marginalized communities already struggling with displacement.

In Oakland <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/oakland>, city officials and a 
property management company have allegedly targeted Qilombo, a community space 
dedicated to arts and activism for people of color. The group claims that 
officials ordered the venue to cease events and that the landlord didn’t renew 
a lease after the Ghost Ship fire.

“For Oakland, it looks like the final nail in the coffin of gentrification if 
you get rid of community spaces,” said operations manager Van Dell. “There’s so 
much to lose.”


Qilombo’s landlord, SMC East Bay, said in an email that it has no intention of 
evicting the group and is supportive of its efforts but for safety reasons will 
not allow public events that are not permitted. A city spokeswoman said 
officials had raised concerns with Qilombo in September but conducted an 
inspection after the Ghost Ship fire, which led to a “cease and desist order” 
for unpermitted gatherings.

Warren Bedell, co-founder of Rhinoceropolis, a DIY space in Denver shuttered 
by the city, said the building, where 11 people lived, had previously passed 
fire inspections. A city inspection after Ghost Shipcited 
<http://www.westword.com/music/rhinoceropolis-diy-venue-shut-down-by-denver-fire-department-for-code-violations-8580550>
 extension cords and a lack of sprinklers in its shutdown.


“If any other businesses were treated like this by the fire department, it 
would be atrocious,” said Bedell, who lived in the property. “It’s ridiculous 
that this is supposed to be in the name of safety. You don’t need to make 
people homeless to keep them safe.”

A Denver fire spokeswoman said the venue had passed inspections as a business 
but did not meet standards for a residential property.

In Oakland, housing activists are pushing for an emergency eviction moratorium 
<https://docs.google.com/a/guardian.co.uk/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdAGJIwOjxkU-sMvZZi7VhDA0jI1xGeRWtSOqkIHFLqSrrfOQ/viewform?c=0&w=1>
 and other new protections that could prevent mass displacement.

Measures solidifying tenants’ rights in these spaces and temporarily pausing 
evictions will give artists and landlords an opportunity to work with city 
officials, said Jonah Strauss, of the Oakland Warehouse Coalition, which is 
pushing for reforms.

“People are afraid for their homes. They’re afraid for their livelihoods,” he 
said.
 