
From Dandong, the largest Chinese city on the border with North Korea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/north-korea>, it’s just a short hop to the 
Hermit Kingdom – or rather, a short swim. In summer, bronzed Chinese bathers 
wade into the Yalu River and paddle 400 metres to the opposite bank, where 
armed North Korean soldiers watch from turquoise guard towers over women 
washing clothes along the muddy bank. The North Koreans don’t dare swim.

 “There are North Korean soldiers hiding in the long grass,” says one elderly 
Chinese woman swimming by the bank. “They will catch you and charge a ransom if 
you get too close.”

 This is the frontline of a long-term communist alliance turned sour. At first 
glance, Dandong – with its 1.8 million people – looks like any other 
second-tier Chinese city: KFC and McDonald’s, 30-storey apartment buildings, 
tree-lined streets jammed with BMWs and Range Rovers.

 But it is also the main umbilical cord for North Korea. From Dandong’s main 
thoroughfare, you can see across the river to dilapidated two-storey houses; at 
night, the North Korean city of Sinuiju (population 250,000) is in complete 
darkness. At least 70% of all trade in and out of this isolated country happens 
between these twin cities, and upwards of 20,000 North Koreans work in Dandong. 
Many shopfronts are in both Chinese and Korean.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdandong-sinuiju-unfinished-bridge-reveals-broken-state-north-korea-alliance-china%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F932f650db47cdb41b8e38f933a6365198b4b81fc%2F0_4_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Unfinished%20bridge%20reveals%20broken%20state%20of%20North%20Korea's%20alliance%20with%20China&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdandong-sinuiju-unfinished-bridge-reveals-broken-state-north-korea-alliance-china%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Unfinished%20bridge%20reveals%20broken%20state%20of%20North%20Korea%27s%20alliance%20with%20China&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdandong-sinuiju-unfinished-bridge-reveals-broken-state-north-korea-alliance-china%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F932f650db47cdb41b8e38f933a6365198b4b81fc%2F0_4_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 People walk along the North Korean embankment of the Yalu River, near Sinuiju. 
Photograph: Thomas Peter/Reuters 
 Until recently, China was betting heavily that economic incentives could 
persuade North Korea’s recalcitrant leaders to behave in line with 
international norms – and Dandong was one of their carrots. China poured 
billions into the city to encourage trade: at least£3bn 
<http://www.huaxia.com/lndd/zsyz/zsxm/dds/2344127.html> in an area called the 
New District, featuring gleaming apartments and malls; twospecial economic zones
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/19/story-of-cities-25-shannon-ireland-china-economic-boom>
, both on river islands; and £250m into a new bridge spanning the Yalu River.

 But relations have since soured, seemingly by the month. In January, North 
Korea completed afourth nuclear test 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/06/north-korean-nuclear-test-suspected-as-artificial-earthquake-detected>
; in February, a North Korean diplomat in Dandong drove his car into a taxi 
while drunk, killing two people. In March, Beijing backed stricter UN 
sanctions; September sawanother nuclear test 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/09/north-korea-nuclear-test-earthquake>
.

“This was one of the worst periods in the history of bilateral relations 
betweenChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> and the DPRK,” says Oleg 
Kiriyanov, a researcher on Chinese-Korean relations at Moscow State University.

 Making matters worse, North Korean leader Kim Jong-un executed his uncle Jang 
Song-thaek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/30/north-korea-reportedly-executes-officials-anti-aircraft-gun-purge>
, the man said to be the driving force behind the economic cooperation projects 
in Dandong – including the new bridge.

 That bridge is now a potent symbol of how things have gone wrong between the 
two allies. It was supposed to open in 2014, but today the off-ramp still ends 
abruptly five metres above the ground: a ladder hovering above North Korean 
soil, unfinished and with no sign of completion.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdandong-sinuiju-unfinished-bridge-reveals-broken-state-north-korea-alliance-china%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbaed9c536956a3e84732cc6e18069f64ff8d2c01%2F0_234_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Unfinished%20bridge%20reveals%20broken%20state%20of%20North%20Korea's%20alliance%20with%20China&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdandong-sinuiju-unfinished-bridge-reveals-broken-state-north-korea-alliance-china%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Unfinished%20bridge%20reveals%20broken%20state%20of%20North%20Korea%27s%20alliance%20with%20China&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdandong-sinuiju-unfinished-bridge-reveals-broken-state-north-korea-alliance-china%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbaed9c536956a3e84732cc6e18069f64ff8d2c01%2F0_234_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 A woman sells cigarettes on China’s side of the Yalu River. Photograph: Thomas 
Peter/Reuters 
 As the bridge, so the trade. The New District’s tower blocks, malls and trade 
zones are mostly empty – a few cars, and rows of empty apartment blocks in an 
area where a two-bedroom unit sells for about half the going rate in central 
Dandong. Indeed, the souring of relations has sucked Dandong into China’s worst 
property slump: last year it recorded theworst-performing 
<http://www.stats.gov.cn/english/PressRelease/201507/t20150720_1217565.html> 
residential market among China’s 70 major cities. Rafts of investors, many of 
them South Korean, have fled.

 The impasse hurts both cities. Dandong is a valuable source of hard currency 
for North Koreans: most of those 20,000 workers are employed in garment, 
machinery and fish-processing factories in Dandong and neighbouring towns, 
often working13-hour days 
<http://www.dailynk.com/english/read.php?cataId=nk00100&num=14017>. Within a 
few blocks of the railway station stand a dozen North Korean restaurants, such 
as the Gaoli Hotel, where North Korean waitresses dressed in pink and yellow
Joseonot dresses receive guests, play the traditional Korean harp and sell 
Pyongyang beer. Conditions are tough – mobile phones are banned, and following 
a spate of defections, waitresses can only travel off premises in groups of 
three – but it is one of the few opportunities for North Koreans to work 
outside their borders.

Elite Pyongyang trade officials, meanwhile, can pay up to £235,000 per year to 
live and earn in Dandong, leaving a family member behind so they don’t defect. 
Many send their children to East Liaoning University, where they use 
smartphones and surf the internet from the high-rise faculty building that 
overlooks their impoverished country.


The Pyonghattan project: how North Korea's capital is transforming into a 
'socialist fairyland'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/sep/11/pyongyang-north-korea-capital-socialist-fairyland-kim-jong-un>
 Dandong’s Eaglebridge International School, run by American adventists, 
opened in October 2012 in the hope of capitalising on what was supposed to be 
the productive new economic relationship between Sinjuiju and Dandong.

 “We came in on the back of this bridge,” says Robert Christensen, director of 
the school’s executive board. “The thinking was that the Chinese government is 
pretty smart. If they’re going to be pouring in billions of US dollars, they 
know what they’re doing.”

 He says they hoped to have 300 students by now, but only 200 have started the 
new school year, about a quarter of them North Korean.

For now, the cities are connected only by a rickety single-lane bridge, built 
by Japan in 1943. This is where the Beijing-Pyongyang overnight sleeper train 
crosses the border; the direction of traffic is alternated. Few Dandong 
residents doubt that the expensive new bridge will open at some point, but no 
one knows how much damage will be done by then – to the housing market, to 
trade and to the wider prosperity of both cities. In the meantime, Dandong and 
Sinuiju remain wedded in an increasingly cold embrace.

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 