
Len McCluskey <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/len-mccluskey>, the union 
leader who witnessed first-hand the Hillsborough tragedy 27 years ago, has 
accused Jack Straw of letting down the victims by failing to order a proper 
inquiry in 1997.

The general secretary of Unite said the former home secretary should “hang his 
head in shame” for overseeing a discredited review when Tony Blair came to 
power.


Earlier this week inquests into the disaster gave their verdict, after two 
years,that the 96 victims were unlawfully killed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/26/hillsborough-inquests-jury-says-96-victims-were-unlawfully-killed>
. For years there were claims from police and other authorities that Liverpool 
fans were to blame.


McCluskey, a lifelong Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/liverpool> 
supporter, was at the match on 15 April 1989. He said he was haunted by the 
scenes he witnessed as he searched for his son around the Leppings Lane end of 
the stadium.


McCluskey said that if Straw had listened to the families, the truth could 
have been uncovered 19 years earlier. In the meantime many family members and 
victims had died, he said.


“Labour came to power in 1997, eight years after the event. Did they do what 
they should have done? No they did not.Jack Straw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jackstraw>, the home secretary, was too 
busy placating the establishment.

“But I understand that all of the cabinet minutes of the time will be made 
available. We will see how far the cover-up went,” he said.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fapr%2F29%2Funion-leader-len-mccluskey-accuses-jack-straw-letting-down-hillsborough-victims%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69ef170ea74e72f87baa8dfdad987cb6131429c3%2F0_234_4515_2709%2F4515.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Union%20leader%20accuses%20Jack%20Straw%20of%20failing%20Hillsborough%20victims&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fapr%2F29%2Funion-leader-len-mccluskey-accuses-jack-straw-letting-down-hillsborough-victims%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Union%20leader%20accuses%20Jack%20Straw%20of%20failing%20Hillsborough%20victims&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fapr%2F29%2Funion-leader-len-mccluskey-accuses-jack-straw-letting-down-hillsborough-victims%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69ef170ea74e72f87baa8dfdad987cb6131429c3%2F0_234_4515_2709%2F4515.jpg>
 Len McCluskey, who was at the match in April 1989. Photograph: Toby 
Melville/Reuters 
As a new home secretary in 1997, Straw was under pressure from the families of 
the victims andLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> MPs to 
reopen an inquiry.

He was sceptical about the possibility of new evidence and wrote to the then 
attorney general, John Morris, saying: “Public concern will not be allayed with 
a reassurance from the Home Office that there is no new evidence. I therefore 
propose that there should be an independent examination of the alleged new 
evidence by a senior legal figure.”


In June 1997, Straw appointed Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to lead the review of 
the Hillsborough evidence. Before the review began, Straw told the judge that 
his officials had already looked at the case and concluded that there was not 
sufficient evidence to justify a new inquiry.


Straw’s doubts over new evidence were not expressed to the House of Commons at 
the time. He told MPs: “I am determined to go as far as I can to ensure that no 
matter of significance is overlooked and that we do not reach a final 
conclusion without a full and independent examination of the evidence.”

The Stuart-Smith review lasted seven months and concluded that there was no 
case for a new inquiry. In 2012, the review was criticised by theHillsborough 
Independent Panel report <http://hillsborough.independent.gov.uk/> for failing 
to fully investigate evidence that police statements from the day had been 
substantially rewritten.

Speaking to the Guardian, Straw said he was “profoundly sorry” that the 
actions that he took failed to get to the bottom of the cover-up.

He said he was busy setting up a separate inquiry into the death of Stephen 
Lawrence and had asked Stuart-Smith to examine whether there was any new 
evidence in good faith.

“He [Stuart-Smith] held the inquiry, he looked at the altered witness 
statements but decided not to make a point about those and concluded there 
weren’t any grounds for reopening an inquiry,” Straw said.

“I greatly regret what happened, but given what Stuart-Smith said, I could 
only go along with his conclusions.”

McCluskey said he was sitting in another stand when he saw the crush 
developing behind Liverpool’s goalposts. It dawned upon him that his son, who 
had gone to the game with friends, might be among the victims.

Instinctively, he made his way towards the pitch and saw a line of dead bodies 
upon the turf with their faces covered. In a traumatised daze, he checked the 
face of each one to make sure they were not his son. Eventually, he made his 
way out of the ground and discovered that his son was safe.

McCluskey, a former docker, said he had known some of the victims’ families 
throughout the 27 years and praised Labour MP Andy Burnham for being at the 
forefront of the campaign for justice.


“It is about solidarity. There are a lot of cities where people have a strong 
bond with one another but I cannot think of many where people would have stuck 
together for that long and through so much,” he said.

McCluskey called for South Yorkshire police and West Midlands police, which 
were at the heart of the cover-up, to be merged with neighbouring forces. He 
said the families deserved to see people exposed for taking part in the 
cover-up and that some should face criminal trials.

“Terrible mistakes can be made, we know that. But what happened after that – 
the perjury and lies and perverting the course of justice among senior elements 
of the police force and senior elements of the government – it should all come 
out in the open,” he said.

 