
A university has been coming under pressure to sack one of its lecturers who 
has become known as one of the most controversial undercover officers deployed 
by the police.

Campaigners have been seeking to persuade London Metropolitan University 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/londonmetropolitanuniversity> to remove 
Bob Lambert from his academic post.

So far the university has backed Lambert, saying they have “absolute faith in 
him as a lecturer” and is a “valued member” of staff”.

Lambert has been at the centre of many of the revelations about the police’s 
use of undercover officers.

To recap, he went undercover in the 1980s to infiltrate animal rights and 
environmental campaigners 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2014/08/25/the-spy-who-loved-me-2> for four 
years.


He fathered a child with an activist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/jun/22/undercover-police-lovers>
, known as Jacqui, before abandoning them. TheMetropolitan Police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/metropolitan-police> has paid more than 
£400,000 to Jacqui 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/oct/23/police-compensation-payout-woman-undercover-officer>
who has been profoundly traumatised after discovering by chance that the father 
of her son was an undercover police officer.

Lambert also deceived another woman into 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/oct/23/police-spy-tricked-lover-activist> 
having a long-term relationship with him, as part of an elaborateattempt to 
lend “credibility” to 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/oct/23/undercover-police-animal-liberation-front>
 his alter ego.

He also stole the identity of a dead boy to shore up his fake identity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/feb/21/anatomy-of-betrayal-undercover-police>
, been accused ofsetting fire to 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/mar/07/activists-appeal-convictions-involvement-police-spy>
 Debenhams,appeared in court using his alter ego 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/jul/06/home-office-police-childrens-identities-lambert>
 rather than his real name, andco-wrote the leaflet at the 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/jun/21/mclibel-leaflet-police-bob-lambert-mcdonalds>
 heart of the notorious McLibel trial. In the 1990s, he was promoted to run the 
operations of the Special Demonstration Squad and was a key figure in thesecret 
operation to spy on the family of Stephen Lawrence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/mar/06/stephen-lawrence-theresa-may-inquiry-police>
.

Since he left Special Branch in 2007, he has taught at three universities.

But the question now is whether a man like Lambert with his undercover past 
should be employed teaching students?

The campaigners say no. Alex Neve, from the Islington Against Spies campaign 
group (see here <http://theoccupiedtimes.org/?p=13640>), has said :”We’re 
saying he’s not a suitable person to be working here, supervising students, 
some of whom may be vulnerable, when he’s shown evidence of having a very 
dubious attitude towards women and consent in the past. Can he be trusted not 
to abuse the power that he’s abused in the past? I don’t think he can.”

Reports of a demonstration can be found here in the Islington Gazette 
<http://www.islingtongazette.co.uk/news/politics/protesters_demand_holloway_university_sack_former_policy_spy_1_3874622>
, theIslington Tribune 
<http://www.islingtontribune.com/news/2014/dec/fresh-protests-over-%E2%80%98police-spy%E2%80%99-lecturer-working-holloway-road-university>
 andIslington Now 
<http://islingtonnow.co.uk/2014/12/04/protest-at-london-met-at-undercover-cop-job/>
, and a public meeting organised by theCampaign Opposing Police Surveillance 
<http://campaignopposingpolicesurveillance.com/> and the university’s UNISON 
<http://www.londonmetunison.org.uk/> Branch here 
<http://campaignopposingpolicesurveillance.com/2014/10/25/cops-public-meeting/> 
andhere <http://www.londonmetunison.org.uk/2014/11/cops/>.

Observer columnist Nick Cohen argues in this article 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/dec/21/why-tolerate-police-spies-in-our-midst>
 that Lambert is “uniquely unqualified” to hold his academic post, adding that 
the security establishment has not disowned him.

London Metropolitan University <http://www.londonmet.ac.uk/> has defended him, 
saying : “Bob Lambert is a valued member of our criminology department, where 
he is popular with both students and staff.

“While we recognise the mistakes Bob made in his police career, for which he 
has apologised and displayed deep regret, we have absolute faith in him as a 
lecturer and member of our community.

“During a thirty-one year policing career, Bob made a significant contribution 
to tackling terrorism, political violence and hate crimes in London which, 
along with his strong academic record, makes him a valuable asset to 
criminology teaching atLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> Met.”

According to this biography 
<http://www.londonmet.ac.uk/faculties/faculty-of-social-sciences-and-humanities/people/surnames-k-to-m/robert-lambert/>
, Lambert is a senior lecturer at the university’sJohn Grieve Policing Centre 
<http://www.londonmet.ac.uk/faculties/faculty-of-social-sciences-and-humanities/research/john-grieve-centre-for-policing--community-safety/>
, teaching students about terrorism, counter-terrorism, far right political 
violence and anti-Muslim hate crimes.

He retains his academic post at St Andrews University 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/standrewsuniversity> where he has been a 
lecturer in terrorism studies 
<http://www.st-andrews.ac.uk/~cstpv/staff/rl40.html>. There have been protests 
there too (seehere <http://www.indymedia.org.uk/en/2012/02/492284.html> and here
 
<http://www.thesaint-online.com/2013/10/st-andrews-lecturer-should-not-be-teaching-%EF%BF%BCbecause-of-life-as-undercover-spy/>
).

However there is a mystery - as yet, not fully explained - about the third 
academic post he held. In 2008, Lambert started work atExeter University 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/universityofexeter> researching 
Islamophobia and counter-terrorism 
<http://www.exeter.ac.uk/news/research/title_152517_en.html>. He became the 
co-director of the university’s European Muslim Research Centre, embarking on a 
decade-long programme of research.

Exeter University has confirmed that Lambert resigned from the university in 
October 2011 - the same monthhis undercover past was 
<http://www.indymedia.org.uk/en/2011/10/486877.html?c=on> exposed. 

We asked Exeter University why he resigned but, after some delay, they refused 
to explain.

Some might wonder why Lambert departed from one university, but manages to 
keep his jobs at two other universities.


UPDATE 


Islington Against Police Spies is organising another demonstration at the 
university at lunchtime on January 30 (details here 
<http://campaignopposingpolicesurveillance.com/2015/01/19/sack-bob-lambert-picket-friday-30-january/>
).


Meanwhile the university’s Unison branch has published a statement in case it 
appears that it supports the call to sack Lambert. The statementcan be found 
here 
<http://www.londonmetunison.org.uk/2015/01/unison-statement-on-campaign-opposing-police-surveillance/>
.

 