
Cheese has a distinguished history in the English language as an indicator of 
esteem. While less often heard these days,big cheese 
<http://www.worldwidewords.org/qa/qa-big1.htm> remains a familiar expression, 
originating allegedly from a cheese made from all the milk produced in a day by 
Republicans in the US town of Cheshire for their hero, Thomas Jefferson. 
(Alternatively, it may be a corruption of the Hindi chiz or the French chose, 
both meaning thing). The important point is that as a word it already implies, 
like gold, an intrinsic value. That may not be why Dairy Crest, the milk 
products firm which makes brands like Cathedral cheddar, is stuffing the hole in
its pension fund 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/bb4ee184-a808-11e2-8e5d-00144feabdc0.html#axzz2QuDwGrPA>
 by taking a Â£60m charge overits principal product 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/apr/18/daily-crest-pensions-cheddar-cheese>
; but, with the value ofgold in freefall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/apr/16/gold-not-so-precious-metal>
, national currencies diluted by quantitative easing and even the digital 
bitcoin suffering a reverse, there may be the kind of opportunity here that 
both the British economy and Britain's beleaguered dairy farmers have been 
crying out for. It certainly meets, or could be modified to meet, many of the 
criteria for money. Like gold or silver, it already has an intrinsic or 
commodity value. By adding it to its pension scheme covenant, Dairy Crest is 
establishing that it has a bank value. The downstream consequences would be 
beneficial: fewer economists; more farmers; a premium on one of Britain's 
finest natural products, grass; and the government's capacity to tinker with 
the value of the new currency would be limited by the natural productive 
capacities of the Holstein cow.
 