
The mooring mast on the Empire State Building


In the never-ending race to build the world’s tallest skyscraper, Manhattan’s 
Empire State Building remains perhaps the most iconic structure that’s ever 
held the title.


The initial plans for the Empire State showed a building that was 1,050 ft, 
just four feet taller than the rival Chrysler Building. But in late 1929, 
Alfred E Smith, the lead investor behind the construction, announced an 
additional 200 ft. This was not through extra storeys but by via anew mooring 
mast for airships <http://www.nytimes.com/2010/09/26/realestate/26scapes.html>, 
so they could now dock in Manhattan instead of the nearest docking station in 
Lakehurst, New Jersey.


Like the fashion for airships, it never really took off. Though the mast was 
added – and the Empire State became the tallest building in the world when it 
opened in 1931 – the difficulty in actually mooring soon rendered the plans 
redundant: high winds made it almost impossible for airships to actually attach 
to the mast, while there was no way passengers would ever be able to walk down 
a gangplank to reach the building.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Furban-oddities-cities-strangest-things-baby-cages-airships-skyscrapers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc4ffc97b9e1d97f7f77269102cf570b97702fe0%2F0_0_3301_4484%2F3301.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Urban%20oddities%3A%20cities%20used%20to%20do%20the%20strangest%20things%20%E2%80%A6&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Furban-oddities-cities-strangest-things-baby-cages-airships-skyscrapers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Urban%20oddities%3A%20cities%20used%20to%20do%20the%20strangest%20things%20%E2%80%A6&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Furban-oddities-cities-strangest-things-baby-cages-airships-skyscrapers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc4ffc97b9e1d97f7f77269102cf570b97702fe0%2F0_0_3301_4484%2F3301.jpg>
 Docking on the Empire State. Photograph: Bettmann/Getty images 
In fact, only one dirigible ever managed to dock at the Empire State Building. 
In September 1931, a privately owned airship managed to dock for just three 
minutes in 40mph winds 
<http://www.airspacemag.com/daily-planet/docking-on-the-empire-state-building-12525534/?no-ist>
 over Manhattan – and even that took the pilot more than half an hour.

The airport in the middle of a city

Town planners have long been the target of abuse and/or condemnation, but few 
decisions, however necessary, have been quite so alarming as that which saw a 
major international airport builtin the middle of one of the most densely 
populated cities on the planet <http://hongwrong.com/kai-tak-airport-photos/>.


With a steep descent over mountains and in between skyscrapers, the approach 
to Hong Kong’s Kai Tak airport was notorious for being one of the most 
dangerous in aviation, and tested a pilot’s skills to the maximum. Remember the 
bit near the end of Star Wars when the X-wing fighters are laying siege to the 
Death Star? Well, it was like that – only more risky.


From its opening in 1925 to when it was finally closed in 1998, there were 12 
major accidents at the airport resulting in the death of more than 200 people. 
In 1998, when the new Hong Kong International airport was opened on the island 
of Chek Lap Kok, 18 miles or so to the west of Hong Kong, the world’s pilots 
breathed a huge sigh of relief.

The baby cage boom

In a world where the nation’s children are welded to technology from an 
ever-younger age, deprived of vitamin D, getting outside to enjoy some fresh 
air has never been more crucial. The trouble with living in a city, however, is 
that space is at a premium and gardens are often non-existent. And if you live 
in flat, well, what can you do?


You could buy a baby cage and hang it outside your apartment window, just like 
some parents did in London in the 1930s 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NerS17sC0Bg>. That way, your child gets to 
play “outside” and you can get on with something else. Whether they get fresh 
air or not is another matter, of course.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Furban-oddities-cities-strangest-things-baby-cages-airships-skyscrapers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb26510fee71d2d68cd0d851bfffd04ef06b73b5c%2F0_341_4187_2512%2F4187.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Urban%20oddities%3A%20cities%20used%20to%20do%20the%20strangest%20things%20%E2%80%A6&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Furban-oddities-cities-strangest-things-baby-cages-airships-skyscrapers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Urban%20oddities%3A%20cities%20used%20to%20do%20the%20strangest%20things%20%E2%80%A6&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Furban-oddities-cities-strangest-things-baby-cages-airships-skyscrapers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb26510fee71d2d68cd0d851bfffd04ef06b73b5c%2F0_341_4187_2512%2F4187.jpg>
 Don’t have a garden? Just cage your baby outside the window. Photograph: Reg 
Speller/Fox Photos/Getty Images 
The brainchild of Emma Read of Spokane, Washington, the Baby Cage received its 
patent in the United States 1923 and, as the application stated, its purpose 
was “to provide an article of manufacture for babies and young children, to be 
suspended upon the exterior of a building adjacent an open window, wherein the 
baby or young child may be placed.”

The cage also doubled as a bed and came with curtains – just to keep out the 
drafts. You know, the drafts you tend to experience when you’re hanging in the 
air, six or seven storeys high.

The Washington fashion police

As the world marked the 70th birthday of the bikini recently 
<https://inews.co.uk/distractions/short-history-bikini-70th-birthday/>, it’s 
worth remembering that we weren’t always allowed such freedom when it came to 
our choice of swimwear. In Washington DC in 1922, for example,police were 
employed to enforce strict dress codes on the Tidal Basin Beach 
<http://www.policestateusa.com/2014/police-measure-bathing-suits-potomac-river/>
 on the Potomac River and order female bathers to change if their swimsuits 
were higher than six inches above the knee – they even carried tape measures.

The order had been imposed by the capital’s superintendent of public buildings 
and grounds, and with public modesty assured, the police officers could then 
concentrate on maintaining the beach purely for the enjoyment of the city’s 
white population.

The Tidal Basin Beach was open from May 1918 up until 1925 as a segregated 
beach (and later became the site of the Jefferson Memorial). The city’s black 
population was consigned to a site on the other side of the Potomac River, 
without any changing facilities – but also without any fashion police.

Smoking on the Underground

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Furban-oddities-cities-strangest-things-baby-cages-airships-skyscrapers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb399161a8ef4e9cc47c8037d1741ba1ae9686270%2F0_9_4192_2515%2F4192.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Urban%20oddities%3A%20cities%20used%20to%20do%20the%20strangest%20things%20%E2%80%A6&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Furban-oddities-cities-strangest-things-baby-cages-airships-skyscrapers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Urban%20oddities%3A%20cities%20used%20to%20do%20the%20strangest%20things%20%E2%80%A6&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Furban-oddities-cities-strangest-things-baby-cages-airships-skyscrapers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb399161a8ef4e9cc47c8037d1741ba1ae9686270%2F0_9_4192_2515%2F4192.jpg>
 Smoking was allowed in certain carriages in trains until 9 July 1984. 
Photograph: Barry Lewis/Corbis via Getty Images 
It’s bad enough being nose-to-nose with other passengers on a crowded Tube 
train, but count yourself lucky you’re not in one of the smoking carriages that 
used to operate on theLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> 
Underground.


And smoking wasn’t just allowed on the Underground, it was positively 
encouraged. There were tobacco adverts on the carriage walls,platform vending 
machines <https://www.flickr.com/photos/klicking/5911958402/in/photostream/> 
selling cigarettes and eventobacco exhibitions 
<http://www.20thcenturylondon.org.uk/ltm-1998-81915>.


It wasn’t just unpleasant, it was highly dangerous – not least because the 
wooden floors had grooves in them ideally suited for housing discarded 
cigarette butts. But after a campaign by the London Transport Passenger 
Committee and the Evening Standard newspaper, smoking was finally banned on the 
Tube in July 1984. (Although it was banned only inside the carriages and not in 
the rest of the stations.)


It took a fire at Oxford Circus station in November 1984 to extend that ban to 
all sub-surface areas on the Underground network.

A drive-through bank in Trafalgar Square
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Furban-oddities-cities-strangest-things-baby-cages-airships-skyscrapers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69256059c1457b40bddf2763816897c0c6e312c0%2F0_0_2200_1848%2F2200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Urban%20oddities%3A%20cities%20used%20to%20do%20the%20strangest%20things%20%E2%80%A6&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Furban-oddities-cities-strangest-things-baby-cages-airships-skyscrapers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Urban%20oddities%3A%20cities%20used%20to%20do%20the%20strangest%20things%20%E2%80%A6&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Furban-oddities-cities-strangest-things-baby-cages-airships-skyscrapers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69256059c1457b40bddf2763816897c0c6e312c0%2F0_0_2200_1848%2F2200.jpg>
 Drummonds drive-through bank in Trafalgar Square in 1961. Photograph: The 
Royal Bank of Scotland Group 
Drummonds bank was situated in London’s Trafalgar Square 
<https://www.flickr.com/photos/31363949@N02/7764494452>, on the corner of the 
Mall and Whitehall, and while it was one of the older financial institutions in 
the UK (it was founded in 1717) it was nevertheless one of the most innovative.


In 1961, for example, they introduced the UK’s first drive-through bank, the 
idea being that if customers could get their fast-food fix without ever leaving 
their car then they could also get their financial one.


Yet Drummonds wasn’t the first bank to launch a drive-through branch. That 
honour goes to City Center Bank in Syracuse,New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york>, which opened its car-friendly 
service way back in 1928 – some 20 years before the first drive-through 
fast-food restaurant was opened on Route 66 by Red’s Giant Hamburg in 
Springfield, Missouri.


Indeed, it’s an idea that’s still popular half a century on, with Metro Bank 
recently opening drive-through branches in Slough and Solihull in the UK.


It also makes getaways more convenient …


The day Sweden swapped sides

It’s 3 September 1967 and Sweden is preparing for “Dagen H” 
<http://rarehistoricalphotos.com/dagen-h-day-sweden-switched-sides-road-1967/> (
dagen meaning “day” and the H standing for Högertrafik, or “right-hand 
traffic”.) It’s the day when, in a controversial scheme designed to bring 
Swedes into line with their Scandinavian neighbours, the entire country will 
change from driving on the left-hand side to the right. Overnight.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Furban-oddities-cities-strangest-things-baby-cages-airships-skyscrapers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7855cfc869fcef6553f1fb5f7ae5c68b3831652%2F0_0_2251_3000%2F2251.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Urban%20oddities%3A%20cities%20used%20to%20do%20the%20strangest%20things%20%E2%80%A6&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Furban-oddities-cities-strangest-things-baby-cages-airships-skyscrapers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Urban%20oddities%3A%20cities%20used%20to%20do%20the%20strangest%20things%20%E2%80%A6&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Furban-oddities-cities-strangest-things-baby-cages-airships-skyscrapers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7855cfc869fcef6553f1fb5f7ae5c68b3831652%2F0_0_2251_3000%2F2251.jpg>
 The moment the traffic changed in Kings Street, Stockholm, at exactly 5am on 3 
September 1967. Photograph: AP 
From 1am to 6am, all non-essential traffic was banned from Sweden’s roads, 
allowing more than 360,000 road signs to be moved or altered, and then, at 
4.50am, all traffic was meant to come to a halt before shuffling over to the 
other side of the road, waiting until 5am, and then continuing with their 
journey.


The controversial change had been years in the making and came despite 83% of 
the population voting in favour of the status quo in a 1955 referendum. Under 
the jurisdiction of the new Statens Högertrafikkommission (state right-hand 
traffic commission), a nationwide educational campaign was launched to sell the 
benefits of the new system. The “Dagen H” logo appeared on everything from milk 
cartons to women’s underwear. There was even anofficial Dagen H song, Håll dig 
till höger, Svensson <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6ODZtwkBYPs> (Keep to the 
right, Svensson) by The Telstars.

The move also necessitated huge changes in the nation’s transportation. All 
Swedish vehicles (the vast majority of which were still left-hand drive) had be 
fitted with new headlamps while 8,000 older buses had to be retrofitted to 
provide doors on both sides. It was the death knell for Stockholm and Malmo’s 
tram systems too, both of which were soon withdrawn and replaced by buses.


Remarkably, the move didn’t lead to carnage. In fact, there were only 125 
reported road accidents on the following day, compared to an average of 164 for 
a normal Monday.


But it didn’t last. Within six weeks the number of motor insurance claims had 
returned to their normal levels while accident rates were back to their 
pre-Dagen H levels by 1969.


All of which begs the question: was it actually worth it?

What strange things have happened in your city? Share your stories in the 
comments below or follow Guardian Cities onTwitter 
<https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 