
Russian president Vladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin> interfered in the US 
presidential election to aid Donald Trump, according to a declassified 
assessment by the NSA, CIA and FBI.


“We assess Russian President Vladimir Putin ordered an influence campaign in 
2016 aimed at the US presidential election. Russia’s goals were to undermine 
public faith in the US democratic process, denigrate Secretary [Hillary] 
Clinton, and harm her electability and potential presidency. We further assess 
Putin and the Russian Government developed a clear preference for 
President-elect Trump,” the agencies found in a long-awaited report that stands 
to hang over the head of the incoming Trump administration.

Russia hacking: US intelligence chief hits back at Donald Trump's 
'disparagement'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/jan/05/russia-election-hacking-hearing-congress>
The report 
<https://www.google.com/url?q=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.dni.gov%2Ffiles%2Fdocuments%2FICA_2017_01.pdf&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNGngBEfadgQE3fOzjAZM4p5IFv0Hg>
 (pdf), for weeks the subject of leaks that have incensed and vexed Trump, 
contradicts the contention from his transition team that Russia did not prefer 
him in the 2016 election, as well as Trump’s insistence that the culprits 
behind the hacks of Democratic political figures are fundamentally unknowable.

The report keeps classified any crucial technical data demonstrating Russian 
culpability, which means its release is unlikely to persuade skeptics that the 
intelligence agencies have definitively proven their case. Nor does the 
intelligence assessment claim that Russian interference was decisive in the 
election.


Though the report lacks detail, never before has the US intelligence apparatus 
publicly assessed a foreign power to have interfered in an election for the 
benefit of an incoming president.

The three US intelligence agencies assessed with “high confidence” that 
Russian military intelligence was behind anonymous hacking entities Guccifer 
2.0 and DCLeaks.com, and relayed to WikiLeaks data stolen from prominent 
Democrats. WikiLeaks’ Julian Assange has denied receiving any material from the 
Russians.

“Moscow most likely chose WikiLeaks because of its self-proclaimed reputation 
for authenticity. Disclosures through WikiLeaks did not contain any evident 
forgeries,” the agencies found.

The intelligence assessment found that a multifaceted Russian influence 
campaign, going beyond the data breaches at the Democratic National Committee, 
began as an effort to undermine Clinton’s “expected presidency” and included 
state-owned media and social media campaigns. It foreshadowed “future influence 
efforts worldwide, including against US allies and their election processes”.

“We also assess Putin and the Russian Government aspired to help 
President-elect Trump’s election chances when possible by discrediting 
Secretary Clinton and publicly contrasting her unfavorably to him,” the report 
said.


While Russian influence campaigns against western powers and Russia’s 
neighbors have been seen before, and are “designed to be deniable”, the 
intelligence agencies called the public release of the stolen data 
“unprecedented”.

Russia also “collected on some Republican-affiliated targets”, the report 
claims, without elaboration, but “did not conduct a comparable disclosure 
campaign”.

After meeting with US intelligence officials at Trump Tower, Trump did not 
endorse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/06/donald-trump-russia-hacking-meeting-intelligence-officials>
 the conclusion of Russian interference but said he would task his 
administration with devising a new plan to “aggressively combat and and stop 
cyber attacks”.


Russian treachery is extreme and it is everywhere | Nick Cohen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/07/russian-treachery-extreme-and-everywhere>
In a statement following his meeting with intelligence chiefs, Trump discussed 
digital intrusions in a generic sense, referring to “Russia, China, other 
countries, outside groups and people” that engage in digital theft, remaining 
agnostic on the intelligence agencies’ conclusion of Russian interference.

He said it was ultimately irrelevant, describing the data penetration and leak 
as having “absolutely no effect on the outcome of the election”.


Democrats seized on the report. Representative Adam Schiff, ranking member of 
the House intelligence select committee, said: “The President-elect’s statement 
… is not supported by the briefing, report, or common sense.”

Chuck Schumer, minority leader in the Senate, raised the prospect of a fresh 
investigation by a select committee.

“We need to confront this interference head on,” he said, “in an aggressive 
and bipartisan manner. If we don’t, it’ll be open season for any foreign power 
who wants to cause trouble in our elections.”

Republicans were quick to deny any suggestion that the election result might 
have been different without the cyber-attack.

While acknowledging Russian meddling, House Speaker Paul Ryan said: “We must 
also be clear that there is no evidence that there was any interference in the 
voting or balloting process. We cannot allow partisans to exploit this report 
in an attempt to delegitimise the president-elect’s victory.”

Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, meanwhile, called for 
“additional punishments on Russia for their cyber interference in the 2016 
elections”.

Nancy Pelosi, the Democratic leader in the House, said: “As stunning as this 
report is in it revelations, I wish the American people could have access to 
more details.”

Several US cybersecurity firms, including CrowdStrike and FireEye, have 
released public reports attributing the data breaches and disclosures to groups 
in Russia, providing vastly more technical detail and analysis than does the 
declassified report.

Brian Bartholomew of Russia-based security firm Kaspersky believes the hacks 
were the work of a group known by several code names, among them Fancy Bear, 
Sofacy and APT 29.

Bartholomew told the Guardian that while Kaspersky tends to shy away from 
attribution and focus on deterrence and analysis, it had already become 
difficult to reach any other conclusion than that Russian state actors were 
behind the Fancy Bear hacks.

“[Julian] Assange said it could have been a 14-year-old hacker – if you look 
at the collective operations of this group, there’s no way a 14-year-old has 
this much money, time and effort to conduct all of these operations together,” 
he said.

Kaspersky believes Fancy Bear controlled several operations attributed to 
Islamic State and other international groups, among them hacks on TV5Monde, the 
German Bundestag and the Democratic National Committee. Those attacks look 
sloppy and public by design, Bartholomew said.


“What it came down to was essentially plausible deniability,” he said. “You 
have an espionage group that is linked to a nation-state group; if you have a 
group that is targeting media or election systems, that’s taking it past the 
line that traditional groups used to follow.”

The fronts for Fancy Bear allowed a more organized and well-funded actor to 
pretend to be a gang of dissidents that just happened to act in a way that 
furthered the interests of the group backing them. “It all forms a line with 
the Russian sphere of influence,” said Bartholomew.


Bartholomew said he hoped the new report would contain at least some new 
technical details. Instead, it contains an analysis of Russian state news 
outlet Russia Today dating back more than four years, and the detail that among 
other tactics, the Russian GRU intelligence agency is said to have hired 
Twitter trolls.

“Pro-Kremlin bloggers had prepared a Twitter campaign, #DemocracyRIP, on 
election night in anticipation of Secretary Clinton’s victory, judging from 
their social media activity,” analysts wrote in the declassified report.


Hours before the release of the declassified report, Trump derided the intense 
political focus on the hack as a “political witch-hunt”, engineered to 
delegitimize his presidency before it begins.

“To some extent, it’s a witch-hunt. They just focus on this,” Trump told the 
New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/06/us/politics/donald-trump-wall-hack-russia.html>
 ahead of his Friday briefing by senior US intelligence officials. Trump and 
Putin have expressed mutual respect, and Trump has said he desires awarmer 
relationship with Russia 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/donald-trumps-plan-to-partner-with-russia-faces-new-bigger-hurdle-1483057733>
 – a desire shared by predecessors George W Bush and Barack Obama whose 
achievement was thwarted by divergent national interests.

It was the latest turbulence in what is shaping up to be an acrimonious 
relationship with US intelligence agencies. Trump has repeatedly dismissed the 
Russian hacking assessment, even putting out a dismissive December statement 
saying its authors were “the same people that said Saddam Hussein had weapons 
of mass destruction”. This week hecited Assange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/04/republicans-break-donald-trump-tweet-julian-assange-dnc-hacks>
, a hated figure in US intelligence circles, casting doubt on Russian 
culpability.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fjoe-biden-donald-trump-grow-up-adult-judy-woodruff-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Biden%20to%20Trump%3A%20%E2%80%98Grow%20up%2C%20Donald.%20Time%20to%20be%20an%20adult%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fjoe-biden-donald-trump-grow-up-adult-judy-woodruff-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Biden%20to%20Trump%3A%20%E2%80%98Grow%20up%2C%20Donald.%20Time%20to%20be%20an%20adult%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fjoe-biden-donald-trump-grow-up-adult-judy-woodruff-video&media=>
Biden to Trump: ‘Grow up, Donald. Time to be an adult’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/06/joe-biden-donald-trump-grow-up-adult-judy-woodruff-video>
By mid-Friday, Trump tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/817413321058029568> that he wanted 
the House and Senate intelligence committees to investigate “top secret 
intelligence shared with NBC prior to me seeing it”.

Young Russian denies she aided election hackers: ‘I never work with douchebags’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/06/russian-hacker-putin-election-alisa-shevchenko>
In a Senate hearing on Thursday, the NSA director warned that intelligence 
officers perceiving disrespect or irrelevance from a Trump White House might “
walk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/jan/05/russia-election-hacking-hearing-congress>
”. The outgoing director of national intelligence testified that US 
intelligence has only grown more confident in attributing the DNC hack to 
Russia since first releasing itsassessment in October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/07/us-russia-dnc-hack-interfering-presidential-election>
.

Leon Panetta, a former CIA director and Pentagon chief in the Obama 
administration, told NBC he has “never seen anything like this in my lifetime 
<https://twitter.com/TODAYshow/status/817344488834146304>,” with a president 
elect “undermining the credibility of the very intelligence agencies that have 
to provide information to him in order for him to be president of the United 
States”. The outgoing vice-president, Joseph Biden, said it was “absolutely 
mindless 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/06/joe-biden-attacks-trump-for-mindless-dismissal-of-agencies-intelligence>
” for Trump to feud with the intelligence apparatus.

Ahead of the report’s release, 176 Democratic members of the House of 
Representatives threw their support to a push, opposed by GOP leadership, to 
create an independent commission to investigate the electoral interference and 
recommend measures to prevent future breaches.

“If we do nothing, we are telling the world our elections are open for 
influence by the most aggressive meddler,” said Eric Swalwell of California, a 
senior member of the intelligence committee and co-sponsor of the effort.

Trump struck a conciliatory tone after his “constructive” meeting with Clapper 
and other senior intelligence officials.

“I have tremendous respect for the work and service done by the men and women 
of this community to our great nation,” Trump said in a statement.

 