
PRO Rugby, the US professional rugby union competition that completed its 
first season in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/29/pro-rugby-denver-stampede-ohio-aviators>
 and employed internationals including Mils Muliaina, Mirco Bergamasco and 
Pedrie Wannenburg, could be set to close.

He has built it – will they come? Doug Schoninger and the US pro rugby dream
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/16/doug-schoninger-us-pro-rugby> 
On Tuesday, league owner Doug Schoninger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/16/doug-schoninger-us-pro-rugby> 
said in a letter to players firstreported by Rugby Today 
<http://www.rugbytoday.com/elite/down-goes-pro> that contracts will be 
terminated if agreement cannot be reached with USA Rugby, the governing body of 
the sport in America.

He insisted however that his project was not closing down. Statements posted 
to PRO Rugby’ssocial media accounts 
<https://www.facebook.com/search/top/?q=pro%20rugby%20north%20america> said it 
planned future competition and quoted a lineattributed to 
<http://oupacademic.tumblr.com/post/48310773463/misquotation-reports-of-my-death-have-been>
 Mark Twain, saying: “Reports of our death have been greatly exaggerated.”

In the letter to players, Schoninger wrote: “We have been having serious 
issues with the cooperation and the enforcement of our agreement with USA Rugby.

“We have been actively trying to resolve our issues with USA Rugby for over 
four months and, unfortunately, it appears that USA Rugby will not honor the 
commitments they made to us.”

He added: “We are hopeful, but with no assurances, that we will be able to 
resolve all issues with USA Rugby prior to end of the termination clause 
period.”

That period is 30 days, Rugby Today reported, adding that as the league year 
ends in mid-March, players will lose two months’ pay. Schoninger wrote that pay 
due on 15 December had been delayed but would be paid this week.

In a statement 
<https://www.usarugby.org/2016/12/statement-regarding-pro-rugby-december-2016/>
, the governing body said: “USA Rugby categorically denies any and all 
allegations purported by PRO Rugby Tuesday 20 December, and is saddened to hear 
of the planned termination of all valid contracts signed by athletes that have 
fulfilled their playing duties for season one and were scheduled to be paid 
through the duration of their 12-month contracts.”

Schoninger met USA Rugby chief executive Dan Payne in New York City last week 
<https://twitter.com/danpayne_USAR/status/809206976093765632>. Issues discussed 
were reported to include the PRO Rugby sanctioning agreement; the Celtic and 
Italian Pro12 competition’sexpressed interest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/23/pro-12-north-american-teams-expanded-league>
 inoperating franchises in North America 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/02/pro12-north-america-us-pro-rugby-league>
; and reported moves by Schoninger to buy the financially strickenSouthern Kings
 
<http://www.heraldlive.co.za/sport/2016/12/14/us-move-invest-ep-rugby-hits-snag/>
 South African Super Rugby team.


Schoninger reached his sanctioning agreement with then USA Rugby chief 
executive Nigel Melville in 2015, to run until 2019. Its exclusivity or 
otherwise has been contested.

In September, Schoninger reacted strongly to reports regarding the Pro12, 
telling the Guardian they were “a distraction I don’t need”.

He added: “Unfortunately what I’m going to have to do if [the Pro12 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/pro12> plan] continues is I’m going to have 
to be a better version of them, not a better version of me … We all know how to 
get a good rugby competition in this world. You pull out a big chequebook. And 
that’s easy.”

In response, USA chief executive Payne expressed support for PRO Rugby but did 
not disavow interest from overseas, saying: “Any outside competition would have 
to align within the strategy and plan we are developing that is focused on 
growing the game within our borders.”

Following reports of Schoninger’s interest in the Southern Kings, SA Rugby, 
the South African governing body,told media 
<http://www.heraldlive.co.za/sport/2016/12/14/us-move-invest-ep-rugby-hits-snag/>
 USA Rugby had given “a clear indication” it did not support the move.
PRO Rugby (@ProRugbyUSA) 
@Rugby_Today <https://twitter.com/Rugby_Today> @MartinPengelly 
<https://twitter.com/MartinPengelly> Sorry RT. We are neither down or out. We 
are reacting to actions of@USARugby <https://twitter.com/USARugby>. Stay tuned 
grave dancers.
 <https://twitter.com/ProRugbyUSA/status/811339716096360448> December 20, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/ProRugbyUSA/status/811339716096360448> 
On Tuesday, Schoninger responded to reports of his competition’s demise with 
defiance. ThePRO Rugby Twitter account <https://twitter.com/ProRugbyUSA> 
published a series of emotive tweets, starting with the message: “We are 
neither down nor out. We are reacting to actions of USA Rugby. Stay tuned grave 
dancers.”


US union voices support for PRO Rugby league in light of foreign interest
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/22/usa-rugby-pro12-pro-rugby> 
Subsequent tweet <https://twitter.com/ProRugbyUSA/status/811349563726561281>s 
included the contention that “at this point @USARugby could use some of 
@realDonaldTrump[’s] can do attitude”. Statementsposted to Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/prorugby/photos/a.933573513377839.1073741828.928089210592936/1217801858288335/?type=3&theater>
 said the league planned to continue and, over a picture of Twain, said: “As 
everyone seems to be reporting our death we feel the need to comment that: ‘The 
reports of our death have been greatly exaggerated.’

PRO Rugby’s first season was contested by five teams and won by the Denver 
Stampede. Last week, it was announced thatthe San Francisco team would be 
disbanded <http://www.rugbytoday.com/elite/pro-rugby-nixes-san-francisco-rush>. 
The other teams affected by Tuesday’s news are the Ohio Aviators, the 
Sacramento Express and the San Diego Breakers.

Expansion to Chicago, New York and Boston had been mooted; attempts to 
establish teams in Canada fell through. The competition’s director of rugby, 
Stephen Lewis, left in October and has not yet been replaced.

Schoninger told The Province 
<http://theprovince.com/sports/rugby/not-a-merry-christmas-for-pro-rugby-as-player-contracts-set-to-be-terminated-league-wide>
, a Canadian newspaper: “I still believe, more strongly than ever, that rugby 
can be a huge sport in North America and I will passionately pursue the growth 
of the game which will benefit our fans, players and coaches.


“The hurdles that have inhibited the growth of the game for years in the USA 
are the same ones that I am navigating my way through now.”
 