
The USA women’s goalkeeper Hope Solo has been suspended for six months by US 
Soccer for disparaging comments about Sweden following theAmericans’ early 
departure from the Rio Olympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/12/usa-lose-womens-football-sweden-olympic-quarter-finals-penalty-kicks>
.

Solo called the Swedes “a bunch of cowards” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/12/hope-solo-sweden-cowards-olympics-football-rio-2016>
 for focusing on defense rather than attacking the three-time defending 
champion US team. Sweden eliminated the USA 4-3 on penalty kicks following a 
1-1 draw in a quarterfinal match.

Hope Solo calls Sweden 'bunch of cowards' after USA falter at Olympics
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/12/hope-solo-sweden-cowards-olympics-football-rio-2016>
The US Soccer president Sunil Gulati said on Wednesday that Solo’s comments 
were “unacceptable and do not meet the standard of conduct we require from our 
national team players”.

“Beyond the athletic arena, and beyond the results, the Olympics celebrate and 
represent the ideals of fair play and respect,” Gulati said. “We expect all of 
our representatives to honor those principles, with no exceptions.”

The 35-year-old Solo, who was previously suspended for 30 days early in 2015 
for her conduct, will not be eligible for selection to the national team until 
February.
Solo was a lightning rod during the Olympic tournament, irking fans in Brazil 
when she posted a photo on social media of herself covered with mosquito 
netting and armed with insect repellant. Fans booed her mercilessly and 
hollered “Zika!” each time she kicked downfield.

Then she caused a stir with her “cowards” comment. 

Sweden’s coach, Pia Sundhage, who led the US team to gold medals in Beijing 
and London, replied by stating: “It’s OK to be a coward if you win.”

Solo has been making headlines throughout her stellar career. 

Last month, she became the first goalkeeper with 100 international shutouts 
when the United States defeated South Africa 1-0 at Soldier Field in Chicago. 
It was also her 150th career win.

David Squires on ... Hope Solo's inglorious exit from the Olympic Games
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/picture/2016/aug/18/david-squires-on-hope-solos-inglorious-exit-from-the-olympic-games>
Solo won her second straight Golden Glove award for the best goalkeeper at the 
Women’s World Cup a year ago. Over the course of the tournament in Canada, she 
had five clean sheets and allowed only three goals in seven games.

She has vocally advocated for women’s rights. Solo was among the US players 
who filed a complaint with the US Equal Employment Opportunity Commission for
wage discrimination 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/31/us-womens-soccer-team-accuses-federation-wage-discrimination>
, saying the men’s national team players have been paid much more than many on 
the women’s team, which for years has outperformed the US men on the 
international stage.

More recently, she has called for better conditions for players in the 
National Women’s Soccer League.

She has also been trying to avoid trial on misdemeanor domestic violence 
charges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/09/us-soccer-hope-solo-fails-legal-bid-assault-charges>
 after a 2014 incident at her sister’s home, when the goalkeeper was accused of 
being intoxicated and assaulting her sister and 17-year-old nephew. Solo said 
she was a victim in the altercation. Earlier this year, an appeals court in 
Washington state rejected Solo’s request to avoid trial.

 