
The Victoria and Albert museum moved quickly to issue a statement confirming 
that its new director,Tristram Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tristram-hunt>, is committed to the 
principle of free entry within hours of his surprise appointment.

Tristram Hunt to quit as MP to become V&A director
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/13/tristram-hunt-to-quit-as-mp-to-become-va-director>
The Labour MP wrote a piece for the Guardian in 2011 headlined, “We need to 
start charging for museums and galleries again” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/mar/06/tristram-hunt-entrance-fees-museums?CMP=share_btn_tw>
 suggesting that museums like the V&A should charge visitors a £5 entry fee.

Free entry has been a red line issue for the major museums, and the V&A 
released a statement setting out Hunt’s position shortly after it emerged that 
he had been appointed to a job that paid his predecessor £145,000 a year.

“Tristram is fully committed to free museum entrance,” it said. “He also 
remains passionate about protecting regional museums and building stronger 
relationships between local and national museums for the benefit of all 
visitors.”

In the article, Hunt complained that huge cuts to local authority budgets were 
leading to closures and charging around the country. “Yet, in the midst of 
this, the teeming London museums continue to enjoy a state subsidy to retain 
free admission.” When so many of the world’s great museums charge, he wrote, 
“why not a fiver for London’s great galleries? Would it really undermine our 
cultural competitiveness?”

Hunt is a respected historian, specialising in Victorian urban history, and a 
brilliant communicator, but there will be surprise that V&A trustees, chaired 
by the Condé Nast magazine publisher, Nicholas Coleridge, have chosen someone 
with no experience of working in, let alone running, a museum.

The appointment of the MP, who has represented Stoke on Trent Central since 
2010, caught most people off guard, with his name not cropping up in any of the 
art world gossip that generally precedes such appointments.


The names mentioned most regularly had been Luke Syson, the former National 
Gallery curator who is now in charge of European sculpture and decorative arts 
at the Met in New York; Tim Knox, formerly at Sir John Soane’s Museum inLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> and now in charge of the Fitzwilliam in 
Cambridge; and Tim Reeve, the extremely able deputy director of the V&A, who 
has been acting director since Martin Roth’s departure.


However, it is not the first time an outsider has been brought in to run a 
major museum. In 1987 the National Gallery appointed a former lecturer and 
specialist magazine editor as its director. Neil MacGregor went on to oversee 
the gallery’s Sainsbury wing extension, before moving to the British Museum, 
which he ran for 16 years. He is rightly regarded as one of the greatest arts 
leaders of all time.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fva-reiterates-commitment-to-free-entry-after-tristram-hunt-appointment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F58ddcf64c51bcf133a9c2a656607d3124d00897e%2F0_82_1313_788%2F1313.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=V%26A%20reiterates%20commitment%20to%20free%20entry%20after%20Tristram%20Hunt%20appointment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fva-reiterates-commitment-to-free-entry-after-tristram-hunt-appointment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=V%26A%20reiterates%20commitment%20to%20free%20entry%20after%20Tristram%20Hunt%20appointment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fva-reiterates-commitment-to-free-entry-after-tristram-hunt-appointment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F58ddcf64c51bcf133a9c2a656607d3124d00897e%2F0_82_1313_788%2F1313.jpg>
 Inside the Victoria and Albert Museum. Photograph: Jean-Pierre Dalbera via 
Flickr 
Sandy Nairne, the former director of the National Portrait Gallery, said 
Hunt’s appointment sounded like a good one. “I have always felt that we should 
think very openly about the range of talented people who could lead our 
institutions. It doesn’t do us well to have narrow precepts about who should be 
doing these things. Leadership can come from many different places so this is a 
really interesting appointment.”

Those sentiments were echoed by Stephen Deuchar, director of the Art Fund, who 
called Hunt’s appointment “a very clever choice”. He added: “I think it is an 
inspired choice, I really do. He is a great communicator and he is really 
committed to the social purposes and potential of museums and visual culture 
more generally.”

Hunt may not have run a museum before, but Deuchar, who once ran Tate Britain, 
said that was not essential: “He knows the UK museum scene better than a lot of 
museum professionals, I dare say. It looks as if he has the perfect range of 
experience to apply to this really important job.”

The V&A won the UK museum of the year award in 2016 after a year that saw its 
most visited ever show, an Alexander McQueen retrospective, and the opening of
restored permanent galleries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/dec/07/europe-1600-1815-v-and-a-london-dark-disturbing-world>
 devoted to European arts and crafts from 1600-1815.

The museum is due to open new spaces in Dundee, China and the Olympic Park in 
east London, described as a museum for the digital age. In South Kensington, , 
the V&A will this year open its new £49m extension, creating a grand entrance 
on Exhibition Road and a temporary exhibition space.

Hunt replaces Roth, the German museum leader who decided to step down while 
the museum was on a high – a decision accelerated by his disillusionment over 
the Brexit vote.

Coleridge said Hunt was “a highly compelling mixture of experience across 
public life, the arts, history, education and academia, and knows our 
collections well from his writing and broadcasting. In addition, he is an 
informed and articulate leader and communicator on numerous facets of culture, 
both historic and contemporary, and I greatly look forward to working with him 
at the V&A.”

His appointment was welcomed by the culture secretary, Karen Bradley, who 
said: “He has a wealth of experience as a historian and a great passion for 
arts and culture that will serve him very well in this role. The V&A is one of 
the world’s leading art institutions and I am sure that Tristram will build on 
its fantastic reputation further.”

The V&A is one of two important appointments being made in the cultural 
sector. Maria Balshaw, currently head of Manchester galleries, has been chosen 
by Tate trustees to succeed Sir Nicholas Serota, but the decision still needs 
to be approved by the prime minister.

It was all but confirmed by the culture minister Matt Hancock, who this week 
said: “I think she would be an amazing director at the Tate. She’s got both the 
capacity to run and to lead a large organisation, but she’s also got that verve 
and that spark to really make it sparkle.”
 