
Valencia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/valencia> have sacked Pako 
Ayestaran as coach less than six months after handing him the job following a 
dire start to the season with the club propping up the La Liga table. They have 
yet to earn a point after four defeats and were beaten 2-1 by Athletic Bilbao 
on Sunday after taking the lead.

“After today’s board meeting, Valencia Football Club have taken the decision 
to relieve coach Pako Ayestaran of his duties,” the club said in a statement on 
Tuesday. “The decision was taken after analysing the team’s current sporting 
situation and the results obtained.”

Valencia are bottom and fast becoming the old lady who swallowed a fly | Sid 
Lowe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/19/valencia-bottom-la-liga-sid-lowe>
The former Valencia defender Voro González has been named as interim coach 
while the club find a successor.

A former assistant manager to Rafa Benítez at Valencia, Ayestaran rejoined the 
club in February as assistant to Gary Neville and was named as his immediate 
successor in March, whenthe former England international was sacked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/mar/30/gary-neville-valencia-experiment-undignified-end>
.

Neville had posted the worst record of any coach in the club’s history but 
Ayestaran has now got that unwanted honour, taking 10 points in 12 games, 
winning three, drawing one and losing eight. Neville picked up 14 points in 16.

Although Ayestaran lost the first game after succeeding Neville, things began 
to look up after three successive victories, includinga 2-1 win at eventual 
champions Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/apr/17/barcelona-v-valencia-la-liga-live>
. Despite his team losing the final three games of the season, Ayestaran was 
handed a new contract until 2018.

The club offloaded 18 players in the close season, including the influential 
Germany centre-backShkodran Mustafi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/25/arsenal-agree-35m-fee-with-valencia-for-shkodran-mustafi>
, the Portugal midfielder Andre Gomes and the strikers Paco Alcacer and Alvaro 
Negredo for a total of over €100m.

They brought in only seven new players with the most high profile being the 
former Manchester United winger Nani and the defender Eliaquim Mangala, who was 
signed on loan from Manchester City.

Ayestaran is the club’s eighth coach since 2012, and the third to lose his job 
in the last year. His sacking, coming so soon after Neville’s departure, is the 
latest blow to the billionaire Peter Lim, who acquired the club in 2014 for 
€420m and cleared the club’s debts of €200m.

Despite the Singaporean’s investment, Valencia are in the midst of the worst 
run of results in their 97-year history.
 