
Right by the dressing room door at Mestalla, fixed on to the wall next to the 
stairs and passed by hundreds of fans at the end of every game, passed by the 
players and the manager too, is a suggestion box. Made from black metal with
Buzón de sugerencias stuck on the front in white, and a tiny window at the 
bottom so you can see if there’s anything inside, it’s only small butthere’s a 
little slot across the top and room enough for recommendations 
<https://twitter.com/sidlowe/status/644254228312158208>. Sign Cristiano 
Ronaldo, perhaps (and sign him,not just his image rights 
<http://www.eurosport.co.uk/football/liga/2015-2016/cristiano-ronaldo-signs-image-rights-deal-with-businessman-peter-lim_sto4800746/story.shtml>
).Bring back Ian Cathro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/mar/02/valencia-real-sociedad-la-liga-david-moyes-ian-cathro>
, maybe. Or how about: score goals and win games? And whatever you do, don’t 
tempt them.

Five-star Napoli blow away Lazio but Serie A title talk is premature
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/21/napoli-lazio-serie-a-title-talk-premature>
“Them” are the Valencia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/valencia> 
supporters and even if he’d never peered inside, the club’s manager, Nuno 
Espirito Santo, surely knew that last one already. They are not the pantomime 
villains they are too often portrayed as, but Nuno knows that this is not 
always an easy club to manage and, just in case he had forgotten, on Saturday 
night he was handed an uncomfortable reminder. What the former Barcelona coach 
Johan Cruyff always called the “entorno” – that debilitating swirl of pressure, 
criticism and self-interest around the club – is certainly present here too 
and, to employ the unusual euphemism, Valencia’s fans are among the most 
“demanding” in Spain: loud, committed and not afraid to turn. Many a manager 
has been whistled at Mestalla. And plenty have been whistled out of there.

A man with presence and charisma, Nuno worked at making supporters 
participants last season, perhaps in part because he knew all that. He 
cultivated them, bringing them alongas a new kind of enthusiasm swept over the 
club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/oct/06/nuno-valencia-atletico-madrid>
 and theyturned up at training to support the team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/jan/05/real-madrids-run-ends-while-barcelona-shoot-themselves-in-the-foot>
, waited for the team bus outside the ground for home matches armed with 
fireworks, and welcomed them back again from away ones. Nuno put them at the 
heart of his discourse, game after game, and after the final match when 
Valencia reached the Champions League he said they had done it together. He was 
popular and a populist, but this weekend the populace turned.

“Mestalla against Nuno” ran the headline in the Valencian sports daily Super 
Deporte, handily drawing onestalla which also means “erupt”. Mestalla erupted, 
all right.

There were just a couple of minutes left and Valencia were drawing 0-0 with 
Real Betis. By the final whistle they had taken 22 shots but only five were on 
target and rarely did they genuinely look like finding a way through, even 
though Betis had been down to 10 men for over 40 minutes. Defeated 3-2 by Zenit 
St Petersburg in the Champions League three days earlier,a game for which only 
28,000 turned up 
<http://www.espnfc.com/blog/espn-fc-united/68/post/2619095/in-the-champions-leaguevalencia-make-an-inauspicious-start>
, Valencia were on course for a third consecutive home match without victory; 
four games into the season, they had won just once – late at Sporting Gijón – 
and scored only two goals.

Valencia’s fans had given a huge ovation to the Betis winger Joaquín as he 
left the field pointing at his heart, clapped off on his return to Mestalla 
where he played for five years. Now they voiced different emotions. It came 
from up the stands, where Alvaro Negredo was sitting, one of four starters 
against Zenit left out of the squad for this game, and it took the form of that 
classic symbol of discontent, the white hanky wave and the whistles. Then they 
started chanting “Nuno, véte ya!” – Nuno, go now!

Now, whistling does not necessarily mean that everything has broken down, or 
that fans cannot be won over once more. Even some chants do not mean that. Not 
in Spain and certainly not at Mestalla. There was something in Rodrigo’s words 
this weekend when he said: “If you don’t want to hear whistles, don’t go out on 
to the pitch.” But this wasn’t one or two of them and it did matter: soon, the 
chant felt almost unanimous, huge numbers joining in. And when the final 
whistle went, the manager who always made a point of leading his players into 
the centre of the pitch to applaud the fans headed straight down the tunnel to 
the dressing room. From there he went up the stairs and into the press room. 
Where, of course, he was asked about it.

“The question is normal and the response is obvious. The fans show their 
discontent and they express it towards the person responsible for the team and 
that’s me. If that is what the criticism is, I accept it and I assume that 
responsibility,” Nuno said. Then he added: “If it is for something else, I 
don’t know and I don’t care.”

And that’s the thing: it is for something else – at least in part. Calling for 
the manager’s head now, just four games into the season, is absurd – even 
Nuno’s biggest critics admitted that.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F21%2Fvalencia-fans-turn-on-nuno-la-liga%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6255e96e55192566c256ab17954b1c011d492f77%2F86_63_3338_2003%2F3338.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Valencia%20fans%20turn%20on%20Nuno%20after%20running%20out%20of%20people%20to%20blame&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F21%2Fvalencia-fans-turn-on-nuno-la-liga%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Valencia%20fans%20turn%20on%20Nuno%20after%20running%20out%20of%20people%20to%20blame&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F21%2Fvalencia-fans-turn-on-nuno-la-liga%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6255e96e55192566c256ab17954b1c011d492f77%2F86_63_3338_2003%2F3338.jpg>
 Nowhere to hide: Valencia’s Portuguese coach Nuno at the side of the pitch in 
the match against Betis Photograph: Jose Jordan/AFP/Getty Images 
Valencia have not been beaten this season and have lost just once in 21 league 
games, against Barcelona back in April. Seventh place is not a disaster: ask 
Sevilla who are currently bottom and no one has turned on Unai Emery,certainly 
not like Valencia’s fans turned on him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2012/mar/12/valencia-prisoners-of-their-success>
 when he was there, taking them to third place three years in a row. Nuno had a 
point when he insisted: “There is no need to change, just strengthen what we’re 
doing,” as did the captain Dani Parejo when he explained it as a case of “the 
ball not wanting to go in”, insisting: “We’re playing better than our 
opponents: we have more of the ball, we’re putting in more crosses, we’re 
getting into the area more, we’re just struggling to finish off the moves.”

But there has been something unconvincing about Valencia, beyond the results. 
As one local columnist slightly oddly put it: “They’re like my fridge in the 
summer, when nothing inside it is getting cold: not broken, exactly, but not 
really working.” And even last season, Valencia’s coaching staff knew that the 
their position was precarious, all too aware that reaching the Champions League 
was not so much an objective as an obligation. This season, expectations were 
higher, the demands too, while the margins narrowed, but Valencia have not 
improved; not yet, anyway. However even that would not explain the change. No, 
this runs deeper.

It is not just that Valencia have not improved, it is that some fans suspected 
that would be the case; some were maybe even waiting for it. The conditions for 
complaint were already there. Nicolás Otamendi departed and Diego Alves is 
injured. The assistant coach, Ian Cathro, has gone, too – and there may 
genuinely be something in that. Meanwhile, Nuno’s relationship with some 
players has become a little tenser, his popularity waning. His assistant coach 
Phil Neville, incidentally, has proven very popular with players. Meanwhile, 
though Valencia officially spent more money than anyone else this summer, that 
figure is misleading: of their total €137m outlay, €74m was spent on buying 
players they had already brought in last summer on loan but with compulsory 
purchase deals.

So? So this was the second summer backed by Peter Lim’s financial muscle and 
fans wanted stars. They got three 19-year-olds: exciting players understandably 
presented as a sign that the club were building for the future but not the 
players some supporters demand, while two of them were represented by Jorge 
Mendes, Lim’s business partner. The same Mendes who took Otamendi to 
Manchester. Besides, that was not the only movement.

This summer, the president, Amadeo Salvo, left and so did the sporting 
director Francisco Rufete and his scout Roberto Fabián Ayala. It didn’t matter 
that Salvo was the president who had worked to make Lim’s arrival possible: the 
owner, not unjustifiably, wanted his own people in charge. Salvo was replaced 
as president by Lay Hoon Chan; no one replaced Rufete, all of which helped to 
underline that their roles had always been limited anyway, with real executive 
power concentrated largely in the hands of Lim and Mendes. For the first time, 
doubts were raised by the fans. Salvo, too, had worked hard to present a 
populist project for the club, making the fans participants. Rufete is a former 
player. Ayala is a club legend.

Those doubts surfaced again this weekend. Nuno, a former goalkeeper who was 
Mendes’s first client, has always been seen as Lim’s manager. When Valencia 
sacked Juan Antonio Pizzi, Salvo admitted that there was no point in keeping 
him on only for the incoming owner to sack him when the purchase went through a 
few months later and Nuno’s relationship with Rufete had not always been good. 
It may not have been fair, but the Portuguese was seen as the winner of what 
some called a summer “civil war”. Lim, Mendes and Nuno were the victors; 
importantly, the vanquished were popular. Some supporters cooled on the coach 
and there had been whistles already.

Eleven days ago, Mario Kempes, arguably the most important player in 
Valencia’s history and a man who has an ambassadorial role at the club, 
suggested that Nuno had accumulated too much power. “You can’t take a corner 
and head it in yourself: Nuno did well last season, when he was only the 
coach,” he said, adding that he didn’t like the departure of Salvo, Rufete and 
Ayala or businessmen – Mendes, in this case – getting involved in football 
clubs. His words, inevitably, had an impact, adding to the mix when Valencia 
drew 0-0 this weekend. As one newspaper put it halfway through August: “If the 
ball is on Valencia’s side, everything will be wonderful. But if not …”

The former Valencia goalkeeper Santi Canizares said there were three types of 
people calling for Nuno to go: those that blamed him for Salvo (and Rufete and 
Ayala) being pushed out; those who never really thought he was that good in the 
first place; and those that always want someone to blame. That someone has 
become Nuno; there’s no one else left.

“The fans show their discontent and they express it towards the person 
responsible for the team and that’s me,” Nuno said afterwards. It is more than 
just the team now; it is everything, whether it is his fault or not. Every 
doubt, every complaint, every suspicion, the missed chances and the missed 
signings. With Mendes not there, Lim in a private box and Nuno down on the 
touchline, visible and exposed, he becomes the target. The only one who 
actually can go now. Still, at least there is one, obvious way out of this: 
start scoring goals and winning games.

Well, it’s a suggestion.

Talking points

• It was all set up to be the day that Cristiano Ronaldo broke the record, or 
at least equalled it. Reporters were dispatched to the Bernabéu, calculators in 
hand, stats scribbled in notebooks –ahem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/19/cristiano-ronaldo-real-madrid-granada-la-liga-match-report>
 – but it was not to be. Real Madrid did win this weekend, but Ronaldo did not 
score. Instead, Karim Benzema did. He got the only goal of a game in which 
Granada felt that they should have got more. Madrid’s goal had been offside; 
Granada’s “goal”, disallowed, had not. Afterwards Granada’s manager José Ramón 
Sandoval complained that Madrid had shown a lack of respect after their website 
invited supporters to bet on how many goals they would score. He might have had 
a point – and the chances are he showed it to his players – but for the fact 
that the website article is put up for every game, in one form or another, and 
run by one of their sponsors: a betting company.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F18%2Fsyrian-refugees-tripped-hungarian-camerawoman-real-madrid-stars-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F18%2F1442601790016%2FKP_476360_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Syrian%20refugees%20tripped%20by%20Hungarian%20camerawoman%20meet%20Real%20Madrid%20stars%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F18%2Fsyrian-refugees-tripped-hungarian-camerawoman-real-madrid-stars-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Syrian%20refugees%20tripped%20by%20Hungarian%20camerawoman%20meet%20Real%20Madrid%20stars%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F18%2Fsyrian-refugees-tripped-hungarian-camerawoman-real-madrid-stars-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F18%2F1442601790016%2FKP_476360_crop_640x360.jpg>
• Ronaldo ran on to the pitch with Zaid, the son of Osama Abdul Mohsen, the 
Syrian refugeewho was (in)famously kicked by that Hungarian camera woman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/08/hungarian-nationalist-tv-camera-operator-filmed-kicking-refugee-children>
. The family are now setting up home in Getafe and they were invited to the 
Bernabéu on Saturday. Lovely.

• Leo: let someone else take them. Asked if Messi scoring twice but missing 
another penalty – that’s six of his last 12 now, 15 of 65 in total, 23% – meant 
that he was “more human”, Luis Enrique replied: “There’s not much about Messi 
that’s human.” Meanwhile, asked if he would change, Marc-Andre ter Stegen said, 
deadpan and firmly: “No. Why change?”

• For one brief moment, Fernando Torres was back in Austria in 2008, dinking 
the ball over the goalkeeper as Atlético defeated Eibar 2-0. He had come on at 
half-time and made the first goal, then scored the second. As for Ángel Correa, 
he had come on to score the first and make the second. Torres now has 99 
Atlético goals.

• Celta were exceptional in the first half as they defeated Sevilla 2-1, even 
if their coach Eduardo Berizzo was not too impressed with the kick-off time. 
“Noon in the north is one thing,” he said, “but noon down in the south is 
something else. I am surprised that we didn’t have breaks so that the players 
could rehydrate.”

• In the weekend’s most enjoyable game, Sporting Gijón earned their first win. 
The first-half was enjoyable, anyway. Two-nil up after eight minutes, they were 
soon level but won 3-2, with all the goals scored in the first 34 minutes. 
Sanabria got two of them; Halilovic made two and they were very tasty.

• Rayo are off the mark but they will have to wait for The Final Countdown: 
this win came away at Las Palmas. So are Getafe but Málaga aren’t: Getafe beat 
Málaga 1-0 at the Coliseum, racking up their first win and leaving their 
visitors without a goal in the opening four games of the season. Leaving owner 
Abdullah Al-Thani a little angry too.He took to Twitter to give some back 
<https://twitter.com/ANAALThani/status/645545674730270720> after fans called 
for him to go. A particular favourite was his own personalDo You Know Who I Am 
<https://twitter.com/ANAALThani/status/645658665429696512>? Qatari royal 
family, in case you didn’t know.Oh, and his claim to love Málaga more than “any 
person on earth” <https://twitter.com/ANAALThani/status/645544861052088320>. 
Which is a big claim. Or might it just be because he doesn’t love any person on 
earth? Anyway, back to teams getting off the mark: Real Sociedad scored their 
first goal of the season and were actually playing pretty well but, down to 10 
men and with their goalkeeper Rulli sent off just before half time, they were 
beaten 3-2 by Espanyol, with Hernán Perez getting a 90th minute winner. David 
Moyes lives in the smartest hotel in an Sebastián.Carry on like this and he’ll 
be checking out sooner rather than later 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/20/real-sociedad-espanyol-la-liga-match-report>
.

Results: Getafe 1-0 Málaga, Real Madrid 1-0 Granada, Valencia 0-0 Betis, Eibar 
0-2 Atlético Madrid, Real Sociedad 2-3 Espanyol, Sevilla 1-2 Celta, Deportivo 
2-3 Sporting, Villarreal 3-1 Athletic Bilbao, Barcelona 4-1 Levante, Las Palmas 
0-1 Rayo.
 