
The total value of Britain’s 28.9m homes has risen by more than 7% in 2016 to 
reach a total of £8.17tn, according to new research.

This means the average property has gone up in value by £56.57 a day, 
according to property website Zoopla, which named theNorfolk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/norfolk> market town of Diss as “the 
year’s biggest winner” when it came to price growth.


The site analysed its price data between 1 January and 7 December 2016, and 
said Britain’s total housing stock was now worth £8,165,502,086,907. This was 
an increase of £559bn – or 7.35% – since January.


Window shopping: Rightmove's 10 most popular properties - 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/dec/19/rightmove-10-most-popular-properties-2016>
Regionally, property values in the east of England were said to have grown the 
most since the start of the year – by 11.56% on average, to reach a typical 
£358,401. The West Midlands was in second place with an increase of 8.74%.


London, which has previously been the region leading the charge, was third 
from bottom in the table with an increase of 5.12%.


At a local level, Diss was named the “best-performing” town, experiencing a 
growth rate of 16.2% and taking the average home’s value to £305,896.

It was one of a number of locations that have become increasingly popular with 
people who are looking for somewhere that enables them to buy a bigger property 
than they could obtain in London and at the same time continue to work in the 
capital. The fastest trains offer a commuting time between Diss and London 
Liverpool Street of less than 90 minutes.


Leatherhead in Surrey came second, with properties typically rising 14.7% to 
reach £833,631.


Aberdeen was named the “poorest performing” town in terms of property values 
over the past year, with average prices falling by an average of 2.83% to 
£217,234.


The collapse in global oil prices has sent house prices tumbling in Aberdeen <>
 and other areas reliant on the North Sea oil industry.

The data also showed Brits spent 2016 looking for outside space. 


According to Zoopla keyword search figures for the year, “garden” remained the 
most popular term. However, “garage” rose from third to second place. The 
biggest mover was “parking,” which soared from the eighth to the fourth most 
popular search term when compared with this time last year.


Lawrence Hall, a spokesperson for the site, said: “2016 has certainly been a 
historic year, with the events of the past six months giving rise to potential 
political uncertainty. However, the property market – it seems – remains 
resilient, and property values across Britain have continued to grow.”

 