
Another uncertain start for the market as European debt worries persist, with 
Vedanta Resources leading the losers following an Indian court ruling which 
ordered a major copper smelter to be closed.

The Madras high court has ruled the Tuticorin plant - the world's ninth 
largest copper smelter owned by Vedanta subsidiary Sterlite Industries - should 
be closed on environmental grounds. A petition challenging its environmental 
clearance and operation was lodged back in 1996 but was finally heard earlier 
this year. Vedanta says a ruling has now been passed, but it is awaiting the 
full text before deciding its next move. It could make an appeal to the supreme 
court.

Meanwhile Tuticorin, which produces almost half of India's total output, has 
indeed stopped production. Vedanta said the plant had been operating for 12 
years and had been in compliance with all the necessary rules, regulations and 
global standards. Vedanta also fell foul of environmental concerns when the 
government rejected its plans to mine bauxite in Orissa.

This latest news has sent Vedanta shares down 113p to £21.48, making it the 
biggest faller in the FTSE 100. Copper has pushed through the $8,000 a tonne 
barrier for the first time since April, also helped by dollar weakness on the 
grounds of more quantitative easing in the US.

Overall the FTSE 100 has fallen 15.36 points to 5563. 08, on continued talk of 
the scale of the Irish bank bailout - and its effect on the country's economy - 
and a possible downgrade of Spanish debt by Moody's.

Banks are weaker on global economic concerns, with Royal Bank of Scotland down 
0.88p to 47.17p andHSBC off 10p at 649.5p.

Centrica is 4.9p lower at 323.2p and Inmarsat down 9.5p to 671p as both 
business went ex-dividend, whileSage slipped 4.5p to 275.5p on profit taking 
after recent bid speculation.

AstraZeneca lost as analysts at RBS cut their rating from buy to hold. The 
company has also begun final stage testing of a new pill for rheumatoid 
arthritis.

Among the mid caps, Dairy Crest jumped 24.4p to 373.4p. After the market 
closed yesterday the milk producer revealed that German dairy companyTheo Müller
 <http://www.muellergroup.com/home.html?L=1> had raised its stake from 3.85m to 
4.05m shares, taking it to 3.04%.
 