
“A whore must always be a whore,” wrote Giuseppe Verdi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/giuseppe-verdi>, a furious response to the 
censors in Rome who had demanded changes to his opera La traviata to make the 
story of the courtesan Violetta more palatable to a conservative public, and a 
startling statement of his radical vision of his opera. At the height of his 
self-confidence and compositional maturity in his 40th year, Verdi had turned 
away from biblical stories and historical dramas to confront his audiences with 
a drama that dealt with some of the great moral and social dilemmas of the 
19th-century world: prostitution, disease, and human passion. Or as Verdi put 
it in his first title for La traviata (“The Fallen Woman”): Love and Death.

But it wasn’t just in Rome that there was controversy. First performed in 
Venice in 1853, La traviata came to London in 1856. And here too, the reaction 
from the great and the good – well, the Times and Illustrated London News – was 
of self-righteous moral indignation: “An exhibition of harlotry upon the public 
stage. It is the poetry of the brothel … All the interest is concentrated upon 
the death-struggles of this wretched girl. It is for her that pity is asked, 
and it is to her that pity is given. Now, we say that, morally speaking, this 
is most hideous and abominable.”

His opera’s music didn’t go down well with some of those London critics 
either: “The claims of the Traviata, as a musical work, are poor indeed, and it 
required something extraordinary in the way of representation to lift it from 
the oblivion to which it was evidently doomed.” One of the most popular and 
most performed operas in the world today, the anonymous author of those words 
would have to do more than aPaddy Ashdown 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/election-2015-32634103>, and eat an entire millinery.

La Traviata exposed an open wound of hypocrisy, misogyny, and sexual politics 
at the heart of European society

But La traviata didn’t just touch a nerve with the leader writers, those 
self-appointed guardians of the moral compass of the British Empire. There was 
a feeling at the time that the entire imperial edifice was under threat from 
the contagion of sexual promiscuity and its concomitant physical diseases. La 
traviata exposed an open wound of hypocrisy, misogyny and sexual politics at 
the heart of European society. And in revealing it for his audiences, in 
creating that problematic but indelible “pity” for Violetta through his music, 
Verdi confronted head-on some of the social difficulties in his own life as 
well.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1-jHIfm3_oI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1-jHIfm3_oI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1-jHIfm3_oI&media=>
Verdi’s journey towards La traviata begins in a theatre in Paris in 1852, 
where he and his partner, the soprano Giuseppina Strepponi – the mother of at 
least four illegitimate children, a woman who had reached the end of her career 
by the time she was in her early 30s, whose then unmarried relationship with 
Verdi scandalised the good burghers of his home town Busseto – saw the 
theatrical sensation of the season, Alexandre Dumas’s La Dame aux camélias. A 
fictionalised account of Dumas’s affair with the real-life courtesan, Marie 
Duplessis, the play was based on his novel, which in turn built on Marie’s 
fame. Dead at just 23, she was one of the most feted figures of the demi-monde, 
whose funeral in 1847 was attended by a glittering array of French aristos – 
who had rented her out on a nightly basis and bought shares in her body.

Verdi put on stage the waltzes and polkas which were thought to encourage 
moral corruption

But Verdi’s Violetta is much more than Dumas’s consumptive heroine. The 
essential arc of the story – Violetta’s life of pleasure, Alfredo’s entreaties 
of love, her escape with him to the country, her sacrifice of this new life 
because of the social outrage of Alfredo’s father, and her death from 
tuberculosis – is the same, but Verdi goes further in his music than Dumas does 
in his story to make Violetta the centre of any audience’s sympathies. It’s 
because of the directness and daring of Verdi’s music that La Traviata was 
perceived by those big beasts of supposed moral rectitude in the press as being 
so dangerous. Verdi doesn’t just put a contemporary story on stage, he sets it 
all to contemporary music, too: the waltzes and polkas that had taken Europe by 
storm were the sounds that accompanied the libidinous pleasures of booze and 
sensuality, and which were thought to encourage moral corruption through the 
corporeal abandon of their relentless rhythms. The most famous of those is the 
drinking song in the first act of La traviata, which I promise you know even if 
you think you don’t: Alfredo’s waltzing “Libiamo 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LTrUnwILuu0>” – “let’s get pissed”, basically.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhjB3fOjidT4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhjB3fOjidT4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhjB3fOjidT4&media=>
Yet it’s in his music for Violetta in the final act that Verdi clinches his 
heroine’s fate and clutches our hearts. Violetta doesn’t go out with a display 
of vocal acrobatics, but rather with music of distilled, dignified and 
heart-rending simplicity in her aria “Addio, del passato 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OV1e_SehRi0>”, her farewell to “dreams of the 
past”. It’s here, at her weakest moment physically, that we experience her true 
moral strength, her enduring belief in the transforming, redeeming power of 
love. As one of the great Violettas of the last 50 years, DameJosephine Barstow 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Josephine_Barstow> says to me in  the 
forthcoming BBC2 film 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/mediacentre/proginfo/2015/25/la-traviata-love-death-and-divas>
: “Violetta taught me how to love.”

Neither the censors nor the critics in London were listened to in 1856. La 
traviata became an instant success, especially with female audiences, and 
Violetta’s agonising ability to touch us is still vividly realised at every 
performance of the opera, which you can hear somewhere in the world pretty much 
every night of the year. But we should remember that this is a work that Verdi 
meant to change us and confront us, not as an operatic consolation. Violetta’s 
searing message of the fate of “fallen women” is one we still need to hear.

 * La traviata: Love, Death And Divas 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b060cdrm>, presented by Tom Service and Amanda 
Vickery, is on BBC2 at 9pm on 20 June and will be available for a month on 
iPlayer.
 