
“After careful consideration” is a bureaucratic phrase that signals elegantly, 
concisely, that you, reader, are about to be stitched up. In that inimitable 
British way, it confirms that you are about to be given a “decision” that was a 
foregone conclusion, justified with the greatest haste, sloppiness and 
unfairness.

So it was on Friday, when the Crown Prosecution Service let slip 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/05/cps-upholds-decision-not-to-charge-over-mi6-role-in-libyans-rendition>
 that “after careful consideration” it had concluded its victims’ right of 
review intoOperation Lydd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/oct/31/met-libya-abduction-rendition-cps>
, the police probe of UK involvement in the kidnap and rendition of two Libyan 
families to Gaddafi’s torture chambers. The CPS decided to upholdits decision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jun/10/libyan-rendition-couple-boudchar-belhaj-criticise-cps-decision>
 that no one in the British government would be brought to justice. It called 
my office (the victims’ representatives) at end of business on a Thursday, in a 
patent effort to bury the decision and ensure the public would take no notice.

It was a land-speed record for the CPS, after the original team sat on the 
matter for two years before charging nobody. The “review” team had the case for 
just over 50 days. With a police file of over 28,000 pages, they would have had 
to read 550 pages daily, seven days a week, just to process all the evidence. 
There is no real prospect that they even read the police file. This is the 
“careful and fully independent consideration” the Libyan renditions victims are 
thought to be worth.

I will never forget the day I met Arwa al-Saadi. With the apparent connivance 
of MI6, this little girl was bundled onto a plane with her father, mother and 
three siblings at the tender age of six. We sat on the sofa and thumbed through 
her pink sketchbook; it was a disturbing mix of manga figures out of her 
favourite cartoons, and scenes from her life’s worst moments. One of them 
showed her and her family in a tiny raft fleeing Gaddafi’sLibya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya> by night. She saw horrors that no 
adult deserves to see. She and her family have been waiting for justice for 
half a decade.

Not only does the CPS refuse to hear from Arwa al-Saadi: it doesn’t want to 
hear from other rendition victims either

Yet, the position of the CPS is that neither she nor any of the victims have 
the slightest role to play in the right for review. Not only does the CPS 
refuse to hear from Arwa, it doesn’t want to hear from other rendition victims 
either, such asAbdul-Hakim Belhaj 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdel-hakim-belhaj>, the Libyan dissident 
who put grievance aside and fought with Nato to overthrow Gaddafi, and has said 
he would walk away from the case for a mere apology. It doesn’t want to hear 
from Fatima Boudchar either, who was five months’ pregnant at the time of her 
abduction. In effect, victims have no role or rights; while prosecutors carry 
out a quick box-tick review.

It is not the first sign that things were amiss at the CPS. During the police 
investigation we asked prosecutors to meet the families. They rebuffed them. 
(They offered, and retracted, a meeting when the original decisionnot to charge 
former MI6 counter-terrorism chief Sir Mark Allen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/09/mi6-officers-not-charges-rendition-of-libyan-families-abdel-hakim-belhaj>
 was published.) In a typical dose of cultural incompetence, thedecision letter 
<https://twitter.com/Reprieve/status/740856840729317376> did not even get the 
victims’ names right <https://twitter.com/cori_crider/status/740857325301420032>
: it mistakenly referred to Arwa’s dad, Sami, as Khadija – the name of Arwa’s 
older sister and only, ever, a woman’s name.

It is difficult to escape the conclusion that the single guiding principle at 
the CPS is to act exactly as those at the top of government would wish. During 
the investigation and afterwards, I spoke to former senior prosecutors and 
others for advice. All of them were clear: members of the security services are 
basically never put on trial in this country and, however shocking this case, 
they probably never will be. The CPS would always, always close ranks and 
defend MI6 officers, looking for any excuse, however flimsy, not to bring a 
single official to book.

George Orwell <http://www.orwell.ru/library/essays/politics/english/e_polit/> 
was right when he said: “When there is a gap between one’s real and one’s 
declared aims, one turns as it were instinctively to long words and exhausted 
idioms, like a cuttlefish spurting out ink.” This is how a 28,000-page evidence 
file from the police transmogrified into “insufficient evidence”. How a brisk 
rubber-stamp by an underling of the chief prosecutor’s decision morphs into 
“careful consideration”. And how the CPS can call something that, in the end, 
never had anything to do with Arwa or any other victim at all a “victim’s right 
of review”.

The director of public prosecutions, Alison Saunders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2014/may/02/alison-saunders-director-public-prosecutions-interview>
, took office saying that vulnerable victims got a “raw deal” out of the 
British justice system. She was right. And perhaps she genuinely meant her 
pledge to do better. Maybe when she said it, without any tough decisions before 
her, it was not just another load of bureaucratic verbiage. If she genuinely 
wants to solve this problem at the CPS, she might start by taking a hard look 
in the mirror.
 