
Vietnam <https://www.theguardian.com/world/vietnam> has begun dredging work on 
a disputed reef in the South China Sea, satellite imagery shows, the latest 
move by the communist state to bolster its claims in the strategically 
important waterway.

Activity visible on Ladd Reef in the Spratly Islands could anger Hanoi’s main 
South China Sea <https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-china-sea> rival, 
Beijing, which claims sovereignty over the group and most of the resource-rich 
sea.

Ladd Reef, on the south-western fringe of the Spratlys, is completely 
submerged at high tide but has a lighthouse and an outpost housing a small 
contingent of Vietnamese soldiers. The reef is also claimed byTaiwan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/taiwan>.

 In an image taken on 30 November and provided by US-based satellite firm 
Planet Labs, several vessels can be seen in a newly dug channel between the 
lagoon and open sea.

South China Sea dispute: what you need to know about The Hague court ruling
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/jul/12/south-china-sea-dispute-what-you-need-to-know-about-the-hague-court-ruling>
While the purpose of the activity cannot be determined for certain, analysts 
say similar dredging work has been the precursor to more extensive construction 
on other reefs.

 “We can see that, in this environment, Vietnam’s strategic mistrust is total 
... and they are rapidly improving their defences,” said Trevor Hollingsbee, a 
retired naval intelligence analyst with the Ministry of Defence. “They’re doing 
everything they can to fix any vulnerabilities – and that outpost at Ladd Reef 
does look a vulnerability.”

 Reuters reported in August that Vietnam had fortified several islands with 
mobile rocket artillery launchers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/10/vietnam-sends-rocket-launchers-to-the-south-china-sea>
 capable of striking China’s holdings across the vital trade route. Vietnam’s 
foreign ministry did not respond to a request for comment.

The vessels at Ladd Reef cannot be identified in the images but Vietnam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vietnam> would be extremely unlikely to 
allow another country to challenge its control of the reef.

Greg Poling, a South China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> Sea 
expert at Washington’s Centre for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), 
said it remained unclear how far the work on Ladd Reef would go. Rather than a 
reclamation and a base, it could be an attempt to simply boost access for 
supply ships and fishing boats.

 Ladd could also theoretically play a role in helping to defend Vietnam’s 
holding of Spratly Island,where a runway is being improved and new hangars built
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/18/vietnam-expanding-south-china-sea-runway-says-thinktank>
, he said. “Vietnam knows it can’t compete with China but it does want to 
improve its ability to keep an eye on them,” Poling said.

 Vietnam has long been fearful of renewed Chinese military action to drive it 
off its 21 holdings in the Spratlys – worries that have escalated amid 
Beijing’s buildup and its anger at the recent Philippines legal action 
challenging its claims.

 China occupied its first Spratlys possessions after a sea battle against 
Vietnam’s then-weak navy in 1988. Vietnam said 64 soldiers were killed as they 
tried to protect a flag on South Johnson reef – an incident still acutely felt 
in Hanoi.

South China Sea: US warns Beijing against building ‘great wall of 
self-isolation’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/04/south-china-sea-us-warns-beijing-against-building-great-wall-of-self-isolation>
The United States has repeatedly called on claimants to avoid actions that 
increase tensions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/23/john-kerry-ease-south-china-sea-tensions>
 in the South China Sea, through which around $5tn (£3.97tn) in world trade is 
shipped every year.

 A spokesperson for the US State Department, Anna Richey-Allen, said it was 
aware of reports of reclamation work by Vietnam and said the United States 
regularly raised concerns about such activity by claimants. “We’ve consistently 
warned that reclamation and militarisation in contested areas of the South 
China Sea will risk driving a destabilising and escalatory trend,” she said. 
“We encourage all claimants to take steps to lower tensions and peacefully 
resolve differences.”

 Vietnam has emerged as China’s main rival in the South China Sea, actively 
asserting sovereignty over both the Paracel and the Spratly groupings in their 
entirety and undergoing its own naval modernisation. Taiwan also claims both 
but its position is historically aligned with Beijing’s.

 The Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative, run by the CSIS, says Vietnam has 
added about 120 acres (49 hectares) of land to its South China Sea holdings in 
recent years.

Regional military attaches say Vietnam’s main holdings are well fortified, 
some with tunnels and bunkers, appearing geared to deterring easy invasion. 
Vietnam’s reclamation work remains modest by Chinese standards, however.

 The United States, which has criticised China for militarising the waterway, 
estimates Beijing has added more than 3,200 acres of land on seven features in 
the South China Sea over the past three years, building runways, ports, 
aircraft hangars and communications equipment.

 Beijing says it is entitled to “limited and necessary self-defensive 
facilities” on its territory and has reacted angrily to “freedom of navigation” 
operations by US warships near Chinese-held islands.


 