
Vietnam is extending a runway on an island it claims in the South China Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-china-sea> in apparent response to 
China’s building of military facilities on artificial islands in the region, a 
US thinktank has reported.


 Satellite images taken this month showed Vietnam had lengthened its runway on 
Spratly Island from less than 760 metres (2,500ft) to more than 1 km, 
Washington’sAsia Maritime Transparency Initiative <https://amti.csis.org/> said.

 AMTI, a project of the Center for Strategic and International Studies 
thinktank, said continued reclamation work would likely mean the runway was 
extended to more than 1.2 km.

South China Sea dispute: what you need to know about The Hague court ruling
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/jul/12/south-china-sea-dispute-what-you-need-to-know-about-the-hague-court-ruling>
 It said the upgraded runway would be able to accommodate maritime 
surveillance aircraft and transport planes, as well as combat aircraft.

The report said Vietnam <https://www.theguardian.com/world/vietnam> had added 
about 23 hectares (57 acres) of land to Spratly Island in recent years, but its 
reclamation work remained modest by Chinese standards.

China has built military-length runways on three artificial islands it has 
built up in the SouthChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> Sea since 
2013.

 The United States, which has criticized China’s reclamation work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/08/beijing-warns-us-to-stay-out-of-south-china-sea-dispute>
 in the South China Sea and stepped up defence cooperation with Vietnam in 
response, said it was aware of the reports that Hanoi had upgraded some of its 
facilities on outposts in the Spratly Islands.

 “We encourage all claimants to take steps to lower tensions and peacefully 
resolve differences,” said Anna Richey-Allen, a spokeswoman for the US State 
Department.

Obama’s failed ‘Asian pivot’ leaves China ascendant | Simon Tisdall
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/25/obama-failed-asian-pivot-china-ascendant>
 Reuters reported in August that Vietnam had discreetly fortified several of 
its islands in the disputed South China Sea with mobile rocket launchers 
capable of striking China’s runways and military installations across the vital 
trade route.

 Military analysts said the deployment of the launchers was the most 
significant defensive move Vietnam has made on its holdings in the South China 
Sea in decades and it underscored Hanoi’s concerns about China’s assertive 
pursuit of territorial claims in the disputed region.

 Vietnam’s foreign ministry has called the information “inaccurate“, without 
elaborating.
 