
Earlier this week, it was widely reported that vinyl is outselling digital 
downloads in the UK for the first time since the iTunes store was launched here 
in 2004. Finally, some good news! After all the tragic losses from the world of 
music in 2016, here was some seasonal good cheer: the warm and wonderful 
crackle of vinyl was finally fighting back against cold, compressed MP3s. But, 
despite the discussions it generated on Newsnight andin these very pages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/06/tables-turned-as-vinyl-records-outsell-digital-in-uk-for-first-time?CMP=fb_gu>
, no one thought to point out that the premise of vinyl surging ahead of 
downloads is utter nonsense.

The real story is that sales of downloads are dropping not because vinyl is 
wooing back digital listeners but because streaming is becoming the default way 
of consuming digital music. Furthermore, the headlines were misleading because 
vinyl hadn’t outsold digital downloads at all, but rather had made more money 
for the music industry over the previous week – and no doubt a good proportion 
of that was thanks to Kate Bush’s new live albumBefore the Dawn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/17/the-k-fellowship-before-the-dawn-review-kate-bush-live>
, which sets you back well over £50 on vinyl, more than four times as much as 
the download.

Direct-to-consumer sales are fun. But would you have seen Tony Wilson flogging 
Blue Monday 12ins on a market stall?

The relentless spin on the so-called “vinyl revival” is getting ridiculous – 
as the Daily Mash pointed out in a piece about howvinyl has become more popular 
than food. 
<http://www.thedailymash.co.uk/news/arts-entertainment/vinyl-sales-overtake-sales-of-food-20161207118622>
 The Entertainment Retailers Association (ERA) has beenspinning this line for 
the last couple years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/nov/27/vinyls-making-a-comeback-dont-believe-the-hype>
, since taking over the reins of Record Store Day. But feelgood stories such as 
this week’s are like those backmasked records that may or may not have 
contained satanic messages: gibberish. The truth, for many labels and shops, 
seems to be the complete opposite.

This year has been the most difficult in the 12 years that I’ve been running 
my label,Sonic Cathedral <http://www.soniccathedral.co.uk/>. If you are 
releasing records by new artists, it is getting harder and harder to sell them. 
Unless you are reissuing Foo Fighters albums to be sold in the supermarket 
chains that have jumped on the vinyl-revival bandwagon, the situation is 
nowhere near as VG+ as ERA is suggesting. It’s not just me:Fortuna Pop! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/mar/12/in-praise-of-fortuna-pop>
 has sadly decided to call it a day after 20 years; another person who runs a 
well respected indie tells me its records sell in smaller and smaller numbers. 
I’ve never sold many copies, but when one of the major indies is shifting 
roughly the same amount – seemingly regardless of press and radio coverage or 
touring – then surely that’s cause for concern, not celebration?

Shops, too, are finding it increasingly difficult to sell new releases. “We do 
what we can to not just sell catalogue reissues,” says George Clift fromHot 
Salvation <http://hotsalvation.com/>, which opened in Folkestone two years ago, 
but he admits it’s getting harder to keep a balance between old and new: 
“Particularly in the provinces, niche isreally fucking niche.”

As a result, direct-to-consumer sales at gigs and events such as the 
Independent Label Market <http://www.independentlabelmarket.com/> are now key 
income streams and, as fun as they are, they are less a sign of growth and more 
proof of how small scale the music industry has become. Would Tony Wilson have 
stood at a market stall flogging 12in singles of Blue Monday in 1983? Would 
Alan McGee, with (What’s the Story) Morning Glory? in 1995?

We have to ask ourselves why people prefer to buy old records. Is it because 
vinyl is essentially a retro format, so people naturally look backwards instead 
of forwards? Is it because the whole culture of music – from the BBC 6Music 
playlist to festival lineups – is so focused on reliving past glories? Earlier 
this year, after 10 years of gentle persuasion, I released the second album by 
the Early Years. At the same time I licensed their 2006 debut from Beggars 
Banquet and repressed it on orange vinyl;the latter 
<http://www.soniccathedral.co.uk/teyreissue/> has outsold the former. I’m 
guessing it’s because these things are a known quantity, and that is what 
people want from their records: familiarity, nostalgia, a warm and cosy 
signifierthat can be used in ads for banks, cars and clothes 
<http://thevinylfactory.com/features/cars-condoms-and-credit-cards-the-use-and-abuse-of-vinyl-in-advertising/>
. Little wonder, then, that records have ended up on supermarket shelves 
alongside the Horlicks and the Werther’s Originals.

Don’t get me wrong, it’s great that people are still buying vinyl, and it’s no 
bad thing that it’s becoming more widely available. But it seems to have had 
very little impact on the industry at large, apart from making things even more 
difficult. In April 2015, when Sonic Cathedral joined forces with Bristol agent 
provocateurs Howling Owl to begin ourRecord Store Day Is Dying 
<http://www.soniccathedral.co.uk/why-record-store-day-is-dying/> campaign, we 
flippantly suggested that every day should be a record store day. But now 
people really are buying expensive reissues all year round – and I don’t like 
it.
 