
Building my first high-rise tower wasn’t too difficult. I threw up some studio 
apartments, hooked them up with power and phone lines, arranged for a rubbish 
collection, and welcomed my first tenants. I packed the people in, stacked the 
units, and the profits soon began to pile up nicely.


It’s fun being a virtual landlord. I’ve been playing Project Highrise 
<http://store.steampowered.com/app/423580/>, a PC and Mac real estate 
management simulation, since the game’s release in September. It gives 
cash-strapped renters like me a chance to indulge the wild fantasy of owning 
property. It also offersmembers of Generation Rent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/30/generation-rent-can-your-landlord-be-your-friend>
 some insight into how real-world landlords and larger developers actually do 
business.


Despite its cutesy appearance, the game is surprisingly detailed 
<http://www.somasim.com/highrise/> and utterly unsentimental. You begin the 
game by managing the costs of building infrastructure, and trying to avoid 
taking on too much bank debt before your tenants can provide a steady revenue 
stream. Before too long, you’re hiring consultants to lobby city hall for a 
metro station and wondering whether “prestige” artwork in the hallway might 
attract higher-paying residents.


In becoming a digital Donald Trump, I learned some interesting, if slightly 
depressing lessons. For one thing, it’s costly to lose tenants. You don’t want 
a day to go by without any rent; and you don’t want to have to reach into your 
pocket to refurbish an empty flat to make it rentable again. So it’s best to 
keep all current tenants happy, if you can. But fixing up occupied flats that 
have turned grimy is also expensive, so it’s worth trying to hold out as long 
as possible without doing repairs.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fvirtual-realty-computer-game-evil-property-developer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c2834e27c4ca22bcb6c26b0261b78f18e9fda50%2F79_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Virtual%20realty%3A%20can%20a%20computer%20game%20turn%20you%20into%20an%20%E2%80%98evil%E2%80%99%20property%20developer%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fvirtual-realty-computer-game-evil-property-developer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Virtual%20realty%3A%20can%20a%20computer%20game%20turn%20you%20into%20an%20%E2%80%98evil%E2%80%99%20property%20developer%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fvirtual-realty-computer-game-evil-property-developer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c2834e27c4ca22bcb6c26b0261b78f18e9fda50%2F79_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 Project Highrise … ‘Before too long, after filling six or seven floors, I 
forgot about them as individuals.’ Photograph: SomaSim 
I also learned how easy it is to dehumanise your tenants. At first, each new 
tower resident was an intriguing little person I cared about. I customised 
their names so I could remember their characteristics. Phyllis, who didn’t seem 
to go out much, became “Phyllis the Quiet One”. Mildred, who always complained 
about the smell of the rubbish bins on her floor, became “Smell-sensitive 
Mildred”. Dave was simply “Tank Top Dave”.


But before too long, after filling six or seven floors, I forgot about them as 
individuals. They were simply rent payers; inhabitants of my units. And if they 
weren’t happy about something, they became a profit-draining pain.


I found it cost effective to evict low paying cafes and cheap liquor stores 
and bring in some higher paying 'creatives'

“We did a lot of research about how real-world things function,” says Matthew 
Viglione, designer of Project Highrise, which is made by Chicago-basedSomaSim 
<http://www.somasim.com/blog/>. “We talked to building developers and owners in 
Chicago about how much they plan for, how much they react, how needy certain 
tenants are, and how much you want residential [tenants] versus commercial 
[tenants]. We did walking tours of various skyscrapers, and said, ‘Yes, we want 
that element in the game.’”

Project Highrise runs a series of urban development challenges in which the 
player is put in charge of buildings in crisis, based loosely on repurposed and 
rejuvenated downtown Chicago skyscrapers like theMarquette Building 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marquette_Building_(Chicago)>.


I tried one challenge called “neighbourhood revitalisation”, which tests your 
ability to revive a particularly run-down building and restore it to 
profit-making glory. Shamefully, I found it cost effective to evict low paying 
cafes and cheap liquor stores and bring in some higher paying “creatives” – 
graphic design studios, architectural practices and talent agencies. Perhaps I 
was only following the gentrification model I’ve absorbed fromreal-life London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/jan/12/gentrification-argument-protest-backlash-urban-generation-displacement>
.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fvirtual-realty-computer-game-evil-property-developer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18a21a54ddeb8d36d2b0bcc4d8e88e3c72336a97%2F0_0_1440_900%2F1440.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Virtual%20realty%3A%20can%20a%20computer%20game%20turn%20you%20into%20an%20%E2%80%98evil%E2%80%99%20property%20developer%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fvirtual-realty-computer-game-evil-property-developer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Virtual%20realty%3A%20can%20a%20computer%20game%20turn%20you%20into%20an%20%E2%80%98evil%E2%80%99%20property%20developer%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fvirtual-realty-computer-game-evil-property-developer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18a21a54ddeb8d36d2b0bcc4d8e88e3c72336a97%2F0_0_1440_900%2F1440.png>
 A screengrab of game play from Project Highrise. Photograph: SomaSim 
Project Highrise’s programmer, Robert Zubek, says the game was not based on 
any one model of change – and it is possible to adopt a number of different 
strategies to find reliable, long-term profit.

“If you imagine a game where your tower is grimy and run down, you don’t 
actually have to fix it,” Zubek explains. “You can just lower the rent just 
enough for people to be less unhappy, so that they don’t move out. So you can 
play this ‘slumlord’ kind of game. It is still dehumanising, because ultimately 
you’re having to treat your tenants as financial resources.”

In this respect, the game reflects life all too well. If continually watching 
the bottom line seems a little grim, there is at least the consolation of 
playing with the form of your fantasy tower. Would-be architects can tinker 
with the shape of construction, although SomaSim’s designers admit to being 
strongly influenced by the simple, clean modernism of Chicago’sMies van der Rohe
 <http://www.miessociety.org/legacy/projects/> for the game’s basic structural 
elements.


“It’s a style that travels well,” explains Viglione. “And the interior design, 
the colour palette and furniture were borrowed from the 1960s. There’s 
something very simple, international and appealing about it. I think the 
optimism of that era was fantastic.”


Tetris on an office building: can 'gamifying' cities help improve them?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/sep/13/tetris-tel-aviv-gamifying-cities-pr>
Intriguingly, some of SomaSim’s early ideas were too awkward to incorporate 
into the finished game. One concept the team considered, before it was finally 
deemed too complex, was offering virtual tenants the chance to sign up to 
long-term tenancy contracts.


“We did consider introducing leases where residents could agree to be locked 
into long-term leases,” says Zubek. “But we had a hard time making that easy 
for the player to understand – it just made it harder to enjoy the game. You 
want to give the player a lot of power so they have the agency to do things.”


After six weeks of playing Project Highrise, squeezing tiny tenants living in 
my laptop tower, I found myself envisioning a different kind of video game: a 
fantasy world which flipped everything on its head, and put the tenant in 
control.


In this alternative game (Project Housing Crisis?) wealthy property magnates 
would be able to vicariously experience the life of an impoverished renter, 
attempting to dodge rent hikes and the threat of eviction while saving up for a 
deposit. You never know, it might even make our cities kinder, more human 
places.

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 