
Stand on Mexico <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico> City’s grand Paseo 
de la Reforma boulevard on a Sunday morning and you’ll hear gears whirring, 
bells ringing and the chatter of voices as 50,000 people cycle, scoot and skate 
along 35 miles of closed roads. Stop and listen on any other day of the week 
and all you’ll hear is the roar of 10 lanes of traffic.

This sprawling megacity of 21 million is home to 5.5m cars, and that number is 
growing despitesome of the worst traffic jams in the world 
<https://www.tomtom.com/en_gb/trafficindex/#/city/MEX>. Residents spend an 
average of three hours a day commuting, and car speeds during rush hour have 
fallen to around 7.5mph (12km/h). Althoughair quality has improved markedly  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/live/2015/nov/09/guardian-mexico-city-week-live#block-564097f6e4b070c70d719542>
since the city was named the most polluted in the world in the 1980s, walking 
or cycling along one of its many multi-lane highways sometimes feels as if you 
are sucking directly on a car exhaust.

For one day every week, though, people on bikes and on foot rule a decent 
stretch of road, for a few hours at least. The officialMuévete en Bici 
<http://www.sedema.df.gob.mx/mueveteenbici/> (Move by Bike) event has been 
going since 2008 but was recently expandedto cover 35 miles (55km) of city 
streets <http://img.overpic.net/images/s/6/k/xs6kxb8d794464vt1f57j.png>. It’s 
not just for cyclists: many others jog with baby strollers, or enjoy free zumba 
classes, martial arts or Mexican wrestling displays.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvine.co%2Fv%2FeLmQTaXzeFa&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvine.co%2Fv%2FeLmQTaXzeFa>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvine.co%2Fv%2FeLmQTaXzeFa&media=>
 Cyclists on Paseo de la Reforma during evening rush hour 
Some might dismiss the weekly car-free morning as a gimmick, but Reforma is 
also home to wide, protected cycle lanes along both sides, from the historic 
centre to the green oasis of Chapultepec park in the west. During rush hour 
these lanes see a constant stream of cyclists in work clothes, many of them 
using theEcobici bike hire system <https://www.ecobici.df.gob.mx/en> – the 
fourth largest in the world after Huangzhou, Paris and London. It is used 
mainly by residents getting around the city, rather than by sightseeing 
tourists, and 37% of users are women.

The city now has around 90 miles (150km) of dedicated bike lanes, and 
environment ministerTanya Müller last week announced 
<https://www.facebook.com/permalink.php?story_fbid=10156288675395360&id=120208740359>
 two new protected cycle paths will be built along Revolución and Patriotismo 
avenues by February. A survey showed 4,000 cyclists a day already brave these 
high-speed, five-lane highways.
 Segregated cycle lanes and bike share stations in Mexico City – the two 
proposed routes are purple 
Sitting in her modern office overlooking the Zócalo – the historic main 
square, ringed by a six-lane road – Müller says cycling plays a crucial role in 
her attempts to make the city more sustainable and helps to fight pollution, 
congestion and obesity.

She has expanded the Ecobici network to more than 6,000 bikes at 444 stations, 
and users can now access the service using an integrated card that also covers 
the metro, bus rapid transport (BRT) and trolleybuses. In an effort to include 
the majority of residents who live on the outskirts of the city, the 
environment ministry has opened a24-hour 400-space secure cycle parking 
facility at Pantitlán 
<http://www.sedema.df.gob.mx/sedema/index.php/movilidad-sustentable/movilidad-en-bicicleta>
 near the airport in the east, and another is being built in La Raza in the 
north. The idea is that people can cycle from home to the hub, take public 
transport into the centre and then use an Ecobici for the “last mile” to work.

Another proposed cycle lane along División del Norte has been stalled for 
years after protests from the plumbing and building suppliers whose shops line 
the route who areworried it will damage trade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/oct/05/bike-lane-blues-london-local-businesses-cycle-enfield-green-lanes>
. “The scheme is on hold but itwill happen,” promises Müller.

Trendy cycling cafes <https://twitter.com/lacadencial> and shops 
<http://pfb.com.mx/> are springing up in cooler parts of town like Condesa and 
Roma, where the pace of the city is slower and drivers are more used to seeing 
people on bikes, tending to give them more space. The last time an official 
survey into cycling was completed eight years ago it showed 1% of journeys 
across the metropolitan area were made by bike. Unofficial estimates now put 
that at around 2%.

Bernardo Baranda of the ITDP <https://www.itdp.org/>, which works to help 
developing countries improve their transport systems, was one of a group of 
cyclists who helped start the grassrootsBicitekas <http://bicitekas.org/> 
organisation in the late 1990s after he returned from a period studying and 
working in the Netherlands.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F145356182&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F145356182>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F145356182&media=>
 Around 120 cyclists take part in last Wednesday’s Bicitekas night ride around 
Mexico City 
Inspired by the efforts of Bogotá mayor Enrique Peñalosa, in 1998 the 
collective started a weeklyPaseo Nocturno <http://bicitekas.org/paseo-nocturno/>
, aCritical Mass <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Critical_Mass_(cycling)>-style 
ride where a group of cyclists meet up on a weeknight and take a four-hour trip 
around some of Mexico City’s busiest roads, staying safe through sheer force of 
numbers. It was revolutionary at the time but now the city hosts an official 
Paseo every Sunday and a government-organised night ride once a month on closed 
roads;last month’s for Day of the Dead attracted a record 95,000 cyclists 
<http://www.maspormas.com/2015/11/01/paseo-nocturno-de-dia-de-muertos-rompe-record-de-asistencia/>
. There are plenty of unofficial night rides, too, run by groups such asMujeres 
en Bici <https://twitter.com/mujeresenbici> and Paseo de Todos 
<https://www.facebook.com/PaseodeTodosCiudaddeMexico/>, as well as the original 
Bicitekas ride.

A car can jump a red light in front of a police officer and he won’t do 
anything – the law is flexible in Mexico City
Agustín Martinez 
Cycling activists galvanised around protests against the Segundo Piso in 2003 
– a second tier to the city’s car-choked multi-lane Periférico ringroad – but 
it wasn’t until the arrival of Marcelo Ebrard as mayor that things began to 
change. Hisoriginal 2007 target of 186 miles of cycle paths 
<https://www.itdp.org/mexico-citys-hopes-riding-on-two-wheels/> has still not 
been achieved, but he and environment ministerMartha Delgado 
<http://martha.org.mx/una-politica-con-causa/> started the official Sunday 
rides, built the bike lane along Reforma and launched Ecobici. There is a 
feeling among activists that, while Müller and current mayor Miguel Ángel 
Mancera are working in the right direction, they are nowhere near as radical.

Cycling <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/cycling> with Baranda on 
some of the city’s protected cycle lanes it is soon clear that a bike is a 
quicker way to get around than a car, especially on journeys under three miles 
(5km). For the most part, concrete and heavy-duty plastic dividers keep the 
traffic at bay, although when they are replaced by reflectors in the road in 
the run-up to a junction some drivers simply swing into the bike lane. I soon 
learn to be incredibly cautious every time the bike lane passes a side road, as 
cars from behind will happily pull alongside and try to turn right across your 
path. Venture away from the cycle lanes and it quickly feels more aggressive.


Baranda would like to say cycling here is safe, but last year suffered his 
first serious accident in two decades when he was overtaken by a truck and a 
ladder poking out of the side caught him on the back of the head. The driver 
didn’t stop and Baranda spent a month in a neck brace. He’s now back out on his 
bike.

Around 1,200 people are killed on Mexico City’s roads every year. Of these 60% 
are pedestrians, but it is not clear how many are cyclists. A third of 
accidents involve speeding cars.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F11%2Fviva-la-revolucion-mexico-city-cyclists-fight-right-safety%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe86e549c2d77259ea17a8dab6d41b61ba015e6e5%2F0_676_3950_2370%2F3950.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Viva%20la%20revoluci%C3%B3n%3A%20Mexico%20City%20cyclists%20fight%20for%20the%20right%20to%20ride%20in%20safety&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F11%2Fviva-la-revolucion-mexico-city-cyclists-fight-right-safety%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Viva%20la%20revoluci%C3%B3n%3A%20Mexico%20City%20cyclists%20fight%20for%20the%20right%20to%20ride%20in%20safety&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F11%2Fviva-la-revolucion-mexico-city-cyclists-fight-right-safety%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe86e549c2d77259ea17a8dab6d41b61ba015e6e5%2F0_676_3950_2370%2F3950.jpg>
 Last month’s official night ride for Day of the Dead attracted 95,000 
cyclists. Photograph: Joel Alvarez/Zuma Press/Corbis 
Baranda would like to see more protected bike lanes but is hopeful a new 
traffic law <https://www.itdp.org/mexico-city-joins-the-vision-zero-movement/>, 
about to come into force, will make cycling safer. Speed limits are being cut 
to 30mph (50km/h) on main roads and 20mph (30km/h) on side streets,cyclists 
will be allowed to proceed through red lights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/oct/27/cyclists-run-red-lights-paris-london-san-francisco>
 if the way is clear, and the city government will put the needs of pedestrians 
first, followed by cyclists, then public transport, cargo and finally private 
cars and motorbikes.

But the tougher traffic laws will only work if the police make them work. “You 
need consequences for bad driving,” says Baranda. “The police need to enforce 
the law.”

That point is echoed by Agustín Martinez, the president of the Bicitekas 
collective. “Not everyone is studying traffic law like we are – drivers need to 
be educated and we need enforcement. A car can jump a red light right in front 
of a traffic police officer and he won’t do anything – the law is very flexible 
in Mexico City.”

Should cyclists be allowed to run red lights?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/oct/27/cyclists-run-red-lights-paris-london-san-francisco>
I ask about a white ghost bike 
<http://mashable.com/2015/04/20/ghost-bikes/#u6.CHpFEGkqV> I spotted on the way 
to theBicitekas HQ <http://bicitekas.org/casa-biciteka/>. One of the group 
explains how a young female cyclist was hit by a car and knocked unconscious. 
When she got up and her boyfriend started remonstrating with the driver, he 
drove off with the woman clinging to the bonnet, accelerating and swerving 
until she fell off. She died of her injuries in hospital. The driver was 
tracked down by police but, says the activist, was freed after a few 
well-placed bribes: “When he was caught he said, ‘I have money, I have power, 
nothing will happen’ – he was right.”

Martinez is pleased with the new traffic law but disappointed with what he 
sees as the lack of recent progress. “We have a lot of friends in the city 
government now and we thought everything would change,” he says. “But it’s 
hard, their hands are tied. [The city government] is scared of the car lobby, 
they defend old ideas like cheap gasoline, they are scared of business and they 
don’t think about the people that live here. It’s all about money.”

There’s no doubt that Mexico City is for the most part still a car-orientated 
city but it is also clear that cycling is in the ascendancy. “It used to be 
that people saw cycling here as something eccentric or crazy,” says Baranda. 
“People thought that if you cycled you must be a tree-hugger or not have enough 
money to get a car, but that’s changed now – now it’s trendy.”

What is your experience of cycling in Mexico City, and how could it be 
improved? What are the challenges and benefits of cycling here? Share your 
experiences and thoughts in the comments below, on Twitter using 
#GuardianMexico or by email tomexicocity.week@theguardian.com 
<mailto:mexicocity.week@theguardian.com>
 