
Vladimir Putin has ordered an investigation after a Russian military plane 
carrying 92 people, including dozens of Red Army choristers, crashed into the 
Black Sea on its way toSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>.

The Tupolev Tu-154 plane was carrying musicians from the famous Alexandrov 
military choir, as well as dancers, musicians and journalists, to a new year 
concert for troops in Syria. It crashed soon after taking off from the resort 
of Sochi on Sunday.

In a statement, the Kremlin said that Putin 
<http://kremlin.ru/events/president/news/53586> expressed his “deepest 
condolences to the families and friends of those killed in the crash”. He also 
ordered the prime minister, Dmitry Medvedev, to form a state commission to 
investigate the crash. It will determine whether safety breaches led to the 
crash.

Russian agencies said all possible reasons for the crash were being examined, 
but investigators believed terrorism was unlikely. Russia’s RIA news agency, 
citing an unidentified security source, said preliminary data indicated the 
plane had crashed because of a technical malfunction, Reuters reported.

A total of 84 passengers and eight crew were on board when the plane dropped 
off radar shortly after take-off at 5.40am local time (0240 GMT) from Adler 
airport in Sochi, southernRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>. 
The plane had stopped off at Adler en route from Moscow to Syria.


Common ground on Syria unites Russia and Turkey against the west
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/21/common-ground-on-syria-unites-russia-and-turkey-against-the-west>
Russia’s defence ministry said fragments of the plane, a Soviet-designed 
three-engine airliner, had been found by rescuers about 1.5km (one mile) from 
the shore in water 50-70 metres deep.

An unnamed ministry source told Russian news agencies that those on board had 
almost no chance of surviving and that no life-rafts had been found. Interfax 
cited another unnamed source as saying the plane had not sent an SOS signal.


The Russian defence ministry added on Sunday that rescuers had said there was 
no sign of any survivors of the crash. Defence ministry spokesman Maj Gen Igor 
Konashenkov said “no survivors are seen” at the crash site, less than a mile 
from the shore.


sochi <https://interactive.guim.co.uk/maps/embed/dec/2016-12-25T06:29:26.html> 
Those on board included Russian service personnel and artists from the Russian 
military’s official choir, theAlexandrov Ensemble 
<http://www.watchmojo.com/video/id/10047/>, who were on their way to celebrate 
New Year’s Eve with air force personnel at the Khmeimim airbase near Latakia in 
western Syria, the defence source told RIA.

Konashenkov said nine Russian reporters had also been on board, as well as 
military service personnel. The journalists were from state-controlled NTV and 
First Channel, as well as the army’s channel Zvezda.

“The search operation is continuing,” said Konashenkov. “Four ships, five 
helicopters and a drone are working in the area,” he said, saying a military 
commission had flown to Sochi to look into what happened.

The Interfax news agency cited an unnamed source in the emergency services as 
saying about six bodies had already been recovered from the sea.

More than 3,000 people, including around 100 divers flown in from across 
Russia, were working through the night on Sunday to search the crash site, the 
Defense Ministry said.

According to the defence ministry’s list of passengers, Elizaveta Glinka, a 
member of Putin’s advisory human rights council, was on the plane. Known as 
Doctor Liza, she was a well-known public figure who had run a major 
humanitarian effort on the separatist side of the lines during the recent war 
in east Ukraine.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dm4ria6UZbSg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dm4ria6UZbSg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dm4ria6UZbSg&media=>
Tu-154 aircraft have been involved in a number of accidents in the past. In 
April 2010, many high-ranking Polish officials, including then president Lech 
Kaczyński,were killed  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/apr/10/poland-president-lech-kaczynski-killed>
when a Tu-154 airliner went down in thick fog while approaching Smolensk 
airport in western Russia.

The plane, which was widely used during the Soviet period, has been taken out 
of commission by many Russian airlines in recent years, but is still used by 
the military. They have flown journalists and other civilians to the Russian 
military base in Syria in recent months.

Moscow has been conducting a bombing campaign in Syria in support of its 
long-time ally President Bashar al-Assad since September 2015, and has taken 
steps to boost its presence in the country.

Putin in October approved a law ratifying Moscow’s deal with Damascus to 
deploy its forces in the country indefinitely, strengthening Russia’s long-term 
presence in the country.

Russian warplanes have flown out of the Khmeimim base to conduct airstrikes in 
Syria, and the base is also home to an S-400 air defence system.
 