
Saracens and England are preparing for life without the Vunipola brothers – a 
double absence that would be felt by any team on Earth – but it does not have 
to be all bad. Marcelo Bosch, their Argentinian team-mate atSaracens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens>, sees a chance for the two of them 
to spend some time away from the endless requirements of life as a rugby player 
at the highest level.

“You can see they’ve played a lot in the past few seasons,” he said. “They 
don’t stop or switch off a lot mentally, because from big games in the
Premiership <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership> or Europe they go 
to England for the Six Nations, having come back from June and November. I 
imagine mentally it must be tough to be always up there emotionally and to stay 
fit. So this gives them an obligatory break.

Chris Ashton makes try-scoring return as Saracens see off Newcastle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/24/saracens-newcastle-falcons-premiership-rugby-match-report>
“They are simple human beings, who want to enjoy playing, but I hope they can 
enjoy the chance to rest a bit. I know they will come back even stronger. 
Everyone at the club supports them so that they can just rest and come back 
whenever they can.”

Mark McCall, Saracens’ director of rugby, has confirmed that Mako will be 
seeing a specialist in four weeks’ time, once the swelling around the prop’s 
injured knee ligament has subsided. Hewill be out for more than those four weeks
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/24/mako-vunipola-england-six-nations-saracens-suspected-ligament-injury>
 but Saracens do not expect to know until then for how much more. He picked up 
the injury last Sunday, in theChampions Cup fixture at Sale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/18/sale-saracens-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
. England’s first Six Nations match, against France at Twickenham, is on 4 
February, six weeks away. It seems inconceivable he will be ready for that. 
Whether he can return before the end of the championship will be assessed by 
his specialist, but that, too, must be considered unlikely.

It is a blow for Saracens, but their squad is deep. Bosch does not anticipate 
too much of a drop-off in quality, even ifSaturday’s win over Newcastle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/24/saracens-newcastle-falcons-premiership-rugby-match-report>
 was several degrees below the immaculate standards Sarries have set themselves 
in recent times.

“I don’t have to tell you how important they are to us,” said Bosch. “They are 
key too for England, who are nowadays one of the best teams in the world. 
Perhaps this can show the depth of our squad. Even though we will miss them 
there are other guys who have the opportunity to play. We have a very good 
squad. We’re not thinking now about the Premiership or the double. It’s still 
early doors but it’s been good so far.”

Saracens remain top of the table, albeit on points difference now from Wasps, 
who picked up a bonus point in theirwin over third-placed Bath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/24/wasps-bath-premiership-rugby-match-report>
. Sarries’ next assignment, at Leicester on New Year’s Day, ought to require 
more precision and energy than they mustered against the Falcons. But, if 
Saracens have lost two key personalities in the Vunipola boys, the revolving 
doors of professional rugby have redelivered them another in Chris Ashton, who 
came off the bench to score his first try of the season, a simple enough finish 
at the end of a game they had only just made safe.

Thomas Waldrom and Exeter inflict another defeat on lacklustre Leicester
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/24/exeter-chiefs-leicester-tigers-premiership-rugby-match-report>
Ashton was returning from his 13-week suspension for biting, a sentence he has 
served no doubt with acute frustration. “He’s been looking forward to playing 
for a while,” said Bosch. “I’m in the same changing room as he is every week, 
so I know how upset he was and how tough it’s been for him. He focused in 
training, trying to help prepare the team as well as possible. Today he had his 
chance to come back. And he got his try at the end, so I’m happy for him.”

Bosch himself scored the other, this one at the end of the first quarter, when 
he picked a fine line through Newcastle’s midfield. It was a rare defensive 
lapse from the Falcons, who are proving these days that they are not just a 
handful at Kingston Park. Away form has long been an issue for them, 
unsurprisingly given the distances they have to travel, and if they had flopped 
under the weight of a long injury list and a long journey on Christmas Eve we 
would surely not have condemned them.

As it was, they stuck to their task with commendable spirit and the odd flash 
of incision. But finishing must be immaculate against Saracens.Newcastle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/newcastlefalcons> could not make tell the 
sieges they set up in Saracens’ territory, particularly in the first half, and 
so they left north London with nothing. At this generous time of year, they 
deserved more, but Saracens feel they have given up enough over the past month 
or so. Without their famous brothers for the foreseeable, they are in no mood 
for generosity.
 