
Sadiq Khan <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sadiq-khan> has called on the 
government to secure proper compensation from Volkswagen for the “dieselgate” 
scandal, saying the £1.1m pledged so far was outrageous.

The London mayor said the settlement was far too low compared with the £12bn 
payout achieved by US authorities for VW’s use of sophisticated “defeat 
devices” to cheat emissions tests. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/25/vw-emissions-scandal-seven-days>

In a letter to the transport secretary, Chris Grayling, Khan also urged the 
government to secure other concessions equivalent to those obtained by the US 
authorities. He wants UK VW owners to have a buy-back option and compensation 
for cities such asLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, which is 
estimated to have up to 80,000 VW cars that have a defeat device installed.

“‘Dieselgate’ is a global health scandal, but more than 12 months after the 
use of so-called defeat devices came to light, the government is running scared 
from its regulatory responsibility to take action on VW,” Khan said.

“In the US, the authorities have secured over £12bn but so far our government 
has only secured an offering of a mere £1.1m – which is simply outrageous. I am 
now urging Chris Grayling to stand up for the British public and come forward 
with an urgent, strong plan of action. In London alone, thousands of Londoners 
unwittingly bought VW cars unaware that their ‘dirty’ diesel engines were 
contributing to London’s toxic air.”

He suggested compensation could fund a national diesel scrappage scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/23/air-pollution-experts-call-for-scrappage-scheme-for-diesel-cars-and-boilers>
 but more pressingly wants the government to use its regulatory powers to 
remove affected vehicles from the streets.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fvw-dieselgate-payout-offer-outrageously-low-says-sadiq-khan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F39e290af6b1caac4ddf7e789071b67675befac2d%2F34_471_4219_2530%2F4219.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=VW%20'dieselgate'%20payout%20offer%20outrageously%20low%2C%20says%20Sadiq%20Khan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fvw-dieselgate-payout-offer-outrageously-low-says-sadiq-khan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=VW%20%27dieselgate%27%20payout%20offer%20outrageously%20low%2C%20says%20Sadiq%20Khan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fvw-dieselgate-payout-offer-outrageously-low-says-sadiq-khan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F39e290af6b1caac4ddf7e789071b67675befac2d%2F34_471_4219_2530%2F4219.jpg>
 Mayor of London Sadiq Khan makes a speech in July 2016 at Great Ormond Street 
Hospital on how he is going to tackle pollution in the capital. Photograph: 
Stefan Rousseau/PA 
His intervention, which follows a letter sent to VW bosses demanding 
compensation for Londoners, comes days afterthe European commission began legal 
action against the UK and six other EU countries for failing to act against car 
emissions cheating 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/08/dieselgate-ec-legal-action-eu-uk-germany-spain-emissions>
.

The UK is one of four countries accused of issuing approvals for VW Group cars 
and not applying national provisions or penalties, despite the company’s use of 
illegal software.

The letter to Grayling says: “Given the global scale of Volkswagen Group’s use 
of ‘defeat devices’, and the urgent national priority ascribed to improving air 
quality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/13/campaigners-criticise-uk-governments-response-to-air-pollution-warning>
 – especiallyby tackling diesel emissions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/02/diesel-vehicles-face-charges-after-uk-government-loses-air-pollution-case>
 – I am surprised you have not been more assertive in using your regulatory 
powers to secure vital action from Volkswagen to begin addressing these 
challenges.”

Khan urged the transport secretary to set out what urgent regulatory action he 
intended to take. He asked for information on the extent to which the defeat 
device software helped the vehicles obtain approval, so he can consider what 
options are open for him to intervene directly “given the lack of progress”.

The mayor wants VW to reimburse Transport for London £2.5m in lost congestion 
charge revenue, resulting from the defeat devices. He plans to use the money to 
raise awareness and reduce exposure to air pollution at schools in some of the 
most polluted parts of London.


The US Department of Justice reached a near $15bn dollar settlement with VW, 
including $10.03bn to compensate consumers and $4.7bn to mitigate the 
additional pollution and invest in green vehicle technology.

A Department for Transport spokesman said it had taken swift action to protect 
UK consumers from VW’s “unacceptable actions”. He added: “We were the first 
country in Europe to complete our own tests (April 2016) to ensure the issue 
was not industry-wide.

“We continue to push VW to take action to compensate the UK consumer. 
Transport minister John Hayes recently met with the MD for VW UK, Paul Willis, 
to reaffirm the government’s calls for compensation and press for a fix to 
affected cars to be carried out as quickly as possible.”
 