
Sam Warburton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sam-warburton> will captain 
Wales in their four-match autumn Test series and in next year’s Six Nations in 
a significant departure by the men in red before the Lions tour to New Zealand 
next summer.

Warburton led the Lions in Australia in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jul/06/australia-lions-third-test-match-report>
 and, with Warren Gatland taking a year-long sabbatical from Wales before the 
10-match trip to New Zealandfor which he will be head coach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/07/warren-gatland-confirmed-as-head-coach-of-2017-british-irish-lion-wales-rugby-union>
, is the leading contender for the armband, closely pursued by England’sDylan 
Hartley who has enjoyed a career resurrection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/07/warren-gatland-dylan-hartley-possible-lions-captain>
 under Eddie Jones.

Players’ interests must be at heart of any new timetable for world rugby | 
Robert Kitson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/sep/20/rugby-union-calendar-world-rugby-test-schedule>
Wales normally delay naming their captain until after the squad to prepare for 
the autumn series or the Six Nations has been announced, with Warburton 
admitting this month that he usually found out through the media. But Rob 
Howley, who has taken over as head coach from Gatland for the season, has 
already spoken to him.

“Sam is a great captain and is the best player to take us forward” said 
Howley. “He has captained the Lions once and I am sure he is in their thoughts 
again, but the challenge for every player is to do well in November and the Six 
Nations. You have to perform for your country to be in contention for next 
summer.

“There is no doubt that the rest of us in the Six Nations have to respond to 
what England have achieved under Eddie Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/12/eddie-jones-england-tour-de-force>
. He said the other day that, given their playing population, they should be 
winning the tournament every year and we all have to do something about that. 
They have got their house in order under Eddie and we look forward to playing 
them in Cardiff next year.”

Howley is Wales’s interim head coach for the second time after filling the 
role in 2012-13 while Gatland was preparing for a Lions tour but there are two 
differences now:Gatland will have no involvement with the Wales side 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/06/warren-gatland-lions-wales-new-zealand-2017>
, having been given dispensation to return for the games against New Zealand 
and Australia four years ago, although he will have a say in national player 
contract talks as Wales look to persuade players based outside the country to 
return home, and he has said hewill be standing down after the 2019 World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/05/warren-gatland-quit-wales-2019>.

“I do not see this as an audition for Warren’s job,” said Howley, who added he 
did not want to talk about whether he would be interested in succeeding 
Gatland. “It is different to four years ago, but my focus is on the next 10 
months and making sure that when the draw is made for the World Cup next May,we 
are where we need to be in the world rankings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/04/rugby-world-cup-pool-a-england-wales-australia>
.”

All Blacks blossoming in time for arrival of Warren Gatland’s Lions | Paul Rees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/08/all-blacks-warren-gatland-british-irish-lions>
Wales’s defeat to Australia in a fourth international in 2012 meant they 
dropped out of the top eight of the world rankings and, in the World Cup draw 
held a few weeks later, they were in a pool with England and the Wallabies.

“We are doing things a bit differently,” said Howley. “Our relations with the 
head coaches of the regions have been informal in the eight years the 
management team has been together, but we have changed that and are working 
closely with them. There is an emphasis on improving the skills of players and 
the opening weeks of the season have shown that the work put in is bearing 
fruit.

“We were the top try scorers in last season’s Six Nations and we scored five 
against New Zealand in the first two Tests. We are evolving our game and the 
task is to match New Zealand, who are setting the standards. It means improving 
our home record from the 70% record in the last three years. The Principality 
Stadium is an inspiration to opponents and I want it to inspire our players 
more.”

Howley would be released by Wales if the Lions wanted him to be attack coach 
next year, as he was in 2009 and 2013. “I am not thinking about that,” he said. 
“Team Wales comes first and my task is ensuring that we reach another level in 
November and beyond.”
 