
A victory for Wales thanks to tries from a Williams and a Davies, and owing 
much to the work of an Edwards, but the current crop remain in the shadows of 
their forefathers. This win – after five straight defeats – was welcome and an 
important one, too, but based on a markedly improved defence rather than any 
great attacking invention.

Liam Williams and Gareth Davies, the two try-scorers, were two of the six 
changes Rob Howley made from last week’s mauling at the hands of Australia so 
while the interim head coach was defiant afterwards, progress remains slow. 
Shaun Edwards will be more pleased that Argentina were limited to just two 
tries considering Wales had shipped 26 in those five defeats but Nicolás 
Sánchez’s creativity and goal-kicking ensured the hosts only crept over the 
line.

“The press have spoken about how good Argentina are, how good they are at 
offloading, how they play loose, attractive rugby and I thought we were able to 
stop them,” said Howley. “I think [with Liam] it’s what they call the X factor. 
He’s quick, elusive, the back three worked really well.”

Scotland suffer agonising defeat as Bernard Foley kicks Australia to late win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/12/scotland-australia-autumn-internationals-match-report>
Looking for early signs of Welsh progress, it was clear that they had at least 
tightened up defensively. Luke Charteris and Ross Moriarty led the way with 
aggression and accuracy so absent seven days ago. And for all that Argentina’s 
early interchanges through Martín Landajo and Sánchez were easy on the eye, the 
Pumas did not pose the same threat as the Wallabies.

Defensive progress is perhaps not surprising – it is 2009 since Jamie Roberts 
last found himself on the bench, so Howley clearly meant business –and the 
return of Sam Warburton and Alun Wyn Jones instantly raised standards.

“He is just a world class player,” added Howley of Jones. “His ability to 
bring players to another level. He’s a test match animal and to have himself 
and Sam Warburton back in the squad certainly raised our performance. What a 
player.”

Sánchez was first on the board with an early penalty but Wales withstood 
Argentina’s early domination and were level at 3-3 after 15 minutes, Leigh 
Halfpenny slotting a penalty from in front of the posts on the 22 after Pablo 
Mantera was penalised at the breakdown.

There were signs, however small, that the hosts were eager to get the ball 
wide but, that said, Wales’s first real opening was through Ken Owens at the 
back of a driving maul – it was not taken but Argentina had been penalised and 
back came the referee, Angus Gardner of Australia, for the simplest of three 
points for Halfpenny.

Not so long ago Halfpenny would waste little time in pointing to the posts for 
anything inside the opposing half but after more Argentina infringement Dan 
Biggar kicked to the corner with an intent that stirred this restless crowd.

Five minutes before half-time, another kickable penalty from a scrum and 
another kick to the corner. Warburton, growing in stature, claimed it but soon 
another chance went begging. Two more scrums followed and soon after the second 
the Pumas tighthead Ramiro Herrera was sent to the sin-bin. It felt like now or 
never for Wales but an Argentina penalty – after the right-wing Matias Moroni 
had packed down at flanker – was met with universal dismay in the stands.

Just a few minutes after the break, Biggar had the crowd on their feet. Taking 
a flat ball from Gareth Davies, he darted down the right and fed Halfpenny on 
the outside. Argentina scrambled but Wales worked the ball swiftly to the left 
where Liam Williams cut inside, stumbled towards the line and, despite a 
desperate tackle from Guido Petti, the try was awarded, after lengthy 
consolation between Gardner and the TMO.

New Zealand bounce back from Ireland defeat with thrashing of Italy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/12/italy-new-zealand-autumn-internationals-match-report>
Breathing space for Wales but not for long. On 48 minutes Landajo took a quick 
tap, jinked downfield and weighted a perfect grubber for Juan Martín Hernández, 
who beat Biggar in the foot race to splash over. Sánchez converted to bring 
Argentina within a point.

A clever chip ahead from Biggar then yielded a lineout deep in the Argentina 
22 and Gareth Davies eventually sniped over after the driving maul came up 
short. Halfpenny converted.

Back Argentina came, however, and after a well-worked move down the right, 
Landajo scored a try ever so similar to that of Gareth Davies, to the right of 
the posts, with Sánchez adding the extras.

Wales were hanging on but at least making their visits into Argentina 
territory pay and Halfpenny notched another penalty with 15 minutes left after 
Sánchez came in at the side.

Sánchez kept Argentina breathing down Welsh necks with another penalty with 
five minutes to go but Halfpenny’s fourth penalty ensured Argentina needed a 
try they would not manage.

“We never got comfortable,” said Daniel Hourcade, the Argentina head coach. 
“We played straight too much and we kicked too much. We didn’t make our game 
plan happen. Wales had a good game and succeeded in their game plan.”

WALES Halfpenny; North, J Davies, S Williams, Liam Williams; Biggar, G Davies; 
Jenkins (capt; Smith 63), Owens (Baldwin 46), Francis, Charteris, Jones, 
Warburton, Tipuric, MoriartyTries Liam Williams, G Davies Con Halfpenny Pens 
Halfpenny 4

ARGENTINA Tuculet (De La Fuente 37); Moroni, Orlando, Hernández (González 
Iglesias 75), Cordero, Sánchez, Landajo (Cubelli 64); Noguera Paz (García Botta 
50), Creevy (capt; Montoya 66), Herrera (Pieretto 71), Petti (Lezana 59), 
Alemanno, Matera (Senatore 63), Ortega Desio, IsaSin-bin Herrara 39 Tries 
Hernández, LandajoCons Sánchez 2 Pens Sánchez 2

Principality Stadium 50,175

Game rating 7/10 Referee Angus Gardner (Aus)
 