
It took a few years before Micah White, the co-founder of Occupy Wall Street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/occupy-wall-street>, could speak of the 
movement as a failure.

When White released the call for Occupy on 13 July 2011, the year was filled 
with optimism from the Arab Spring and an untested faith in the power of social 
media. At the time, White worked as an editor at activist magazine AdBusters. 
Together with its founder, Kalle Lasn, he sent out the call to 90,000 email 
addresses that led to the viral movement that spread to more than750 locations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2011/oct/17/occupy-protests-world-list-map?newsfeed=true%23data>
 worldwide.

Five years later, White found himself in a radically different spot: he 
announced his run for mayor in Nehalem, an otherwise quietOregon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/oregon> town of 278 residents. These days, 
White argues that rural areas are where the efforts of activists should be 
focused. Occupy Wall Street, as a movement, was unable to effect political and 
legislative change. But moving to small-town America still might.

Traumatized by Occupy’s dissipation, White and his wife decided to move from 
Berkeley to Nehalem in 2012 on the basis that it was “the most beautiful place 
they’d ever been” – a town whose city limits contains a total of 0.24 square 
miles of land.

After his move, White started to think deeply about the failures of Occupy.

Trump doesn’t sit around whining whether he’s able to govern. He just does

“It took me a year to even think that Occupy could be the end of protest. And 
then it took another year after that to be able to talk about this publicly,” 
White explained. “Many activists don’t want to hear about it, because protest 
is an industry.”

The brutal removal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/cifamerica/2011/nov/25/shocking-truth-about-crackdown-occupy>
 of the Zuccotti Park tent camp by police forces made White realize that street 
protests have become outdated. “It demonstrated that a mass movement in the 
streets doesn’t attain higher sovereignty over its government,” White told me. 
“It’s not protected from police violence or eviction.”

Instead, White focused on hyper-local activism. 

As word spread about the arrival of an Occupy founder in town, White’s 
neighbors – some who were hippies who moved in the 1970s, others who were 
priced out of nearby Portland – started approaching him with questions. How do 
we protect the local watershed? How do we vote on the construction of the 
parking lot?

White realized that activists can’t just take to the streets to gain power. 
“The only thing that works is to merge protest with political parties,” White 
explained. “You have to win wars, or win elections.”

Prior to White’s candidacy, Nehalem’s city council meetings were reasonably 
routine affairs. Its five members came together once a month in Nehalem’s city 
hall, a single-story wooden structure that reminds of the history of western 
pioneers that preceded the town.

One month the vote is on the renovation of a parking lot, and another month 
the discussion is about the timber harvest, an industry that once made Nehalem 
thrive but has since wound down. Most of the time, meetings take no longer than 
30 minutes. Even in a year of unprecedented political strife on the national 
stage, White was the only candidate to challenge a mayoral race in Nehalem’s 
Tillamook County.

White staged his first protest at 13 years old and is as close as one can get 
to be considered a career activist. Yet, moving to a rural community made him 
reconsider the techniques he had been employing.

“People in urban areas forget that there’s a whole other reality,” he said. 
“In rural America, you can’t use standard activist techniques such as blocking 
the streets, because those people are your neighbors.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Factivism-rural-america-occupy-movement%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b75b13f165c4a5d79f4bab0e4af56afce985f56%2F0_365_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Want%20to%20be%20part%20of%20the%20next%20wave%20of%20activism%3F%20Move%20to%20rural%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Factivism-rural-america-occupy-movement%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Want%20to%20be%20part%20of%20the%20next%20wave%20of%20activism%3F%20Move%20to%20rural%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Factivism-rural-america-occupy-movement%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b75b13f165c4a5d79f4bab0e4af56afce985f56%2F0_365_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 An Occupy activist on the fifth anniversary of the movement in September 2016. 
Photograph: Mary Altaffer/AP 
When White made his announcement on 15 July, the national media had not yet 
started to show the interest it now holds in America’s heartland. It was almost 
four months before that election night, when America, glued to the television, 
watched former Democratic strongholds flip red piece by piece, leading Donald 
Trump to victory. (Tillamook County, which had voted Obama for both terms, 
ended up electing Trump. It hadn’t voted red since Reagan’s win in 1984.)

White’s rural mission had started much earlier. His book, The End of Protest: 
A New Playbook for Revolution <https://endofprotest.com/>, was released in 
March 2016. In it, he describes Occupy as a “constructive failure”, urging 
activists to apply lessons learned: “Change won’t happen through old models of 
activism. Protests have become an accepted, and therefore ignored, by-product 
of politics-as-usual.”

Small-town America, on the other hand, was where White saw the potential to 
apply the participatory democracy that Occupy’s leaderless organization failed 
to achieve.

“Nehalem represents one revolutionary scenario for building power in rural 
communities,” White writes. “The rural uprising begins when revolutionary 
activists distribute ourselves into pre-existing micro-cities in Cascadia [the 
Pacific north-west region that includes Oregon], ensuring that in each place 
there are enough of us to sway every local election.”

White released his announcement to run in an open letter he sent to every 
registered voter in town. He wrote, “I’m concerned because the majority of our 
city council – four out of five – were not elected by voters: they were 
appointed to their current positions by decree.” He continued by pleading for 
more power to the residents: “Sadly, the undemocratic process of appointments 
has fostered a city council culture that is unresponsive, unimaginative and 
unprepared for navigating our city into the future.”

In the same letter, White also called for the first meeting of the Nehalem 
People’s Association <https://www.facebook.com/PeopleOfNehalem/>, a 
neighborhood organization whose meetings would provide an open platform for 
residents to discuss local issues. More than 60 people showed up at the first 
meeting at the local community centre, which amounts to 20% of Nehalem’s total 
population.

How to survive and resist in the Trump era: practical things you can do now
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/11/how-to-survive-and-resist-in-the-trump-era-practical-things-you-can-do-now>
“Imagine that in New York,” White said. “That would be the equivalent of 1 
million people.” For White, Nehalem can be seen as a microcosm of America: no 
matter how small the town is, it has its own portion of income inequality and 
political strife. This means that if a new form of democracy can be created in 
Nehalem, it could be possible in every other city in America.

“The left is not revolutionary and doesn’t want to govern. The real 
revolutionaries now, unfortunately, is the right,” White explained. “Trump 
doesn’t sit around whining whether he’s able to govern. He justdoes.”

‘What makes you an expert?’

If Nehalem is a microcosm of America, then the arrival of the newcomer has 
caused a similar division among the town’s population.

At the first Nehalem People’s Association meeting, a group of residents showed 
up wearing “Keep Nehalem, Nehalem” sweatshirts. One of those residents, who 
spoke to me on the condition of anonymity, said that half of the 60 people at 
the meeting showed up just to express their dismay at White’s efforts. The 
loosely bound organization has been vocal against White’s efforts in Nehalem. 
Recently, a resident started offering bumper stickers featuring the campaign’s 
motto on the group’s Facebook page.

The support of the resident-led movement goes out to Bill Dillard, White’s 
opponent in the mayoral race. Dillard, who grew up in Nehalem, is a familiar 
face to many. He has been on the city council since 2003, his father served on 
the city council for many years before, and he’s worked as a local firefighter 
for 14 years. If Micah’s agenda was change, then Dillard ran on the sentiment 
of those who wanted to maintain the status quo.

In a letter addressed to White, Dillard writes, “Your newsletter has quite a 
laundry list of things that you envision for Nehalem’s future. After your three 
and a half years here, what makes you the expert on what the City of Nehalem 
needs?” His letter ends with a word of advice: “Mr White, Nehalem is not a 
political experiment. It’s our home.”

Nehalem’s local press fell between the gaps of the increasing divide. In an 
article titled “Nehalem and the n-word: campaign tactics go low and grow”, the 
North Coast Citizen, a local newspaper, reported on racial slurs targeting 
White since he announced his bid for mayor.

White is African American while Nehalem, according to the latest census, is 
93% white. One resident, Steve Meadows, is reported to have sent White a text 
containing a photo of ‘Nehalem’ tattooed over a bare stomach. The paper quoted 
him saying, “Because he’s a nigger, that’s why.”

This could be the end of protest. Many activists don’t want to hear about it, 
because protest is an industry

After the article’s publication, the paper received backlash from some 
readers, angry that their town had been painted racist over the actions of a 
few – some even called upon their neighbors to cancel their subscriptions. The 
reporter left the paper soon after the article’s publishing, and the article 
has since been removed (a transcript can still be found on White’sFacebook page 
<https://www.facebook.com/MicahWhitePhD/posts/583183271877675>). Joe Warren, 
the paper’s publisher, told me her leave was not related. “It’s a little 
community, they don’t get a lot of hard news written about them,” he said. “And 
suddenly there’s a new twist in a small town that they had never seen before, 
by someone well-known nationwide trying to make his way in.”

Jeremy Robert Mulcahy-Hill, a 30-year-old resident who has lived in Nehalem 
for over half of his life, explained: “Very little of us knew that Micah even 
lived here. We just didn’t know how he fits into the community, how he’s been 
giving back, and how he’s been interacting with the rest of the population. And 
all of a sudden, he was running for mayor.”

Mulcahy-Hill ran for city council this cycle but unwillingly got dragged into 
the controversy. A millennial, he is from a different generation than the 
incumbent council. He explained: “It turned into an us v them, the incumbents v 
the challengers. And if you were a challenger, you automatically got lumped in 
with Micah’s theology.”

According to Mulcahy-Hill, the tension grew so strong that one perspective 
council member retracted from the election. “It started as adults being adults, 
and wanting the betterment of the community, and it turned into a high school 
popularity contest.”

The exact measure of the national and local divisions became clear on 8 
November. White lost the election with 139 votes to 36, while Mulcahy-Hill lost 
to incumbent Stacy Jacobson, a longtime Nehalem resident with many ties to the 
community.

After his loss, White continued to attend city council meetings and is set on 
continuing his political mission. “There’s never been a positive social change 
that hasn’t been met with a tremendous amount of negative resistance, and that 
resistance always starts with the majority,” White told me. “Look at women’s 
rights, or even American democracy. If you go back to the American revolution, 
there were tons of royalist Americans who were opposed to it.”

But what if Nehalem simply isn’t ready for change? If this year’s political 
upheaval has made anything clear, it’s that in politics, timing is as decisive 
as reason. Trump’s rise to the presidency is only possible after a time in 
which the nation’s rural-urban divide and income gap have been brewing for 
decades. White had attempted viral movements before, but Occupy only spread 
when it fed on the right mixture of internet culture and economic meltdown.

Now that many democracies seem to be making an unthinkable return to 
authoritarianism, it has never been a better time to stop thinking of our 
post-war stability as the end point and start to reconsider what the future 
will look like. White, as a abstract and explosive thinker, is more often too 
early than too late. The success of his efforts will depend on whether he can 
sustain his movement until the window is right, and when rural America will be 
ready for the change foreseen by the pundits on the coasts.

For now, the seeds have been planted in Nehalem’s soil. “Before Micah was 
here, you’d hear about council meetings and there were two or three people who 
attended,” Mulcahy-Hill told me. “Now it’s a full house – you might as well buy 
tickets.”

 * This article was amended on 6 January 2017. A previous version incorrectly 
identified the year in which Tillamook County last voted for a Republican 
presidential candidate.  