
Even in the digital age, it’s an experience familiar to many: scrolling 
through a radio tuner, jumping from crackled voices to clearcut sound, shipping 
forecasts to pop tunes, in the hunt for a station you want to listen to.


Now, you can experience this on a global scale, hopping thousands of the 
world’s radio stations. Launched this week,Radio.Garden <http://radio.garden/> 
is an interactive website that presents Earthcovered in tiny dots, each 
representing a radio station that can be tuned into at the click of a button.

With global tensions high, anger at the political establishment and fake-news 
dominating social media discussions, it feels like there has never been a 
better time to enable people to reflect on human communication on an 
international level.Radio <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio>.Garden 
allows the world to be explored through its sounds, and while some seem 
foreign, many seem familiar.

At the time of writing, Classic FM Sofia is beaming out a romantic symphony, 
Mali Jet is blasting out fast-paced hi-life, and over on the west coast of the 
US Rockabilly Radio is, well, living up to its name.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Ftune-in-to-worlds-radio-stations-radiogarden%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05c3041abd9ebade0a1590f926515e48fba85aa4%2F1_0_1555_933%2F1555.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Want%20to%20tune%20in%20to%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20radio%20stations%3F%20Grow%20your%20listening%20with%20Radio.Garden&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Ftune-in-to-worlds-radio-stations-radiogarden%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Want%20to%20tune%20in%20to%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20radio%20stations%3F%20Grow%20your%20listening%20with%20Radio.Garden&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Ftune-in-to-worlds-radio-stations-radiogarden%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05c3041abd9ebade0a1590f926515e48fba85aa4%2F1_0_1555_933%2F1555.jpg>
 Users can explore stations almost anywhere in the world. Photograph: 
Radio.Garden 
After jumping between talk radio stations in more languages than I can count, 
I paused on Richmond Indie Radio, which has just played Marquee Moon by 
Television, before jumping over to ESPN Tucson, to hear a discussion of the 
Rams game, before spinning back to Europe, where Munich’s Hardest Hits is 
sounding a little like the UK’s Magic FM.


One enlivening tool lets listeners hear international radio jingles, “a 
worldwide crash course in station identification”, as well as the option to 
listen to audio clips from radio discussions around the world.

On Reddit, it prompted a sweet discussion, with people talking about their 
first contact with radio
Jonathan Puckey, Studio Puckey 
The interactive was created by Amsterdam-based design companies Studio Puckey 
<http://puckey.studio/> and Moniker <https://studiomoniker.com/>, which were 
approached by the Netherlands Institute for Sound and Vision to develop an 
installation for a research project about radio called Transnational Radio 
Encounters, which focuses on radio that crosses linguistic and geographical 
barriers.

“Conceptually, what was really important for us was to leave out the city 
names, countries and borders and just leave you with this naked Earth,” says 
Jonathan Puckey, part of the team that created it. “Then you just have these 
pin points transmitting radio.”

It’s not a comprehensive collection of the world’s radio stations, but 
currently features more than 8,000, with more being added every day. Stations 
that wish to be featured are invited to get in touch.

Since it launched, the site has gone viral. 

“This was a big surprise for us,” says Puckey. “We have a crisis meeting 
tomorrow! Since this morning I’ve had 350 emails from different stations that 
would really like to be on it. I had the same again the day before. Were going 
to spend a weekend adding as many new stations as we can.”

Puckey says it was only after the site launched, when he was reading the 
social media comments about it, that he realised what an emotive project it 
was. “On Reddit, it prompted a really sweet discussion, with people talking 
about their first contact with radio, or grandparents who had worked in radio 
during the second world war.

“It’s not a political statement. But it can be used as a tool to start these 
kinds of discussions,” he says.

 