
At the Labour party conference this week, there was plenty of good sense to be 
found in terms of housing policy. Teresa Pearce, the shadow housing and 
planning minister,made clear her priorities were increasing social housing 
numbers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/sep/29/social-housing-labour-shadow-housing-minister>
, detoxifying the debate around council housing, targeting rogue landlords and 
closing the tax gap when it comes to private rent. In the leader’s speech, 
Jeremy Corbynannounced  
<http://labourlist.org/2016/09/united-we-can-shape-the-future-jeremy-corbyns-speech-to-conference/>
that “Labour will remove the artificial local borrowing cap and allow councils 
to borrow against their housing stock”, a measure councils have been seeking 
for years.

As Pearce told the Guardian, the London mayoral election was very clearly a 
referendum on housing. But concerns about housing go far beyond the capital, 
and will figure highly in the concerns of any voter around the country. Without 
good housing policy, Labour will get nowhere electorally. Explaining the roots 
of the crisis and the solutions that work for all in need will be key to 
winning over voters in the 2020 election.

Council houses change lives: we will build them
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/sep/29/social-housing-labour-shadow-housing-minister>
Yet some of the worst offenders when it comes to housing policy are not 
Conservative councils, but Labour ones. When hearing about a local authority 
with a reprehensible policy or attitude towards those in housing need, it’s too 
depressingly often run by Labour councillors. Earlier this week,Nottingham city 
council’s stigmatising posters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/sep/20/aylesbury-estate-ruling-future-regeneration-sajid-javid>
 depicting homeless people as both frauds and addicts and encouraging locals 
not to give spare change, were banned by the Advertising Standards Authority. 
The authority said four of the five ads portrayed all beggars as “disingenuous 
and undeserving individuals” adding that it considered the ads reinforced 
negative stereotypes of a group of individuals, most of whom were likely to be 
considered as vulnerable, faced a multitude of issues and required specialist 
support. “On that basis we concluded [the ads] were likely to cause serious or 
widespread offence.”

Meanwhile, in London, secretary of state for communities and local government 
Sajid Javid <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sajid-javid> has blocked the 
compulsory purchase orders of a number of flats on the Aylesbury estate in 
south London, where Southwark council’s regeneration plans meant it had to buy 
out residents who had previously bought their homes from the council under the 
right-to-buy policy.

A government inspector found the valuations of the flats were far lower than 
their actual value 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/sep/20/aylesbury-estate-ruling-future-regeneration-sajid-javid>
 and ruled that this jeopardised the human rights of the leaseholders. The 
council is appealing the decision, meaning that Javid –a man who read passages 
from Ayn Rand’s The Fountainhead, a paean to individualism, to woo his wife 
<http://www.conservativehome.com/parliament/2015/01/javid-i-read-the-courtroom-scene-from-the-fountainhead-to-my-future-wife.html>
 – has a more leftwing approach to housing rights than Southwark’s nominally 
Labour council.

Next door to Southwark in Lambeth, and in Newham in the east, the story barely 
differs: tale after tale of demolition and social cleansing cloaked in the term 
“regeneration”. It is a scrabble to extract value from land, while extracting 
and uprooting long-term tenants from their homes. From themoving of mothers to 
Birmingham from East Ham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/may/24/homeless-london-birmingham> to 
theplanned demolition of the beautifully designed Central Hill estate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jan/31/council-estates-if-they-arent-broken-lambeth-council-central-hill-estate-social-housing-affordable>
, Labour councils keep getting into scrapes with residents and protesters.

And these scrapes aren’t quickly forgotten. The Brexit vote shows that many 
people feel politics in Westminster is disconnected from their lives, but their 
local council often has a direct and identifiable effect on their lives. If 
that includes making families homeless, uprooting communities whilemocking 
residents protesting your plans 
<http://www.brixtonbuzz.com/2016/04/lambeth-labour-cllr-takes-to-twitter-to-post-pics-of-cats-on-treadmills-to-mock-local-library-campaigners/>
, that will be the face of the Labour party people remember.

For Labour to win, its national policy must trickle down to local authority 
level. As Corbyn and Pearce argue, Labour needs to value and keep social 
housing, keep services in-house, and understand that social housing offers 
people opportunities and is not simply the housing of last resort.

Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/housing/> for your free Guardian 
Housing network newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to you on the 
last Friday of the month. Follow us:@GuardianHousing 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>
 