
To make a city, the first thing you need is a name. Any name can work, though 
some certainly suggest a more successful future than others.

Chechnya’s capital, for example, is called Grozny, which translates from the 
Russian as “fearsome”. It goes back to the name of the colonial fort that the 
Tsar established inChechnya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/chechnya> at the 
start of the 19th century, around which a city of what is now 271,000 people 
eventually grew. It is a name that certainly reflects Grozny’s tortured 
history: from Stalin’s genocidal mass deportations and Putin’s murderous war to 
force it back into Russia’s orbit, to its subsequent descent into warlord-ism. 
But it is not necessarily the kind of identity that attracts eager new citizens 
or investors.

The sense of purpose that can eventually turn a settlement into a city – even 
one born in the most difficult circumstances – begins when it acquires a name. 
In 1630, a group of English Puritans fleeing religious persecution at home left 
for North America and named what would some day be a city of 3 million after
Boston <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/boston>, the town in England they 
had left behind.

Tel Aviv, meanwhile, was founded in 1909 by a handful of refugees displaced by 
European pogroms. They gathered on a beach outside Jaffa, drew lots for sites 
on which to build homes, and gave the land a Hebrew name.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fwar-persecution-ego-how-cities-get-names-deyan-sudjic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7fc0e0abd10c88710e4870cdf9ef4a1337a358b6%2F0_267_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=War%2C%20persecution%20and%20ego%3A%20how%20do%20cities%20get%20their%20names%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fwar-persecution-ego-how-cities-get-names-deyan-sudjic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=War%2C%20persecution%20and%20ego%3A%20how%20do%20cities%20get%20their%20names%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fwar-persecution-ego-how-cities-get-names-deyan-sudjic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7fc0e0abd10c88710e4870cdf9ef4a1337a358b6%2F0_267_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 The name of Rio’s favela Complexo do Alemão, came from the immigrant who 
originally owned the land. Photograph: Felipe Dana/AP 
 Slums are different. Mostly they do have names, even if they were acquired 
with random promiscuity, but it doesn’t lead to investment or permanence. The 
lack of infrastructure is limiting.

One name that attached itself to a city in this way is Complexo do Alemão, the 
violentRio de Janeiro <https://www.theguardian.com/world/rio-de-janeiro> favela 
that started to grow faster and faster from 1950 onwards. More-or-less 
illegally, it has spilled breeze blocks and corrugated asbestos cement roof 
tiles over every inch of the land that was once owned by an immigrant referred 
to by the first squatters as the “Alemão”, Portuguese for German. (Alemão is 
also the faintly dismissive term in Brazil for any fair-skinned foreigner, but 
the particular foreigner who owned Complexo do Alemão had actually been born in 
Poland rather than Germany.)

 Another randomly acquired name is that of Soweto, the bleak city on the edge 
of Johannesburg that grew, equally bleakly, out of the English acronym for 
south-western townships. Soweto has its roots in a settlement process that is 
very different from the shanty towns of Brazil; it is the product of an attempt 
by the vanished apartheid regime to force black people out of those city-centre 
areas that it designated for whites. In Complexo do Alemão, life is also 
lawless, short and harsh – but it is a community initiated by the people who 
live in it, rather than a settlement that was imposed on them.

 A city sometimes reflects the act of will of the individual who brought it 
into being. Alexander the Great named Alexandria for himself, while – scarcely 
less immodestly – Peter the Great gave St Petersburg the name of his patron 
saint. George Washington chose the location of the US capital but not the name; 
that came as a tribute from the commissioners put in charge of the construction 
of the US capital by Congress. When Juscelino Kubitschek surprised his 
electorate, and perhaps even himself, by carrying out the provisions of the 
Brazilian constitution and building a new capital within his five-year term in 
office as president, he named it for his country: Brasília.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fwar-persecution-ego-how-cities-get-names-deyan-sudjic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7724cf8429cf5d1d9e0eb61ba10570df669fb56b%2F0_194_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=War%2C%20persecution%20and%20ego%3A%20how%20do%20cities%20get%20their%20names%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fwar-persecution-ego-how-cities-get-names-deyan-sudjic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=War%2C%20persecution%20and%20ego%3A%20how%20do%20cities%20get%20their%20names%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fwar-persecution-ego-how-cities-get-names-deyan-sudjic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7724cf8429cf5d1d9e0eb61ba10570df669fb56b%2F0_194_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
 Milton Keynes got its name from the village it was built upon. Photograph: 
David Sillitoe for the Guardian 
 In 1967, the British government decided to call a new city of 250,000 people 
it planned to build half way between London and Birmingham,Milton Keynes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/may/03/struggle-for-the-soul-of-milton-keynes>
. This was not an attempt to couple the author of Paradise Lost with the 
20th-century economist, as if in some earnest effort to erode the line between 
culture and science. Nor was it capitalism’s riposte to Karl-Marx-Stadt, as the 
East German city of Chemnitz was called between 1953 and 1990.

In fact, Milton Keynes was the name of a Buckinghamshire village that was 
about to be engulfed by the new city. The village died, but its name lives on 
in the entity that extinguished it. Ancient lanes and Georgian brick houses 
still survive in the midst ofMilton Keynes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/milton-keynes>, trapped among the precast 
concrete terraces, the business parks and the traffic-segregating underpasses.

 Cities with contested identities come with multiple names. To use one rather 
than another – Derry rather than Londonderry, for example – is to demonstrate a 
particular interpretation of the city’s history. When the names of cities are 
changed for political reasons, outcomes can be unpredictable. Mumbai’s English 
speakers – for the most part members of an Indian intellectual elite – are much 
more likely to use the old name of Bombay than their British counterparts, who 
may be overcompensating for past offence.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fwar-persecution-ego-how-cities-get-names-deyan-sudjic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05a3728fc41affda2732c5fd9cd200b5b5ed6d39%2F0_349_5433_3259%2F5433.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=War%2C%20persecution%20and%20ego%3A%20how%20do%20cities%20get%20their%20names%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fwar-persecution-ego-how-cities-get-names-deyan-sudjic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=War%2C%20persecution%20and%20ego%3A%20how%20do%20cities%20get%20their%20names%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fwar-persecution-ego-how-cities-get-names-deyan-sudjic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05a3728fc41affda2732c5fd9cd200b5b5ed6d39%2F0_349_5433_3259%2F5433.jpg>
 Icelanders have their own name for Istanbul, dating back to the 11th-century 
when they referred to it as the ‘Great City’. Photograph: Alamy 
 Mumbai’s roots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/mar/30/story-cities-11-reclamation-mumbai-bombay-megacity-population-density-flood-risk>
 go back to the successive waves of the European colonisation of India. The 
Portuguese handed over the cluster of islands and fishing villages that 
constituted Bombay to the British in the 17th century. The 20,000 inhabitants 
of those days have swelled to an estimated 18 million, as a port city 
successively became a mill complex, a railway hub, a financial centre, and a 
centre for the Indian cinema industry.

 Some cities measure out their histories in multiple identities, throwing 
light on to the varying political and cultural agendas of their leaders. 
Istanbul, once called Constantinople and before that Byzantium, has been the 
capital city of three different empires. It is shaped by the surviving 
fragments of the Greek, Roman, Byzantine and Ottoman civilisations that built 
it.

What makes a city a city - and does it really matter anyway?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/may/08/what-makes-city-tech-garden-smart-redefine>
Although modern Turkey’s founder, Kemal Atatürk, was born in what is now 
Greece, he moved his capital from Istanbul in EuropeanTurkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> to Ankara in Asia, a city created 
from almost nothing. And he insisted on Istanbul as the name for what much of 
the rest of the world continued to call Constantinople.

In Slav languages it was known as Tsarigrad, a name that is still used in 
Bulgaria. Iceland too has its own name for Istanbul, which goes back to the 
time of the 11th-century Viking raids on the Black Sea, when they referred to 
it simply as the “Great City”. Ever since 1930, however, the Turkish post 
office has refused to deliver mail addressed to any other version of the name 
for the city than Istanbul.

 The more historic trading connections, the more linguistic variations there 
are for a city’s name. The more powerful the city, however, the more likely all 
its trading partners will be to use its common name.

This is an edited extract from The Language of Cities by Deyan Sudjic 
<https://www.penguin.co.uk/books/280291/the-language-of-cities/>, published by 
Allen Lane (RRP £25.00).Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion



 