
Hundreds have been killed and wounded in a spate of terror attacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris-attacks> across Europe in the past two 
years. These callous crimes have not just targeted individuals, they are also 
attacks on our societies, our freedoms and our way of life. The need to protect 
people from such wanton violence is clear, but this is not something that can 
be achieved by any means. Crucially, it neither should nor can be achieved by 
riding roughshod over the very rights that governments are supposed to uphold.

Related: I was held after reading a book on a plane – we need to rethink our 
terror laws | Faizah Shaheen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/15/faizah-shaheen-reading-book-on-plane-syria-terror-laws-muslims-radicalisation>

The last two years have seen a profound shift across Europe: a move from the 
view that it is the role of governments to provide security so that people can 
enjoy their rights, to the view that governments must restrict people’s rights 
in order to provide security. The result has been an insidious redrawing of the 
boundaries between the powers of the state and the rights of individuals. In 
the weeks after the horrific Paris attacks in November 2015, for example, France
 declared a state of emergency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/16/france-nationwide-state-of-emergency>
 and set about introducing a series of new counter-terrorism measures. Other 
countries quickly followed suit, passing draconian new laws of their own: a 
ripple effect spreading across Europe and resulting in an ever-deeper state of 
permanent securitisation.

Individual EU countries and regional bodies have responded to the attacks by 
proposing, adopting and implementing wave after wave of counter-terrorism 
measures that have eroded the rule of law, enhanced executive powers, peeled 
away judicial controls, restricted freedom of expression and exposed everyone 
to government surveillance. Brick by brick, the edifice of rights protection 
that was so carefully constructed after the second world war is being 
dismantled.

In a report published today 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/documents/eur01/5342/2017/en/>, Amnesty 
International reveals how a deluge of new laws and amendments rushed through by 
individual EU states are corroding the rule of law and undermining fundamental 
freedoms. The recent wave of counter-terrorism measures has often proved to be 
discriminatory both on paper and in practice, and has had a disproportionate 
and profoundly negative impact, particularly on Muslims, foreign nationals or 
people perceived to be Muslim or foreign.

Men, women and children have been verbally and physically abused 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/28/hate-crime-horrible-spike-brexit-vote-metropolitan-police>
. Passengers have beenremoved from planes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/03/man-removed-easyjet-flight-luton-prayer-message-phone>
 because they “looked like a terrorist”. Women have beenbanned from wearing a 
full-body swimsuit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/24/the-burkini-ban-what-it-really-means-when-we-criminalise-clothes>
 on the beach in France. Refugee children in Greece have been arrested for
playing with plastic guns 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/europe/syrian-refugee-children-arrested-toy-gun-greece-detained-beaten-strip-naked-amnesty-international-a7341206.html>
.

One of the most alarming developments across the EU is the effort by states to 
make it easier to invoke and prolong a “state of emergency” as a response to 
terrorism or the threat of violent attacks. In a number of countries, emergency 
measures that are supposed to be temporary have become embedded in ordinary 
law. Powers intended to be exceptional are appearing more and more as permanent 
features of national law.

Given the febrile state of European politics, people should be extremely wary 
of the range of powers and extent of control over their lives that they are 
prepared to hand over to their governments. The rise of far-right political 
discourse, anti-refugee sentiment, stereotyping and discrimination against 
Muslims and intolerance of free speech or other forms of expression increase 
the risk that these emergency powers will target certain people for reasons 
that have nothing at all to do with a genuine threat to national security. 
Indeed, this is happening inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> already.

Related: Bombs and guns won’t beat us, but our own hysteria will | Simon 
Jenkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/10/hysteria-terrorists-fear-donald-trump-falling-into-bin-laden-trap>

The threshold for the triggering and extension of emergency measures has been 
lowered – and runs the risk of being reduced even further in coming years. 
While international human rights law is clear that exceptional measures should 
only be applied in genuinely exceptional circumstances – namely “in time of war 
or other public emergency threatening the life of the nation” – the disturbing 
and corrosive idea that Europe faces a perpetual emergency is beginning to take 
hold.

There are many countries in Europe, particularly those with little history of 
terrorism, in which hardline governments of whatever political persuasion will 
be tempted to impose states of emergency in response to the first serious 
terrorism-related attack they face. These governments will enjoy a range of 
sweeping powers whose use is unlikely to be restricted to those involved in the 
committing of such acts.

Ultimately, however, the threat to the life of a nation – to social cohesion, 
to the proper functioning of institutions, to respect for human rights and the 
rule of law – does not come from the isolated acts of a violent criminal 
fringe, however much they may wish to destroy these institutions and undermine 
these principles. It comes from governments and societies that are prepared to 
abandon their own values in confronting them.

On 15 November 2015, two days after his wife was killed in the Bataclan 
theatre in Paris, Antoine Leiris wrotean open letter to the killers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/17/bataclan-paris-victim-helene-muyal-husband-antoine-leiris-killers-open-letter>
. “On Friday night, you stole the life of an exceptional being, the love of my 
life, the mother of my son, but you will not have my hate … You want me to be 
scared, to see my fellow citizens through suspicious eyes, to sacrifice my 
freedom for security. You have failed. I will not change.”

If we are to avoid creating societies in which liberty becomes the exception 
and fear the rule, we must follow Leiris’s example. We must not allow fear to 
change us.

• Dangerously disproportionate: The ever-expanding national security state in 
Europe <https://www.amnesty.org/en/documents/eur01/5342/2017/en/> is published 
today.
 