
Warren Gatland <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/warren-gatland> said he is 
not itching for a breakdown battle with a New Zealand side bereft of Richie 
McCaw after the Wales coach made four changes to his pack for Saturday’s first 
Test in Auckland.

Three of those changes from the team beaten by grand slam winners England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/29/england-wales-international-match-report>
 two weeks ago are in the front five. Gatland has also been able to pick his 
fit-again captainSam Warburton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/04/sam-warburton-wales-new-zealand> 
after a six-week injury break.

The inclusion of the record-breaking prop Gethin Jenkins may suggest Gatland 
is after more scavengers in his pack but he says he is merely looking for 
experience.

Sam Warburton: Wales must step up a gear to end lean run against All Blacks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/04/sam-warburton-wales-new-zealand> 
With the All Blacks having lost household names such as McCaw, Dan Carter, 
Ma’a Nonu and Conrad Smith sinceretaining the World Cup at Twickenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/31/new-zealand-australia-rugby-world-cup-final-match-report>
 seven months ago, Gatland wants to throw into battle as many experienced 
campaigners as he can.

Wales will start with a team totalling 760 caps, compared with the 580 for the 
home side. When you add 20 Tests for the British and Irish Lions from six of 
the Wales players, it is the visitors who have an edge over the world champions 
in one department at least.

“We are expecting a really tough contest at the breakdown but we are not 
targeting that area. With our loose forwards and Gethin Jenkins, who is so 
strong over the ball, we feel we can pose a threat,” Gatland said.

“But it was more about picking experience so we can hopefully be really 
competitive against the world champions. We’ve got experience coming back into 
the team with Gethin, Ken Owens, Bradley Davies and Jonathan Davies.

“You’ve always got to be excited about playing the best team in the world, the 
back-to-back world champions, in their own back yard. It is a huge test for us 
but to get the chance to test yourself against the best is exciting.”

Wales have not beaten New Zealand since 1953 and have lost 26 games in a row 
against them. Gatland’s men will get three chances to make history this month 
and their Kiwi coach wants them to be bold and brave.

“My understanding of New Zealand rugby is that this week they will concentrate 
on the basics,” Gatland said. “Do them accurately, not be afraid to play a bit 
of territory and put us under pressure to see if we make mistakes.

“It is making sure we match that and we are accurate ourselves. Their policy 
will be to try to win the first two Tests and then throw the youngsters into 
the third one but we’re not going to roll over and let that happen or make it 
easy for them.

“The challenge for is to stay in the arm-wrestle and to match them physically 
up front. When opportunities arise, we have to take risks and play expansive 
rugby.

“Often the difference between one side and the other has been a magical moment 
from someone, a flip-pass from Kieran Read or something else. The team that 
take the risks are often the ones who get across the line.

“The message to our players is to be bold, be smart in the way we play and 
don’t be scared to try things. If it’s a pass out of the back of the hand or 
round the back, then try it.”

New Zealand

Ben Smith; Waisake Naholo, Malakai Fekitoa, Ryan Crotty, Julian Savea; Aaron 
Cruden, Aaron Smith; Kieran Read (capt), Sam Cane, Jerome Kaino, Brodie 
Retallick, Luke Romano, Owen Franks, Dane Coles, Joe Moody.

Replacements Nathan Harris, Wyatt Crockett, Charlie Faumuina, Patrick 
Tuipulotu, Ardie Savea, TJ Perenara, Beauden Barrett, Seta Tamanivalu.

Wales

Liam Williams; George North, Jonathan Davies, Jamie Roberts, Hallam Amos; Dan 
Biggar, Rhys Webb; Taulupe Faletau,Sam Warburton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sam-warburton> (capt), Ross Moriarty, Alun 
Wyn Jones, Bradley Davies, Samson Lee, Ken Owens, Gethin Jenkins.

Replacements Scott Baldwin, Rob Evans, Tomas Francis, Jake Ball, Ellis 
Jenkins, Gareth Davies, Gareth Anscombe, Scott Williams.
 