
Warren Gatland <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/warren-gatland>, the Wales 
coach, has said that, despite suffering a 3-0 Test series defeat at the hands 
of the All Blacks, the tour to New Zealand had been a good experience for his 
players and important lessons had been learned for the team’s development.

Wales had pushed the world champions in the first two Tests, losing them 39-21 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/11/new-zealand-wales-first-test-match-report>
 and36-22 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/18/new-zealand-wales-match-report> 
respectively, but were soundly beaten46-6 in the third 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/25/new-zealand-wales-match-report> 
in Dunedin on Saturday, conceding 16 tries to five over the three matches.

The architect of the All Blacks’ 29th win in a row over Wales was the fly-half 
Beauden Barrett who ran in two tries and contributed 26 points, although it was 
his Wales counterpart Dan Biggar who had drawn first blood with an early 
penalty.

Barrett replied in kind only for Biggar quickly to restore Wales’ lead but 
they did not disturb the scoreboard after that.

The All Blacks took command with Ben Smith and George Moala scoring tries 
before half-time. After the interval Barrett added a third try bursting through 
Biggar and Rhys Webb to touch down and struck again when he bamboozled three 
defenders. They finished in style when Israel Dagg raced 80 metres to the line.

Afterwards Gatland said: “It was a pretty disappointing third Test after all 
the positives that came out of the first two games. We started pretty well in 
Dunedin but New Zealand were superb in attack and we missed too many tackles.

“We came on tour with a different mindset and wanting to evolve our game with 
some more attacking play. We normally pride ourselves on a 90% tackle 
completion rate but our defence has let us down. We’ll take lessons home with 
us and make sure we apply them when we next get together as a team.

“It has been a good experience for the players and the biggest lesson of all 
we learned is about collision dominance at the breakdown, how they accelerate 
into the contact area. It creates quick ball on attack and puts pressure on 
your defence.”

Sam Warburton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sam-warburton>, the Wales 
captain, admitted after the third Test: “They were just way too good for us. 
The strength in depth they have in New Zealand is remarkable. The amount of 
talent they have got is frightening,” he said. “They may have lost [Dan] 
Carter, [Richie] McCaw, [Ma’a] Nonu, [Conrad] Smith and all of those great 
players but that doesn’t make a difference here. They lose a little bit of 
experience but they have some super players to come in. That’s why they are the 
best rugby nation in the world.”

The 22-year-old Gloucester flanker Ross Moriarty, who has twice won the Junior 
World Championship with England at Under-20 level, said: “We have got to look 
at ourselves and work on the things we haven’t done well at. We will be looking 
forward to playing against southern hemisphere sides again in the autumn and 
putting into practice the lessons we have learned on this tour.”
 