
With three small words, Draymond Green confirmed what we’ve all been wondering 
about theGolden State Warriors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/golden-state-warriors> and the Cleveland 
Cavaliers.

“It’s a rivalry.”

There wasn’t a single lead change during Golden State’s commanding 126-91 win 
over the Cavaliers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/16/golden-state-warriors-cleveland-cavaliers-report>
, but there was a shift in the power dynamic at Oracle Arena on Monday night: 
the Warriors have reclaimed the lead in the fiercest – and newest – grudge 
match in the NBA.

See you in June: Warriors lay waste to Cavaliers in potential finals preview
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/16/golden-state-warriors-cleveland-cavaliers-report>
The Warriors had a lot to prove after blowing a 3-1 advantage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/20/cleveland-cavaliers-win-nba-title-golden-state-warriors-game-7-nba-finals>
 in the 2016 finals, andfalling to Cleveland in the last minutes of their 
rematch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/25/nba-christmas-scores-roundup> on 
Christmas Day. On Monday night, after three days of rest, they came back fully 
loaded, shooting at over 50% with 15 three-pointers and 37 assists. But for a 
team with an explosive offense, defense was the star. The Warriors blocked 11 
shots and consistently attacked the rim to prevent the Cavaliers from catching 
up. They capitalized on Cleveland’s 15 turnovers to gain an extra 20 points.

“When we play like that, we’re tough to beat,” Warriors head coach Steve Kerr 
said.

And here’s just how bad Cleveland’s night was:

 * Cleveland had more turnovers (15) than assists (11), giving up 20 points. 
 * The Cavaliers only had 11 assists total; Curry and Green had 11 apiece. 
 * The Cavaliers allowed 78 points, the most in a first half since 2011. 
 * Cleveland’s starters had double-digit negative impact on the plus-minus 
scale. 
 * It was the biggest loss by a defending champion in 10 years. 
Days before their second match-up of the season, LeBron James, in an ESPN 
interview 
<http://www.espn.com/nba/story/_/id/18483124/lebron-james-downplays-talk-cleveland-cavaliers-golden-state-warriors-rivalry>
, called Golden State “probably one of the best teams ever assembled” but 
wouldn’t make the leap to call them rivals, and he has repeatedly said that he 
isn’t thinking about potential NBA finals rematch.

“Regardless of whether LeBron thinks it’s a rivalry or not, they want to beat 
us,” Green countered after the blowout.
Arielle Retting (@aretting) 
Draymond Green: "It's a rivalry" pic.twitter.com/a0bheZsdyi 
<https://t.co/a0bheZsdyi>
 <https://twitter.com/aretting/status/821214127649456128> January 17, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/aretting/status/821214127649456128> 
But it’s difficult to form a rivalry when teams are in different conferences 
and only face each other twice a season. Most of the league’s greatest power 
struggles – the Lakers v the Celtics, Wilt Chamberlain v Bill Russell – took 
several games and many years to form. The Lakers and Celtics have faced off in 
the finals 12 times; Russell and Chamberlain antagonized each other for a 
decade.

The Warriors and the Cavaliers had little history before these recent 
match-ups, and each team hadn’t been a true playoff contender in decades until 
James andStephen Curry <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/stephen-curry> came 
around.

But the tension between the teams has escalated with each recent game, and it 
only seems to be building. You could feel how high the stakes were with each 
big play on Monday night.

Kevin Durant – who has his own rivalry with James 
<http://www.mercurynews.com/2016/12/24/the-kevin-durant-lebron-james-rivalry-has-been-injected-into-warriors-cavs/>
 from his Oklahoma City Thunder days, after falling to the Miami Heat in the 
2012 finals – intenselyblocked James at the rim 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7MX5xqJrp5k>, sending the crowd into a frenzy.

“Fans are starting to respect defense, and they can sense when there’s a 
momentum shift,” Durant said of the play. “Especially at home, when you get a 
block against anybody, the crowd really enjoys it.”

With his arm extended, Green collided with James during the first half, which 
earned him a flagrant one foul – areminder of their confrontation 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?time_continue=1&v=cxlThiXNNjg> during game four 
of the finals that also earned Green a flagrant one foul and got him suspended 
for a game.
Michael Lee (@MrMichaelLee) 
Not. A. Rivalry pic.twitter.com/dIOqcaFSXB <https://t.co/dIOqcaFSXB>
 <https://twitter.com/MrMichaelLee/status/821172816074579968> January 17, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/MrMichaelLee/status/821172816074579968> 
“I think it’s intense enough for two matches,” Green said. “The fact that you 
only play twice a year makes it even more exciting. If we want to play each 
other again, then try to get to theNBA finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nba-finals>.”

That seems to be a likely scenario. The Warriors and the Cavaliers are poised 
for their third straight finals battle, each sitting at the top of their 
conferences.

Their two match-ups of the season behind them, both teams are looking to the 
future. Cleveland head coach Tyronn Lue said the Cavaliers will get right back 
to work to “regroup” after the loss, and work on getting newly acquired Kyle 
Korver into the mix, an excellent three-point shooter who could match up nicely 
against theSplash Brothers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/jan/07/golden-states-steve-kerr-is-much-more-than-the-splash-brothers-chaperone>
 in the playoffs.

The Warriors are set to break ground on their new arena in San Francisco on 
Tuesday, and Klay Thompson said the team will use the rest of the season to 
“develop great habits” to get them prepared for the post-season.

With a championship and a regular-season win split between each team, the 
champion of this year’s inevitable finals clash will be crowned the winner of 
the rivalry so far. But this is only the beginning of a tug-of-war that could 
go on for many more years – even decades.

Is it June yet?
 