
There has been no more pivotal a building constructed in Poland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/poland> after 1945 than the Palace of 
Culture and Science – or to give it its full title: “the Palace of Culture and 
Science in the name of Joseph Stalin”. And none more divisive and 
controversial, either.

It’s a skyscraper 231 metres tall, the highest building in Poland, built in a 
mixture of then-compulsorySocialist realism 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Socialist_realism> with elements of Polish 
historicism. It stands for everything Poland tried to reject after the fall of 
the Berlin Wall in 1989 and the swift crumbling of the Soviet Union, and better 
than any other building it epitomises the 44 years of the People’s Polish 
Republic.

The palace turns 60 this year: it was finished 10 years after the end of the 
second world war, which both destroyed and transformed Poland. What came after 
was the greatest challenge in the country’s history – to this day, people can’t 
decide whether it was a failure, or a success.

Started in 1952, the Palace was a cornerstone of the Warsaw to come, planned 
together with a majestic Parade Square. During construction it was still 
surrounded by post-war ruins, with people living in tenements cut in half by 
bomb craters, survivors of Warsaw’s razing by the Nazis in 1944.

The palace was a symbol of how strategically important Poland was to Moscow – 
and to Stalin
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F08%2Fwarsaw-palace-of-culture-stalin-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-32%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F7%2F1431007505761%2Fe55fa98c-ecc5-41af-8597-7a0bc5e37491-2036x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Warsaw's%20Palace%20of%20Culture%2C%20Stalin's%20'gift'%3A%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2032&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F08%2Fwarsaw-palace-of-culture-stalin-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-32%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Warsaw%27s%20Palace%20of%20Culture%2C%20Stalin%27s%20%27gift%27%3A%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2032&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F08%2Fwarsaw-palace-of-culture-stalin-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-32%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F7%2F1431007505761%2Fe55fa98c-ecc5-41af-8597-7a0bc5e37491-2036x2040.jpeg>
 Head architect Lev Rudnev’s plan for the tower was influenced by his previous 
work on Moscow’s skyscrapers. Photograph: Paul Almasy/Corbis 
The Palace’s chief architect, Lev Rudnev, collaborated with a Polish team of 
architects, but – as a “gift” from Stalin – it was built by 3,500 Soviet 
workmen, who were housed in a special estate during the time of construction. 
It may have been Stalinist folly to build such an opulent palace while the rest 
of the city barely existed; but one can also imagine this new building bringing 
hope and inspiration to a city being transformed, not just physically but 
socially. Thousands of people poured in from across the devastated country to 
help rebuild the capital.

Rudnev’s plan for the tower was influenced by his previous work on the most 
impressive of the Moscow skyscrapers, theMoscow State University 
<http://www.msu.ru/en/>, which served as his blueprint. In Warsaw, Rudnev’s 
grand idea for the palace was an eclectic mix of Russian baroque and gothic 
details on a steel-framed tower.

To call Socialist realism eclectic is, of course, heresy – officially it was 
to be “socialist in content, national in form”. But there’s no such thing as 
purely “national” architecture, and in practice the palace was incredibly 
eclectic: for research, Rudnev travelled to key Polish heritage sites in Kraków 
and Zamość to study Polish renaissance architecture, resulting in the spiky 
“Polish parapets” that decorate the roof of the building.

The palace’s exterior was also extremely elaborate: it is surrounded by dozens 
of monumental sculptures in theclassical style of Michelangelo’s ignudi 
<http://www.moodbook.com/history/renaissance/sistine-chapel-ignudi.html#sistine-chapel-the-ignudi-ignudo-1>
, including astronomer and mathematicianCopernicus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/blog/2009/jul/17/new-element-copernicus-copernicium>
, Romantic poet Adam Mickiewicz, pioneering physicistMarie Curie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2011/nov/07/marie-curie-birth-google-doodle>
, as well as idealised model workers – the most famous one holding a Ten 
Commandments-style book inscribed with the names of Marx, Engels and Lenin 
(Stalin’s name was carefully removed after 1956).

Like the famous Moscow metro system, this was luxury for the masses

But if you think the exterior is something – well, come inside. The palace 
shocks equally from the interior, with marble floors and endless staircases and 
corridors that dazzle with their weighty glass chandeliers and gilded 
finishings. Like the famous Moscow metro system, this was luxury for the masses.

But what differentiated the palace from its Muscovite cousins was its entirely 
public use – it was designed to hold several museums, theatres and sports 
venues. The same congress room with seating for 3,000 guests that for years 
held the Communist Party’s annual meetings, also hosted legendary gigs by the 
Rolling Stones and Leonard Cohen.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F08%2Fwarsaw-palace-of-culture-stalin-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-32%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F7%2F1430995397339%2F9632560956_7471d4f53a_o-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Warsaw's%20Palace%20of%20Culture%2C%20Stalin's%20'gift'%3A%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2032&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F08%2Fwarsaw-palace-of-culture-stalin-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-32%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Warsaw%27s%20Palace%20of%20Culture%2C%20Stalin%27s%20%27gift%27%3A%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2032&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F08%2Fwarsaw-palace-of-culture-stalin-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-32%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F7%2F1430995397339%2F9632560956_7471d4f53a_o-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The entrance hall of the Palace of Culture and Science.Photograph: Jorge 
Láscar/flickr <https://www.flickr.com/photos/jlascar/9632560956/> 
The palace was a symbol of how strategically important Poland was to Moscow – 
and to Stalin. It could even have been built as a veiled apology, however 
bizarre, for the initial Soviet-backed burden of terror experienced during the 
installation of the communist system: the rigged elections, detentions andeven 
executions <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Capital_punishment_in_Poland>, 
especially of members of the Home Army. But this past was seldom spoken about 
until the 1970s and the anti-communist (yet socialist in spirit) people’s
Solidarity movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/sep/13/poland-union-solidarity>.

In many ways, Poland’s experience of communism could have been much worse. The 
mid-1950s, when the palace was built, were the nearest thing to prosperity most 
people in the Socialist republics ever experienced. Poland was a part of the 
Soviet Bloc but not the Soviet Union, enjoying more freedoms than many other 
countries behind the Iron Curtain. Particularly after the political “thaw” in 
1956, it had the region’s most interesting and relatively free press, 
avant-garde cinema, art, literature and music, and all this thanks to state 
support.

Today, the palace is home to concerts, wonderfully quirky museums, the city’s 
most popular multiplex cinema, and several hip bars and theatres. It also hosts 
the biggest Polish casino, a sign of the times.

Moscow's Narkomfin building: Soviet blueprint for collective living – a 
history of cities in 50 buildings, day 29
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/may/05/moscow-narkomfin-soviet-collective-living-history-cities-50-buildings>
Both loved and hated passionately, the palace stands as a symbol of Warsaw’s 
destruction, its resurrection at the hands of an unpopular, Soviet-imposed 
government – and, in recent years, as a reminder of Poland’s past that 
paralyses it today, as public discussion about the country’s shared history is 
hijacked by ritual wars between nationalist Catholics and liberals.

Perhaps this is why some think that demolishing the palace would destroy any 
memory of communism, with Poland’s image emerging cleaner and more innocent as 
a result. But memories don’t work like that. Despite occasional threats of 
demolition – or privatisation – it is simply too big, too statuesque and too 
symbolic to get rid of in any organised manner. Surrounded by tacky skyscrapers 
built after 1989 (symbols of hasty money-making), the palace has resisted 
significant changes in Poland’s political system, and will continue to do so.

 * Which other buildings in the world tell stories about urban history? Share 
your own pictures and descriptions with GuardianWitness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/mar/23/50-buildings-great-stories-urban-history>
, on Twitter and Instagram using #hoc50 or let us know suggestions in the 
comments below
 