
Two weeks ago, a Dutch expedition 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/11/16/dutch-probe-mystery-of-wartime-shipwrecks-that-appear-to-have-go/>
 preparing a 75th anniversary commemoration of the Battle of the Java Sea found 
only holes on the seafloor where the ships used to be. The Dutch ships HMNLS De 
Ruyter and HMNLS Java are “completely missing” and a large section of HMNLS 
Kortenaer has been stripped away. The same has been confirmed forHMS Exeter and 
HMS Encounter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/17/indonesia-says-its-not-to-blame-for-missing-shipwrecks>
, as well as sections missing from HMS Electra. The US submarine Perch is also 
completely gone. While the Perch sank without its crew on board, the other 
vessels are war graves.

Mystery as wrecks of three Dutch WWII ships vanish from Java seabed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/16/three-dutch-second-world-war-shipwrecks-vanish-java-sea-indonesia>
The shipwrecks were salvaged by the scrap metal industry operating in Surabaya 
and Madura,Indonesia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/indonesia>. The Dutch 
ships were only discovered in 2002 and were intact at that time, so the salvage 
occurred recently.

Indonesia has been incredulous, responding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/17/indonesia-says-its-not-to-blame-for-missing-shipwrecks>
: “As there was no agreement or announcement, when the ships go missing, it is 
not our responsibility.” A member of the navy commented: “The Indonesian navy 
cannot monitor all areas all the time.”

Is it true that nothing could be done to protect the shipwrecks?

To begin, Indonesia has an obligation relating to commercial seabed 
exploitation under theUN Convention on the Law of the Sea 
<http://www.un.org/depts/los/>, as well as for the actions of its citizens. As 
naval vessels, the ships have sovereign immunity and remain the property of 
their nations. This exploitation of cultural resources ends up in processing 
plants on Indonesian soil. Illegal looting and conversion in ingots for sale is 
trafficking. Cultural property trafficking is the responsibility of the 
Indonesian government, in the same way asarms, human, and endangered species 
trafficking 
<https://indonesia.iom.int/sites/default/files/Factsheet%20-%20Counter-Trafficking.pdf>
.

Ancient DNA reveals genetic legacy of pandemics in the Americas
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/blog/2016/dec/19/ancient-dna-reveals-genetic-legacy-of-pandemics-in-the-americas>
However, is it feasible to protect shipwrecks? What would protection mean in 
terms of cost and logistics?

In 2014, Indonesia passed a law protecting the manta ray 
<http://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2014/02/21/indonesia-hopes-cash-manta-ray-tourism.html>
, a large marine species, in its territorial waters (2.2 million square miles). 
The government has been policing fishing and protecting the species followingan 
academic study 
<http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0065051> that 
each manta ray is worth up to $1 million in tourist revenue over the course of 
its lifetime, an industry in Indonesia worth $15 million annually. By 
comparison, a dead ray only sells for $40-500. Given this economic incentive, 
Indonesia adopted active protection.

Could this type of protection be feasible for shipwrecks? Unlike manta rays, 
shipwrecks don’t move. Unlike rays that can be caught by a single fisherman, 
the complete salvage of a second world war destroyer takes an army of divers. 
Unlike fishing vessels that operate on the move, salvage requires hundreds of 
hours of sitting over a wreck. Unlike marine species that can be cut up to 
facilitate smuggling, salvage of a phosphor bronze propeller requires industry 
to process it into ingots.

Protecting these ships is not only possible, but also easier than the 
protection that Indonesia already has in place for marine species. Importantly, 
the economic benefit of shipwrecks likely far exceeds marine species. 
Shipwrecks, especially those from the World Wars, are among the most popular 
dives for tourists. Unlike marine species, shipwrecks are available for tourism 
year round, so visitors never leave disappointed. Shipwrecks offer long-term 
sustainable tourism that likely exceeds revenue from manta ray tourism. 
Indonesia could simply extend its protection to the locations of known 
shipwrecks and monitor the activity of the scrap metal industry.

While Great Britain and the Netherlands are not to blame for the destruction 
of the ships in the Java Sea, both countries have repeatedly failed to protect 
war graves.

The Netherlands has a significant illegal salvage industry, notably looting 
HMS Aboukir, HMS Hogue, and HMS Cressy off the Dutch coast. Similarly, UK 
salvers haveexploited historic Dutch shipwrecks 
<http://webcache.googleusercontent.com/search?q=cache:sj0Dk4g3n5kJ:www.crawleynews.co.uk/news/eastgrinstead/Man-cautioned-illegal-recovery-shipwreck-artefacts/article-3285735-detail/article.html+&cd=7&hl=en&ct=clnk&gl=uk>
. At a recent lecture at the British Museum, Dr. Innes McCartney presented 
evidence showing the widespread salvage of the ships from the Battle of Jutland.
A recent report showed it to be a Dutch salvage firm 
<http://thepipeline.info/blog/2016/05/22/exclusive-named-the-salvage-company-which-looted-jutland-war-graves-as-mod-fails-to-act/>
. UK and Dutch officials know theresponsible 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2042294/Dutch-vessels-ransack-sunken-British-warships-containing-bodies-1-500-sailors-scrap-metal.html>
 salvers, but neither government has taken action beyond strongly worded 
letters.

Salvage in European waters and recent events in the Java Sea demonstrate that 
war graves from every nation need to be respected, it cannot be selective to 
one’s own nationality.

Protecting shipwrecks may be difficult, but it is not unfeasible. If the UK 
and Netherlands wished to, they could follow the US and France, who actively 
protect and monitor war graves around the world. When monitoring fails, 
prosecution acts as a deterrent to future illegal activity.

Significantly, we have already paid for the system to prevent illegal salvage. 
Dr. McCartney discussed the UK’sSatellite Applications Catapult 
<https://sa.catapult.org.uk/> (SAC), a system in place that tracks ships’ 
Automatic Identification System (AIS), a requirement for ships over a certain 
size (you can track ships at sea by their AIS from your home computer at
MarineTraffic.com <https://www.marinetraffic.com/>). Illegal salvers deactivate 
their AIS when over a shipwreck, which registers with the SAC system. At a 
recent meeting at UNESCO, France described the success of using this type of 
system to combat illegal salvage. UK officials simply need to apply the SAC 
system to protecting shipwrecks.

Had the UK used SAC to monitor its war graves, and if Indonesia included 
cultural heritage in its environmental protection scheme then the Java Sea 
shipwrecks may still be there. These methods can immediately limit illegal 
salvage worldwide. Nations can also increase prosecution as a deterrent against 
future looting. Finally, countries should work with the local dive industry, as 
the best protectors of shipwrecks are the communities who are invested in 
sustainable tourism.

Another step could be ratification of the 2001 UNESCO Convention on the 
Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage 
<http://www.unesco.org/new/en/culture/themes/underwater-cultural-heritage/2001-convention/>
. The UK government willconsider the Convention in spring 2017 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/publications/written-questions-answers-statements/written-question/Commons/2016-11-21/53922/>
, which has already been ratified by France, Spain, and Italy, among others.

Shipwrecks around the world can be protected using programs that are already 
paid for and in place. All it takes is someone in these governments to say it 
is worthwhile, and understanding that it is economically beneficial to do so.
 