
The Seattle Reign midfielder Megan Rapinoe and Washington Spirit owner Bill 
Lynch aren’t so different. That statement may seem strange in the wake of 
Wednesday’s incidents at the Maryland SoccerPlex, where Lynch metaphorically 
kicked the platform out from under Rapinoe’s feet, only to sufferRapinoe’s 
blistering response 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/soccer-insider/wp/2016/09/08/megan-rapinoe-responds-to-washington-spirit-playing-national-anthem-with-teams-in-locker-room/>
 a couple of hours later.

But Rapinoe and Lynch have a couple of things in common. They’re devoted to 
women’s soccer, even with all its difficulties and controversies. And they both 
wear their hearts on their sleeves. Rapinoe drew attention earlier last weekend 
bytaking a knee during the national anthem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/04/megan-rapinoe-anthem-protest-colin-kaepernick>
 at a Reign home game, an act of solidarity with San Francisco quarterback 
Colin Kaepernick’s well-publicized decision to sit during the anthem as a 
protest over race issues in the United States. Would she do the same at the 
Maryland SoccerPlex, in the exurbs of the nation’s capital?


Washington Spirit move anthem to avoid Megan Rapinoe 'hijacking'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/07/megan-rapinoe-anthem-protest-washtington-spirit-colin-kaepernick>
Lynch didn’t give her the chance. He rearranged the pregame schedule 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/07/megan-rapinoe-anthem-protest-washtington-spirit-colin-kaepernick>
 so that the anthem would be played while the players were in the locker rooms. 
At the same time,the Spirit emailed a press release 
<https://twitter.com/JeffKassouf/status/773669540471443456> to journalists 
explaining the decision.


The words were clumsy, attempting to compliment Rapinoe but undermining the 
point with loaded words like “hijack.” That’s not surprising to those who have 
long followed the Spirit. Lynch is far from shy about speaking up to praise the 
military, and at each home game, the PA announcer reads an awkward statement 
thanking those who are currently serving or have served. It’s sincere, but the 
sheer repetition of it has turned it into background noise.


And Lynch’s statement was a clear misreading of the women’s soccer fanbase. 
Washington Spirit fans are generally not the flag-burning type, and you can’t 
hold a gathering of 3,000 people in the DC area without including quite a few 
veterans or current military. But they’re also not receptive to any perceived 
limits on free expression. When Rapinoe, who is still regaining fitness after a 
knee injury, entered the game in the second half, the Spirit’s supporters group
greeted her warmly <https://twitter.com/blackandredU/status/773691866151653376>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fwhy-colin-kaepernick-not-standing-national-anthem-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20is%20Colin%20Kaepernick%20not%20standing%20for%20the%20national%20anthem%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fwhy-colin-kaepernick-not-standing-national-anthem-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20is%20Colin%20Kaepernick%20not%20standing%20for%20the%20national%20anthem%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fwhy-colin-kaepernick-not-standing-national-anthem-video&media=>
Why is Colin Kaepernick not standing for the national anthem? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/sep/02/why-colin-kaepernick-not-standing-national-anthem-video>
So Lynch’s move had backfired. Had Rapinoe knelt during the anthem as 
expected, fans surely would’ve moved on. Instead, we got the extraordinary 
sight of die-hard fans – who have a history of needling otherwise-beloved US 
players on behalf of the hometown Spirit – cheering for an opponent in the 
midst of a game with massive playoff implications.

Even Jeff Plush, the league’s low-profile commissioner who happened to be in 
attendance,was taken aback 
<https://twitter.com/caitlinbuckley2/status/773685568622518273>. Rapinoe had 
surely claimed the high ground without saying a word. And Rapinoe gave it right 
back, going beyond mere profane criticism of Lynch’s anthem antics andcalling 
the Spirit owner “homophobic.” 
<https://twitter.com/caitlinbuckley2/status/773729577281650688>

The claim is, to put it mildly, not substantiated by history. Before the NWSL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nwsl-national-womens-soccer-league> 
existed, Lynch started a club called DC United Women and found a way to bring 
in Joanna Lohman and Lianne Sanderson, at the time the most vocal gay soccer 
players in the world (and, at the time, a couple).

DC United Women morphed into the Spirit, and the team’s first captain was Lori 
Lindsey, who had openly discussed her sexuality a few months earlier. The team 
has continued to employ gay players, including Lohman, who has had a career 
renaissance since returning to Washington last year.

Obama defends US football player refusing to stand for national anthem
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/05/barack-obama-colin-kaepernick-national-anthem-protest>
And earlier this season, the Spirit responded to the shooting at a gay 
nightclub in Orlando withemotional observances when the Orlando Pride visited 
<http://www.excellesports.com/news/pride-spirit-fans-players-stand-together-orlando-washington/>
, painting a rainbow ribbon (technically a violation of the Laws of the Game, 
but no referee would be a stickler on this occasion) on the field.

Simply put, if Lynch has an issue with homosexuality, it boggles the mind that 
he would’ve bought into women’s soccer in the first place. Today’s women’s 
soccer community is far removed from its  heteronormative marketing of the 
1990s and early 2000s. Rapinoe and Abby Wambach, who are both gay, are two of 
the first names who would spring to mind if a casual fan were asked to name 
recent US women’s players.

Whether Rapinoe faces any backlash from her words will speak volumes about the 
state of the volatile US women’s soccer community, still reeling from the early 
ouster in the Rio Olympics and the dismissal of ever-controversial goalkeeper 
Hope Solo.

Even as players and their lawyers plow through contentious contract 
negotiations, riding the slogan “Equal Pay for Equal Play,” players make 
curious demands for special treatment. The USA and Houston Dash star Carli 
Lloyd recently refused to take part in a postgame media session until a 
reporter whohad previously asked  
<https://twitter.com/RipSports/status/770302496577236992>about her absence from 
the teamwas removed <https://twitter.com/NWSLmedia/status/772517169947029505>, 
a decision that would generate fodder for talk radio for days in a more 
prominent sports league. Other players are far less accessible to the media 
than they had been in past years.

Despite it all, the NWSL has gained some traction this year. Attendance is up 
<http://equalizersoccer.com/2016/08/31/the-lowdown-another-messy-re-entry-for-nwsl>
 in most markets, and Orlando has embraced its expansion team. The league 
finally returned to television Wednesday night with an entertaining clash 
between Chicago and Kansas City coming across well despite technical glitches 
such a faulty microphone for play-by-play commentator Jenn Hildreth.


And the play has been terrific. The Spirit had more to celebrate last night 
than clinching a home playoff date – reigning league MVP Crystal Dunn
emphatically snapped out of a goal-scoring drought 
<https://twitter.com/OurGameMagazine/status/773685657378050048>.

Can the league can take the “no such thing as bad publicity” adage to heart 
and turn attention to the action on the field? And will players who are still 
adjusting the having a platform be able to adjust to dealing with the response?


Both questions have no easy answers. But with passionate people like Rapinoe 
and Lynch making statements – sometimes misstatements – the questions won’t be 
going away any time soon.


 * Disclaimer: The reporter has written an unofficial book about the 
Washington Spirit’s first season in 2013, and he occasionally writes about 
youth soccer for SoccerWire, a site owned by Spirit president Chris Hummer.  


 