
Wasps will not try to overturn their 20-18 defeat at Connacht 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/17/connacht-wasps-european-champions-rugby-cup-match-report>
 on Saturday after the European Champions Cup organisers admitted the home 
side’s match-winning try came from a lineout that should not have been allowed 
because time was up, although English clubs remain concerned about the overall 
standard of officiating in the tournament.

Champions Cup officials admit error for Connacht’s decisive try against Wasps
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/18/connacht-wasps-european-rugby-champions-cup-mathieu-raynal>
European Professional Club Rugby apologised for the stand-in referee Mathieu 
Reynal’s error but said the result would stand, something Wasps accepted in a 
statement issued by the club on Monday. “Wasps’ pitchside officials immediately 
stressed to the fourth official thatConnacht 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/connacht> could not take the lineout, as the 
referee had indicated time had gone beyond 80 minutes,” the club said. “Players 
on the pitch also emphasised to the referee that time was up. Despite several 
protests, the lineout was still allowed to be taken.

“We all understand referees are only human and mistakes do occasionally 
happen. However, for a referee and fourth official to get the laws of the game 
wrong at a crucial stage of a big match is hugely disappointing. The error made 
could have serious repercussions in terms of Wasps’ qualification hopes or the 
prospect of securing a home quarter-final. EPCR have stated that the result 
stands and we congratulate Connacht after a hard fought contest.”

Connacht’s Naulia Dawai and Jack Carty seize last-gasp win over Wasps
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/17/connacht-wasps-european-champions-rugby-cup-match-report>
The try which condemned Wasps <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-wasps> 
to their first defeat in the group came after Connacht had been awarded a 
penalty with the clock past 80 minutes. Reynal, who had come on the field six 
minutes earlier as a replacement for Jérôme Garcès, allowed the Irish province 
to kick the ball to touch, despite Wasps’ protests, with Naulia Dawai’s try 
from the lineout and Jack Carty’s conversion giving the home side victory.

Under the rules, which are changing next season, Reynal should have told 
Connacht they could have a scrum or take a tap penalty. Wales, losing 23-20, 
suffered in reverse in Rome in 2007 when the referee Chris White told them they 
had time to kick a penalty to touch and take the lineout only to blow for 
full-time when the ball went dead.

There has been a flurry of yellow and red cards in the two European 
competition this season. This time a year ago, 11 players from English clubs in 
the Champions Cup had been sent to the sin-bin and none sent off but the 
figures this season are respectively 24 and one with Sale receiving nine 
yellows and Leicester seven as referees crack down on acts that have the 
potential to cause head injuries.

European Rugby Champions Cup: talking points from the weekend's action
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/19/european-rugby-champions-cup-talking-points-from-the-weekends-action>
“There seems to be a red card every game these days or two or three yellows so 
I think we probably need new coaches to be able to adapt to the lawmakers,” 
Sale’s director of rugby, Steve Diamond, said. “Referees are being told what to 
do, but I do not think we are being given enough time to implement our coaching 
techniques. Coaches and players are having to adapt to the changes very 
quickly.”

Mark McCall, the Saracens <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> 
director of rugby, agreed. “It seems to change from one week to the next,” he 
said. “People want to be able to coach and prepare their team with some 
consistent interpretations and maybe that’s not always the case. I think we 
need referees to use judgment but you’re relying on the opinion of the referee 
on the day. That’s potentially a dangerous thing to do.”
 