
Dai Young is determined that Wasps should avoid a slip-up in their pursuit of 
the AvivaPremiership <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership> title when 
they travel to Newcastle Falcons on Friday night.

The Coventry-based club could replace Saracens at the top of the table if they 
prevail at Kingston Park, but Young refuses to view victory over the Falcons as 
a foregone conclusion.

“The Christmas period is always a busy one and we’ve had two tight turnarounds 
ahead of what will be a big challenge for us on Friday night,” theWasps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-wasps> director of rugby said. “It’s 
a massive game for us. If you want to be achieving, then you have to be winning 
these kinds of games.

“It’s never easy to pick up away wins, especially somewhere like Newcastle, 
but you have to beat sides below you if you want to be in there at the end of 
the season.

“Newcastle have taken a few sides by surprise this season with their 
determination to play an expansive game of rugby, but we had sight of them 
early on in this campaign and have experienced first-hand just how dangerous 
they can be.

“Although we won that game at the Ricoh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/30/wasps-newcastle-premiership-match-report>
 in October the scoreline flattered us, and if we let the Falcons dominate 
possession like they did that day, we will be in for a very tough evening.”

Wasps have rotated their squad, with the full-back Kurtley Beale and captain 
Joe Launchbury rested, and Kyle Eastmond starting at inside-centre.

Newcastle’s director of rugby, Dean Richards, is braced for a points-heavy 
match. “Wasps are no slouches and their try-count is huge each game this 
season. They score a lot of tries,” he said.

“Defensively, they leak a lot of points but at the same time their objective 
each game is to outscore the opposition and score as many points as they 
possibly can.

“They’re a good side packed with stars from all over the place. They’ll be a 
difficult nut to crack but having said that, we’re pretty confident in the way 
we’re playing at the moment. We’re playing good rugby and enjoying ourselves as 
well. We’re on the up, which is nice.”

Richards is looking to improve on Newcastle’s ninth place and feels his side 
deserve to be higher given this season’s performances. “We thought we could 
have got somethingout of last weekend’s game at Saracens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/24/saracens-newcastle-falcons-premiership-rugby-match-report>
 and there were a couple of results earlier in the season we felt we could have 
got something out of as well,” Richards added.

“Another five, six points and we’d have felt a little bit more in tune with 
where we feel we are. But it’s not about what’s happened, it’s about what’s 
going to happen over the next six months. We’re on the up, we’re improving, 
we’re shaping up and playing some good rugby.”
 