
Wasps scored 64 points and eight tries the last time they faced Saracens at 
Allianz Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/14/saracens-wasps-premiership-match-report>
 eight months ago, but the Premiership leaders are expecting a considerably 
closer contest against the champions on Sunday.

Saracens were shorn of their England players last February while Wasps had 
only a couple of absentees, and when the two clubs met in the Champions Cup 
semi-final later in the season, the victorious Sarries were more convincing 
than the24-17 scoreline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/23/saracens-wasps-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
 suggested.

“This game will show how far we have come from last season and will be a 
massive test for us,” theWasps <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-wasps> 
director of rugby, Dai Young, said. “I am pleased with the start we have made 
and the exciting part is that there is more to come from the team; we are 
nowhere near the finished article and have ridden our luck a bit.”

The preparations of both clubs for the game were hampered by England’s 
training camp in Brighton last Monday and Tuesday.Wasps lost their flanker Sam 
Jones to a broken leg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/05/sam-jones-miss-england-autumn-internationals-broken-leg>
 sustained during a bout of judo with the Saracens second-row Maro Itoje and 
Owen Farrell is again absent from the home side with a back injury that is 
preventing him from place-kicking.

Saracens’ Mark McCall hits out at RFU after England training camp injuries
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/06/saracens-mark-mccall-england-injuries-rfu>
“Nothing has been mentioned about last February’s game,” said Schalk Burger, 
who joinedSaracens <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> in the summer 
after a 13-year international career with South Africa. “Wasps play an exciting 
brand of rugby and what makes them dangerous is that they are backing up what 
they did last season.

“They are trying to improve having lost two semi-finals last season and it is 
going to be a big challenge for us. It will be a contrast in styles and what 
was important for us was the way we reacted against Bristol in the last round 
after losing at Harlequins when we were not happy with certain facets of our 
game.

“The focus in Bristol was on intensity, energy and executing the gameplan. We 
stuck to it all evening and gave them nothing to work with, even if our 
performance was not perfect. I hope we rock up on Sunday with the same energy.”
 