
It’s curious, given the cultural currency of having Thom Yorke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/dec/01/thom-yorke-youtube-steals-art-nazis-second-world-war>
 feature on your track, just how many artists choose to turn his vocals down in 
the mix.Modeselektor <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=afw5Z7XNDUQ>, Burial 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0RU49Ujys3c> and Flying Lotus 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xxP6q63NY7Y> have manipulated, buried and 
distorted his spectral presence on their songs. Maybe it’s testament to how 
Yorke’s instrument-like voice transcends the egocentric posturing of the indie 
rock singer stereotype, or perhaps it’s a badge of solidarity – emphasising 
that his work with artists on the outskirts of mainstream music requires no 
fanfare, no big deal.

Or maybe Yorke hates being the centre of attention. In Radiohead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/dec/01/thom-yorke-youtube-steals-art-nazis-second-world-war>
’s 2016 shows, Yorke has been enjoying his role front and centre of stage like 
never before in the band’s 20-year career – unselfconsciously dancing and 
interacting as if hewas in the audience 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e15vnYucPZg>, rather than narcissistically 
absorbing the adoration.

Illuminated by the ambience and stillness of Mark Pritchard’s intoxicating 
electronic instrumentation, Beautiful People, a collaboration originally 
released in March, finds Yorke hiding in the shadows once more.

“The original instrumental to Beautiful People is a personal song about loss, 
hopelessness and chaos, but the message is love and hope,” Pritchard says of 
the track. “Thom’s contribution to this collaboration captured perfectly what 
the piece is about. I will be for ever grateful to have worked with such an 
immense talent.”

Now the track comes with a video, first premiered in cinemas at Sundance and 
arriving 
<http://www.sundance.org/blogs/mark-pritchard-thom-yorke-beautiful-people-music-video-next-fest>
 online today via Guardian Music. The eerie imagery created by Polish filmmaker 
Michał Marczak captures a nomadic sense of isolation, a space-like excursion of
Beta Band <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=okKnDaewuC4> and Björk 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gQEyezu7G20>-like proportions, set to the 
gently shuffling bossa nova, and led by the hologram of Yorke as he navigates 
his way around the misty mountains.

Take a look at the video below. 

 Watch the video for Beautiful People  