
Graham Taylor was warmly remembered here by the club that made his name and 
whose name he helped to make. Sadly forWatford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/watford> and their emotional crowd, the 
team on the field failed to do their part and the game ended in a very 
forgettable draw.

Before the match hundreds gathered by a memorial of bright yellow flowers and 
hundreds of equally bright shirts to pay respect to their former manager. With 
Taylor’s wife, Rita, and their two daughters in attendance, the teams entered 
the field to Taylor’s favourite song, Buddy Holly’s Raining in My Heart.

There was also a flash of red and yellow foils in the Rookery Stand that 
spelled out their love for Taylor. The big screens played footage from Taylor’s 
two spells in charge at the club and there were messages of condolence 
scrolling along the hoardings. Finally, there was that unstinting minute’s 
applause, rounded out with chants in praise of the man. “We love you Graham 
Taylor” was a consistent refrain. You could feel that love.

It was clear there was pressure on Watford to perform. Pressure that was 
already palpable thanks to Walter Mazzarri’s side having taken four points from 
their previous seven matches. They failed to rise to the challenge. In physical 
effort Watford hardly stinted but they were noticeably lacking in creativity 
and composure.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fwatford-middlesbrough-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51c194e89eed164575e96d90053fb5416828e6c8%2F0_0_5298_3644%2F5298.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Watford%20held%20by%20Middlesbrough%20as%20Graham%20Taylor%20is%20remembered&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fwatford-middlesbrough-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Watford%20held%20by%20Middlesbrough%20as%20Graham%20Taylor%20is%20remembered&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fwatford-middlesbrough-premier-league-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51c194e89eed164575e96d90053fb5416828e6c8%2F0_0_5298_3644%2F5298.jpg>
 Some of the tributes to Graham Taylor outside Vicarage Road. Photograph: 
Richard Heathcote/Getty Images 
This was all grist to the mill of Aitor Karanka, who changed the shape of his 
side to match the three at the back of his hosts, and was more than happy to 
settle for a point.

“It was very emotional, for all of us,” said Mazzarri, still speaking through 
an Italian translator. “This was due to the passing of a great person who made 
the history of Watford.

“When there was the minute of applause I was very emotional, more than what 
you might think. That minute made everyone come together and it was a special 
moment.

“The first half we were less good and it could be due to that emotion. The 
second half we were much better and should have got the win.”

Karanka agreed that Watford grew into the match even if neither side could 
claimed to have been dominant. “It was a good point,” he said. “I was looking 
at it in analysis and I thought that the best way to play against their shape 
is to play that way too.

“Our shape was good, the commitment was good. We were better in first half but 
we knew the second half would be a different game. Watford are a really strong 
team, a really mature team, and the only thing that we could do in the second 
half was defend.”

Graham Taylor obituary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/12/graham-taylor-obituary> 
Boro did have a goal ruled out in the first half, Cristhian Stuani adjudged 
offside after having poked Álvaro Negredo’s flick into the net. The same 
combination 10 minutes before half-time saw Stuani read his strike partner’s 
header but lift his shot on to the roof of the net from a difficult angle.

At half-time Luther Blissett came on to speak about Taylor, a man he called a 
father, recalling the glory years when promotion to the First Division was 
followed by European football and, in 1984, an FA Cup final. “I owe everything 
to Graham Taylor,” the former striker said. “We wouldn’t be here if it wasn’t 
for him.”

Mazzarri said his own half-time team talk was largely tactical, but Watford 
did return for the second half with greater vigour. Within three minutes of the 
restart they should have claimed the lead they craved when José Holebas’s cross 
sailed over the Boro defence and found Christian Kabasele at the far post. The 
makeshift wing-back must not have anticipated the ball getting beyond his 
marker, George Friend, because, even though he was left in time and space, he 
could only prod a limp header wide.

Karanka brought on Rudy Gestede for his debut and Mazzarri did the same for 
Tom Cleverley in the hope of shifting the balance. Gestede shot just over from 
range with 10 minutes remaining.

Cleverley came the closest to breaking the deadlock when his side-foot shot 
from a clever Deeney header came back off the post. The final whistle was 
greeted with a chorus of boos.

“We missed a bit of luck,” said Mazzarri. “Not just the Cleverley chance but 
others. These are small details and they make a big difference.

“In terms of the pressure I feel, I can tell you with a smile on my face it’s 
no more than I put on myself every day.”
 