
If you are poor or on the brink of financial hardship right now in Britain and 
the US, these are ominous times. After six brutal years of austerity in the UK, 
where the collective spectres of further cuts, pay squeezes and Brexit are set 
to leave households even worse off, there’s an atmosphere of profound 
insecurity for many. In the US, progressive policies and government programmes 
aimed at alleviating poverty have been under sustained ideological attack for 
decades – even when the evidence shows they work. But now, in the wake of 
Donald Trump’s election and a Republican-dominated Congress, anti-poverty 
advocates in the US are preparing for the fight of their lives. The new 
Congress has not even convened yet and already it looks as if one of President 
Obama’s most popular measures, an initiative intended to grant millions of 
workers more rights to overtime pay, could be an early victim 
<http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2016/11/21/republicans_are_going_to_nix_obama_s_overtime_pay_rules.html>
. This comes only a few months after anti-poverty campaigners were celebrating 
encouraging figures on poverty reduction and theroll-out by numerous cities and 
states of higher local minimum wages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/27/us-data-progressive-policies-reduce-poverty>
.

What will President Donald Trump do? Predicting his policy agenda
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-president-policy-immigration-agenda-healthcare>
Trump and his adopted party have (expensive) tax cuts for the rich within 
their sights while a plethora of progressive initiatives that predominantly 
affect the very poorest are now in the firing line. This includes theAffordable 
Care Act <http://obamacarefacts.com/affordablecareact-summary/>, which ensured 
millions more Americans had healthcare for the first time.

Activists are right to be alarmed. An emboldened Republican Congress could 
ring the death knell for some, or some parts of, a range of vital programmes. 
Rebecca Vallas, managing director of theCenter for American Progress 
<https://www.americanprogress.org/issues/poverty/view/>’s Poverty to Prosperity 
programme, says the signs are deeply worrying. While Trump campaigned as a 
workers’ champion of sorts by pledging to “bring back jobs” and protect social 
security, for example, “he has wasted no time selecting advisers and appointees 
for critical posts in his administration who have crusaded to dismantle the 
safety net”, she says. Furthermore, renewed manoeuvres that were already in 
play prior to the election result are taking centre-stage. The most notable is 
Republican House speakerPaul Ryan’s plans for tax and welfare reforms 
<https://www.thenation.com/article/struggling-white-voters-who-helped-elect-trump-are-headed-for-buyers-remorse>
 (in other words,take from the poor and give to the rich 
<http://ctj.org/ctjreports/2016/06/ryan_tax_plan_reserves_most_tax_cuts_for_top_1_percent_costs_4_trillion_over_10_years.php#.WDg2Wtd4X9K>
) wrapped in the rhetoric of making work pay and tackling poverty. “Speaker 
Ryan’s ‘better way’ agenda released this summer made clear that virtually no 
part of the safety net will be safe from attack under a GOP-controlled 
Congress, with housing, nutrition assistance, and even the nation’s school 
lunch programme for hungry kids on his hit list,” Vallas explains.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fwe-need-to-reframe-debate-about-poverty%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8522e31aca22d0c88a507d78e9fe3220e2085d1%2F0_14_4657_2794%2F4657.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=We%20need%20to%20reframe%20the%20debate%20about%20poverty%20%7C%20Mary%20O%E2%80%99Hara%20%7C&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fwe-need-to-reframe-debate-about-poverty%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=We%20need%20to%20reframe%20the%20debate%20about%20poverty%20%7C%20Mary%20O%E2%80%99Hara%20%7C&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fwe-need-to-reframe-debate-about-poverty%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8522e31aca22d0c88a507d78e9fe3220e2085d1%2F0_14_4657_2794%2F4657.jpg>
 Republican House speaker Paul Ryan has talked about ‘making work pay’. 
Photograph: ddp USA/Rex/Shutterstock 
According to Dan Lesser of the Chicago-based social justice organisation the 
Shriver Center <http://www.povertylaw.org/>, many of the programmes that are 
under threat in some way, including food stamps, have been proven to help the 
most vulnerable keep their heads above water. “All told, our safety-net 
programmes combined to lift roughly 38 million people – including 8 million 
children – out of poverty in 2014 alone,”he writes 
<https://theshriverbrief.org/paul-ryans-anti-poverty-plan-built-on-the-falsehood-that-the-war-on-poverty-has-failed-72a3a3bec603#.hauoh9ein>
.

Like many anti-poverty campaigners on both sides of the Atlantic, Lesser has 
pointed out that part of the problem with introducing, or trying to protect, 
programmes is that they are often stridently, and wrongly, painted as 
ineffective. It is a crucial observation because it feeds into the problem of 
an underlying public distrust of the social safety net. Beyond the daily thrust 
of politics, the ways in which poverty is talked about and how its causes are 
understood by wider society matters greatly. If people who receive benefits are 
widely perceived as “shirkers”, for example, how can the public and politicians 
be convinced otherwise? The fact is that if politicians are to be swayed in 
favour of anti-poverty strategies then the public must first be persuaded of 
their merit so that upwards pressure can be applied.

Indeed, work is already under way exploring this. The UK’s Joseph Rowntree 
Foundation 
<https://www.jrf.org.uk/blog/i-daniel-blake-best-way-argue-tackling-uk-poverty> 
has launched a project, in collaboration with the National Children’s Bureau 
and the US-based non-profit theFrameWorks Institute 
<http://www.frameworksinstitute.org/>, aimed at reframing the poverty debate 
<https://www.jrf.org.uk/report/talking-about-poverty-how-experts-and-public-understand-uk-poverty>
. It is a huge, long-term undertaking. But as recent events show, it is 
absolutely necessary.

In the meantime, those advocating for sustainable solutions to poverty, both 
in Britain and the US, are having to do so against the starkest of political 
backdrops. So there really is only one thing left to do: fight.
 