
Marine investigators are calling for the wearing of lifejackets to be a legal 
requirement on commercial trawlers after a spate of deaths at sea.

The Marine Accident Investigation Branch  <http:// 
https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/marine-accident-investigation-branch>
 took the unusual step of recommending legislation as it released reports into 
four of the nine commercial fishing deaths so far this year.

CI Steve Clinch, who heads the branch, said: “The MAIB rarely recommends the 
introduction of new legislation to solve safety problems, but the rate that 
commercial fishermen are losing their lives due to drowning shows no sign of 
reducing.

“This has been a particularly bad year: the MAIB has investigated the deaths 
of nine commercial fishermen, and today [Thursday] is publishing three reports 
covering the deaths of four. All four might well have survived had they been 
wearing a lifejacket when they entered the water.”

Clinch said in the cold waters around the UK survival time can be measured in 
minutes unless a lifejacket is being worn.

“However, this message is not getting home despite a three-year campaign that 
has seen almost every commercial fisherman in the UK receive a free lifejacket,.

“Evidence from other countries shows that education campaigns alone have 
little effect on behaviour, but when backed by legislation the change is both 
significant and sustained,” said Clinch, adding that all trawler crew members 
should wear lifejackets when working on deck at sea.

Those who have died this year include father and son Gareth and Daniel 
Willington, 
<http://www.walesonline.co.uk/news/wales-news/father-son-named-fishermen-board-11266630>
whose boat Harvester grounded on rocks off Pembrokeshire, south-west Wales, in 
April. Daniel’s body remains missing.

The MAIB report says a likely scenario is that one of the men became entangled 
in a rope; the other went to his aid and both fell overboard. It adds: “Neither 
crew member wore a personal flotation device [PFD], significantly lowering 
their chances of survival.”

In the same month Craig Reid  
<https://www.thecourier.co.uk/fp/news/scotland/157690/photo-of-fisherman-missing-overboard-off-orkney-coast-released/>
fell from the stern of a fishing vessel called Apollo as its trawl net was 
being hauled in heavy seas north-west of Orkney. The water temperature was 9C. 
Crewmates flung a lifebuoy to him but he could not cling on to it. His body was 
found months later. The report says Reid was young and fit but could not 
survive in the cold water.

The report adds: “MAIB analysis of many similar accidents shows that in UK 
waters a person who falls overboard, without a lifejacket, typically loses the 
ability to help themselves within 10 minutes of entering the water.”

In October 2015 Gerard Gillies was lost overboard from the Annie T  
<https://www.pressandjournal.co.uk/fp/news/islands/715173/tributes-paid-to-fisherman-killed-after-falling-overboard/>
in the Sound of Mingulay, at the southern edge of the Western Isles of 
Scotland. He is thought to have had a heart attack.

Three working lifejackets – which had been supplied to the trawler’s crew free 
of charge by the ScottishFishing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/fishing> Federation – were still in 
their original packaging and had never been used.

According to the MAIB, the likelihood of surviving an overboard incident is 
five times greater if a lifejacket is worn.

By law, lifejackets have to be worn in certain circumstances in Ireland, 
France, Norway, Belgium, Spain, Portugal and Iceland.

Many fishermen resist wearing lifejackets because they feel they restrict 
their movement as they work on deck or are uncomfortable. Some argue they can 
be dangerous if they snag on equipment.
 