
The election of Donald Trump as president of the United States is the biggest 
political earthquake of our times, and its reverberations are inescapably 
global. It has fully revealed an enormous pent-up anger – which had first 
become visible in the mass acclaim in Russia andTurkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/30/welcome-to-demokrasi-how-erdogan-got-more-popular-than-ever>
 for pitiless despots and the electoral triumph of bloody strongmen in India 
and the Philippines.

The insurgencies of our time, including Brexit and the rise of the European 
far right, have many local causes – but it is not an accident that demagoguery 
appears to be rising around the world. Savage violence has erupted in recent 
years across a broad swath of territory: wars in Ukraine and the Middle East, 
insurgencies from Yemen to Thailand, terrorism and counter-terrorism, economic 
andcyberwar <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/cyberwar>. The conflicts, 
not confined to fixed battlefields, feel endemic and uncontrollable. 
Hate-mongering against immigrants and minorities has gone mainstream; figures 
foaming at the mouth with loathing and malice are ubiquitous on old and new 
media alike.

There is much dispute about the causes of this global disorder. Many observers 
have characterised it as a backlash against an out-of-touch establishment, 
explaining Trump’s victory – in the words of Thomas Piketty – as “primarily due 
to the explosion in economic and geographic inequality in the United States”. 
Liberals tend to blame the racial resentments of poor white Americans, which 
were apparently aggravated during Barack Obama’s tenure. But many rich men and 
women – and even a small number of African-Americans and Latinos – also voted 
for a compulsive groper and white supremacist.

The Nobel prize-winning economist Paul Krugman admitted on the night of 
Trump’s victory that “people like me – and probably like most readers of the 
New York Times – truly didn’t understand the country we live in”. Since the 
twin shocks ofBrexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/29/daniel-hannan-the-man-who-brought-you-brexit>
 and theUS election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/membership/2016/nov/16/how-trump-took-middletown-muncie-election>
, we have argued ineffectually about their causes, while watching aghast as the 
new representatives of the downtrodden and the “left-behind” – Trump and Nigel 
Farage, posing in a gold-plated lift – strut across a bewilderingly expanded 
theatre of political absurdism.

But we cannot understand this crisis because our dominant intellectual 
concepts and categories seem unable to process an explosion of uncontrolled 
forces.

In the hopeful years that followed the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989, the 
universal triumph of liberal capitalism and democracy seemed assured; free 
markets and human rights would spread around the world and lift billions from 
poverty and oppression. In many ways, this dream has come true: we live in a 
vast, homogenous global market, which is more literate, interconnected and 
prosperous than at any other time in history.

And yet we find ourselves in an age of anger, with authoritarian leaders 
manipulating the cynicism and discontent of furious majorities. What used to be 
called “Muslim rage”, and identified with mobs of brown-skinned men with bushy 
beards, is suddenly manifest globally, among saffron-robedBuddhist 
ethnic-cleansers in Myanmar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/09/myanmar-moment-of-truth-aung-san-suu-kyi>
, as well as blond white nationalists in Germany. Violent hate crimes have 
blighted even the oldest of parliamentary democracies, with themurder of the MP 
Jo Cox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/16/labour-mp-jo-cox-shot-in-west-yorkshire>
 by a British neo-Nazi during the venomous campaign for Brexit. Suddenly, as 
the liberal thinker Michael Ignatieff recently wrote: “Enlightenment humanism 
and rationalism” can no longer adequately “explain the world we’re living in.”

The largely Anglo-American intellectual assumptions forged by the cold war and 
its jubilant aftermath are an unreliable guide to today’s chaos – and so we 
must turn to the ideas of an earlier era of volatility. It is a moment for 
thinkers such as Sigmund Freud, who warned in 1915 that the “primitive, savage 
and evil impulses of mankind have not vanished in any individual”, but are 
simply waiting for the opportunity to show themselves again. Certainly, the 
current conflagration has brought to the surface what Friedrich Nietzsche 
called “ressentiment” – “a whole tremulous realm of subterranean revenge, 
inexhaustible and insatiable in outbursts.”

By contrast, the fundamental premise of our existing intellectual frameworks 
is the assumption that humans are essentially rational and motivated by the 
pursuit of their own interests; that they principally act to maximise personal 
happiness, rather than on the basis of fear, envy or resentment.

Trump, Brexit and the age of popular revolt: 2016 in Long Reads
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/11/trump-brexit-age-of-popular-revolt-2016-in-long-reads>
The bestseller Freakonomics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2005/jul/24/society1> is a perfect 
text of our time in its belief that “incentives are the cornerstone of modern 
life,” and “the key to solving just about any riddle”. From this view, the 
current crisis is an irruption of the irrational – and confusion and 
bewilderment are widespread among political, business and media elites. The 
ordinarily stolid Economist has lately lurched from dubious indignation over 
“post-Truth politics” to the Rip Van Winkle-ish declaration of “The New 
Nationalism”. Many other mainstream periodicals now read like parodies of New 
Left Review, as they attend belatedly to the failings of global capitalism – 
most egregiously, its failure to fulfil its own promise of general prosperity.

We can now see, all too clearly, a widening abyss of race, class and education 
in Britain and the US. But as explanations proliferate, how it might be bridged 
is more unclear than ever. Well-worn pairs of rhetorical opposites, often 
corresponding to the bitter divisions in our societies, have once again been 
put to work: progressive v reactionary, open v closed, liberalism v fascism, 
rational v irrational. But as a polarised intellectual industry plays catch-up 
with fast-moving events that it completely failed to anticipate, it is hard to 
avoid the suspicion that our search for rational political explanations for the 
current disorder is doomed. All of the opponents of the new “irrationalism” – 
whether left, centre, or right – are united by the presumption that individuals 
are rational actors, motivated by material self-interest, enraged when their 
desires are thwarted, and, therefore, likely to be appeased by their fulfilment.

This notion of human motivation deepened during the Enlightenment, whose 
leading thinkers, despising tradition and religion, sought to replace them with 
the human capacity to rationally identify individual and collective interests. 
The dream of the late 18th century, to rebuild the world along secular and 
rational lines, was further elaborated in the 19th century by the utilitarian 
theorists of the greatest happiness for the greatest number of people – and 
this notion of progress was embraced by socialists and capitalists alike.

After the collapse of the socialist alternative in 1989, this utopian vision 
took the form of a global market economy dedicated to endless growth and 
consumption – to which there would be no alternative. According to this 
worldview, the dominance of which is now nearly absolute, the human norm isHomo 
economicus, a calculating subject whose natural desires and instincts are 
shaped by their ultimate motivation: to pursue happiness and avoid pain.

This simple view always neglected many factors ever-present in human lives: 
the fear, for instance, of losing honour, dignity and status, the distrust of 
change, the appeal of stability and familiarity. There was no place in it for 
more complex drives: vanity, fear of appearing vulnerable, the need to save 
face. Obsessed with material progress, the hyperrationalists ignored the lure 
of resentment for the left-behind, and the tenacious pleasures of victimhood.

And yet modern history provides enormous evidence for the persistent power of 
unreason. It was not so long ago – in the early 19th century – that French 
pretensions to a rational, universal, and cosmopolitan civilisation first 
provoked resentful Germans into the militant expression of what we now call 
“cultural nationalism”: the assertion ofauthentic culture rooted in national or 
regional character and history.

One revolution after another since then has demonstrated that feelings and 
moods change the world by turning into potent political forces. Fear, anxiety 
and a sense of humiliation were the principal motive of Germany’s expansionist 
policy in the early 20th century – and it is impossible to understand the 
current upsurge of anti-western sentiment in China, Russia and India without 
acknowledging the role played by humiliation.

Yet a mechanistic and materialist way of conceiving human actions has become 
entrenched, in part because economics has become the predominant means of 
understanding the world. A view that took shape in the 19th century – that 
there is “no other nexus between man and man than naked self-interest” – has 
become orthodoxy once again in an intellectual climate that views the market as 
the ideal form of human interaction and venerates technological progress and 
the growth of GDP. All of this is part of the rigid contemporary belief that 
what counts is only what can be counted and that what cannot be counted – 
subjective emotions – therefore does not. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fwelcome-age-anger-brexit-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fefe7bd84ea818c88a5b736546f63159d4c685729%2F0_263_4434_2660%2F4434.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Welcome%20to%20the%20age%20of%20anger%20%7C%20Pankaj%20Mishra&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fwelcome-age-anger-brexit-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Welcome%20to%20the%20age%20of%20anger%20%7C%20Pankaj%20Mishra&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fwelcome-age-anger-brexit-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fefe7bd84ea818c88a5b736546f63159d4c685729%2F0_263_4434_2660%2F4434.jpg>
 A Brexit supporter, and a Vote Remain campaigner exchange views in Market 
Square, Northampton, on 31 May Photograph: Christopher Furlong/Getty Images 
Our current disregard of non-economic motivations is even more surprising when 
we learn that less than a century ago, the Enlightenment’s “narrow rational 
programme” for individual happiness had already become “the butt of ridicule 
and contempt” – as the Austrian modernist writer Robert Musil observed in 1922. 
Indeed, the pioneering works of sociology and psychology as well as modernist 
art and literature of the early 20th century were defined in part by their 
insistence that there is more to human beings than rational egoism, competition 
and acquisition, more to society than a contract between logically calculating 
and autonomous individuals, and more to politics than impersonal technocrats 
devising hyper-rational schemes of progress with the help of polls, surveys, 
statistics, mathematical models and technology.

Writing in the 1860s, during the high noon of 19th-century liberalism, Fyodor 
Dostoevsky was one of the first modern thinkers to air the suspicion, now 
troubling us again, that rational thinking does not decisively influence human 
behaviour. He pitted his Underground Man – the quintessential loser dreaming of 
revenge against society’s winners – against the idea of rational egoism, or 
material self-interest, then popular in Russia among eager readers of John 
Stuart Mill and Jeremy Bentham. Dostoevsky’s protagonist obsessively assaults 
the shared rationalist assumptions of both capitalists and socialists: that 
human beings are logically calculating animals, driven by perceived incentives:

Oh, tell me who was it first announced, who was it first proclaimed, that man 
only does nasty things because he does not know his own interests; and that if 
he were enlightened, if his eyes were opened to his real normal interests, man 
would at once cease to do nasty things, would at once become good and noble 
because, being enlightened and understanding his real advantage, he would see 
his own advantage in the good and nothing else?

Dostoevsky defined a style of thought that was later elaborated by Nietzsche, 
Freud, Max Weber and others – who mounted a full-blown intellectual revolt 
against the oppressive certainties of rationalist ideologies, whether left, 
right or centre. This is an intellectual revolution that is barely remembered 
today – but it erupted at an emotional and political moment that would seem 
eerily familiar to us: a period of uneven and disruptive economic growth, 
distrust of politicians, fear of change, and anxiety about rootless 
cosmopolitans, aliens and immigrants.

This was an era when the disaffected masses – recoiling from the 19th 
century’s prolonged experiment in laissez-faire economic rationalism – had 
begun to fall for radical alternatives, in the form of blood-and-soil 
nationalism and anarchist terrorism. This anti-liberal political uprising 
forced many of those we now regard as central figures of 20th-century 
intellectual life to question their fundamental notions of human behaviour, and 
to discard the positivist nostrums that had taken root in the previous century.

By the late 1850s, Charles Darwin had already shattered the notion that human 
beings could control how they develop – let alone build a rational society. 
Novelists, sociologists and psychologists examining the turbulent mass 
societies of the late 19th century concluded that human actions could not be 
reduced to single causes, whether religious and ideological faith, or the 
rationality of self-interest.

Freud, who lived in turn-of-the-century Vienna while demagogues were 
scapegoating Jews and liberals for the mass suffering inflicted by industrial 
capitalism, came to see the rational intellect as “a feeble and dependent 
thing, a plaything and tool of our impulses and emotions”. “One gets the 
impression,” Freud wrote in The Future of an Illusion (1927) “that culture is 
something imposed on a reluctant majority by a minority that managed to gain 
possession of the instruments of power and coercion.” Long before the 20th 
century’s explosions of demagoguery, Max Weber, as he observed Germany’s hectic 
industrialisation, presciently speculated that individuals, unmoored by 
socioeconomic turmoil and alienated by bureaucratic rationalisation, could 
become vulnerable to a despotic leader.

The problem for these critics of Enlightenment rationalism, as Robert Musil 
defined it, was not that we “have too much intellect and too little soul”, but 
that we have “too little intellect in matters of the soul”. We suffer even more 
from this problem today as we struggle to make sense of the outbreaks of 
political irrationalism. Committed to seeing the individual self as a rational 
actor, we fail to see that it is a deeply unstable entity, constantly shaped 
and reshaped in its interplay with shifting social and cultural conditions. In 
our own time, amid what Hannah Arendt described as a “tremendous increase in 
mutual hatred and a somewhat universal irritability of everybody against 
everybody else”, this fragile self has become particularly vulnerable to 
ressentiment.

Ressentiment – caused by an intense mix of envy, humiliation and powerlessness 
– is not simply the French word for resentment. Its meaning was shaped in a 
particular cultural and social context: the rise of a secular and meritocratic 
society in the 18th century. Even though he never used the word, the first 
thinker to identify how ressentiment would emerge from modern ideals of an 
egalitarian and commercial society was Jean-Jacques Rousseau. An outsider to 
the Parisian elite of his time, who struggled with envy, fascination, revulsion 
and rejection, Rousseau saw how people in a society driven by individual 
self-interest come to live for the satisfaction of their vanity – the desire 
and need to secure recognition from others, to be esteemed by them as much as 
one esteems oneself.

But this vanity, luridly exemplified today by Donald Trump’s Twitter account 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/aug/10/donald-trump-twitter-republican-candidate-android-iphone>
, often ends up nourishing in the soul a dislike of one’s own self while 
stoking impotent hatred of others; and it can quickly degenerate into an 
aggressive drive, whereby individuals feel acknowledged only by being preferred 
over others, and by rejoicing in their abjection. (As Gore Vidal pithily put 
it: “It is not enough to succeed. Others must fail.”)

Such ressentiment breeds in proportion to the spread of the principles of 
equality and individualism. In the early 20th century, the German sociologist
Max Scheler <https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/scheler/> developed a 
systematic theory of ressentiment as a distinctly modern phenomenon – ingrained 
in all societies where formal social equality between individuals coexists with 
massive differences in power, education, status, and property ownership. In an 
era of globalised commerce, these disparities now exist everywhere, along with 
enlarged notions of individual aspiration and equality. Accordingly, 
ressentiment, an existential resentment of others, is poisoning civil society 
and undermining political liberty everywhere.

But what makes ressentiment particularly malign today is a growing 
contradiction. The ideals of modern democracy – the equality of social 
conditions and individual empowerment – have never been more popular. But they 
have become more and more difficult, if not impossible, to actually realise in 
the grotesquely unequal societies created by our brand of globalised capitalism.

The past two decades of hectic globalisation have brought us closer than ever 
before to the liberal Enlightenment ideal of a universal commercial society of 
self-interested, rational and autonomous individuals – one that was originally 
advocated in the 18th century by such thinkers as Montesquieu, Voltaire, Adam 
Smith, and Kant. In the 19th century, it was still possible for Marx to sneer 
at Jeremy Bentham for assuming “the modern shopkeeper, especially the English 
shopkeeper, as the normal man”. In our own time, however, the ideology of 
neoliberalism – a market-centric hybrid of Enlightenment rationalism and 
19th-century utilitarianism – has achieved near total domination in the 
economic and political realm alike.

The success of this universal creed can be attested by many innovations of 
recent decades that now look perfectly natural. The rational market is expected 
to ensure the supply of valuable products and services, while the task of 
governments is to ensure fair competition, which produces “winners” and 
“losers”. The broad intellectual revolution in which an all-knowing market 
judges failure and success has even more forcefully insisted on the rationality 
of the individual.

Issues of social justice and equality have receded along with conceptions of 
society or community – to be replaced by the freely choosing individual in the 
marketplace. According to the prevailing view today, the injustices entrenched 
by history or social circumstances cease to matter: the slumdog, too, can be a 
millionaire, and the individual’s failure to escape the underclass is 
self-evident proof of his poor choices.

Us v Them: the birth of populism | John B Judis | The Long Read
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/13/birth-of-populism-donald-trump>
But this abstract conception has no room for the emotional situation of real, 
flesh-and-blood people – and how they might act within concrete social and 
historical settings.

One of the first people to notice the disturbing complex of emotions we now 
see among self-seeking individuals around the world was Alexis de Tocqueville – 
who was already worried in the 1830s that the American promise of meritocracy, 
its uniformity of culture and manners, and “equality of conditions” would make 
for immoderate ambition, corrosive envy and chronic dissatisfaction. The 
passion for equality, he warned, could swell “to the height of fury” and lead 
many to acquiesce in a curtailment of their liberties, and to long for the rule 
of a strongman.

As De Tocqueville pointed out, people liberated from old hierarchies “want 
equality in freedom, and, if they cannot get it, they still want it in slavery.”

We witness a universal frenzy of fear and loathing today because the 
democratic revolution De Tocqueville witnessed has spread from its American 
centre to the remotest corners of the world. The rage for equality is conjoined 
with the pursuit of prosperity mandated by the global consumer economy, 
aggravating tensions and contradictions in inner lives that are then played out 
in the public sphere.

“To live in freedom,” De Tocqueville warned, “one must grow used to a life 
full of agitation, change and danger.” This kind of life is barren of 
stability, security, identity and honour, even when it overflows with material 
goods. Nevertheless, it is now commonplace among people around the world that 
rational considerations of utility and profit – the needs of supply chains and 
the imperatives of quarterly shareholder returns – uproot, humiliate and render 
obsolete.

The widespread experience of the maelstrom of modernity has only heightened 
the lure of ressentiment. Many new individuals now “live in freedom”, in De 
Tocqueville’s words, even as they are enslaved by finely integrated political, 
economic and cultural powers: the opaque workings of finance capital, the harsh 
machinery of social security, juridical and penal systems, and the unrelenting 
ideological influence of the media and the internet.

Never have so many free individuals felt so helpless – so desperate to take 
back control from anyone they can blame for their feeling of having lost it. It 
should not be surprising that we have seen an exponential rise in hatred of 
minorities, the main pathology induced by political and economic shocks. These 
apparent racists and misogynists have clearly suffered silently for a long time 
from what Albert Camus called “an autointoxication – the evil secretion, in a 
sealed vessel, of prolonged impotence”. It was this gangrenous ressentiment, 
festering for so long in places such as the Daily Mail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/27/revenge-of-the-tabloids-brexit-dacre-murdoch>
 and Fox News, that erupted volcanically with Trump’s victory.

Rich and poor alike voting for a serial liar and tax dodger have confirmed yet 
again that human desires operate independently of the logic of self-interest – 
and may even be destructive of it. Our political and intellectual elites 
midwifed the new “irrationalism” through a studied indifference to the 
emotional dislocation and economic suffering induced by modern capitalism. Not 
surprisingly, they are now unable to explain its rise. Indeed, their universal 
assumption, hardened since 1989, that there are no alternatives to 
western-style democracy and capitalism – the famous“end of history” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/mar/21/bring-back-ideology-fukuyama-end-history-25-years-on>
 – is precisely what has made us incapable of grasping the political phenomena 
shaking the world today.

It is clear now that the exaltation of individual will as something free of 
social and historical pressures, and as flexible as markets, concealed a 
breathtaking innocence about structural inequality and the psychic damage it 
causes. The contemporary obsession with individual choice and human agency 
disregarded even the basic discoveries of late-19th-century sociology: that in 
any mass society, life chances are unevenly distributed, there are permanent 
winners and losers, a minority dominates the majority, and the elites are prone 
to manipulate and deceive.

Even the terrorist attacks of 9/11 left undisturbed the vision in which a 
global economy built around free markets, competition and rational individual 
choices would alleviate ethnic and religious differences and usher in worldwide 
prosperity and peace. In this utopia, any irrational obstacles to the spread of 
liberal modernity – such as Islamic fundamentalism – would be eventually 
eradicated. Fantasies of a classless and post-racial society of empowered 
rational-choice actors bloomed as late as 2008, the year of the most 
devastating economic crisis since the Great Depression.

How the education gap is tearing politics apart | David Runciman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/05/trump-brexit-education-gap-tearing-politics-apart>
Today, however, the basic assumptions of cold war liberalism lie in ruins – 
after decades of intellectual exertion to construct flimsy oppositions between 
the rational west and the irrational east. The political big bang of our time 
does not merely threaten the vanity projects of an intellectual elite, but the 
health of democracy itself – the defining project of the modern world. Since 
the late 18th century, tradition and religion have been steadily discarded, in 
the hope that rational, self-interested individuals can form a liberal 
political community that defines its shared laws, ensuring dignity and equal 
rights for each citizen, irrespective of ethnicity, race, religion and gender. 
This basic premise of secular modernity, which earlier only seemed menaced by 
religious fundamentalists, is now endangered by elected demagogues in its very 
heartlands, Europe and the US.

Where do we go from here? We can of course continue to define the crisis of 
democracy through reassuring dualisms: liberalism v authoritarianism, Islam v 
modernity, and that sort of thing. It may be more fruitful to think of 
democracy as a profoundly fraught emotional and social condition – one which, 
aggravated by turbo-capitalism, has now become unstable. This might allow us to 
examine the workings of ressentiment across varied countries and classes, and 
to understand why ethno-nationalist supremacy has grown alongside economic 
stagnation in America and Britain, even as it flourishes alongside economic 
expansion in India and Turkey. Or, why Donald Trump, the flashy plutocrat 
tormented by his lowly status among Manhattan’s cultivated liberals, 
obsessively baits the New York Times and calls for a boycott of the Broadway 
show Hamilton.

That a rancorous Twitter troll will soon become the world’s most powerful man 
is the latest of many reminders that the idealised claims of western elites 
about democracy and liberalism never actually conformed to the political and 
economic reality at home. A rowdy public culture of disparagement and 
admonition does not hide the fact that the chasm of sensibility between a 
technocratic elite and the masses has grown. Everywhere, a majority that was 
promised growing equality sees social power monopolised by people with money, 
property, connections and talent; they feel shut out from both higher culture 
and decision-making.

Many people find it easy to aim their rage against an allegedly cosmopolitan 
and rootless cultural elite. Objects of hatred are needed more than ever during 
times of crisis, and rich “citizens of nowhere” – as Theresa May dubbed them – 
conveniently embody the vices of a desperately sought-after but infuriatingly 
unattainable modernity. And so globalisation, which promotes integration among 
shrewd elites, helps incite ressentiment everywhere else, especially among 
people forced against their will into universal competition.

In search of a balm for these wounds, many intellectuals have embraced 
nostalgic fantasies of vanished unity. Earlier this year, the New York Times 
columnist David Brooks returned from communist Cuba gushing about Cubans’ 
“fierce love of country, a sense of national solidarity and a confident 
patriotic spirit that is today lacking in the United States.” More recently, 
Simon Jenkins,in this newspaper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/01/blame-trump-brexit-identity-liberalism>
, and the intellectual historian Mark Lilla – in a widely circulatedNew York 
Times opinion piece 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/20/opinion/sunday/the-end-of-identity-liberalism.html?_r=0>
 – have urged the rejection of “identity liberalism” and the necessity of 
embracing national unity and common identity. As Trump’s victory was declared, 
Simon Schama tweeted that we need a new Churchill to save democracy in Europe 
and America.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fwelcome-age-anger-brexit-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F263a7ebc2229915f996b9820232d537ed30ca56e%2F0_182_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Welcome%20to%20the%20age%20of%20anger%20%7C%20Pankaj%20Mishra&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fwelcome-age-anger-brexit-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Welcome%20to%20the%20age%20of%20anger%20%7C%20Pankaj%20Mishra&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fwelcome-age-anger-brexit-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F263a7ebc2229915f996b9820232d537ed30ca56e%2F0_182_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 A Trump supporter in Ambridge, Pennsylvania during the presidential election 
campaign. Photograph: Evan Vucci/AP 
Such breast-beating amounts to a truly irrational demand: that the present 
abolish itself, making way for a return to the past. Ideally, to the time when 
paternalistic white liberals occupied the vital centre, little disturbed by the 
needs and desires of history’s forgotten, humiliated and silenced people.

These lamentations for simpler times – that all we lack is the right sort of 
spine-stiffening democratic leader, or rational culture, or cultural unity, or 
patriotic spirit – ignore the fragmented nature of our politics. Social and 
technological developments are not liberal or conservative, democratic or 
authoritarian; they are as prone to enshrine LGBT rights as to reinstate 
torture and disseminate fake news. Nor does the longing for the good old days 
adequately respond to the massive crisis of legitimacy facing democratic 
institutions today.

Political antidotes to the sinister pathologies unleashed by Putin, Erdoğan, 
Modi, Brexit and Trump require a reckoning with the bad new days – something a 
lot more forward-looking than models of solidarity inspired by Cuba or 
Churchill, nationalist pedagogies for the oppressed, or dauntless faith in 
globalisation eventually delivering the promised goods.

Inside the Kremlin’s hall of mirrors | Peter Pomerantsev
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/apr/09/kremlin-hall-of-mirrors-military-information-psychology>
This work is necessary – but it can only proceed with a more sophisticated 
analysis of how today’s landscape of hyperrational power has coerced a new and 
increasingly potent irrationalism into existence. And such analyses would 
require, above all, a richer and more varied picture of human experience and 
needs than the prevailing image of Homo economicus. This intellectual effort – 
which was first undertaken more than a century ago by the thinkers cited here – 
would necessarily take us beyond liberalism and its faith in the curative power 
of economic growth.

What Robert Musil called the “liberal scraps of an unfounded faith in reason 
and progress” have yet again failed modern human beings in their all-important 
task of understanding their experience. We once more confront the possibility, 
outlined in Musil’s great novel about the collapse of liberal values, The Man 
Without Qualities, that the characteristic desolation of the modern human being 
– his “immense loneliness in a desert of detail, his restlessness, malice, 
incomparable callousness, his greed for money, his coldness and violence’ – is 
“the result of the losses that logically precise thinking has inflicted on the 
soul”.

For nearly three decades, the religion of technology and GDP and the crude 
19th-century calculus of self-interest have dominated politics and intellectual 
life. Today, the society of entrepreneurial individuals competing in the 
rational market reveals unplumbed depths of misery and despair; it spawns a 
nihilistic rebellion against order itself.

With so many of our landmarks in ruins, we can barely see where we are headed, 
let alone chart a path. But even to get our basic bearings we need, above all, 
greater precision in matters of the soul. The stunning events of our age of 
anger, and our perplexity before them, make it imperative that we anchor 
thought in the sphere of emotions; these upheavals demand nothing less than a 
radically enlarged understanding of what it means for human beings to pursue 
the contradictory ideals of freedom, equality and prosperity.

Otherwise, in our sterile infatuation with rational motivations and outcomes, 
we risk resembling those helpless navigators who, De Tocqueville wrote, “stare 
obstinately at some ruins that can still be seen on the shore we have left, 
even as the current pulls us along and drags us backward toward the abyss”.

• Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongrea 
<https://twitter.com/@gdnlongread>d, or sign up to the long read weekly email 
here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/jul/20/sign-up-to-the-long-read-email>.
 