
Major western cities are tightening security for New Year’s Eve celebrations 
amid continuing terrorism fears, with authorities particularly concerned about 
a repeat of this year’s deadly truck attacks inGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> and France.


“Every measure is being taken to prevent a possible attack,” said police 
spokesman Thomas Neuendorf in Berlin, where concrete blocks and armoured cars 
will prevent all but carefully controlled pedestrian access to Pariser Platz, 
the square in front of Brandenburg Gate that is the traditional site for New 
Year’s Eve celebrations.

Twelve people died and more than 50 were injured in the German capital on 19 
December when a hijacked truck wasdriven into Christmas market crowds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/21/berlin-christmas-market-attack-a-graphical-guide-to-what-we-know-so-far>
. The suspected perpetrator, Anis Amri, a Tunisian national, fled and was 
eventuallyshot dead by police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/23/anis-amri-berlin-attack-suspect-shot-dead-milan>
 in Italy.


The attack, months after a similar atrocity in Nice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/21/nice-attacker-plotted-for-months-and-had-accomplices-prosecutor>
 on Bastille Day killed 86 people and wounded more than 400, underscored the
threat to large holiday crowds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/20/truck-attacks-in-berlin-and-nice-reflect-change-in-isis-tactics>
 in open spaces from a low-tech but devastating type of terrorist attack that 
can be carried out by one person.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fwestern-cities-tighten-new-years-eve-security-terror-attack-fears-persist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ccaf379bf45f79816bf796d54d59d6b7d739609%2F0_42_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Western%20cities%20tighten%20New%20Year's%20Eve%20security%20as%20terrorism%20fears%20persist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fwestern-cities-tighten-new-years-eve-security-terror-attack-fears-persist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Western%20cities%20tighten%20New%20Year%27s%20Eve%20security%20as%20terrorism%20fears%20persist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fwestern-cities-tighten-new-years-eve-security-terror-attack-fears-persist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ccaf379bf45f79816bf796d54d59d6b7d739609%2F0_42_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Germany has deployed about 1,700 officers in and around Pariser Platz, near 
Brandenburg Gate, in Berlin. Photograph: Fabrizio Bensch/Reuters 
Neuendorf said about 1,700 officers, some carrying submachine guns, would be 
stationed in and around the square in an “unprecedented” security operation. 
Glass bottles and fireworks will be banned and revellers subjected to bag 
searches and video surveillance.

Cologne has also dramatically stepped up security, increasing police numbers 
fivefold and installing new CCTV cameras sincehundreds of women were sexually 
assaulted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/05/germany-crisis-cologne-new-years-eve-sex-attacks>
 and robbed outside the central train station by suspects mainly of North 
African and Arab appearance on New Year’s Eve 2015.

Paris has again cancelled its traditional firework display at the Eiffel Tower 
– as it did after the November 2015 terror attacksin which 130 people died 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/12/surviving-bataclan-you-have-to-live-life-to-the-full-for-all-the-people-who-died>
 – but the French capital expects up to 600,000 people on the Champs-Élysées to 
watch alightshow at the Arc de Triomphe 
<http://www.rtl.fr/actu/societe-faits-divers/nouvel-an-2016-transports-spectacles-securite-que-se-passe-t-il-a-paris-et-en-le-de-france-7786487890>
 and see in 2017.

Amid tight security, however, more than 50 surrounding streets will be closed 
to traffic, including parked cars, from 6.30pm on Saturday, many access roads 
will besealed off with concrete barriers 
<http://www.rtl.fr/actu/international/face-a-la-menace-terroriste-le-nouvel-an-sous-haute-securite-7786509566>
 or heavy vehicles, and strict bans on fireworks and glass bottles will be 
enforced,Paris city hall said 
<http://www.paris.fr/actualites/circulation-le-soir-du-reveillon-et-le-jour-de-l-an-toutes-les-infos-3230>
.

The French interior minister, Bruno Le Roux, earlier said more than 90,000 
police and soldiers would be on duty around the country over the holiday 
period. Three men were arrested near Toulouse on Wednesday on suspicion of 
planning New Year’s Eve terror attacks.

Brussels, where suicide bombers killed 32 people and injured more than 300 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/14/the-harrowing-story-of-the-woman-in-the-brussels-bomb-photograph-nidhi-chaphekar>
 in March, alsocancelled its New Year’s Eve fireworks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/30/turkey-says-it-has-foiled-isis-plot-to-launch-new-years-eve-attack>
 display in 2015 after the discovery of a terror plot but decided to go ahead 
this year with “significantly enhanced” security.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fwestern-cities-tighten-new-years-eve-security-terror-attack-fears-persist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F55d3f0b5f37108ccf59cf6972446ceab09c539b4%2F0_198_3166_1899%2F3166.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Western%20cities%20tighten%20New%20Year's%20Eve%20security%20as%20terrorism%20fears%20persist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fwestern-cities-tighten-new-years-eve-security-terror-attack-fears-persist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Western%20cities%20tighten%20New%20Year%27s%20Eve%20security%20as%20terrorism%20fears%20persist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fwestern-cities-tighten-new-years-eve-security-terror-attack-fears-persist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F55d3f0b5f37108ccf59cf6972446ceab09c539b4%2F0_198_3166_1899%2F3166.jpg>
 A Belgian soldier signals to a passing horse-drawn carriage while patrolling 
the streets of Brussels. Photograph: Francois Lenoir/Reuters 
City hall said two metro stations and all but five access roads leading to the 
party strip between Place de la Bourse and Place de Brouckère would be closed, 
with strict security checks on everyone entering the zone.

In Madrid, heavy vehicles will be used to block potential truck attacks on New 
Year’s Eve crowds in the central square Puerta del Sol, with an extra 1,600 
police on duty. Trucks weighing more than 3.5 tonnes have been banned from 
areas holding traditional Three Kings parades on 5 January.

In Italy, where fears of an attacks were heightened last week by Amri’s 
killing in the suburbs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/23/anis-amri-from-young-drifter-to-europes-most-wanted-man>
 of Milan, the interior ministry said it had deported a Tunisian national who 
was “set to strike” Italy.

The prime minister, Paolo Gentiloni, has said there is no evidence the Berlin 
attacker was part of a terrorist network inItaly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy>, but police have increased their 
presence at possible targets and tourist areas in Rome, and some trucks and 
buses are forbidden from entering the city centre.

Security concerns are not confined to continental Europe. In London, armed 
police will join about 3,000 officers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/29/london-new-years-eve-policing-plan-nice-berlin-truck-attacks>
 on the streets as hundreds of thousands of people come to watch the official 
fireworks display by the river Thames.

In New York, police chief Carlos Gomez said 65 heavy rubbish and salting 
trucks loaded with sand would bestationed around the perimeter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/29/new-york-times-square-new-years-eve-security-precautions>
 of Times Square – where up to 2 million people are expected to gather – as 
well as 100 lighter “blocker trucks” nearby. About 7,000 police will be on duty.


“Due to the terrorist attacks in Nice, France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>, and in Berlin, we’ve enhanced our 
security measures,” Gomez said.

In Sydney, an extra 2,000 police officers will be deployed for the waterfront 
celebrations, with buses used as barriers in some busy pedestrian areas.
 