
“After seeing midfield maestro Jamie O’Hara show his silky skills on Celebrity 
Big Brother, my memory went back to Fulham’s home game v Ipswich Town last 
season,” begins Will O’Leary. “O’Hara was in the Fulham side that was 1-0 down 
after 16 seconds. Has there been any game where a quicker goal has been 
conceded with the opposing team kicking off?”

The long answer is yes – quite a few in fact. Let’s start in London. “I can 
still see Joe Cole’s ropey backpass setting up James Beattie to score for 
Southampton at the Bridge (28 August 2004) after just 12 seconds,” recalls 
Chris Taylor. “Luckily Beattie was in fine goalscoring form that day and put 
through his own net as José Mourinho’s Chelseawon 2-1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2004/aug/29/match.sport1>.” Darren White 
also has memories of an early goal against the run of kick-off, scored by Peter 
Withe for Sheffield United against Barnsley in 1985. “I believe this was timed 
at nine seconds,” says Darren. “Unfortunately, this was the days before blanket 
TV coverage for all games, so I can’t show you proof, but I was there and the 
event is implanted on my mind!”

Related: Which footballer has scored the most goals for a single club? | The 
Knowledge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/11/which-footballer-has-scored-the-most-goals-for-a-single-club-the-knowledge>

Michael Winther gets straight to the point: “Roy Makaay against Real Madrid in 
the Champions League. Ten seconds.Goal here 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qgPo77-SMJQ>.” Stephan Wijnen can top that, 
though. “Tjaronn Chery (now of QPR) scored after just nine seconds in the match 
between Roda JC and ADO Den Haag in the Dutch Eredivisie on 16 October 2011,” 
he notes. “Roda JC kicked off, but Chery scored quickly for ADO 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G-00EYYHsHg>.” Julian Unkel adds: “The fastest 
Bundesliga goal ever was scored after the opponent kicked off. In 2015, Kevin 
Volland from Hoffenheim scored against Bayern Munich after 9 seconds, 
capitalising on a bad pass by David Alaba.”

To social media, where Andrew Toothill recalled this from Alan Shearer …

… while Yaad Ilani chose Hakan Sukur from the 2002 World Cup 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fXNxufuCJbs>.

Sam Holden remembers a classic of the genre, Davide Gualtieri’s legendary goal 
for San Marino against England in 1993, whichcame after 8.3 seconds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2012/oct/10/san-marino-davide-gualtieri-england>
, while Sam O’Leary cites Christian Benteke’s 8.1-second effort for Belgium 
against Gibraltar. “I had the misfortune of seeing St Albans City concede from 
their own kick-offafter just 8 seconds 
<http://www.kentonline.co.uk/gravesend/sport/wonder-goal-out-of-all-103249/> to 
Ebbsfleet United back in September,” chimes in Andrew Levey. “Ebbsfleet’s Sam 
Deering scored a screamer from 55 yards. He proceeded to slide in front of the 
St Albans fans in celebration and got a pint of beer lobbed on him for his 
troubles.”


The best nomination so far comes from Ben Cordes. “The fastest goal ever 
scored in MLS play was by Mike Grella for New York Red Bulls on 18 October 
2015, officially clocked at 7 seconds 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eui09a56ywk>. It also happens to fit Will 
O’Leary’s criteria: Grella intercepted a wayward opening kick-off backpass, 
took three touches, and slotted past the ‘keeper (with assistance froma wicked 
deflection,cheers to readers of The Fiver).”

Most relegations for a city in one season

“All three of Stuttgart’s professional football teams were relegated on one 
day in March – VfB Stuttgart from the Bundesliga, Stuttgarter Kickers and VfB 
Stuttgart II from 3 Liga,” emailed Julian Unkel last year. “Has any city seen 
worse days with more teams relegated?”

“Cities like London and Reykjavík have a lot of football clubs, so it’s no 
surprise it’s happened in both cities,” emailed Ásgeir H Ingólfsson. “Yet 
despite having a lot more clubs then Stuttgart, they’ve only equalled them – 
with three clubs relegated in the same season. In London it happened in 1979 
(QPR and Chelsea relegated from the First Division and Millwall from the 
Second), 1980 (Fulham and Charlton relegated from the second, Wimbledon from 
the third) and 2015 (QPR from the Premier League, Millwall from the 
Championship and Leyton Orient from League One). It’s also happened three times 
in Reykjavík – in 1985 (Þróttur and Víkingur relegated from the first division, 
Fylkir from the second), 1998 (Þróttur and ÍR got relegated from the top 
division, Fjölnir from the rebranded League Two) and 2003 (Þróttur and Valur 
from the top division and Léttir from League Two). As you can see Þróttur gets 
relegated a lot.”
 Reykjavík in happier times. Photograph: Stoyan Nenov/Reuters 
Knowledge archive

“Having seen West Ham goalkeeper Jimmy Walker receive a yellow card as he was 
stretchered off in the recent Championship play-off final, I wondered if any 
players have received red cards while being carried off?”asked Hywel Benbow 
back in the day.

The answer was plenty, Hywel. Not even the sight of stretcher-bearers has 
dissuaded referees from rubbing salt into the wounds down the years. One of the 
more recent of these cases occurred on September 2001, when Charlton’s Steve 
Brown received his marching orders against Leicester for deliberate handball – 
while being carried off with a sprained ankle. The lack of sympathy shown by 
referee Mike Dean[yep, that one – 2017 ed] sparked outrage among home fans, who 
bombarded the field with club catalogues that had been left on seats before the 
game. Their ire delayed the game by five minutes, but Dean placated them 
somewhat by reducing Leicester to nine men as the Addicks won 2-0, condemning 
Peter Taylor to the sack two days later.

Related: What is the fastest penalty ever awarded in a football match? | The 
Knowledge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/04/what-is-the-fastest-penalty-ever-awarded-in-a-football-match>

Another double fracture of the leg unsurprisingly sparked Scunthorpe’s Nigel 
Pepper into a red mist on August 2000. Pepper, real name Colin, was playing 
just his second game for the club, when Kidderminster’s Paul Webb slid in to 
perform the aforementioned damage. Pepper’s revenge was meted out in a swift 
blow to Webb’s chin, earning him a straight red, but it didn’t prevent the 
Irons still running out 2-0 victors.

Far more impressive fisticuffs occurred back in 1963, pre-dating the advent of 
the red card, when St Andrew’s played host to a fiery encounter between 
Birmingham winger Bertie Auld and Fulham’s Johnny Haynes. Chris Ferns took up 
the story: “If memory serves, Haynes fouled Auld, who was legendary for his 
temper, and was promptly knocked out in retaliation. Auld then flattened 
another Fulham player who tried to intervene, rendering him unconscious as 
well. The upshot was that both Auld and Haynes were sent off, the latter via a 
stretcher.”

More fighting, but of the Bowyer-Dyer team-mate variety, ensured a famous 
red-card injury special in Scotland back in 1994. Hearts defender Graeme Hogg’s 
criticism of Craig Levein during a pre-season friendly at Raith didn’t go down 
too well; Levein responded by breaking Hogg’s nose as a brawl broke out. The 
pair were dismissed – Hogg via a stretcher – earning each hefty bans from the 
SFA; 10 games for Hogg and 14 for Levein.

However, Billy Stewart reckoned he could top the lot: “George McCluskey was 
playing for Kilmarnock at Cowdenbeath during the 90s when he committed a tackle 
worthy of a sending off, injuring himself in the process. A stretcher could not 
be found, so a wheelchair was brought on instead. George then had the 
embarrassment of being wheeled off the pitch with the referee running alongside 
him, brandishing the red card.”

 * For thousands more questions and answers take a trip through the Knowledge 
archive <https://www.theguardian.com/football/series/theknowledge>. 
Can you help?

“In north London there is a 200m stretch of road named Bobby Moore Way 
<https://www.google.co.uk/maps/@51.6058518,-0.1548198,17z>,” emails Andy Kelly. 
“There are no houses on the road as its only purpose appears to be a slip road 
on to the North Circular (A406). It seems strange that such a nondescript road 
with no apparent geographical link is named after the England World Cup-winning 
captain. Does anyone know why it was named after him?” Next to a Powerleague, 
perhaps? How about unusually placed road names after footballers?

“I have just finished reading Richard Foster’s article ‘What do footballers do 
while recovering from long-term injuries?’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-agony-and-the-ecstasy/2017/jan/16/footballers-long-term-injuries-gundogan-manchester-city>
 and it got me wondering whether a player’s contract has ever expired while 
they were recovering from a long-term injury?” wonders Christopher Day-Kerry. 
“Have the clubs then dropped them to recover alone or extended the contract? 
Obviously I realise that some players simply retire once substantially injured 
and I’m sure others have had their contracts terminated early. Any info?” Or 
perhaps some positive stories of clubs and injured players?

“I was reading that when Milan get eventually sold to a Chinese group, it will 
mark the end of Silvio Berlusconi’s reign as club president,” writes Ursolin 
Waxoh. “The article didn’t state so, but I was wondering whether Mr Berlusconi 
is Europe’s longest-serving club president. Surely not? No other examples come 
to mind though. Can you help?”


“While in the process of taking Fulham to mid-table mediocrity in Football 
Manager recently I managed to field a very presidential front two of (Cauley) 
Woodrow and (Callum) Wilson: the 28th US president,” declares Nick Cousins. 
“Are there any real-life examples of the surnames of a football partnership at 
the same club forming the name of a world leader?”

“Has any player or club has played against all 92 current FA and Football 
League clubs?” asks Danny Ryan. “I thought perhaps Vardy or Lambert or Claridge 
might have come close but been caught out by an untimely promotion or the 
formation of MK Dons.”

 * Send your questions and answers to knowledge@theguardian.com 
<mailto:knowledge@theguardian.com> or tweet @TheKnowledge_GU 
<https://twitter.com/theknowledge_gu>.  