
When it comes to addressing civic problems, one of today's buzzwords is 
"resilience". The United Nations office for disaster risk reduction recently 
launched aMaking Cities Resilient programme 
<http://www.unisdr.org/we/campaign/cities>; in Wisconsin, the Centre for 
Resilient Cities <http://www.resilientcities.org/Resilient_Cities/PROFILE.html> 
opened a research lab just last year.

At the Rockefeller Foundation, the 100 Resilient Cities project 
<http://100resilientcities.rockefellerfoundation.org/> is highlighting urban 
hardiness around the world, while theInternational Council for Local 
Environmental Initiatives <http://resilient-cities.iclei.org/> is hosting its 
resilience series. Companies likeSiemens  
<http://w3.siemens.com/topics/global/en/sustainable-cities/resilience/Pages/home.aspx?stc=wwzcc120154>
are getting into the act, as are organisations likethe World Bank 
<http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/COUNTRIES/EASTASIAPACIFICEXT/0,,contentMDK:21845641~pagePK:146736~piPK:226340~theSitePK:226301,00.html>
. Books are being published, conferences are being held, and, around the world, 
resilience is being encouraged.

At first flush, resilience seems a clear lens for addressing the problems of 
cities, suggesting – unlike "sustainable" or "livable" – a fairly inclusive 
standard of measurement. Resilience reflects a city's ability to persevere in 
the face of emergency, to continue its core mission despite daunting 
challenges, and is as appropriate to discussions about Venice's rising tides as 
Medellin's corruption, Detroit's unemployment as Budapest's floods.

The concept also extends beyond disaster preparedness. At a recent 
clearinghouse on resilient cities, Thomas Frieden, director of the US Centers 
for Disease Control, noted that "Resilient systems are everyday systems that 
can be scaled up. Managing in an emergency is like managing normally, except 
more so." In other words, as cities work to build resilience, they should 
develop procedures that enable them to carry out their daily mission, whatever 
that mission may be.

One strength of the resilience lens is that it can address life expectancy in 
Glasgow, population retention in Dakar and religious clashes in Ramallah. This, 
however, could also be a weakness, as the needs of individual cities are not 
only varied but might be contradictory. As the notion of resilience is carried 
across cultures, and applied to hundreds of cities around the world, varying 
ideas about the purpose of cities, and of the individuals who reside in them, 
becomes a potential stumbling block.
 Children look at the African Renaissance monument in Dakar, Senegal, in 2010. 
People of a city contribute to its resilience as much as its walls and bridges. 
Photograph: Seyllou/AFP/Getty Images 
For a westerner schooled in the English philosopher Thomas Hobbes 
<http://www.constitution.org/th/decive06.htm>, the purpose of a city might be 
the preservation of life, and "a more contented life thereby". For one who 
follows his compatriotJohn Locke 
<http://www.egs.edu/library/john-locke/biography/>, the purpose might be the 
preservation of "life, liberty, and property." But, as the emergence of factory 
towns or frontier communities suggest, cities are built for numerous reasons 
other than the needs of their citizens. And, while the rights of the citizens 
and the needs of businesses, or the defence of national security, often go hand 
inhand, they do not always do so.

The Chilean architect Alejandro Aravena, renowned for his work on socially 
inclusive urban designs through his practice, Elemental,explains the concept of 
resilience <http://alejandroaravena.com/obras/vivienda-housing/elemental/> in 
terms of "magnets," which draw workers to cities, and "bombs," which push them 
away. As the global workforce becomes more mobile, cities that offer the best 
amenities and resources will draw the most workers – and will be the most 
resilient. Alternately, he notes, cities that are unable to maintain a high 
quality of life will be less resilient.

The question of the purpose of cities, and their responsibility to their 
citizens, is at the centre of the Rockefeller Foundation's 100 Resilient Cities 
programme. Designed topromote urban resilience around the world 
<http://www.rockefellerfoundation.org/blog/33-resilient-cities-announced-by>, 
the programme will award grants to 100 cities that "have demonstrated a 
dedicated commitment to building their own capacities to prepare for, 
withstand, and bounce back rapidly from shocks and stresses". The Foundation's 
support will include hiring a "chief resilience officer" for the city, as well 
as providing aid to develop a resilience plan and access to services to begin 
implementing that plan.
 A giant storm drain beneath Sheffield, UK. Water management has become a 
major issue for cities. Photograph: Robert Shone/Barcroft Media 
More than 1,000 cities registered to take part in the Resilient Cities 
programme, and almost 400 formally applied for inclusion. On 2 December, the 
foundation announced its first 33 honorees. Arrayed across six continents and 
21 countries, the selected cities range from thriving megacities likeMexico City
 
<http://100resilientcities.rockefellerfoundation.org/cities/entry/mexico-citys-resilience-challenge>
 to struggling regional hubs likeRotterdam 
<http://100resilientcities.rockefellerfoundation.org/cities/entry/rotterdams-resilience-challenge>
, relatively young metropolises likePorto Alegre 
<http://100resilientcities.rockefellerfoundation.org/cities/entry/porto-alegres-resilience-challenge>
 to some of the oldest occupied areas on the planet, such asRome 
<http://100resilientcities.rockefellerfoundation.org/cities/entry/romes-resilience-challenge>
. All have experienced significant setbacks that have tested their resilience, 
and they have all attempted to design programs and procedures to help them come 
to terms with their vulnerabilities.

According to the Rockefeller Foundation's president, Judith Rodin, the 
intention is to circumvent the problem of conflicting civic and cultural 
philosophies by focusing on solving specific problems, using flooding as an 
example She says: "Your city's vulnerability to water may require an 8ft-tall 
dike, while another city requires natural infrastructure like archipelagoes and 
oyster beds. Those are very different practices, but they represent the same 
resilience principle, which is that you've got to figure out how to deal with 
water in a way that really works."

Ultimately, Rodin hopes, the programme will form the basis of a "set of 
systematic resilience principles that are generalisable". And, eventually, she 
says, the project hopes to help all cities learn to view their specific 
problems "through a resilience lens".

But is it possible to trade a specific regional lens for a worldwide one? To 
some extent, this conflict emerged when the mayors of two of Rockefeller's 
honored cities outlined the problems that their communities face. Noting that 
New Orleans has, in recent years, weathered two devastating hurricanes, a 
financial crisis, and an unprecedented oil spill, its mayor, Mitch Landrieu, 
highlighted the city's historic relationships with cities around the globe, and 
suggested ways that it could leverage its web of economic and cultural 
connections to develop solutions to its problems. On the other hand, Khalifa 
Sall, the mayor of Dakar, Senegal, noted that his city's relationships with 
other areas is part of its problem, as more economically robust regions have 
been siphoning off Dakar's young workers.
 Urban anglers on Galata bridge, Istanbul, in 2010. Creativity, improvisation 
and adaptation says as much about a city as its people. Photograph: David 
Levene for the Guardian 
By placing the question of resilience in the hands of 100 cities spread around 
the world, the Rockefeller Foundation is effectively outsourcing the question. 
The answers are likely to be pragmatic and ad hoc, a collection of best 
practices for dealing with a variety of crises. More broadly, however, the 
resilience movement is a global attempt to address two of the longest-standing 
and most vital questions facing theorists, planners and leaders. Namely, what 
is the purpose of society, and what is a society's responsibility to its 
citizens.
 