
Friday evening

 * Access to Facebook, Twitter and YouTube is restricted in Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey>, shortly after news broke that a 
military coup may be under way, according to two internet monitoring groups. 
The news is quickly reported around the world. 
 * Army vehicles fan through Istanbul, Turkey’s largest city, with tanks seen 
outside the country’s main airport, and military trucks filmed blocking the 
bridges connecting the city’s Asian and European sides.

 * A soldier is filmed telling passers-by: “It’s a coup, go home.” Chaos 
breaks out on Istanbul’s main thoroughfare, Istiklal, with people running in 
all directions, and restaurants and shops closing. 
 * The Turkish military release a statement through state media that declares a
coup is under way 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2016/jul/15/turkey-coup-attempt-military-gunfire-ankara>
 in the country. It is answered quickly by sources close to the elected 
president,Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, who insist that the attempt has failed and his 
government remains in power. 
 * A spokesman for the presidency confirms there has been an attempted coup by 
“a group within the armed forces”,but says it will fail and those involved will 
be punished. 
Friday night 

 * Gunshots are heard in the capital, Ankara, as military planes fly low and 
fast overhead.Tanks open fire near the Turkish parliament building, Reuters 
reports, following similar reports fromNTV 
<https://twitter.com/MahirZeynalov/status/754077838580576257> and local 
journalists <https://twitter.com/jonnyhogg1/status/754077338279739392> about 
gunfire in Ankara and Istanbul. 
 * In a statement released through Turkish television channels, people 
claiming to speak for the Turkish military say the army has taken charge of the 
countryand declare Erdoğan’s government has eroded Turkey’s secular traditions. 
They claim the country is now being governed by a “peace council”.

 * In response a spokesman for Erdoğan says the coup is supported by only a 
faction of the army and that he is still in command of the country.

 * Some two hours after the military begins to make its move, Erdoğan finally 
reaches Turkish television studios via FaceTime and calls on Turks – some 49.5% 
of whom voted for his party in November 2015 – to respond to the coup by 
rallying in public.“I urge the Turkish people to convene at public squares and 
airports,” Erdoğan says. “There is no power higher than the power of the 
people,” he continues, adding that the judiciary “will swiftly respond to this 
attack”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Ferdogan-facetime-turkey-coup-attempt&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Erdo%C4%9Fan%20addresses%20Turkey%20via%20FaceTime%20amid%20attempted%20coup%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Ferdogan-facetime-turkey-coup-attempt>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Erdo%C4%9Fan%20addresses%20Turkey%20via%20FaceTime%20amid%20attempted%20coup%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Ferdogan-facetime-turkey-coup-attempt&media=>
Erdoğan addresses Turkey via FaceTime amid attempted coup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/jul/15/erdogan-facetime-turkey-coup-attempt>
 * An official says Erdoğan is “safe” and speaking from Marmaris, a 
Mediterranean resort town where he is said to be on holiday. An eyewitness told 
the BBC of hearing helicopters and gunfire overnight in Marmaris, and Erdoğan 
also claims in a later press conference the town was attacked.

 * Members of the military declare a curfew across parts of the country, 
television channels report.Some Turks rush to stockpile food and water, and 
withdraw cash from banks, amid fears of a potential administrative meltdown in 
the coming days. 
Overnight 

 * Large crowds gather in opposition to the armed forces and there are 
unconfirmed local reports of fighting in Ankara and Istanbul. Casualties are 
reported. 
 * Erdoğan blame 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2016/jul/15/turkey-coup-attempt-military-gunfire-ankara?page=with:block-57895aace4b033b610b6e3fa#block-57895aace4b033b610b6e3fa>
s the coup on factions loyal to dissident Fethullah Gülen,a US-based Turkish 
cleric who is a former ally turned prominent critic of his home country’s 
president. 
 * Gülen, who lives in exile in Pennsylvania, strenuously denies any 
involvement in the coup. The cleric, who heads the Hizmet movement, is an 
influential figures among Turks at home and abroad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/16/fethullah-gulen-who-is-the-man-blamed-by-turkeys-president-for-coup-attempt>
, frequently accused by Erdoğan of trying to destabilise his government.

 * The military’s grip on key civil institutions, including major transport 
hubs and media organisations,appears less strong than reported earlier in the 
coup. 
Saturday morning


 * A furious Erdoğan arrives at Istanbul’s Ataturk airport and declares his 
government remains in charge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/16/how-recep-tayyip-erdogan-inflamed-tensions-in-turkey>
. The president vows to round up and punish those behind the military revolt, 
as his government announces hundreds of people have been arrested on suspicion 
of involvement, including senior colonels and generals. 
 * Coup leaders continue to put up a defiant front, with anti-government 
groups claiming there are still pockets of resistance around the country. 
 * Video footage emerges of soldiers leaving their positions or being taken 
away under arrest, with one large contingent abandoning their blockade of 
Istanbul’s Bosphorus bridge, hands raised in surrender. 
 * Local reports claim at least 60 people have been killed, many of them 
civilians. Sixteen people involved in the attempted coup died in clashes at 
military police command, and 250 others were arrested, according to reports. 
Separately, 13 soldiers who tried to storm the presidential palace in Ankara 
were arrested.

 * The head of the armed forces, General Hulusi Akar, is reportedly freed, 
having been taken hostage earlier in the military revolt. 
 * More than 1,500 members of the armed forces have been arrested, among them 
29 colonels and five generals, the government announces. Rear AdmiralNejat 
Atilla Demirhan and General Memduh Hakbilen, the chief of staff of Turkey’s 
command for the Aegean region, are said to be among those detained. 
Saturday lunchtime 

 * Turkish prime minister Binali Yildirim calls the night’s events a “black 
stain” on Turkish democracy and praises the role of civilians and the police in 
putting down the coup. He says161 people have been killed and more than 1,440 
injured, with 2,839 military personnel arrested. 
 * Eight men land in a Turkish military helicopter in the Greek city of 
Alexandroupolis and attempt to claim political asylum, Greek police sources 
said. Turkey’s foreign minister tweeted ademand for their return 
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Turkey%20coup%20attempt%20a%20%27black%20stain%20on%20our%20democracy%27%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0latest%20updates&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fturkey-coup-attempt-military-gunfire-ankara%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-578a0b6de4b033b610b6e455%23block-578a0b6de4b033b610b6e455&original_referer=https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2016/jul/15/turkey-coup-attempt-military-gunfire-ankara>
.

 * An anti-government group took over a frigate in the naval base of Gölcük and
held the head of the Turkish fleet hostage, a Greek military source told 
Reuters. 
Saturday afternoon

 * The post-coup crackdown spreads beyond the military as Turkish media 
reported <https://twitter.com/Hurriyet/status/754283953985458176> that 2,745 
judges have been removed from duty. Five members of HSYK, Turkey’s highest 
judiciary board, were also removed, state-run Anadolu Agency reports. 
 * Gülen, the cleric blamed by Erdogan for leading the failed coup, denies any 
involvement in the uprising. A statement released by Reuters says he 
“categorically denies” the claims that he orchestrated the coup, and argues 
power should be won through free and fair elections.

 * Turkish opposition leader Kemal Kilicdaroglu, of the Republican People’s 
party (CHP), criticises the coup attempt and says that political parties should 
take a “joint stand” against such attempts.

 * People waving Turkish flags gather in Ankara following a call during the 
prime minister Binali Yildirim’s lunchtime press conference forcivilian 
demonstrations this evening against the coup. 

 