
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> will look back on 2016 
as a dreadful year – the horror of attacks in Brussels, Nice and Berlin, the 
shame of Calais and the earthquake of Brexit.

Sadly, 2017 might be another. 

Or it might not. If there was one thing 2016 taught us, it’s that predictions 
are a mug’s game, so here are two scenarios for next year.

The doomsday option is this: another indiscriminate, deadly attack early in 
the year bodes ill for a continent that lost 130 people to terrorist attacks in 
2016. It plays into the hands ofGeert Wilders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/geert-wilders>, the Dutch far-right 
candidate in March general elections, who sweeps to victory.

Barely a month later – just before the first round of France’s potentially 
pivotal presidential elections on 23 April – Turkey’s increasingly autocratic 
president,Recep Tayyip Erdoğan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/recep-tayyip-erdogan>, finally runs out of 
patience.

The fear of Marine Le Pen – w​ill the next political earthquake happen in 
France?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/14/the-fear-of-marine-le-pen-will-the-next-political-earthquake-happen-in-france>
In exchange for cracking down on people smugglers, Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> was promised €3bn (£2.5bn) by 
Brussels (to help it cope with the nearly 3 million refugees on its territory), 
visa-free travel for its citizens and progress on EU membership.

But Europe is appalled by Erdoğan’s repressive response to the failed July cou 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey-coup-attempt>p, and MEPs have urged 
EU capitals to freeze 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/24/eu-parliament-votes-freeze-membership-talks-turkey>
 accession talks. Nor is there agreement on whether Turkey has met conditions 
for visa-free travel.

So Erdoğan decides now would be a good time to open his borders, allowing 
hundreds of thousands of desperate refugees and migrants stuck in Turkey to 
leave for the EU if they wish, which many – especially fit young men – do.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fwhats-in-store-for-europe-in-2017-a-look-at-possible-scenarios%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f6e33220fac108f3bc95dd9df2bd6380b678296%2F0_133_4899_2939%2F4899.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What's%20in%20store%20for%20Europe%20in%202017%3F%20A%20look%20at%20possible%20scenarios&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fwhats-in-store-for-europe-in-2017-a-look-at-possible-scenarios%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%27s%20in%20store%20for%20Europe%20in%202017%3F%20A%20look%20at%20possible%20scenarios&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fwhats-in-store-for-europe-in-2017-a-look-at-possible-scenarios%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f6e33220fac108f3bc95dd9df2bd6380b678296%2F0_133_4899_2939%2F4899.jpg>
 Turkey’s president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan. Photograph: Depo 
Photos/Rex/Shutterstock 
Images of this new exodus of migrant misery flash across the continent’s TV 
screens as France votes and, despite polls putting her conservative rival, 
François Fillon, well clear,Marine Le Pen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/marine-le-pen> of the radical-right, 
anti-immigration Front National storms to a shock second-round victory in May.


In snap June elections, Italy’s Five Star Movement (M5S) then completes an 
anti-establishment takeover of three of the EU’s six original members, and by 
autumn the escalating migrant crisis and ongoing terror threat unseat a fourth: 
badly weakened by the continuing fallout from Berlin’s deadly Christmas market 
attack,Angela Merkel <https://www.theguardian.com/world/angela-merkel> falls in 
Germany’s federal elections.

Following Donald Trump’s example, protectionist European governments eagerly 
set about ripping up multilateral trade agreements and locking down borders. In 
the Netherlands andFrance <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>, Wilders 
and Le Pen head for early referendums on Nexit and Frexit; Italy calls a 
plebiscite on readopting the lira.

Finally, with the eurozone’s debtors and creditors at each others’ throats and 
a hapless, floundering and increasingly disconnected EU at risk if not of 
outright collapse, then at least of radical remodelling,Greece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> says once more: “Can’t pay, won’t 
pay,” and Berlin and Brussels reply: no more bailouts.

None of this, of course, need happen.

Europe’s police and intelligence services could continue to thwart the terror 
plots, and Turkey’s Erdoğan could conclude his long-term interests are, on 
balance, better served by not plunging Europe into terminal crisis.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fwhats-in-store-for-europe-in-2017-a-look-at-possible-scenarios%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbfa900718e711172f074da6e91765446f1640237%2F0_202_6016_3611%2F6016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What's%20in%20store%20for%20Europe%20in%202017%3F%20A%20look%20at%20possible%20scenarios&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fwhats-in-store-for-europe-in-2017-a-look-at-possible-scenarios%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%27s%20in%20store%20for%20Europe%20in%202017%3F%20A%20look%20at%20possible%20scenarios&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fwhats-in-store-for-europe-in-2017-a-look-at-possible-scenarios%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbfa900718e711172f074da6e91765446f1640237%2F0_202_6016_3611%2F6016.jpg>
 Could Brexit be followed by Nexit and Frexit? Photograph: Alamy 
The continent could just – as the recent unexpected victory of the 
left-leaning independent Alexander Van der Bellen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/04/far-right-party-concedes-defeat-in-austrian-presidential-election>
 over the far-right’s Norbert Hofer in Austria’s presidential election may show 
– have reached peak populism.


Shaken by the obvious chaos of Brexit, rocked by the profoundly destabilising 
advent of Trump, Europe’s voters could take a closer look at what the nativist, 
radical-right parties are promising and opt, instead, for security.


In the Netherlands, Wilders has scored sky high in the polls before, only to 
see his support plummet on voting day. Even if his party does wind up the 
largest in parliament, he is likely to find it very difficult to form a 
majority.

In France, too, nobody seriously yet thinks the numbers can add up for Le Pen 
and Fillon – especially if he moderates the fiercest of his free-market 
proposals – may well prove the polls right and cruise to a comfortable win.

Planned electoral reforms in Italy should usher in a proportional 
representation system that means it will be all butimpossible for a single 
party to form a government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/05/italy-referendum-result-not-another-brexit-trump>
, and anyway M5S has always refused to take part in any form of coalition.

Merkel convinces Germany’s voters she is their safest choice; Greece – as it 
always, somehow, has – will pull through; and the EU could finally act on its 
dawning understanding that if it is to survive, it has to offer concrete 
answers to citizens’ needs and fears.

It does all add up, though, to a lot of “ifs”, “mays”, “buts” and “coulds”. A 
wind of anxious, resentful, anti politics-as-usual change is blowing across 
Europe. It would be surprising if it does not claim at least some more 
establishment victims.
 