
Gentrification 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/feb/27/ruth-glass-spike-lee-gentrification-50-years>
 – a term first usedmore than half a century ag 
<https://sites.google.com/site/gg2wpdermotmitchell/history-and-explanation-of-gentrification>
o to describe the displacement of a neighbourhood’s working-class occupiers and 
the transformation of its entire social character – now has a seemingly 
unyielding grip on cities throughout the world. Stories of spiralling house 
prices, fractured communities and empty towers are commonplace from San 
Francisco to Sydney and everywhere in between.

But can gentrification be stopped? Some may say it’s inevitable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/jan/16/gentrification-inevitable-bad-urban-change>
, but is there nothing that governments, local councils, housebuilders or 
communities can do to limit its ill-effects?

Grassroots campaigns protesting about luxury developments and the loss of 
affordable housing are taking place in cities around the world – fromCorazón 
Del Pueblo in Los Angeles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/19/los-angeles-la-gentrification-resistance-boyle-heights>
 toReclaim Brixton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/davehillblog/2015/apr/28/brixton-anti-gentrification-protest-reclaim-foxtons-estate-agent>
 orFocus E15 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/oct/05/focus-e15-mums-fight-for-right-to-home>
 in London, andSave Moore Street in Dublin 
<http://www.independent.ie/irish-news/traffic-chaos-in-dublin-as-hundreds-come-out-to-protest-moore-street-gentrification-34409561.html>
.

Some cities have introduced policies to safeguard affordable housing, such as 
São Paulo’sZones of Special Social Interest 
<http://www.thepolisblog.org/2012/01/misusing-city-statute-in-sao-paulo.html>. 
Berlin, among other cities, has introduced restrictions 
<http://archpaper.com/2016/05/berlin-restricts-airbnb/> to limit the 
gentrifying impact of holiday rental website Airbnb, which is seen as 
contributing to the shortage of affordable residences.

Rent control has been seen as a potential means of preventing gentrification 
<http://chicagoreporter.com/in-the-citys-gentrifying-neighborhoods-rent-control-could-offer-relief-for-some-residents/>
, but there aredoubts over how effective it is 
<http://journal.firsttuesday.us/rent-control-versus-gentrification-in-california/47920/>
. Earlier this year, New York mayorBill de Blasio also passed an inclusionary 
housing plan 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/23/nyregion/new-york-council-passes-zoning-changes-de-blasio-sought.html?_r=0http://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/23/nyregion/new-york-council-passes-zoning-changes-de-blasio-sought.html?_r=0>
 to address the issues around affordable housing in the city.

Others are working hard to create more inclusive urban development. Community 
land trusts (CLTs) are local organisations set up and run by community members 
to develop and manage genuinely affordable homes –Granby Four Streets CLT 
<http://www.granby4streetsclt.co.uk/history-of-the-four-streets/> in Liverpool 
andLondon CLT 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2015/jul/26/ringing-londons-changes-at-st-clements-in-mile-end>
 being two such examples.

But what about where you live? Are there policies, campaigns or projects to 
keep housing affordable, prevent displacement and resist gentrification? And if 
not, do you think there should be?

How to get involved


Share your stories with us and a selection will be featured on Guardian Cities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities>, which next week will be hosting a special 
series focusing on gentrification around the world.

You can either contribute using the form below, or using GuardianWitness 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/> (just click on the blue “Contribute” 
button). You can also follow Guardian Cities onTwitter 
<https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> to join the discussion, using the 
hashtag#GlobalGentrification. 
 