
Europeans living in Britain

For many of the estimated 3 million non-British EU citizens living in the UK, 
the vote to leave has proved unsettling at the very least.
Eleonora Belfiore (@elebelfiore) 
Today feels black. For those of us who are going to suffer the consequences of 
this Referendum without a chance to vote, especially
 <https://twitter.com/elebelfiore/status/746245190961213440> June 24, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/elebelfiore/status/746245190961213440> Alex SE26 
(@alex_SE26) 
@jk_rowling <https://twitter.com/jk_rowling> I am French living in London, sad 
today and now feel for Scotland. Write us a great story about a magician saving 
the UK ?
 <https://twitter.com/alex_SE26/status/746204846445858817> June 24, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/alex_SE26/status/746204846445858817> 
But what will it actually mean for them in practice? Some confusion is 
understandable, as during the campaign the opposing sides said very different 
things.

Vote Leave gave unequivocal assurances 
<http://www.voteleavetakecontrol.org/restoring_public_trust_in_immigration_policy_a_points_based_non_discriminatory_immigration_system>
 that any new immigration system would not affect EU citizens already in the 
country. “There will be no change for EU citizens already lawfully resident in 
the UK,” it said, promising on its website that such people would 
“automatically be granted indefinite leave to remain in the UK and will be 
treated no less favourably than they are at present”.

But equally unequivocal was the remain side, which warned that “all current EU 
citizens here would lose their automatic right to come and work in the UK. This 
means that living and working in the UK would be significantly more difficult 
after a leave vote for EU citizens, and is likely to involve restrictions and 
barriers in the form of permits, visas or other costs and bureaucracy”.

Leading lawyers say the leave claims are not based in fact and the status quo 
is unlikely to continue, given that immigration was so central to the leave 
campaign. In reality the rights of EU citizens living in the UK are not 
guaranteed and will now be part of the negotiation withEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.

EU referendum live – Boris Johnson says 'no need for haste' over Brexit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/23/eu-referendum-result-live-counting-leave-remain-brain-in-europe>
“There is no cast-iron guarantee on acquired rights in the event Britain 
leaves the EU,” said Sionaidh Douglas-Scott, professor of law at Queen Mary 
University of London and an expert in European law. “If you leave the EU you 
are no longer a member of the club that gives you those rights.”

Acquired rights are likely to relate to the right to residence, to work, to 
run a business, to own a property, the right to access public services such as 
health and education, and the right to remain in a country after retirement.

The rights of EU immigrants will not change overnight but Nick Rollason, 
immigration partner at London law firm Kingsley Napley, believes an inevitable 
consequence will be that people will need new documentary evidence of their 
right to remain.

“When a potential employer asks for evidence of your right to live in the 
country, it won’t be enough just to show your passport,” said Rollason. “They 
will want proof.”

An Australian-style points system already exists for would-be immigrants from 
outside the European Economic Area and this could be applied to new applicants 
or even current residents.

The tier 2 visa system 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/migration-advisory-committee-reviews-of-tier-2>
 is the main route for visa applicants and operates on a points system similar 
to that of Australia, with salary, English-language fluency and other factors 
scored. After five years of continuous residency, visa holders can apply for 
the permanent right to remain in the country.

In practice proving continuous residency for five years is not 
straightforward. “If you’ve been made redundant, if you’ve had a sabbatical, 
had study leave or travelled, it can be difficult,” said Rollason.

For those who have been in the UK for more than 10 or even 20 years, applying 
for permanent leave to remain after Brexit could also be a challenge if 
paperwork such as P60s have not been kept.

Granting permission for EU nationals to stay will have to be supported in law 
and, Rollason believes, in practice with documentation required to demonstrate 
the right to work and settle in the UK.


For this reason, he believes EU citizens concerned about their rights in the 
UK should look at applying for a registration document.Lisa O’Carroll 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Feu-referendum-how-britain-voted-for-brexit-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20how%20Britain%20voted%20for%20Brexit%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Feu-referendum-how-britain-voted-for-brexit-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=EU%20referendum%3A%20how%20Britain%20voted%20for%20Brexit%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Feu-referendum-how-britain-voted-for-brexit-video&media=>
EU referendum: how Britain voted for Brexit – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jun/24/eu-referendum-how-britain-voted-for-brexit-video>
Britons living in the EU

For the 1.3 million Britons living in other European U countries, Thursday’s 
vote has ushered in a protracted period of uncertainty.

Dominic Grieve, a former attorney general, has argued 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/mar/18/dominic-grieve-brexit-2m-britons-abroad-illegal-immigrants-eu-echr>
 that British expats could in theory become illegal immigrants overnight if 
Britain does not maintain some form of freedom of movement as part of its 
settlement with the EU. But few see mass expulsions as a realistic possibility.

Some lawyers have argued that British expats living in the EU at the time of 
Brexit would have “acquired rights” under the 1969 Vienna convention on the law 
of treaties. Others, though, say these might not extend much beyond residency 
and property rights – and could well exclude rights to benefits, pensions and 
healthcare.

New arrivals might soon face stricter residency requirements, particularly if 
Britain imposes similar criteria on incoming EU nationals, and it is likely 
that existing expats, too, would at the very least face new administrative 
arrangements, possibly including residency and work permits, even higher 
property taxes.


EU to assess its future next week without UK, says Donald Tusk
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/europe-plunged-crisis-britain-votes-leave-eu-european-union>
In the near term, British people employed by foreign companies in an EU member 
state, who are paid in euros and covered by their host country’s social 
security probably have little to fear. But for those relying on UK revenues, 
the exchange rate is an obvious and immediate concern.

Many are also worried about the possible end of reciprocal healthcare 
arrangements, which give them free – or nearly free – treatment as EU citizens 
who have paid into a member state’s system.

In short, while there is no certainty as to what the future will hold, expats’ 
rights will no longer be guaranteed and will be subject to bilateral 
renegotiation.

Much will depend on what is politically realistic. Unilateral measures likely 
to cause major disruption or suffering are – given the 3 million EU citizens 
living in the UK – in no one’s interests.Jon Henley
 