

Even if you didn’t glimpse the BP-branded sea monster that invaded the British 
Museum during a protest in September 
<http://blueandgreentomorrow.com/energy/hundreds-bp-protesters-joined-30-foot-sea-monster-british-museum/>
, and managed to avoida naked man being slathered with oil at Tate Britain 
<http://www.tom-jeffreys.co.uk/art-not-oil/167>, you’re unlikely to have missed 
the bitter guerrilla war raging between Big Oil and sections of the art world.

For a while, it looked as if the protesters had the upper hand. In March, BP 
announced that, owing to an “extremely challenging business environment”, it 
wouldn’t be renewinga sponsorship deal with Tate 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-bp-britain-sponsorship-idUSKCN1081G0> that 
had been in place for 26 years. Activists promptly hailed this as a brilliant 
victory, and a parting of the ways with the Edinburgh international festival 
swiftly followed. But then in July, the company indicated that it wasn’t done 
yet, announcing that it wouldcontinue funding other leading institutions 
<http://energydesk.greenpeace.org/2016/07/28/bp-renews-corporate-sponsorship-deal-top-uk-arts-institutions/>
 to the tune of £7.5m over the next five years. Tate’s loss appears to be the 
Royal Shakespeare Company’s gain (or, given the politics, possibly it’s the 
other way around).

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Farts-sponsorship-big-oil-banks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7b172c677431426c1f99446f36d4238614b9f44%2F0_0_5144_3086%2F5144.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What's%20so%20bad%20about%20taking%20sponsorship%20money%20from%20Big%20Oil%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Farts-sponsorship-big-oil-banks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%27s%20so%20bad%20about%20taking%20sponsorship%20money%20from%20Big%20Oil%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Farts-sponsorship-big-oil-banks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7b172c677431426c1f99446f36d4238614b9f44%2F0_0_5144_3086%2F5144.jpg>
 A protest against BP sponsorship at Tate Britain in 2011. Photograph: Jeff 
Blackler/Rex/Shutterstock 
The controversy got so heated that, earlier in the summer, Arts Council 
England and campaigning group Index on Censorship produceda report 
<http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/advice-and-guidance-library/freedom-expression-guidance>
 advising organisations on how to head off “ethical and reputational” issues 
before they reached sea-monster-critical levels. (A parallel report advised 
organisations on how to coordinate with police forces, should things get really 
out of hand.)

BP sparks campaigners' fury with new arts sponsorship deals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/28/bp-sponsorship-arts-organisations-british-museum-national-portrait-gallery>
For some people who work in the arts, the issue is clear: oil companies are 
the enemy, and their support of cherished cultural institutions is a cynical 
attempt at “greenwashing”. Speaking in October, the actor Mark Rylance 
suggested that for BP to bankroll museums and galleries was merely a “
calculated advertising ploy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/02/mark-rylance-heads-list-of-artists-calling-for-end-to-bp-cultural-sponsorship>
”.

Making a Radio 4 documentary about the tangled issue of corporates and arts 
sponsorship, I’ve been struck by how the arguments are rarely straightforward. 
Oil money, for instance, is a tiny slice of the pie – that controversial Tate 
sponsorship amounted toan estimated 0.5% 
<http://energydesk.greenpeace.org/2016/07/28/bp-renews-corporate-sponsorship-deal-top-uk-arts-institutions/>
 of the organisation’s annual turnover. Is this evidence that such companies 
wield far more influence than they pay for – or that the issue has been blown 
out of all proportion?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Farts-sponsorship-big-oil-banks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb6b4e8a098b84e9bc31ec0b135096813d9ba2529%2F0_561_5576_3346%2F5576.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What's%20so%20bad%20about%20taking%20sponsorship%20money%20from%20Big%20Oil%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Farts-sponsorship-big-oil-banks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%27s%20so%20bad%20about%20taking%20sponsorship%20money%20from%20Big%20Oil%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Farts-sponsorship-big-oil-banks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb6b4e8a098b84e9bc31ec0b135096813d9ba2529%2F0_561_5576_3346%2F5576.jpg>
 The Royal Shakespeare Company has a new five-year deal with BP, alongside the 
British Museum, National Portrait Gallery and Royal Opera House. Photograph: 
Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Are arts organisations obliged to probe the bank accounts of individual 
donors? How clean does clean need to be?

Then there’s the fact that hard distinctions between “good” money and “bad” 
are often anything but. In terms of climate change, is being financed by a 
company that extracts oil worse than being financed by a car-maker, or even by 
people who drive or fly a lot? What about banks, which caused the financial 
crisis, or the big accountancy and consultancy firms that stood by and let 
them? Then there are all those foundations, whose money may be inherited from 
historically dubious sources – are they off limits? Are arts organisations 
obliged to probe the bank accounts of individual donors? In short, how clean 
does clean need to be?

Surely there’s a more overriding point: that if funding accomplishes some form 
of social good, that is in itself an argument for keeping it. A hard-headed 
question quickly follows: if oil companies stopped pumping money into the arts, 
where would that cash actually go? Isn’t it better that it helps to subsidise 
theatre tickets and enable museum loans rather than disappearing into the 
pockets of shareholders? In New York, I asked the director of the Metropolitan 
Opera,Peter Gelb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/oct/02/new-york-metroplitan-opera-house-peter-gelb>
, what his view was. He’d love to have such a problem, he sighed – most 
American energy companies regard opera as too highbrow by half. Few, if any, 
would come near it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Farts-sponsorship-big-oil-banks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29830da994c340fe5a552fa0d6e9d290a3c22266%2F0_0_6813_4547%2F6813.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What's%20so%20bad%20about%20taking%20sponsorship%20money%20from%20Big%20Oil%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Farts-sponsorship-big-oil-banks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%27s%20so%20bad%20about%20taking%20sponsorship%20money%20from%20Big%20Oil%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Farts-sponsorship-big-oil-banks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29830da994c340fe5a552fa0d6e9d290a3c22266%2F0_0_6813_4547%2F6813.jpg>
 The City of London … why shouldn’t bank profits go to museum loans rather than 
shareholders’ pockets? Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
One thing we can be sure of is that this funding controversy will only 
intensify. Government funding for UK arts organisations has been cut by nearly 
a third since 2010. According to an increasingly depressing series of reports 
by the research groupGPS <http://www.gpsculture.co.uk/>, the problem outside 
London is particularly acute, despite recent attempts by the Arts Council to 
rebalance things:public cultural spending is £4.91 a head per year outside 
London, £65.18 within 
<https://www.thestage.co.uk/news/2016/london-receives-twice-as-much-arts-funding-as-rest-of-england-report-claims/>
. Much though we might wait for Philip Hammond to take a leaf from the German 
government’s book and increase arts funding as a response to economic 
uncertainty, there seems more chance of Beckett’s Godot finally turning up. For 
those of us who care about the arts, corporate cash might be the best hope.

Perhaps there’s one thing we can learn from all this: we are long overdue a 
proper public debate, one that sees the issues from every side. Making the 
programme, I was surprised to learn that when three of thefour major 
organisations funded by BP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/28/bp-sponsorship-arts-organisations-british-museum-national-portrait-gallery>
 were approached, none would give us an on-the-record interview on the subject, 
and neither would Tate. As that Arts Council report recognises, too few 
institutions are transparent about the way they handle corporate funding, or 
how they police the ethical dilemmas that attend it. Decision-making is often 
murky, and accountability vague; those of us who love and support the arts 
aren’t invited to give our view, still less suggest how some of these problems 
should be solved. No one benefits from a culture of silence.

 * In Business: Corporates and the Arts is on Radio 4 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b006s609> on 22 December. 
 * This article was amended on 5 December 2016 to clarify that only three of 
the four major organisations funded by BP, as well as Tate, received a request 
for an interview at the time the documentary was made.
 