
Values. The eternal principles on which our sense of self depends. The moral 
code that runs through our character like words in a stick of rock. The 
standards of behaviour that have stood the test of time.

If that sounds like a crowd-pleasing conference speech, the kind politicians 
give to make party members go all misty-eyed, it certainly could be. It’s also 
a load of rubbish.

Think of how differently your great-grandparents, if they lived in Britain, 
looked at the world. Think of how a Victorian gentleman would have thought 
about morality, and Britain’s role as a global power. Go back another 300 
years. What was more important, freedom or virtue? Obedience before God or the 
right of every person to fulfil their potential? Equality or hierarchy?

British values are necessarily a work in progress. Defining them is in fact 
about setting out how we want to be now, or what we could achieve if we put our 
minds to it. They’re up for grabs, subject to change, very much part of 
politics.

The government has said that schoolchildren in England should be taught “
fundamental British values 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/jun/09/michael-gove-says-all-schools-must-promote-british-values-after-trojan-horse-reports>
” which it describes as “democracy, the rule of law, individual liberty, and 
mutual respect and tolerance of those with different faiths and beliefs”. And 
then there are hidden values – the ones we might not immediately perceive, but 
which govern our behaviour in important ways. I’ve made a little list, 
incomplete and up for debate. But let’s see how we score, and where there’s 
room for improvement.

Democracy
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fwhat-are-british-values-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e8b1d516b65fa180c8b7669e2aa092871587717%2F0_0_1840_1104%2F1840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20are%20British%20values%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20David%20Shariatmadari&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fwhat-are-british-values-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20are%20British%20values%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20David%20Shariatmadari&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fwhat-are-british-values-google%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e8b1d516b65fa180c8b7669e2aa092871587717%2F0_0_1840_1104%2F1840.jpg>
 ‘All-powerful monarch Charles I was executed. But he was replaced by a 
dictator, Oliver Cromwell.’ Rupert Everett as Charles I in Cromwell and 
Fairfax. Photograph: PA 
Can we afford to be a bit smug here? Our parliament was a power to be reckoned 
with earlier than many others. In the 17th century, England became one of the 
first European nations to undergo a republican revolution. MPs clashed with the 
crown and the country descended into civil war. All-powerful monarch Charles I 
was executed. But he was replaced by a dictator, Oliver Cromwell. Parliamentary 
government became the norm from the 18th century onwards. At first, only 
landowners could vote to return representatives to parliament. Thefranchise was 
extended 
<http://www.parliament.uk/about/living-heritage/transformingsociety/electionsvoting/chartists/keydates/>
 to all men over 21 and to women over 30 in 1918 and to women over 21 in 1928. 
But democracy is in trouble: turnout in general elections is nowabout 65% of 
registered voters <http://www.ukpolitical.info/Turnout45.htm>. Because of our 
electoral system, parties (like today’s Conservatives) can win and govern alone 
on the votes of less than a quarter of the electorate.Political education 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/01/young-people-vote-political-education>
 could boost these figures. Andproportional representation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/pr> would be fairer, but might give 
fringe parties undue influence.

Living our values score: 7/10

How to do better: Get out the vote

Free speech
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fwhat-are-british-values-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91432b0e2799c8cf7f3403399aaf3209a35f0017%2F0_69_3637_2183%2F3637.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20are%20British%20values%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20David%20Shariatmadari&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fwhat-are-british-values-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20are%20British%20values%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20David%20Shariatmadari&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fwhat-are-british-values-google%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91432b0e2799c8cf7f3403399aaf3209a35f0017%2F0_69_3637_2183%2F3637.jpg>
 ‘We have always lived with taboos and no-go areas – they are what regulate and 
define our culture.’ An 1829 cartoon by William Heath depicts British prime 
minister Arthur Wellesley running the gauntlet of a protestant mob crying ‘no 
popery’. Photograph: Hulton Archive/Getty Images 
Here’s an interesting thing. Free speech is often touted as an Anglo-Saxon 
value (see thefirst amendment to the US constitution 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/First_Amendment_to_the_United_States_Constitution>
). It’s also said to be under threat. Political correctness and 
hypersensitivity to offence are its enemies. A golden age offree speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/freedom-of-speech> is slipping away from us. 
The idea that people should be allowed to publish the widest possible range of 
views, with bad ones exposed to public scrutiny and the contempt they deserve, 
is an excellent rule of thumb. That’s the position set out inJohn Milton’s 
English classic Aeropagitica <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Areopagitica>. 
What’s often forgotten is that Milton thought some views were beyond the pale 
and shouldn’t be tolerated. “Popery” for example. In other words, being 
Catholic. We have always lived with taboos and no-go areas – they are what 
regulate and define our culture. Rather than expecting these to disappear 
completely, which is unrealistic, shouldn’t we try to make our taboos reflect 
contemporary values, rather than those of a more discriminatory and 
hierarchical past? Not so long ago, it was difficult if not illegal to talk or 
write about many aspects of human sexuality, to criticise the monarchy, the 
Church of England or the army. I’d be happier with a climate in which it’s 
harder to insult people because they’re Jewish, female, black or gay.

Living our values score: 7/10

How to do better: Don’t be evil

Property
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fwhat-are-british-values-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a2dfb1484bbfa98a35bc67c0dfb7fa7b41d3a18%2F0_0_3579_2149%2F3579.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20are%20British%20values%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20David%20Shariatmadari&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fwhat-are-british-values-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20are%20British%20values%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20David%20Shariatmadari&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fwhat-are-british-values-google%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a2dfb1484bbfa98a35bc67c0dfb7fa7b41d3a18%2F0_0_3579_2149%2F3579.jpg>
 ‘Property rights would probably jump out as something the British value with 
unusual consistency.’ Christmas lights in Melksham. Photograph: Matt 
Cardy/Getty Images 
If a Martian were to cast an eye over the great sweep of British history, 
property rights would probably jump out as something the British value with 
unusual consistency.Magna Carta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/magna-carta>, in 1215, sought to ensure 
that property couldn’t be randomly expropriated by the crown. The rule of law 
that governs our lives emerged as a framework to protect life and property. At 
times Britons have extended the concept to encompass territories inhabited by 
other peoples and the ownership of human beings. That was despicable. But 
property isn’t in and of itself a bad thing. Most of us want to own things. It 
would just be nice if they were spread around a bit more evenly.

Living our values score: 4/10

How to do better: Give everyone a fairer share

Tolerance
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fwhat-are-british-values-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffcca73b18a90dc249920feaae35ac5792f0e6720%2F0_241_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20are%20British%20values%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20David%20Shariatmadari&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fwhat-are-british-values-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20are%20British%20values%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20David%20Shariatmadari&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fwhat-are-british-values-google%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffcca73b18a90dc249920feaae35ac5792f0e6720%2F0_241_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 ‘We’re not above scapegoating people on the basis of their appearance or 
background.’ An EDL rally against a Slough mosque. Photograph: Peter 
Marshall/Demotix/Corbis 
I find it a bit vertigo-inducing when Conservative politicians, many of whose 
colleagues voted forsection 28 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2000/jul/25/qanda.rostaylor>, deploy 
language suggesting that Muslims aren’t supportive enough of gay rights. I 
suppose these rapid about-turns serve to underline my point about the fluidity 
of values. We should be grateful that a party whose members delayed the repeal 
of anti-gay legislation until 2003 has arrived at a more enlightened position. 
What’s the British record on toleration more generally? Jewish people were
expelled from England in 1290 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2000/oct/01/jasonburke.theobserver>, but 
welcomed back in 1656 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/religion/religions/judaism/history/350.shtml>. After the 
Reformation, protestants from across Europe, like the French Huguenots, were 
given safe harbour in English cities. On the other hand, for a long time – 
several hundred years – it was very difficult to bean “out” Catholic 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anti-Catholicism_in_the_United_Kingdom>. Laws 
excluded this religious minority from public office. In1780 there were riots 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gordon_Riots> against them in London. To this 
day, it’s illegal for the head of state to be Catholic.

Britain is currently a multifaith, multi-ethnic nation, with a high rate of 
ethnically mixed relationships. We’re also a “permissive society” thanks to 
liberal legislation introduced since the 1960s. We’re not, however, above 
scapegoating people on the basis of their appearance or background. In the 
current climate, Muslims appear to be bearing the brunt of our 
difficult-to-shake habit of intolerance.

Living our values score: 6/10

How to do better: Tackle Islamophobia

Institution building
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fwhat-are-british-values-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F471e1a4c8774efcc7a3511571b8d989327f1b1d2%2F0_0_5300_3180%2F5300.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20are%20British%20values%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20David%20Shariatmadari&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fwhat-are-british-values-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20are%20British%20values%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20David%20Shariatmadari&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fwhat-are-british-values-google%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F471e1a4c8774efcc7a3511571b8d989327f1b1d2%2F0_0_5300_3180%2F5300.jpg>
 ‘The British Museum <http://www.theguardian.com/culture/british-museum>, which 
has collected the best of what human civilisation has to offer – not without 
controversy – is now open to the world for free.’ Photograph: Alamy 
This sounds boring. But it’s something we can be truly proud of. Elsewhere 
institutions provoke fear, contempt or frustration. Officials get in the way, 
demand bribes or unreasonable payments, throw up obstacles to creativity or 
make life difficult for minority groups. Britain’s institutions have their fair 
share of problems. But they’re better than most. TheBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> is a major national asset. Its 
journalism is meticulous and independent, a genuine global good. Our 
universities have a long history of making life better in all sorts of ways.The 
British Museum <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/british-museum>, which has 
collected the best of what human civilisation has to offer – not without 
controversy – is now open to the world for free. The NHS is, despite 
everything, a beacon of fairness and excellence in a world where, most of the 
time, your good health depends on how much money you have. It’s too easy, 
living among these institutions, to forget how unusual they are. We should 
cherish them.

Living our values score: 9/10

How to do better: Don’t take anything for granted

Eccentricity
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fwhat-are-british-values-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7719bdd3f6a27963c2310f339779c67c4719a407%2F0_0_2832_1701%2F2832.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20are%20British%20values%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20David%20Shariatmadari&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fwhat-are-british-values-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20are%20British%20values%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20David%20Shariatmadari&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fwhat-are-british-values-google%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7719bdd3f6a27963c2310f339779c67c4719a407%2F0_0_2832_1701%2F2832.jpg>
 ‘Rather than encouraging them to conform, we celebrate their absurdity.’ 
Vivienne Westwood and Stuart Goddard aka Adam Ant at Malcolm McLaren’s funeral 
in London, 2010. Photograph: REX 
A stock character in the annals of national stereotype is the “English” 
eccentric. Obviously no one told eminent Scottish poetWilliam McGonagall 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_McGonagall>, author of the Tay Bridge 
Disaster and those immortal lines: “your central girders would not have given 
way, At least many sensible men do say, Had they been supported on each side 
with buttresses, At least many sensible men confesses”. OrWelsh eccentric 
William Price <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_Price_(physician)>, 
archdruid and founder of theCremation Society of Great Britain 
<http://www.cremation.org.uk/>. Britons can be pretty weird. And yet, rather 
than encouraging them to conform, we celebrate their absurdity. Just look at 
punk grand dame Vivienne Westwood, music alien David Bowie or stately homo 
Quentin Crisp. Some of our best eccentrics were nurtured by free education and 
a generous dole. Who can afford to be an oddball now?

Living our values score: 8/10

How to do better: Bring back dropping out

Comedy
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fwhat-are-british-values-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F965f5cdb40fe8c9f1a6152da3e0c710b0d923953%2F0_0_708_426%2F708.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20are%20British%20values%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20David%20Shariatmadari&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fwhat-are-british-values-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20are%20British%20values%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20David%20Shariatmadari&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fwhat-are-british-values-google%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F965f5cdb40fe8c9f1a6152da3e0c710b0d923953%2F0_0_708_426%2F708.jpg>
 ‘We definitely are good at making people laugh.’ Rob Delaney and Sharon Horgan 
in Catastrophe. Photograph: Paul Thompson/Channel 4 
British humour! It’s the envy of the world. Well, unless you count situation 
comedy. Who’d rather watchMy Family 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2011/mar/25/my-family-robert-lindsay>
 thanUnbreakable Kimmy Schmidt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/mar/10/unbreakable-kimmy-schmidt-tina-fey-triumphs-again>
?Miranda <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/miranda> than Arrested 
Development <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/arrested-development>? 
I’m just kidding, because we definitely are good at making people laugh. 
Chaucer got in there early, Shakespeare was a dab hand when he wasn’t strewing 
the stage with corpses, Jonathan Swift did all right too. From Gilbert and 
Sullivan to music hall to pantomime, we kept the tradition going through the 
19th and early 20th centuries. After the dark days of the second world war came 
the satire boom. The best kind of boom, I think you’ll agree. No one gets hurt, 
just deflated. And then there was the alternative scene,Spitting Image 
<https://www.theguardian.com/arts/pictures/0,,1444231,00.html>, Whose Line is 
It Anyway? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jun/23/whose-line-is-it-anyway-live-review-clive-anderson-josie-lawrence>
. Now we have Peep Show <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/peep-show> and
Catastrophe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/jan/27/catastrophe-a-proper-romcom-that-is>
. British comedy is brilliant.

Living our values score: 9/10

How to do better: Remember there’s more to life than Monty Python
 