
Messaging services such as WhatsApp, Facebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> Messenger and Gmail will face 
tough new rules on the tracking of users under a revision to the ePrivacy 
Directive proposed by the European Commission on Tuesday.


The new legislation seeks to reinforce the right to privacy and control of 
data for European citizens, with messaging, email and voice services – such as 
those provided by Facebook, Google andMicrosoft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/microsoft> – forced to guarantee the 
confidentiality of conversations and metadata around the time, place and other 
factors of those conversations.

Listening to, tapping, intercepting, scanning or the storing of communications 
will not be allowed without the consent of the user, unless it is critical for 
billing or other purposes. Companies will have to ask for the explicit consent 
of users before being able to use their data for advertising purposes, which 
most use to fund services provided for free to end-users.

Andrus Ansip, vice-president for the digital single market said: “Our 
proposals will deliver the trust in the Digital Single Market that people 
expect. I want to ensure confidentiality of electronic communications and 
privacy. Our draft ePrivacy Regulation strikes the right balance: it provides a 
high level of protection for consumers, while allowing businesses to innovate.”

The rules governing the placing and use of cookies, which currently require 
consent for all purposes and has led to acookie warning  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/mar/19/cookies-how-to-avoid-being-tracked-online>
appearing on a site when visiting for the first time, are being simplified. The 
EC hopes to remove the overload of cookie warnings.

Cookies required for the operation of an internet experience that do not 
impact on privacy, such as items in an online shopping cart, will no longer 
require consent, nor will cookies used to analyse visitor numbers. But “privacy 
intrusive” cookies will still require consent before being placed on a user’s 
machine.

The proposals also ban unsolicited and nonconsensual electronic communication, 
and will require marketing calls to display their phone number or use a special 
prefix only for marketing calls.

Companies falling foul of the new laws will face fines of up to 4% of their 
global turnover, in line with the separate General Data Protection Regulation 
(GDPR) set to be applied in 2018.

MEP and former vice-president of the European Commission, Viviane Reding, 
welcomed the proposal but warned that scrutiny of the exemptions regarding 
metadata and content was required. She said: “I salute the extension of the 
scope to over-the-top services such asWhatsApp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/whatsapp>, the recognition of the 
general principles of confidentiality and prior consent, and the many consumer 
safeguards regarding unsolicited direct marketing communications and spam.”

The EC’s proposal looks to close the perceived regulation gap between 
traditional telecoms companies and predominantly US-based internet 
communications companies. It extends some of the rules governing telecoms 
operators to so-calledover-the-top 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Over-the-top_content> services, while also 
allowing telecom companies to use customer metadata – such as the duration and 
location of calls – to provide additional services and make more money, 
something they are barred from doing under the current rules.

The telecoms industry said the proposals were still stricter for them than web 
companies. Lise Fuhr, director general of the European telecoms lobby ETNO 
said: “Unlike others, telcos risk being prevented from expanding consumer 
choice by using traffic and location data for big data analytics, Internet of 
Things and connected driving services.”

Online advertisers also warned that overly strict rules would undermine the 
ability of many websites to fund themselves and offer free services. Yves 
Schwarzbart, head of policy and regulatory affairs at the Internet Advertising 
Bureau, said: “It will particularly hit those companies that … find it most 
difficult to talk directly to end users and what I mean by that is tech 
companies that operate in the background and facilitate the buying and selling 
of advertising, rather than the ones that the user directly engages with.”

Online advertising generates £10bn ($12bn) of revenue for publishers and 
content creators in the UK alone, according to the IAB.

The proposal requires approval from the European Parliament and member states 
before becoming law,. It is set to join the much needed update to data 
protectionvoted through under the GDPR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/14/european-parliament-approve-tougher-data-privacy-rules>
, which will apply to the UK from 25 May 2018, despite the Brexit process.

 * European parliament approves tougher data privacy rules 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/14/european-parliament-approve-tougher-data-privacy-rules>

 * EU charges Facebook with giving ‘misleading’ information over WhatsApp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/20/eu-facebook-misleading-information-whatsapp> 