
“Before Christmas I went to watch my team, Witton Albion, play Chester FC in 
the FA Trophy,” writes Stephen Yoxall. “We were awarded a penalty after six 
seconds when Tolani Omotola was fouled by Blaine Hudson. Is this the fastest 
penalty awarded in football history?Highlights of the game are here 
<https://youtu.be/eKqpfcCuHpQ>, and the incident, from kick-off to penalty, 
starts about a minute in.”

First things first: here’s what happened 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3vJvtFmsV0E> in the FA Trophy first-round tie 
on 13 December. Witton’s penalty, awarded after just 6.18 seconds (and, was 
saved, but Bradley Bauress followed up his own spot-kick to score the rebound. 
Omotola was then sent off later in the first half, before Hudson – probably 
fortunate to avoid a dismissal with the initial penalty – belatedly picked up a 
second booking during the second period. Witton’s coach Paul Moore was later 
sent to the stands, before the visitors’ Matthew Devine gave away a late 
penalty, which earned him a red card, and Chester an equaliser. And then the 
nine men were beaten when Chester’s Elliott Durrell grabbed an injury-time 
winner.

When footballers on loan score against their own clubs | The Knowledge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/when-footballers-on-loan-score-against-their-own-clubs>
“The madness that can happen in cup games, happened,” sighed Chester FC’s 
manager Jon McCarthy afterwards 
<http://www.chesterchronicle.co.uk/sport/football/football-news/the-ref-another-planet-reaction-12317583>
. “We’ve had the referee before, he’s all right, but it was like the game was 
out of control. Both sets of players and managers need to take responsibility 
for that, as well as the referee, and it created for a chaotic night … Was it 
like it like the football equivalent of Fawlty Towers? It was all 12 in one!”


We’ve been unable to find a quicker penalty awarded, but here are some other 
noteworthy incidents, in descending order:

13 seconds – Columbus Crew v Chicago Fire (Jul 2015). Sean Johnson catches 
Ethan Finlay. Federico (brother of Gonzalo) Higuaín scores from the spot in a 
3-1 win.

13 seconds – Valladolid v Celta Vigo (Mar 2001). Fernando Fernández scores 
after Celta defender Fernando Caceres hauled down Alberto Lopez, but the 
visitors came back to win 2-1.

11 seconds – Macclesfield v Wrexham (Nov 2013). The visitors’ goalkeeper Andy 
Coughlin brings down Connor Jennings,who steps up himself to score 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3eq6y2mCCFE>. The Silkmen win 3-2 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/football/24681656>. Wrexham player-manager Andy 
Morrell: “I don’t think it’s a pen. I think he [Coughlin] got the ball but that 
a horrendous start for us.”

10 seconds – Montenegro v Ghana (Mar 2014). The Ghanaian defender David Addy 
slides in on Filip Kasalica from outside the area –contact is made just inside 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Va_YmMI_RQw>. Dejan Damjanovic converts the 
only goal of the game.

9 seconds – Steaua Bucharest v Dinamo (Nov 2016). Dinamo keeper Jaime Penedo 
clatters midfielder William De Amorim 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bTp8SapauME>. Fernando Boldrin scores, but 
Dinamo come back to win 3-1.

8 seconds – Heerenveen v SC Cambuur (Nov 2014). Leonard Nienhuis sends 
Heerenveen’s Mark Uth flying –Uth gets up to score 
<https://rutube.ru/video/e7d3e13d4ee1d8290f72bd83c8ba8270/>. It finishes 2-2.

8 seconds – Hamburg v Paderborn (Feb 2015). Marcell Jansen is scythed down by 
Patrick Ziegler <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qqiwpcU-tPY>. Rafael van der 
Vaart converts as Hamburg win 3-0.

‘Less than 10 seconds’ – Ängelholm v AIK (July 2010). As documented by Stuart 
Fuller here 
<https://theballisround.co.uk/2010/07/06/the-quickest-penalty-of-all-time/>.

We thought we’d check in with the record books and a kind spokesperson at 
Guinness World Records had this to say: “This isn’t something we currently have 
a record for but is something we would monitor, however the FA Trophy – which 
was the competition this was achieved in – would not qualify as the level of 
play falls below our requirements for professional standardisable sport. 
Unfortunately for records directly involving performance in competitive play, 
we must only accept those which occur at a top-level professional, 
international, or pre-eminent amateur (ie Olympics) level due to the various 
differences in competitions from country to country. As the FA Trophy covers 
teams from below the Football League, of which the majority are 
semi-professional, we’re unable to standardise the level of play when comparing 
to other leagues and cups across the world.”

Still, it’s well, well worth your time 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3vJvtFmsV0E> …
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3vJvtFmsV0E&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3vJvtFmsV0E>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3vJvtFmsV0E&media=>
 Witton Albion’s speedy strike at Chester FC. 
Total domination, team v team


“Having learned that Ireland had never won a game of rugby union against New 
Zealand in more than 100 years of competitive fixtures, I was set to wondering 
whether there was a similar relationship between teams in football,” writes 
Owen Thomas.“Which pair of teams have competed in the most matches or for the 
longest time, with one of them having failed to ever win?”

“Dundee United have played Barcelona four times in competitive football and 
have won all four,” cheers Jamie Watt, before posing a question of his own: 
“Does this make them the most successful club to play against Barça, for a team 
having played them multiple times?”

And Kári Tulinius got in touch too: “Iceland’s first ever international 
fixture was in 1946 against Denmark, which the former colonial overlord won,” 
writes Kári. “That set the pattern for the next 70 years (at the very least). 
The two national teams have played 23 times, Denmark triumphing 19 times,
including once 14-2 
<http://www.11v11.com/matches/denmark-v-iceland-23-august-1967-229939/>. The 
other four games were draws. This might just be the world record in 
international football, but at least Iceland got to go to the Euros last year 
while Denmark sat it out.”

Here’s that 14-2 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MjVfbING0pw>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMjVfbING0pw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMjVfbING0pw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMjVfbING0pw&media=>
When a league table got the hump

“Looking at the top of the Scottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership/table>, it occurred 
to me that if St Johnstone could just get their act together and climb above 
Hearts, the initial letters of the first five teams would spell an actual word, 
‘crash’,” points out Alistair Murdoch. “It got me wondering whether anyone out 
there has spotted any interesting words formed by the initial letters of teams 
in sequence in a league table (whether at the top or anywhere in the middle).”

“I very much enjoyed the 2004-2005 season when a ‘camel’ finished top of the 
Premier League,” emails Arlindo Camacho. “Chelsea, Arsenal, Manchester United, 
Everton and then Liverpool. Before the latest round of games (if we’re 
referring to Tottenham as Spurs) we had ‘clams’. Yup. Great days.”

Any more for any more? You know how to get in touch 
<mailto:knowledge@theguardian.com>.

Knowledge archive

“My club, non-league side Guildford City, have just completed what I think may 
be a unique, albeit unwanted, record,”wrote Matt Howell in 2001 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/apr/13/king-olav-crystal-palace-the-knowledge>
.“Have there been any other instances within senior football of two brothers 
being sent off for the same club during the same season while playing in the 
same position? Regular goalkeeper Antony Hall was dismissed last weekend, 
further to the sending off of his brother Michael during a cup match earlier in 
the season. It was Antony himself who suggested this might be a record and I’d 
be interested to see if he’s correct.”

The Hall boys have some company, courtesy of Manchester United. “Fábio da 
Silva was sent off in a League Cup match against Wolves for a professional foul 
on Michael Kightly during the 2009-10 season,” wrote Tim Hill. “In the same 
season his brother (and twin) Rafael was also red carded while playing against 
Bayern Munich in the Champions League quarter-final.”

 * For thousands more questions and answers take a trip through the Knowledge 
archive <https://www.theguardian.com/football/series/theknowledge>. 
Can you help?

“Has there ever been a substitution in a live commentary before?” wonders Ben 
Manchester. “Not just a pundit being changed because he has to be somewhere 
else, but a commentator losing his voice after a particularly vocal goal shout? 
Or a bout of hiccups?”

The Premier League's 1950s-born players and football grounds named after 
sports | The Knowledge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/07/the-knowledge-premier-league-1950s-born-player>
“Ryan Giggs didn’t take a penalty for Manchester United (excluding shootouts) 
until scoring two against Tottenham in 2010 aged 36,” notes Mike Coxon. “This 
seems staggering given the amount of games he played for the club (and even 
more so when you consider that he went on to take quite a few more and never 
missed – think of the amount of goals he could have scored if he’d taken them 
since 1991), but is there any player who has taken their first penalty (either 
for their club or in their career) later?”

“If York stay 24th in the National League, would they be the first pro club to 
be finish bottom of the table and be relegated for two consecutive seasons?” 
wonders Jim Waterson. “Obviously loads of clubs have been relegated in 
consecutive seasons but absolute last place twice is impressive.”

“The MLS Cup final on 10 December was played in -4 degree weather. Was this 
the coldest cup final ever played?” ponders Chris Corrigan.

“I know it’s a standard for national teams to take three goalkeepers to an 
international tournament in their squad,” begins Antony Collins. “I was 
wondering if there has even been an occasion when all of a squad’s goalkeepers 
have been injured, suspended or otherwise ineligible and a team has had to 
start a match with an outfield player in goal for an international tournament 
game?”

 * Send your questions and answers to knowledge@theguardian.com 
<mailto:knowledge@theguardian.com> or tweet @TheKnowledge_GU 
<https://twitter.com/theknowledge_gu>.  