
The last year was a tumultuous one for the housing sector 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/dec/20/affordable-housing-2016-brexit>
, with the controversialHousing and Planning Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/aug/08/housing-planning-act-attack-local-government>
 passed, but an unexpected change of prime minister meant some changes in 
direction for housing policy.

With Brexit on the horizon and the possibility that Britain is heading for 
choppy fiscal waters, our expert panel give their predictions, concerns and 
hopes for the year ahead, including legal trends, homelessness, housing supply 
and how housing associations can adapt, rather than die.

Young people at risk of homelessness
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhousing-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2F2017-predictions-social-housing-policy-affordable-homes-homelessness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F781d970dc91b180edf77598997065a9651f5d3f0%2F373_83_1508_1508%2F1508.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20does%202017%20hold%20for%20social%20housing%3F%20We%20ask%20the%20experts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhousing-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2F2017-predictions-social-housing-policy-affordable-homes-homelessness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20does%202017%20hold%20for%20social%20housing%3F%20We%20ask%20the%20experts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhousing-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2F2017-predictions-social-housing-policy-affordable-homes-homelessness%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F781d970dc91b180edf77598997065a9651f5d3f0%2F373_83_1508_1508%2F1508.jpg>
 Jenny Barnes. Photograph: Jenny Barnes 
We’re really concerned by the proposed removal of the automatic entitlement to 
housing benefit for certain 18- to 21-year olds. The government has committed 
to protect those for whom it is inappropriate to live in the family home, but 
has provided alarmingly little detail on how it intends to assess this 
criteria. It’s very difficult to gather evidence on such a sensitive subject – 
which parents will admit that they cannot house their own child? Yet for many 
young people, staying at home simply isn’t an option. For them, housing benefit 
is a lifeline, not a lifestyle choice. It is vital that no young person is 
denied the support that they need. We urge the government in 2017 to finally 
clarify how it is going to ensure that those who cannot stay in the family home 
will not be at risk of losing this support.

Not knowing where to turn can be a huge obstacle to vulnerable young people 
getting the help they need to find a safe place to stay. Research we 
commissioned showed that 56% of young people wouldn’t know what help and 
support they were entitled to if they were at risk of homelessness.

In February 2017 Centrepoint will launch the Centrepoint Helpline – the first 
single national support service for young people who are, or could become, 
homeless, and who need advice. The helpline will transform the way in which 
young people in desperate need can find help, as well as the longer term 
healthcare and housing support that they need to turn their lives around.

Jenny Barnes, head of policy and research, youth homelessness charity 
Centrepoint

Homelessness
 Jon Sparkes. Photograph: Sam Mellish 
 The homelessness reduction bill passed its second reading in the House of 
Commons late in 2016could be made law in early 2017. This would transform the 
way people across England are protected from homelessness. However, it could 
still be blocked. So, I’d urge anyone who wants to support the bill to sign up 
to our No One Turned Away campaign.

 In j2017, Crisis will mark its 50th anniversary year. It’s shocking that we 
still need to be here after 50 years, and during 2017 we will be bringing 
together a plan to end homelessness in this country once and for all.

With rising homelessness, a chronic lack of truly affordable housing and deep 
cuts to benefits and the services people need this will be no small task and we 
cannot succeed alone. We hope to bring together campaigners, other 
organisations, local and national government to make this happen together.

Jon Sparkes, chief executive of homelessness charity, Crisis

Housing associations face more risk
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhousing-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2F2017-predictions-social-housing-policy-affordable-homes-homelessness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc378c4da521de15ffa2a872987d93081aeaae29c%2F1343_101_1788_1788%2F1788.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20does%202017%20hold%20for%20social%20housing%3F%20We%20ask%20the%20experts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhousing-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2F2017-predictions-social-housing-policy-affordable-homes-homelessness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20does%202017%20hold%20for%20social%20housing%3F%20We%20ask%20the%20experts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhousing-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2F2017-predictions-social-housing-policy-affordable-homes-homelessness%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc378c4da521de15ffa2a872987d93081aeaae29c%2F1343_101_1788_1788%2F1788.jpg>
 Tom Murtha. Photograph: Tom Murtha 
We are told that housing associations are positive about 2017 and are gearing 
up for their most ambitious year yet and this year should see the sector 
produce more homes of all types for the government.

But this will also create more risk for some housing associations. We could 
witness the first major financial failure for some years. Even with the 
government’s small move away from its obsession with ownership, how many of the 
new homes will be genuinely affordable to those on low/no incomes? London 
appears to be moving towards producing some social rent homes but there is 
little evidence to suggest this is happening elsewhere. In 2016, we saw another 
net reduction in social rent homes, and lettings in this category has reduced 
by over 20,000 in two years.

A housing white paper is promised and I would be the first to welcome it if it 
provided enough investment in social rent homes to turn the tide.

Maybe the new giant associations will use their huge assets and profits to 
provide a solution. Perhaps the future lies in off site manufacturing which 
could reduce building costs. The news of a partnership with China looks 
promising but it is early days. Maybe India has the answer in the form of an 
entrepreneur who wants to build new cities in the UK and elsewhere.

One thing is clear, unless we see significant growth in social rent homes the 
housing crisis for many will get worse. By Christmas 2017 we will see more 
homeless people on the streets and more people living in poor housing paying 
rents they cannot afford leading to a further increase in poverty and 
inequality.

Tom Murtha, social housing campaigner

Housing law
 Giles Peaker. Photograph: Giles Peaker 
The homelessness reduction bill will pass, albeit in watered down form from 
the original conception, as councils fight a rearguard action to avoid having 
to treat people as homeless before a possession order is made. Funding of 
extended advice and assistance duties will be an issue, despite government 
assurances.

The reduced benefit cap will see a significant increase in people made 
homeless from private sector and even social rented accommodation nationally. 
The discretionary housing payment funds will be increasingly directed to 
dealing with the benefit cap to the exclusion of other welfare reform issues 
such as the bedroom tax. The reduced benefit cap will cause a fresh crisis in 
provision of temporary accommodation for homeless households, particularly 
though not exclusively in London.

Early on in the year, the court of appeal will deliver its first judgment on 
the meaning of “significantly more vulnerable” for priority need for childless 
homeless households. This will not end litigation on the issue. Despite the 
housing minister committing to a review of leasehold issues, leasehold reform 
will not happen.

Giles Peaker, partner at Anthony Gold Solicitors 

Policy change
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhousing-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2F2017-predictions-social-housing-policy-affordable-homes-homelessness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd383de1cd8ef72fa69b24ac0f41c95cb5b347047%2F283_72_1001_1001%2F1001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20does%202017%20hold%20for%20social%20housing%3F%20We%20ask%20the%20experts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhousing-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2F2017-predictions-social-housing-policy-affordable-homes-homelessness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20does%202017%20hold%20for%20social%20housing%3F%20We%20ask%20the%20experts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhousing-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2F2017-predictions-social-housing-policy-affordable-homes-homelessness%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd383de1cd8ef72fa69b24ac0f41c95cb5b347047%2F283_72_1001_1001%2F1001.jpg>
 James Caspell. Photograph: James Caspell 
 The recent reversals on pay to stay and high value voids are a false dawn. 
Ideologically the current government does not believe that social housing 
should provide the solution to the housing crisis, despite there being an 
overwhelming economic and ethical case for it, as part of a multi-tenure 
increase in supply.

However, once Article 50 is triggered there will be even less capacity for at 
least the next couple of years for civil servants to deliver policy changes 
that are only ideological. More positively, there is a real opportunity for the 
sector to step up and deliver solutions in the uncertain climate of Brexit.

One way a housing organisation will be able to thrive in the next four years 
is by diversifying its tenure mix from a commercial perspective, looking at 
innovative approaches, such as modular housing, while reducing overheads 
through agile working and technology.

We could also expect to see some moves made to improve regulation of the very 
worst private landlords, as more and more people of all ages are forced to live 
with the current uncertainty of the private rented sector.

James Caspell, head of business improvement and performance at Sutton Housing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/housing> Partnership

Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/housing/> for your free Guardian 
Housing network newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to you on the 
last Friday of the month. Follow us:@GuardianHousing 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>
 