
As the man who drafted it has said 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-britain-eu-amato-idUSKCN1012Q8>, the EU’s 
divorce clause was never meant to be triggered: article 50 was inserted into 
the Lisbon treaty purely to silence British complaints that there was no 
official way out of the union.


So there is a certain irony in Britain now becoming the first European Union 
member state to formally begin the two-year leaving process, after Theresa May 
said Brexit would finally startby the end of March 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/01/theresa-may-to-propose-great-repeal-bill-to-unwind-eu-laws>
.

What will happen now? 

With the start date now known, albeit approximately, British efforts will 
redouble to open informal talks before official negotiations begin – despite 
Brussels’s repeated insistence on “no negotiation without notification”.

David Davis’s Brexit ministry, expected soon to number as many as 500 staff, 
and the government’s legal department will bear the brunt of extracting Britain 
from the bloc and defining its future relationship. The key question they must 
resolve – and still a source of conflict within the government – remains 
whether the UK will push for enhanced access to the single market.

That, Brussels and other EU capitals have repeatedly insisted, can only come 
at the price of free movement for European migrant workers, an acceptance of 
the single market’s rules and regulations, and a contribution to Brussels’s 
budget.

DExEU 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-for-exiting-the-european-union>
, Davis’s department, will model different “soft” and “hard” Brexit scenarios 
and their impact on dozens of sectors of the UK economy, help define the 
cabinet’s preferred Brexit target, and draw up negotiating priorities: what 
does Britain want, what can it not do without, what might it be prepared to 
sacrifice.

Both DExEU and the government’s legal department will also now begin work on 
the act that will repeal the 1972 European Communities Act – the law that binds 
EU law to the British statute book – and new legislation to transpose EU 
legislation into British law in its entirety.

May says she will trigger article 50, starting EU withdrawal, before end of 
March - Politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/oct/02/conservative-conference-may-to-explain-brexit-great-repeal-bill-in-marr-interview-politics-live>
The bill, announced by May on Saturday night, will be brought forward in the 
next parliamentary session. It will take effect on the day Britain leaves the 
EU, now set at no later than the end of March 2019, with future governments 
able to unpick EU-derived laws as desired.

Much of all this work will plainly need to be completed before article 50 is 
triggered, at which point the two-year clock starts ticking. Liam Fox’s 
international trade department, meanwhile, is to focus primarily on exploring 
new trade deals with non-EU countries (none of which can be signed before 
Britain has left).

The long goodbye

As far as the exit process then goes, article 50 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/25/article-50-brexit-debate-britain-eu>
 lays down the basic steps. The very first – a significant potential obstacle – 
states that the decision to leave has to have been taken in accordance with 
Britain’s “own constitutional requirements”.

That is one reason why nothing can happen before next year: several cases are 
currently before the courts arguing that the government does not have the power 
to invoke article 50 without parliament’s approval. The issue is likely to move 
swiftly to the supreme court, which will be under pressure to deliver a final 
judgment by Christmas.

Assuming that hurdle is cleared, article 50 says the leaving state must notify 
the European council – made up of the 28 heads of government, the council 
president, Donald Tusk, and the European commission president,Jean-Claude 
Juncker <https://www.theguardian.com/world/jean-claude-juncker> – of its 
intention. This could be in the form of a letter, or a formal statement at a 
council meeting; the first full European council meeting of 2017 is on 9-10 
March.

Article 50 <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/article-50> then states: “In 
the light of the guidelines provided by the European council, [the EU] shall 
negotiate and conclude an agreement with the state, setting out the 
arrangements for its withdrawal, taking account of the framework for its future 
relationship with the union.”

Hard Brexit will breed new bigotry, warns former Tory minister
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/01/hard-brexit-new-bigotry-warns-nicky-morgan>
As Steve Peers, professor of EU law at the university of Essex, points out 
<https://fullfact.org/europe/how-eu-works-leaving-eu/>, article 50 goes on to 
define three distinct stages of that withdrawal process. First, the council, in 
the form of its chief Brexit negotiator,Didier Seeuws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/26/belgian-diplomat-to-head-eus-brexit-taskforce>
, and the member states it represents – without the UK – must agree the broad 
guidelines for negotiations.

This in itself is likely likely to take some months – and may be complicated 
by elections in the Netherlands, France and Germany that could well see the 
arrival of new governments with new positions.

Next, the commission’s negotiating team, headed by the French former foreign 
minister and EU commissioner, Michel Barnier, and his German deputy, Sabine 
Weyand, negotiates the exit agreement with Britain on behalf of the EU.

The third stage of article 50 requires the deal to be approved by the UK and 
qualified majority of the council: 20 of the 27 remaining states. The European 
parliament also has to approve it, by a simple majority (and will, its 
president Martin Schulz and Brexit representative Guy Verhofstadthave said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/23/osborne-warns-may-against-hard-brexit>
, be no pushover.)

All of this, the article states, must be concluded within two years after 
notification – at which point Britain, unless it has won the unanimous 
agreement of the rest of the council, or the agreement specifies an earlier or 
later date, will no longer be an EU member.

What will the deal need to cover? 

Charles Grant of the Centre for European Reform <http://www.cer.org.uk/> 
likens it to a divorce settlement, “dividing up the properties, institutions 
and pension rights, and dealing with budget payments and ... the rights of UK 
citizens in the EU and vice versa”.

The most sensible way to tackle the process, according to David Hannay 
<https://infacts.org/article-50-process-will-cats-cradle-complexity/>, a highly 
experienced former UK ambassador to the EU, would be for both parties to first 
sit down and, in a largely technical first stage, agree on a list of everything 
that has to be covered.

Among the most complex issues Hannay identifies are the “acquired rights” of 
UK and EU citizens, and Britain’s international obligations under agreements it 
entered into as an EU member – such as the commitments made on its behalf at the
Paris climate change conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/22/paris-climate-deal-set-signed-record-number-states-un>
.

There will also, he predicts, be “lengthy and contentious” arguments over 
Britain’s remaining budgetary and other financial liabilities – many 
complicated by the fact that EU programmes in fields such as scientific 
research and regional development often involve commitments beyond the exit 
date.

Bitter fight over Brexit set to overshadow Conservative conference
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/01/tory-conference-brexit-divisions-moderate>
And that’s not all ...

That is not the end. Most experts understand the phrase “taking account of the 
framework for its future relationship with the union” to mean, however, that 
Britain will have to conclude two separate agreements: one on its legal 
separation from the union, and the other on its future trading relationship.

Both the commission and Tusk have said talks on the trade agreement cannot 
start until after Britain leaves, but several member states – including Germany 
– have indicated that in practice, they will have to be conducted in parallel.

In any case, Grant has argued that there will almost inevitably have to be a 
third agreement 
<http://www.cer.org.uk/insights/theresa-may-and-her-six-pack-difficult-deals>, 
too: an interim arrangement to bridge the gap between Britain leaving the EU 
and the entry into force of the trade deal.

That final agreement, trade experts say, could take several years to 
negotiate, and will be subject to unanimous voting and national ratification by 
all 27 remaining EU states, leaving open the possibility of almost endless 
haggling by every member with something to ask of Britain – think, for example, 
of Spain and Gibraltar.
 