
Depending on how you count them, there are about 10,000 cities around the 
world, housing more than 50% of the world’s population. By all estimates, that 
number is only increasing and by 2050,70% of the world’s population will live 
in urban areas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/mar/22/un-cities-mega-regions>. Our 
cities face an ever-expanding range and severity of challenges – from 
increasing climate-related hazards to additional stresses on infrastructure, 
society and the economy.

With so many risks – both known and unknown – how can cities become more 
resilient to the social, economic and physical challenges of the 21st century? 
And how can cities utilise these perceived challenges as means to better plan 
and create thriving cities, resilient to the potential shocks and stresses that 
will accompany such stark changes?

Responding to these questions, the Rockefeller Foundation – which supports 
Guardian Cities <https://www.theguardian.com/cities> – created 100 Resilient 
Cities (100RC) <http://www.100resilientcities.org/#/-_/>, an organisation 
dedicated to helping cities around the globe build resilience to both sudden 
shocks – traumatic events like earthquakes and floods – and more long-term, 
chronic stresses such as poverty and housing shortages. Since our inception in 
2013, 100RC has worked to fulfil its call-to-action by choosing 100 cities to 
form this important vanguard.

To help them build resilience, 100RC offers member cities four types of 
support: assistance to develop a comprehensive “resilience strategy”; access to 
a $100m-plus pool of best-in-class services from partners in the private, 
public, NGO and academic sectors; and connection through our peer-to-peer 
network so that cities can learn from each other’s success and failures. But 
perhaps the most important offering is funding and support for hiring achief 
resilience officer (CRO) 
<http://www.100resilientcities.org/blog/entry/what-is-a-chief-resilience-officer#/-_/>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fwhat-chief-resilience-officer-summit-100rc-mexico-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F6%2F1446806655721%2F3dfca42c-12a3-43cd-b8b4-ed85bc8c8a4c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20is%20a%20chief%20resilience%20officer%20%E2%80%93%20and%20what%20are%20they%20doing%20in%20Mexico%20City%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fwhat-chief-resilience-officer-summit-100rc-mexico-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20is%20a%20chief%20resilience%20officer%20%E2%80%93%20and%20what%20are%20they%20doing%20in%20Mexico%20City%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fwhat-chief-resilience-officer-summit-100rc-mexico-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F6%2F1446806655721%2F3dfca42c-12a3-43cd-b8b4-ed85bc8c8a4c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Activists lie on the street pretending to be dead during a flash mob to draw 
attention to the health risks caused by pollution in Mexico City. Photograph: 
Yuri Cortez/AFP/Getty Images 
A CRO is a high-level adviser to the city’s chief executive, who has the 
responsibility of working across sectors of society and silos of government so 
that key decision-makers connect important strands of work. A CRO can help to 
shape thinking about how decisions and priorities affect the ability of their 
city not only to survive a possible disaster, but to adapt, grow and thrive no 
matter what kinds of chronic stresses and acute shocks a city experiences. If 
you think of those involved in resilience building as an orchestra, the CRO 
should act like a conductor, drawing all those parties together to build a 
harmony.

This work involves consensus building, leadership and bridging difficult 
divides – which is why we are in Mexico City this week, along with our global 
network of CROs, for thesecond Chief Resilience Officer summit 
<http://www.100resilientcities.org/blog/entry/2nd-annual-chief-resilience-officer-summit-begins-november-9-in-mexico-city#/-_/>
, a week-long event that will convene pioneers in the practice of urban 
resilience from six continents and more than 30 countries. CROs will share 
ideas, further best practices, and develop the tools necessary to make sure 
their cities are stronger, more robust, more inclusive – and ultimately more 
resilient.

There is no better place to do this than in the living resilience laboratory 
that is Mexico City. As the cultural and political heart of Mexico, and an 
economic powerhouse in Latin America, the city faces many challenges and 
opportunities that are shared throughout the world.

For example, while the city flourishes in many respects, it grapples with the 
effects of rapid urban expansion. Since the 1950s, Mexico City’s metropolitan 
area population has exploded from three million to 21 million inhabitants, with 
nearly three million people now residing in informal settlements.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fwhat-chief-resilience-officer-summit-100rc-mexico-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F6%2F1446806249493%2Fb8902504-b984-4480-9958-54288ec83730-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20is%20a%20chief%20resilience%20officer%20%E2%80%93%20and%20what%20are%20they%20doing%20in%20Mexico%20City%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fwhat-chief-resilience-officer-summit-100rc-mexico-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20is%20a%20chief%20resilience%20officer%20%E2%80%93%20and%20what%20are%20they%20doing%20in%20Mexico%20City%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fwhat-chief-resilience-officer-summit-100rc-mexico-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F6%2F1446806249493%2Fb8902504-b984-4480-9958-54288ec83730-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Workers stand on the emergency stairs in an office building during an 
earthquake drill in Mexico City. Photograph: Bernardo Montoya/Reuters 
Poorly planned urban expansion, coupled with the proliferation of these 
informal settlements, has greatly exacerbated the risks and impacts of shocks 
and stresses, as earthquakes, long-term water shortage and land subsidence 
impact informal settlements at a greater rate. Rapid growth has exposed 
significant stresses on the city’s social and physical infrastructure – 
consuming conservation land, stressing the water aquifer, and increasing 
poverty and inequity.

To better understand how these risk factors fit together, Mexico City is 
beginning to look at the links between problems – for example, between informal 
housing and economic inclusion, and building codes and water aquifers. This is 
crucial as it considers how to survive the next major incident, while building 
a city that thrives for all its inhabitants.

 Like many progressive, resilience-minded cities, Mexico City is now exploring 
new ways to combat shocks and stresses at the same time, with a clear focus on 
improving the prospects of vulnerable communities. For instance, efforts to 
improve transportation and traffic, including investments in bus rapid transit, 
bike lanes and pedestrian-friendly zones, have improved access to jobs and 
neighbourhoods while decreasing the city’s air pollution – once labelled the 
worst in the world.

The opportunity for peer-to-peer learning in a classroom as rich as Mexico 
City will be instrumental in 100RC’s efforts to catalyse a new global practice 
of resilience. We want CROs to learn from the work Mexico City is doing, while 
taking note of the historic challenges the city has faced.

While people, places and languages will always differ, approaches to 
addressing long-term risks and opportunities shouldn’t. We have seen through 
our work that cities across the globe share common challengesand solutions, and 
we hope that the learning from Mexico City will spark new and shared ideas for 
our broad-based resilience movement.

Michael Berkowitz is president of 100 Resilient Cities, an organisation 
pioneered by the Rockefeller Foundation
 