
Disabled man forced off bus by refusal to move pram sparks equality test case
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/nov/11/disabled-man-forced-off-bus-refusal-move-pram-sparks-equality-test-case>
Should a wheelchair user <https://www.theguardian.com/society/disability> who 
wants to travel by bus have priority over a child in a pushchair? That, broadly 
speaking, is the question that will now come before Britain’s most senior 
judges.

In granting Doug Paulley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/nov/11/disabled-man-forced-off-bus-refusal-move-pram-sparks-equality-test-case>
permission to appeal this week 
<https://www.supremecourt.uk/news/permission-to-appeal-decision-8-jul-2015.html>
, the UK supreme court has raised the possibility that buggies will no longer 
be allowed to block wheelchairs on buses.

Paulley, 36, relies on a wheelchair to get about. In February 2012 he tried to 
board a bus from Wetherby to Leeds, only to find that the only available space 
was occupied by a woman with a sleeping child in a pushchair. The driver asked 
her to fold down the chair and move. She refused, insisting that her pushchair 
would not fold.

Paulley offered to fold down his own wheelchair and sit in an ordinary seat. 
But the driver said it would not be possible to secure his chair safely on the 
winding roads of West Yorkshire.

Paulley waited for the next bus, missed his train at Leeds, and arrived at his 
destination an hour late. With the support of theEquality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/equality> and Human Rights Commission, he 
sued the bus operator for unlawful discrimination, and was awarded compensation 
of £5,500.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fjul%2F09%2Fwheelchair-pram-bus-space%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F9%2F1436441946393%2F26afb16b-9f9e-4598-a830-927ef974deb3-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wheelchair%20or%20pram%3A%20which%20more%20deserves%20space%20on%20the%20bus%3F%20%7C%20Joshua%20Rozenberg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fjul%2F09%2Fwheelchair-pram-bus-space%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wheelchair%20or%20pram%3A%20which%20more%20deserves%20space%20on%20the%20bus%3F%20%7C%20Joshua%20Rozenberg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fjul%2F09%2Fwheelchair-pram-bus-space%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F9%2F1436441946393%2F26afb16b-9f9e-4598-a830-927ef974deb3-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Doug Paulley from Wetherby, Yorkshire, won compensation from First Group - the 
company then successfully appealed. Photograph: Andrew McCaren/Ross Parry 
Last December the bus company, First Group, persuaded three appeal judges, 
headed by Lady Justice Arden, tooverturn that decision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2014/dec/08/bus-parents-buggies-wheelchair-users-appeal-first-group>
. So the question for the supreme court will be whether Paul Isaacs, the 
part-time judge at Leeds who found in Paulley’s favour, got it right first 
time. The supreme court judges would not have granted Paulley permission to 
appeal unless there was at least a chance that they would find in his favour.

In the court of appeal, Lord Justice Lewison said the case 
<http://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWCA/Civ/2014/1573.html> was not about whether 
other passengers should make room for a wheelchair user: of course they should, 
if possible. Nor was it about whether parents in the wheelchair space with a 
child in a folding buggy should fold their buggies in order to make way for a 
wheelchair user: of course they should, if possible.

Non-wheelchair users, unlike wheelchair users, normally had a choice about 
which part of the bus to sit or stand in. Common decency and respect for 
wheelchair users should mean that other passengers make way for them.

What was at issue, he said, was whether the bus company must have a policy to 
compel all other passengers to vacate the wheelchair space irrespective of the 
reason why they are in it, on pain of being made to leave the bus if they do 
not, leaving no discretion to the driver.

That, said the judge, was “a step too far”. Parliament had not intended the 
rights of wheelchair uses to trump all other considerations.

Arden agreed that a bus company must take all reasonable steps, short of 
compelling passengers to move from the wheelchair space. Requiring them to move 
– or leave the bus if it was full – would require legislation.

Lord Justice Underhill considered whether the bus company should have required 
other passengers to give priority to wheelchair users. Such a policy could not 
be enforced by the driver, Underhill said. “The fact that some passengers will, 
albeit rarely, act selfishly and irresponsibly is a sufficient reason for 
imposing on bus companies a legal responsibility for a situation which is not 
of their making and which they are not in a position to prevent.”

Really? Manhandling uncooperative passengers is certainly no part of a bus 
driver’s duties. But we are all familiar with the driver who refuses to move 
until an antisocial individual gets off. Support from other passengers can be 
surprisingly effective.

The law requires bus companies to make reasonable adjustments for wheelchair 
users. But is it reasonable to give people in wheelchairs priority over people 
pushing buggies?

That was what parliament had intended, said Isaacs, the part-time judge at 
Leeds. No it was not, said Lewison in the court of appeal. “What is a 
reasonable adjustment depends, among other things, on the impact of the 
adjustment on others.”

What would be reasonable in these circumstances? Public buses are required to 
have space for at least one wheelchair. They are not required to have floor 
space for buggies, shopping trollies or wheeled suitcases — still less for lots 
of people to stand opposite the exit doors. Removing a sleeping child from a 
buggy may be inconvenient, but it is not likely to be as inconvenient for a 
parent as it would be for a wheelchair user to be prevented from boarding. 
People in wheelchairs should surely have priority in the spaces provided for 
them.

There are limits, of course: there might be another wheelchair user on board 
already, or just too many passengers. We do not require people to get off a bus 
early just because others want to get on. But it should not be possible for 
disability legislation to be circumvented so easily.

Lewison’s “common decency and respect for wheelchair users” should be more 
than merely an aspiration: the supreme court should find a way of making it 
enforceable.
 