
Before the eager young New York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> 
traffic department employee who would eventually become known as Gridlock Sam 
had begun his long war against cars in earnest in the early 1970s, he got a 
dull assignment: standing out in the cold weather, timing car traffic as it 
crossed into Midtown.

At least, it would have seemed dull to most people. For Sam Schwartz 
<http://www.samschwartz.com/> it was exciting, because it was data collection 
for a clean air proposal known as the “Red Zone”. Within this zone, private 
cars in Midtown would be banned, outright, between 10am and 4pm. Schwartz loved 
the whole idea. “It was just a very exciting time to be in city government,” he 
recalls. “There we were – going to do the first car ban.”

Few people know that, 45 years before the bike lanes and public plazas New 
Yorkers now take for granted, there were people inside the city’s transport 
department, people like Schwartz, trying to crack down on cars. Schwartz’s hair 
and beard are grey now, and it’s been two decades since he left city government 
to found a transportation planning firm, but he’s just as gregarious as he was 
back in the 1970s.

In those days, cars were the technology of the future. The automobile, despite 
being highly controversial in its early days, was as dominant in New York as it 
was in all cities across North America. Mass transit infrastructure was allowed 
to decay, or actively ripped up, even when doing so made a city’s transport 
network less efficient.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fnew-york-city-ban-cars-gridlock-sam-schwartz-manhattan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70bbf45577c616a3722d529ba5e0adbf37b36452%2F90_29_1167_1727%2F1167.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20New%20York%20City%20tried%20to%20ban%20cars%20%E2%80%93%20the%20extraordinary%20story%20of%20'Gridlock%20Sam'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fnew-york-city-ban-cars-gridlock-sam-schwartz-manhattan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20New%20York%20City%20tried%20to%20ban%20cars%20%E2%80%93%20the%20extraordinary%20story%20of%20%27Gridlock%20Sam%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fnew-york-city-ban-cars-gridlock-sam-schwartz-manhattan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70bbf45577c616a3722d529ba5e0adbf37b36452%2F90_29_1167_1727%2F1167.jpg>
 The city even went as far as manufacturing ‘No Cars’ signs. Photograph: Samuel 
Schwartz 
When streetcar tracks were removed 
<http://www.streetsblog.org/2011/04/11/the-efficient-past-and-wasteful-present-of-the-brooklyn-bridge/>
 from the Brooklyn Bridge (the last were ripped up in the early 1950s), the 
number of people crossing daily dropped from 400,000 to 170,000. “Even 
progressive groups who you’d have thought would say ‘slow down’ supported 
removing tracks from the Brooklyn Bridge,” says Schwartz.

But in the tumultuous 1960s, with the freeway revolts and environmental 
movement, the pendulum began, very slowly, to swing the other way. And by 1971, 
when Schwartz joined the New York City traffic department full of “crazy” ideas 
such as bike lanes and public plazas, a plan like the Red Zone seemed like its 
time had come. The city even went as far as manufacturing “No Cars” signs.

At the last minute, however, mayor John Lindsay – who had initially championed 
the plan – got cold feet, and the Red Zone was cancelled. But it was just the 
beginning.


‘We got further than Bloomberg’

Today, we tend to think of congestion pricing as a new idea, but New York has 
been trying to implement some variant of it for decades. “It was conceived here 
in New York by William Vickery, a Columbia University professor, who later won 
the Nobel Prize,” says Schwartz. “He used to badger me about it in traffic 
meetings.”


One of the few officials not caught up in the corruption scandals of the 
1970s, Schwartz earned the nickname Gridlock Sam under mayor Ed Koch, when he 
was selected by David Gurin, a founder of advocacy groupTransportation 
Alternatives <https://www.transalt.org/>, as deputy traffic commissioner. His 
big break came with the transit strike in 1979: he landed the job of developing 
transportation contingency plans, and produced his now famous “Grid-Lock 
Prevention Program”.

The new term, coined by Schwartz and a colleague, became a media sensation. 
And his plan – which, among other things, would have prohibited any cars with 
just one occupant entering Manhattan – worked wonders during the 11-day strike. 
“It worked so much better than 1966 [the year of the previous strike] that 
people hailed us as heroes,” Schwartz recalls. He was eventually promoted to 
New York City traffic commissioner, and “gridlock” has since become synonymous 
with stalemate and immobility, not just in traffic but in politics and beyond.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fnew-york-city-ban-cars-gridlock-sam-schwartz-manhattan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F39e586c98990803156e3d3ff4427554c9a388a4c%2F22_88_1428_857%2F1428.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20New%20York%20City%20tried%20to%20ban%20cars%20%E2%80%93%20the%20extraordinary%20story%20of%20'Gridlock%20Sam'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fnew-york-city-ban-cars-gridlock-sam-schwartz-manhattan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20New%20York%20City%20tried%20to%20ban%20cars%20%E2%80%93%20the%20extraordinary%20story%20of%20%27Gridlock%20Sam%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fnew-york-city-ban-cars-gridlock-sam-schwartz-manhattan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F39e586c98990803156e3d3ff4427554c9a388a4c%2F22_88_1428_857%2F1428.jpg>
 Sam Schwartz with longtime New York mayor Ed Koch 
But Schwartz had been fighting gridlock even before the phenomenon had a name. 
After the Red Zone failure, he and Lindsay tried again in 1973 – but this time, 
rather than simply banning cars, they would implement congestion pricing, in 
the form of tolls on the East River bridges.

The main bridges into New York had originally been built as toll bridges, 
between 1883 and 1909. In 1911, however, the cityremoved tolls 
<http://cityroom.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/07/19/july-19-1911-the-day-east-river-tolls-melted-away/>
 on the Queensboro, Brooklyn, Manhattan, and Williamsburg Bridges. City 
officials soon realised they had blundered, but discovered that it’s a lot 
easier to give people something for free than to convince them to start paying 
for it again. Repeated tolling attempts were beaten back.

This time, however, the stars seemed aligned. “In 1973 we got further than any 
other time – further than [Mayor] Bloomberg,” Schwartz says. Not only was the 
then-mayor committed, but New York’s governor backed the plan, too. “He signed 
the plan to do tolls on all the bridges, and then the feds approved it as part 
of the Clean Air Act.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fnew-york-city-ban-cars-gridlock-sam-schwartz-manhattan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47ee2f872b20c4ee223742d81710d235b3466573%2F0_39_5475_6842%2F5475.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20New%20York%20City%20tried%20to%20ban%20cars%20%E2%80%93%20the%20extraordinary%20story%20of%20'Gridlock%20Sam'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fnew-york-city-ban-cars-gridlock-sam-schwartz-manhattan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20New%20York%20City%20tried%20to%20ban%20cars%20%E2%80%93%20the%20extraordinary%20story%20of%20%27Gridlock%20Sam%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fnew-york-city-ban-cars-gridlock-sam-schwartz-manhattan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47ee2f872b20c4ee223742d81710d235b3466573%2F0_39_5475_6842%2F5475.jpg>
 A street market on pedestrianised Broadway in 2009. Photograph: Alamy 
In 1974, Abe Beame took over from Lindsay as mayor and tried to cancel the 
plan. But the Natural Resources Defence Council and others sued the city to 
enforce it, and the Environmental Protection Agency ordered the city to put 
tolls in place by 1977. The city fought back in federal court, and lost. “Only 
an act of Congress could stop it now,” says Schwartz. And that’s exactly what 
happened.

“Two of the most progressive elected officials that one would think would be 
supportive of such a plan … came out and wrote theMoynihan-Holtzman Amendment 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Congestion_pricing_in_New_York_City>,” Schwartz 
says. “It allowed Beame to skate and not implement congestion pricing.” 
Subsequent proposals had no better luck.

Both conservatives and liberals support congestion pricing: the right likes 
the market-pricing mechanism, and the left hates cars. So why is it so hard to 
get through? “I have found support from the right and the left,” Schwartz says. 
“It’s the middle we have the hardest time with on congestion pricing.”

Beyond popular opposition in Queens and Brooklyn, powerful Manhattan interest 
groups – including the parking garage owners, their Teamsters-represented 
workers, and the hotel industry – have opposed tolls on the East River bridges. 
Schwartz points out the irony that these groups practise a form of congestion 
pricing themselves. “You go to the very centre of Manhattan, the price is the 
highest,” says Schwartz. “They practise congestion pricing but they don’t want 
the city to do it.”

Schwartz fought the primacy of the automobile in New York in other ways, too. 
Having given up on closing Midtown entirely to private cars, he worked on a 
smaller plan under Mayor Lindsay to close Broadway to traffic in Herald Square, 
home of Macy’s flagship department store on 34th Street, as well as in Times 
Square.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fnew-york-city-ban-cars-gridlock-sam-schwartz-manhattan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44cfd662e6518d547fe00097fc586f3f71009a84%2F0_227_2832_1699%2F2832.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20New%20York%20City%20tried%20to%20ban%20cars%20%E2%80%93%20the%20extraordinary%20story%20of%20'Gridlock%20Sam'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fnew-york-city-ban-cars-gridlock-sam-schwartz-manhattan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20New%20York%20City%20tried%20to%20ban%20cars%20%E2%80%93%20the%20extraordinary%20story%20of%20%27Gridlock%20Sam%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fnew-york-city-ban-cars-gridlock-sam-schwartz-manhattan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44cfd662e6518d547fe00097fc586f3f71009a84%2F0_227_2832_1699%2F2832.jpg>
 New York Mayor John Lindsay carries in his budget on 15 April 1966. 
Photograph: Everett/REX/Shutterstock 
According to Schwartz: “Macy’s said, ‘Over our dead bodies.’” The company’s 
concern was apparently not a sense of entitlement to free driving, but fear of 
the crime that was overrunning the city and its public spaces. “Crime was 
rampant. It was not like it is today. The concept of what were public spaces 
then was totally different from today.”

The vast reduction in crime under Mayor Rudolph Giuliani is often overlooked 
when people discuss how New York now uses its public space. Safer streets 
helped make businesses more comfortable with the actual closure of Broadway, 
which happened under MayorMichael Bloomberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/michaelbloomberg>.

“If we didn’t have the drop in crime, there’s no way people would have allowed 
it to occur,” Schwartz says of the pedestrianisation of Times Square. He points 
to the recent proliferation in the square of so-calleddesnudas 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/21/nyregion/mayor-de-blasio-raises-prospect-of-removing-times-square-pedestrian-plazas.html 
http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/21/nyregion/mayor-de-blasio-raises-prospect-of-removing-times-square-pedestrian-plazas.html>
, topless women in body paint who pose for photographs for tips. “Look at the 
outcry when we had a few bare-breasted women – they immediately said, ‘Let’s 
open it up [to car traffic].’” The fear that public spaces create public 
disorder still lingers.

For his part, Schwartz also put permanent bus lanes on Madison Avenue, which 
are still there today, and implemented the city’s first protected cycle lanes. 
“One of the things we did every morning during the [1979] transit strike was to 
have our volunteers put up cones that created bike lanes on Fifth and Sixth 
Avenue,” he says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fnew-york-city-ban-cars-gridlock-sam-schwartz-manhattan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67e9dc9247cdaa54a64dd235054a9fa57f42b6ce%2F0_190_4012_2408%2F4012.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20New%20York%20City%20tried%20to%20ban%20cars%20%E2%80%93%20the%20extraordinary%20story%20of%20'Gridlock%20Sam'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fnew-york-city-ban-cars-gridlock-sam-schwartz-manhattan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20New%20York%20City%20tried%20to%20ban%20cars%20%E2%80%93%20the%20extraordinary%20story%20of%20%27Gridlock%20Sam%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fnew-york-city-ban-cars-gridlock-sam-schwartz-manhattan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67e9dc9247cdaa54a64dd235054a9fa57f42b6ce%2F0_190_4012_2408%2F4012.jpg>
 A ‘desnuda’ in body paint poses in Times Square in 2015. The controversy 
sparked calls to reinstate car traffic. Photograph: Don Emmert/AFP/Getty Images 
But, as with congestion pricing, New York was not ready for bike lanes when 
Schwartz tried to install them permanently, and there was a chorus of public 
complaints. They also came at the time of “a bizarre two-to-three month period 
in which three women were hit by bikes and killed”, Schwartz says. A story goes 
that Governor Hugh Carey, riding in a limousine down Sixth Avenue with Jimmy 
Carter, told the US president: “Look out your window and see how Ed [Koch] is 
wasting your money on these bike lanes.”


Koch folded under the pressure and removed the lanes 
<http://www.peopleforbikes.org/blog/entry/ed-koch-force-behind-creation-and-removal-of-first-green-lanes-passes->
. “It only lasted for about two months and that killed it for the next 20 
years,” Schwartz says, adding that, to hide from angry activists, “I shaved my 
beard so no one would recognise me, but they did anyhow.”

Back in the fray

Two decades later, protected bike lanes finally had their day. In his recent 
book Street Smart, Schwartz admits his jealousy of Mayor Bloomberg’s transport 
commissioner, Janette Sadik-Khan. “She was doing things I had just dreamed 
about or had to abort: creating pedestrian plazas, adding physically separated 
bicycle lanes, and ... speeding buses through the densest parts of the city 
with a form of Bus Rapid Transit.”

Streetfighting woman: inside the story of how cycling changed New York
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/mar/11/cycling-fights-new-york-mean-streets-janette-sadik-khan>
As with the Broadway closures, it was broader civic change that had helped 
pave the way. Cycling was newly hip, the success of cities such as Copenhagen 
was more widely known, and web activist sites such asStreetsblog 
<http://www.streetsblog.org/> had built a bigger public constituency for 
cycling.

Congestion charging <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/congestioncharging>, 
however, remained elusive. In 1990, Schwartz eventually left city government, 
watching from afar as his successors continued to be foiled in their pursuit. 
Bloomberg made major progress with public plazas and protected bike lanes, but 
not congestion pricing: the state legislature shot down his attempt to 
implement tolls on the East River Bridges, after a public outcry and lobbyist 
pushback.

But in the last few years, congestion pricing is back on the agenda – and 
Gridlock Sam is back in the fray. While running his own engineering firm, he 
was privately taking stock of the complaints against congestion pricing, and 
one day announced a new private proposal calledMoveNY <http://iheartmoveny.org/>
.

A direct salvo against the opposition to the Bloomberg plan, MoveNY would not 
just add tolls on the East River bridges but, ingeniously, reduce tolls 
significantly on outlying bridges such as the Throg’s Neck, connecting the 
Bronx and Queens, where there are no good transit alternatives. Like the London 
congestion charge, it would also charge Manhattanites to enter the congestion 
pricing zone south of 59th street. And it would reinvest a quarter of the 
proceeds back into roads and bridges, with the rest into transit.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fnew-york-city-ban-cars-gridlock-sam-schwartz-manhattan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15060b8ea1417246555be00c3567fc157f43c47f%2F0_0_750_481%2F750.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20New%20York%20City%20tried%20to%20ban%20cars%20%E2%80%93%20the%20extraordinary%20story%20of%20'Gridlock%20Sam'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fnew-york-city-ban-cars-gridlock-sam-schwartz-manhattan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20New%20York%20City%20tried%20to%20ban%20cars%20%E2%80%93%20the%20extraordinary%20story%20of%20%27Gridlock%20Sam%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fnew-york-city-ban-cars-gridlock-sam-schwartz-manhattan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15060b8ea1417246555be00c3567fc157f43c47f%2F0_0_750_481%2F750.jpg>
 Gridlock Sam with New York mayor Michael Bloomberg 
The plan is still not popular with everyone, with Queens borough president 
Melinda Katz leading theopposition 
<http://observer.com/2015/04/a-pack-of-queens-democrats-oppose-new-congestion-pricing-plan/>
. “There’s just something fundamentally not right with making people pay to 
drive across the street in the same city,” she says, adding that the original 
bridge tolls were never intended to subsidise other activities.

The debate is only going to intensify. Traffic congestion is worsening in 
Manhattan, the subways are overcrowded and increasingly unreliable, and the 
state is struggling to pay for it all. Whether congestion pricing passes or 
not, the price will be paid, one way or another.

In the meantime, Gridlock Sam is enjoying the public spaces and bike 
infrastructure he longed to see for so many years. On the ceiling of his office 
at his engineering firm, he has affixed one of those “No Cars” signs from the 
Red Zone plan – a reminder of how close New York came to getting rid of cars 
entirely, nearly half a century ago.

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 