
At the Mercury prize ceremony on Thursday night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/live/2016/sep/15/the-2016-mercury-prize-ceremony-live>
, Radiohead – instead of performing – unveiled a video of Thom Yorke and Jonny 
Greenwood performing Present Tense. It’s the latest in a long line of videos in 
which big music stars team up with major Hollywood directors, the former 
presumably thinking some silver-screen glitz will rub off on them, the latter 
thinking it’s an easy payday  they can show their pop smarts and improve an 
oft-shoddy artform.

So settle back in the back row, dig in to your popcorn (please don’t bring 
nachos, they stink the place out) and let us consider that point where canvas 
chair meets mixing desk. There are scores more than these five, though, so do 
highlight your favourites in the comments …

Radiohead – Present Tense (directed by Paul Thomas Anderson)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6hgVihWjK2c&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6hgVihWjK2c>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6hgVihWjK2c&media=>
What films has he made? Several that are often regarded as among the best to 
have come out of Hollywood in the last 20 years, redolent of the golden age of 
the 1970s – Boogie Nights, Magnolia, There Will Be Blood, The Master, Inherent 
Vice. He also made Radiohead’s clip forDaydreaming 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TTAU7lLDZYU> earlier this year, and Greenwood 
has recorded film scores for him.


And what’s the video like? Minimal. Yorke and Greenwood are filmed with two 
cameras, and it cuts back and forth between the two as they sit and play 
Present Tense, accompanied by a Roland CR-78. There’s a third shot appears 
around two minutes in but it’s hardly dramatic: a close-up of Thom Yorke. The 
lighting is soft and orange, to fit the subdued mood of the music. To be 
perfectly honest, it’s hard to know what about this video required the presence 
of Anderson, other than the fact that all concerned are Serious Artists, and it 
reflects well on one Serious Artist to work with other Serious Artists rather 
than, say, Captain Flatpack.

Any of the director’s usual themes or tricks? There’s no plot, which some say 
can be an Anderson weakness. On the plus side, it doesn’t last for hours, and 
there’s no gnomic dialogue that makes little or no sense.

Michael Jackson – Thriller (directed by John Landis)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsOnqjkJTMaA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsOnqjkJTMaA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsOnqjkJTMaA&media=>
What films has he made? His glory days are passed, but leading up to Thriller 
in 1983 he had a six-year run of hits – Kentucky Fried Movie, Animal House, The 
Blues Brothers, An American Werewolf in London, Trading Places.

And what’s the video like? The first of the great video spectacles of the 
1980s – less a pop promo than a mini-film, complete with four minutes of 
pre-song set-up with MJ and his date at the cinema watching a horror movie, 
before we get into the clip proper. Let’s be honest: it was brilliant then, and 
it’s still brilliant now. Jackson was at his pre-weirdness best, his dancing’s 
great, and though the body of the video seems a bit slow now – the first two 
minutes of the song are just Jackson dancing around his date as they walk home 
– once we reach the Vincent Price narration bit in the middle, it’s cracking 
all the way. Jackson wasn’t shy about using top-end directors: Martin Scorsese (
Bad <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dsUXAEzaC3Q>), John Singleton (Remember 
the Time <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LeiFF0gvqcc>), and David Fincher (Who 
Is It <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tAKWEHb82d8>), back when he was making 
more videos than movies, all made clips for him.

Any of the director’s usual themes or tricks? You mean apart from Jackson 
turning into a werewolf in the opening sequence? And the garishly entertaining 
schlockiness? And the whole B-movie ethos of it all? It’s Landis all over.

Bruce Springsteen – Dancing in the Dark (directed by Brian De Palma)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D129kuDCQtHs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D129kuDCQtHs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D129kuDCQtHs&media=>
What films has he made? One of Hollywood’s hottest talents in the 1970s, he 
made a series of acclaimed and controversial thrillers (Carrie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/22/brian-de-palma-carrie-horror>, 
Dressed to Kill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/aug/04/dressed-to-kill-palma-dvd>, 
Scarface <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/17/scarface-crime>, Body 
Double), some big-budget smashes (The Untouchables 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/mar/18/reel-history-the-untouchables>, 
Mission: Impossible) and one of the most notorious flops in Hollywood history 
(The Bonfire of the Vanities). He’s now the subject ofa documentary by Noah 
Baumbach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/01/de-palma-documentary-review-noah-baumbach-jake-paltrow>
.

And what’s the video like? Basic. Bruce Springsteen sings the song on stage 
and dances. And then gets Courteney Cox up on stage to dance with him. Also 
from the Born in the USA album,I’m on Fire 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lrpXArn3hII> was a much more cinematic piece 
of work, even if it did reveal the limitations of Springsteen’s acting (he 
played a mechanic. No hint of typecasting there). The video made a mainstream 
star of him, though, and introduced something he does to this day: dragging a 
woman on to the stage to dance with him through the song. The remarkable thing 
is the effort it took to have one of rock’s great performers dance awkwardly 
for a few minutes – there’s an amazing video of himrehearsing at home for the 
filming <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EW_pPSi53dI>, throwing those ungainly 
moves, and anotherearly version of the clip 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vh8NQo1p5sA>, made by Daniel Pearl and Jeff 
Stein, that features the Boss dancing in his vest on a soundstage. It makes you 
realise how great, if simple, the final “in concert” clip really was.

Any of the director’s usual themes or tricks? Not a single epic tracking shot; 
no obvious steals fromHitchcock <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xS6aSrkHyEc> or
Eisenstein <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QJpRSf4q-hI>. Mind you, Cox should 
consider herself lucky she doesn’t end the video dismembered, Springsteen 
having turned out to be a misogynist serial killer. That would have been par 
for the course with De Palma.

New Order – Touched By the Hand of God (directed by Kathryn Bigelow)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DT9M_bqIB6EU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DT9M_bqIB6EU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DT9M_bqIB6EU&media=>
What films has she made? At the point this clip was made, Bigelow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jan/12/kathryn-bigelow-zero-dark-thrity> 
was best known for the vampire movie Near Dark. Since then, she’s become better 
known forPoint Break 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/sep/16/patrick-swayze-joe-queenan>, The 
Hurt Locker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/aug/28/the-hurt-locker-review> and Zero 
Dark Thirty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jan/24/zero-dark-thirty-review>.

And what’s the video like? Funny – which is not really what New Order’s public 
image was in 1987 (unless you count Bernard Sumner appearing on Pop Quiz and 
referring to Bono as Bongo to be the height of humour). It castsNew Order 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/neworder> as a hair metal band, complete 
with terrible wigs (and Gillian Gilbert on keytar and Peter Hook in codpiece) 
in a perfect facsimile of the hair metal videos of the day. The only bum note 
comes from the occasional interpolation of clips from the film Salvation! – 
Touched By the Hand of God was originally recorded for the soundtrack of said 
film.

Any of the director’s usual themes or tricks? At no point are any cold-eyed 
representatives of US imperial power placed in the Middle East.


Faith Hill – There You’ll Be (directed by Michael Bay)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBwyWmqV_RJc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBwyWmqV_RJc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBwyWmqV_RJc&media=>
What films has he made? Action extravaganzas galore: Bad Boys, Bad Boys II 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2003/jul/21/artsfeatures>, four Transformers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/10/transformers-age-of-extinction-review-michael-bay>
 films (with a fifth to come),The Rock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/apr/14/my-guilty-pleasure-the-rock-michael-bay-film>
, Armageddon … What Woody Allen is to neurotic people talking to each other, 
Michael Bay is to things being destroyed without any need for a plot.

What’s the video like? The song was recorded for the soundtrack of Bay’s film 
Pearl Harbor, so it serves as a promo for that – lots of clips of Ben Affleck, 
Kate Beckinsale and Josh Hartnett. But there’s a video in there, too. And it’s 
not a very good one. For the sake of thematic unity, Bay sets it in the 1940s. 
Or does he? Because Hill keeps materialising and dematerialising, so it’s hard 
to know if she’s really there or has been beamed in from the future.

But as a compendium of ballad cliches, it’s hard to beat: Hill stands with her 
arms swept behind her, like a freeze-frame of a sprinter breasting the ribbon, 
in the way that is meant to signify undying love and commitment (I dare you to 
declare your commitment to your loved one in this position tonight; time how 
long it takes them to ask why you’re standing like some kind of halfwit with 
damaged shoulders); she is shot from below, gazing into the distance, while a 
wind machine ruffles her hair and blows mist (or fog, or clouds) past her; she 
looks pensive, leaning out of a car window; she walks through a forest of 
hanging sheets. It’s unadulterated crap. But thenMichael Bay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/michael-bay> makes millions, while I’m 
sitting in an office snarking about a pop video, so who’s the smart one?

Any of the director’s usual themes or tricks? Nothing gets destroyed, but it’s 
got empty grandeur by the tonne.
 