
Justice Samuel Alito listened intently as prosecutor Karl Racine made the 
case: “Crooked Friar Laurence, with his small hands …” There was a lot more 
where that came from: jokes about “bigly”, “low energy”, building a wall, dodgy 
email servers and wayward opinion polls to get the audience laughing,


Taking a break from his day job as a supreme court justice, Alito was 
presiding overthe mock trial of Friar Laurence, 
<http://www.shakespearetheatre.org/newsroom/shakespeare-theatre-company-presents-mock-trial-romeo-juliet-wrongful-deaths/>
 accused of negligent and reckless conduct that led to the deaths of Romeo and 
Juliet, for the Shakespeare Theatre Company in Washington. The 66-year-old cut 
a genial and amused stage presence but left the most on-the-nose political gags 
to others.

The US could be vastly different a year from now. Here's how
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/29/donald-trump-first-year-in-office-different-america>
It was a sage decision in the current hyperpartisan climate. After the death 
of Alito’s fellow conservative Antonin Scalia last February, Barack Obama 
nominatedDC appeals court judge Merrick Garland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/mar/16/obama-nominates-merrick-garland-supreme-court-dc-appeals-court-judge>
 to replace him. But the Republican-led Senate refused to consider his 
nomination, leaving the seat vacant so it could be filled by the winner of the 
presidential election.

The strategy was condemned as crude, cynical and inimical to the rule of law. 
It also worked. Now President-elect Donald Trump has promised to nominate a 
conservative in the mould of Scalia. Having previously releaseda list of 21 
candidates, 
<https://www.donaldjtrump.com/press-releases/donald-j.-trump-adds-to-list-of-potential-supreme-court-justice-picks>
 he said he had whittled the list down to “probably three or four”. According 
to the incoming White House chief of staff, Reince Priebus, Trump will announce 
his pick around the time of his inauguration on 20 January.

In theory that should mean the justice will take his or her seat at the start 
of April: current members of the court have facedan average of 71 days 
<http://www.npr.org/2016/02/14/466723547/7-things-to-know-about-presidential-appointments-to-the-supreme-court>
 between nomination and confirmation. But the Garland case may have upended all 
protocol. Democrats, smarting over the way he was treated, could seek to throw 
sand in the gears for as long as possible.

“I think there will be a huge fight,” said Marge Baker, 
<http://www.pfaw.org/category/people/marge-baker> executive vice-president at 
People For the American Way, a liberal advocacy group that intends to pressure 
Democrats. “Republicans totally threw out the playbook on President Obama’s 
nomination; Merrick Garland was a moderate nominee. I can’t imagine the 
Democrats will roll over and we’ll certainly push them not to.”

Some Democrats, a minority in the Senate, seem ready to do battle. Senator 
Jeff Merkley of Oregontold MSNBC last month: 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/politics/supreme-court/empty-supreme-court-seat-being-stolen-republicans-merkley-n682386>
 “There’s no legitimacy to a supreme court justice in a seat that’s been stolen 
from one administration and handed to another. We need to do everything we 
possibly can to block it … it won’t be DOA unless the American people 
understand that this is the theft of the court.”

There is plenty to fire up liberals. Among the rumoured contenders are Bill 
Pryor, 54, who sits on the 11th circuit court of appeals and once described Roe 
v Wade, the 1973 decision making abortion legal, as the “worst abomination in 
the history of constitutional law”. Another is Diane Sykes, 58, who sits on the 
seventh circuit court of appeals and voted to uphold Wisconsin’s voter ID law – 
seen by some ascrucial to Hillary Clinton’s shock defeat in the state 
<http://www.latimes.com/nation/la-na-minority-voter-suppression-2016-story.html>
 – as well as supporting businesses that challenged Obamacare over 
contraception access.

Both are relatively young and therefore good long-term investments, which 
Trump is said to favour. Like Scalia, both are originalists, which the late 
justice defined as interpreting the constitution as it was meant when adopted, 
not according to contemporary mores.

Baker said: “They’re among the most extreme and ideological activists on the 
federal bench. Judge Pryor would be devastating to the rights of women, LGBT 
Americans, and workers … Judge Skyes for her part has ignored constitutional 
protections, like the right to a fair trial and the right to vote, to push her 
far-right ideology.”

At least eight Democrats will be required to give Trump’s nominee the 60 votes 
needed for confirmation. But if they hold out and attempt to filibuster, 
Republicans may reach for the“nuclear option” 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/11/gop-supreme-court-filibuster-nuclear-option-231582>
 of changing the rules to allow nominees to be confirmed by a simple majority 
vote. Democrats made a similar change for all judicial nominees except the 
supreme court in 2013.

The death of Scalia left the supreme court split between four conservatives 
and four liberals; if Trump’s nominee is not confirmed before the end of March, 
it will be the longest vacancy in the modern era. The replacement is expected 
to restore the long-held conservative majority, whereas Clinton looked set to 
give liberals the edge. Potential issues at stake include abortion, the death 
penalty, immigration, religious rights, presidential powers and transgender 
rights.


Edward Fallone, 
<https://law.marquette.edu/faculty-and-staff-directory/detail/1996511> a 
professor at Marquette University School of Law – from which Sykes is a 
graduate – in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, said: “It will be Trump’s way right out of 
the gate of giving conservatives something they want. If he compromises on 
other things, like immigration for example, giving them the supreme court 
nominee of their dreams will go a long way to shoring up his support.”

The supreme court nomination may be a sideshow compared with Trump’s choice of 
attorney general, Jeff Sessions, a hardliner on immigration accused of making 
racist comments in the past. Nearly 150 outside groups arereportedly pressuring 
<http://thehill.com/homenews/senate/311448-left-right-prep-for-battle-royal-over-sessions>
 Senate Democrats to stop him.

Fallone added: “They have to recognise they can’t block every appointment. 
They’re going to have to concentrate their fire. Whoever Trump appoints can’t 
be more conservative than Scalia: it restores the status quo.”

The bigger question, he suggests, is what would happen if another justice, 
such as the liberalRuth Bader Ginsburg, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jul/14/ruth-bader-ginsburg-regrets-donald-trump-remarks-faker>
 83, has to be replaced during Trump’s term. “You would probably still need an 
additional Trump appointment to overturn Roe v Wade. It may be the real fight 
is over the second Trump appointment, maybe after midterm elections when 
Democrats might be in a stronger position. They may decide this is one they can 
afford to let through.”

Vincent Eng, a lobbyist whose clients include the National Asian Pacific 
American Bar Association, agreed. “Democrats and liberals have to pick their 
battles,” he said. “I don’t see this selection as a big fight, as opposed to 
what will happen if Ginsburg goes.”


Conservatives also believe the vacancy will be filled sooner rather than later.
Curt Levey <https://twitter.com/curt_levey>, an attorney with FreedomWorks and 
the Committee For Justice, said: “You’re replacing Scalia so the court isn’t 
going to be any further right than a year ago. When Anthony Kennedy or Ruth 
Bader Ginsburg retire, they’ll fight hard.

“The Republicans fought Merrick Garland because they faced armageddon. The 
Democrats are not facing armageddon here. My guess is they will give the 
nominee a tough ride but they won’t filibuster; they could filibuster but they 
would lose.”

As for Garland, on 18 January, two days before Trump’s inauguration, he will 
resume hearing cases in his current position as chief judge of the US court of 
appeals for the District of Columbia circuit. At a recent Hanukkah reception at 
the White House, Obama welcomed him as “one of the country’s finest jurists”.
 