
Luxury beach stay in Cambodia

Until now, tourism on the beautiful islands strung along Cambodia's 440km 
coastline has centred on simple,laid-back beach shacks 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/2009/mar/10/beach-holidays-cambodia-island-hopping>
. Now, the first luxury resort has opened. Song Saa (songsaa.com 
<http://songsaa.com/>) is a collection of 27 villas spread over two jungle-clad 
islands in the Gulf of Thailand. Tourism development in Cambodia has not been 
withoutcontroversy <http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2008/apr/26/cambodia>, but 
the owners of Song Saa are keen to stress their commitment to sustainability, 
employing a team of four to oversee the protection of the marine reserve 
surrounding the islands and to manage projects with local communities.

But above all Song Saa is about luxury – the villas are vast and each has its 
own pool, the restaurant is headed by Neil Wager, formerly chef at the insanely 
luxurious North Island in the Seychelles, and a typical day will be spent 
wafting between the spa, water sports centre, yoga centre and infinity pool. Of 
course, private islands where you are pampered to within an inch of your life 
do not come cheap. But for the next three months the resort is offering a major 
discount, so if you are going to splash out on a once-in-a-lifetime week of 
luxury, now is the time to do it. Between 23 December and 13 February, an 
eight-night stay with full board in a jungle villa, plus a night's B&B in Phnom 
Penh and private flight transfers, costs from £2,141pp with AboutAsia (
aboutasiatravel.com 
<http://www.aboutasiatravel.com/cambodia/vacations/luxury-hotels-cambodia/song-saa-island-resort.htm>
), a saving of £1,981pp. Offer excludes international flights.

Or for a tenth of that, a week's trip combining B&B at The Independence hotel 
<http://www.aboutasiatravel.com/cambodia/vacations/luxury-hotels-cambodia/independence-hotel-sihanoukville.htm>
 in Sihanoukville and a B&B stay at Lazy Beach (lazybeachcambodia.com 
<http://lazybeachcambodia.com/Home.html>) on the island of Koh Rong Samloem, a 
two-hour boat ride from Sihanoukville, costs around £225pp in early December, 
including transfers, also through AboutAsia. Flights extra. 

Sailing the Canary Islands
 Tall Ships Adventures 
How do you enjoy the year-round sunshine of the Canary Islands on a budget 
without booking a tacky package? Answer: set sail! Tall Ships Adventures 
(023-9283 2055,tallships.org <http://tallships.org/>) is offering a seven-night 
voyage around the islands, starting and finishing in Tenerife. Open to anyone 
aged 18 to 75 – sailors and non-sailors – it's all hands on deck with everyone 
expected to muck in and help sail the ship alongside the professional crew. 
That means you might find yourself on night watch in the wee hours, rather than 
sleeping soundly in your bunk. A special two-for-one offer this December means 
it's cheap as chips: £382.50 full-board for two. The catch? You get what you 
pay for – crew sleep in "pipe cots" in shared cabins with eight to a cabin. 
Spacious it ain't. The trip departs 11 December, so you'll be home in time to 
celebrate Christmas with a healthy glow.

A pub with rooms in East Sussex
 The Bell, East Sussex 
Does the prospect of the festive season bring you out in a cold sweat (all 
that shopping, the annual debate over who's going where and cooking what?) Then 
a cheeky pre-Christmas break at the Bell, a new pub with rooms in Ticehurst, 
East Sussex, could be just the ticket (01580 200234,thebellinticehurst.com 
<http://thebellinticehurst.com/>, rooms from £90 to £145). It's so new (opening 
11 November) its website isn't even up and running yet – though the holding 
page is enough to make us want to go.

If the relentless gentrification of tired pubs irks you, the Bell definitely 
isn't one for you. The new owner has pumped an astonishing £2.8m into the 
former coaching inn – surely some sort of gastrofication record. As well as the 
pub, it has seven guest rooms that mix quirky vintage finds with modern 
must-haves, including iPads and plasma screens, and some with real log fires, a 
guest parlour with honesty bar and a restaurant. It's so hot off the press we 
don't have details yet of the menu but the marketing blurb describes it as 
"traditional with a modern twist, using local ingredients". Twenty minutes' 
drive from Tunbridge Wells, Ticehurst is an archetypal south-east England 
village with a ramshackle churchyard, a handful of unreconstructed pubs and 
great walking on the doorstep.

Shopping in Istanbul
 Grand Bazaar 
Christmas shopping is one of those activities that should be fun but nearly 
always feels like a chore and ends up with a last-minute trudge along the 
highstreet or a trawl throughamazon.co.uk <http://www.amazon.co.uk/>. Bring 
back the fun – spend the weekend in Istanbul, and you can pick up some 
fantastic bargains that you know no one else will have bought, in between 
gawping at world-class sights from the Byzantine Ayasofya mosque to the 
Archaeological Museum, which houses the tomb of Alexander the Great.

If bargain hunting in the Grand Bazaar leaves you in need of a rest, book into 
a hammam for a restorative massage – the Ayasofya Hürrem Sultan Hamam is a 
16th-century bathhouse where you can sweat out the grime of the city in 
spectacular surroundings, before hitting the bars and restaurants in the 
evening. For places to drink, eat and party, take a look at our brilliant 
insider'sguide to the city 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/series/istanbul-city-guide?intcmp=122&INTCMP=SRCH>
.

Exclusive Escapes (020-8605 3500, exclusiveescapes.co.uk 
<http://www.exclusiveescapes.co.uk/>) has an offer on Istanbul breaks until 
mid-December. A three-night stay at theSirkeci Konak 
<http://www.exclusiveescapes.co.uk/destinations/property/sirkeci/detail/> 
boutique hotel costs £720pp, including return flights with Turkish Airlines, 
transfers and a private guide for half a day.

Ice sculpture festival in Bruges
 Ice Festival Bruges Photograph: Reuters 
Bruges is atmospheric at any time of year; in the run up to Christmas it is 
even more fairytale-like, its pretty squares and cobbled streets strung with 
lights, and tempting aromas drifting from market stalls. An added festive 
factor is the 300 tonnes of ice and 400 tonnes of snow shipped in for the 
annual Snow & Ice Sculpture festival (25 November-15 January,icesculpture.be 
<http://www.icesculpture.be/>, adults €11, children €7). Sculptors create their 
frosty art works in a giant thermal tent where it's a permanent -6C. This 
year's theme is Disneyland Paris. A two-night stay at the Hotel Aragon on a B&B 
basis costs from £238pp including return Eurostar (London St Pancras to 
Brussels) and onward rail to Bruges with Inntravel (01653 617000,inntravel.co.uk
 <http://www.inntravel.co.uk/Holidays/short-breaks/Belgium/Hotel-Aragon>). If 
you prefer to DIY your trip, the Bread and Butter B&B (+32 5033 4726,
breadandbutter.be <http://www.breadandbutter.be/>, doubles from €85 B&B) is a 
quirky guesthouse with vintage wallpaper and salvaged furniture, but check 
availability – it only has one guestroom.

Volunteering in New Orleans
 Bourbon Street in New Orleans, US. Photograph: Joseph Sohm/Corbis 
Anyone who has considered volunteering over Christmas should check out Hands 
Up Holidays' (handsupholidays.com <http://www.handsupholidays.com/tours>) 
selection of trips, which incoporate an element of charity work into the 
itinerary. It's not all give – you get to holiday in a fantastic destinations 
while doing your bit to help. In New Orleans community groups are still working 
on rebuilding lives – both literally and metaphorically – six years after 
Hurriance Katrina devastated the city. On this eight-day trip you can do your 
bit by helping to renovate houses, assisting in a homeless shelter, teaching IT 
skills or helping in a home for the elderly. You can stay in five-star B&B 
accommodation for £1,670pp based on two sharing, as shown on the website – or 
for £1,200pp at the four-star Hotel Monteleone on a B&B basis. The trip 
includes three full days' volunteering plus sightseeing with a local guide, but 
not international flights. The price also includes a £150 per person donation 
to the volunteer project. Dates are flexible.
 