
The future of cycling in the UK was dealt a bad hand when George Osborne’s 
Spending Review 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/spending-review-and-autumn-statement-2015-documents/spending-review-and-autumn-statement-2015>
 revealed a new commitment of £300m to cycling investment to 2020/21. While 
that might sound like a lot, it equates to around £1.40 per person per year in 
England (outside of London), and a significant step backwards fromprevious 
commitments 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/cycling-delivery-plan-informal-consultation>
 to minimum funding of £10 per person per year. To put this in perspective, the 
average investment in the Netherlands is around €30 (£22) per person per year.

But while the UK government may be limiting the chances for British cities to 
become the most cycle-friendly in the world, across the globe many metropolises 
are taking huge steps to improve conditions for people on bikes. One Danish 
study reveals that for every kilometre cycled, society enjoys a 23 cent (16p) 
profit, while driving the same distance produces a net loss of 16 cents (10p). 
Of course, cycling also increases fitness, tackles stress levels and one less 
car on the road will help to lower pollution levels.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhere-world-most-cycle-friendly-city-amsterdam-copenhagen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a0904375c59aa9567753252ba8b3fb9a78a2559%2F0_52_4301_2582%2F4301.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Where%20is%20the%20most%20cycle-friendly%20city%20in%20the%20world%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhere-world-most-cycle-friendly-city-amsterdam-copenhagen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Where%20is%20the%20most%20cycle-friendly%20city%20in%20the%20world%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhere-world-most-cycle-friendly-city-amsterdam-copenhagen%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a0904375c59aa9567753252ba8b3fb9a78a2559%2F0_52_4301_2582%2F4301.jpg>
 Cycling accounts for 48% of journeys in Amsterdam. Photograph: Giorgio 
Fochesato/Getty 
Notable success stories come from the hailed Dutch and Danish cycling utopias, 
where investment into cycling is highest. But even they’ve had their share of 
problems. During the urban modernisation of cities after the second world war, 
cars became a dominating force on the streets of Copenhagen, and modal share of 
bicycles fell to as low as 10% before the city sought to tackle the problem 
through a combination of car-free days, the removal of parking spaces and 
pruning areas for pedestrian use. Today, Copenhageners on bikes account for 
over 50% of trips within the city centre; in Amsterdam, it’s 48% in the urban 
core, and in the university city ofGroningen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jul/29/how-groningen-invented-a-cycling-template-for-cities-all-over-the-world>
, bikes are used for 61% of all trips (rising to 70% of trips made to 
educational institutions). These cities are all obvious contenders for the most 
cycle-friendly crown, but there are other factors to consider besides numbers.

A study shows that for every km cycled, society enjoys 16p profit while 
driving the same distance produces a loss of 10p

Since 2011, Copenhagenize Design Company <http://www.copenhagenize.com/> has 
analysed cities’ efforts to improve bikeability across avariety of factors 
<http://copenhagenize.eu/index/criteria.html> including advocacy, 
infrastructure, social acceptance and modal share to create a biennial 
bike-friendlycity index <http://copenhagenize.eu/index/index.html>. “The 
rankings are based on data from the parameters, but we add added bonus points 
for things such as political will … [Parameters] plus expertise provides a more 
‘now’ vision of what’s happening in a city, not just data,” says Mikael 
Colville-Andersen, chief executive of the company. Developed as a tool to 
determine the most effective initiatives for re-establishing the bicycle in the 
urban landscape, this year Copenhagenize scrutinised 122 cities with a 
population above 600,000. There are a few exceptions to those analysed, and 
less populated places with national significance – such as Malmö and Ljubljana 
– were included to provide a more well-rounded spread, and to limit Dutch and 
Danish cycling utopias from dominating the list.

Unsurprisingly, those cities still come out on top, and the Danish capital 
itself takes Copenhagenize’s first place, withAmsterdam 
<http://copenhagenize.eu/index/02_amsterdam.html> and Utrecht 
<http://copenhagenize.eu/index/03_utrecht.html> running in close second and 
third. Copenhagen claimed Amsterdam’s spot at the top this year, after the 
city’s bikemodal share jumped 
<http://www.copenhagenize.com/2014/07/the-greatest-urban-experiment-right-now.html>
 by 9% between 2012 and 2014. The city can also boast 5.2 bikes for every car 
in the city, and bonus points were awarded for the continued investment incycle 
infrastructure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/jul/14/bike-lanes-bridge-copenhagen-new-cycle-snake-cykelslangen>
, including the new cycle “superhighway” that’s currently under way to connect 
residents of surrounding areas to the capital.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhere-world-most-cycle-friendly-city-amsterdam-copenhagen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F513c02eacaeb50dfee970e8fe774c115f25e801e%2F0_0_4896_2939%2F4896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Where%20is%20the%20most%20cycle-friendly%20city%20in%20the%20world%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhere-world-most-cycle-friendly-city-amsterdam-copenhagen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Where%20is%20the%20most%20cycle-friendly%20city%20in%20the%20world%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhere-world-most-cycle-friendly-city-amsterdam-copenhagen%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F513c02eacaeb50dfee970e8fe774c115f25e801e%2F0_0_4896_2939%2F4896.jpg>
 Portland has a cycle modal share of 7.2% and over 319 miles of bike lanes. 
Photograph: Rick Bowmer/AP 
Back to looking at the hard statistics 
<https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/> again, the League of American 
Bicyclists (LAB) have producedUS city rankings 
<http://bikeleague.org/sites/default/files/Where_We_Ride_2014_data_web.pdf> 
based on commuter modal share.Davis, California 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/aug/03/davis-california-the-american-city-which-fell-in-love-with-the-bicycle>
 comes out on top with a 23.2% of total commutes made by bike, making it the 
most cycle-friendly city in the US. As a small college town of 66,700 people, 
they have it much easier than the country’s bustling metropolises. At almost 10 
times larger than Davis, Portland, Oregon has achieved a bike modal share of 
7.2% thanks to over 319 miles (and rising) of bike lanes. Over the years, this 
infrastructure has cost the city around $60m (£39.7m) – the samecost of 
constructing 1 single mile of urban freeway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/oct/28/price-mile-highway-bike-friendly-city>
.

Across the country, however, the modal share still hovers below 2%, but many 
municipalities are making big waves to shift the focus away from the dominating 
car, and back down to a more human level. In Detroit, home of the motor car, 
over 170 miles of cycle track have been introduced on the roads since 2006, 
contributing to a 400% rise in the number of cyclists on the roads since 2000, 
and aweekly bike ride <http://slowroll.bike/> around the city regularly draws 
in over 3,000 people. Cincinnati, too, has felt a 350% increase, but both 
cities are struggling to push the percentage of total bike commuters above 1%. 
“It’s incredible how communities throughout the country are able to leverage 
their unique circumstances to improve conditions for bicyclists,” says LAB 
policy specialist Ken McLeod. “Sometimes communities that have lost population 
and have overbuilt roads give some of that space to bicycles”.

Similarly to the rust belt cities, residents of Christchurch, New Zealand took 
to cycling as a more efficient mode of transport when roads and routes were 
blocked or diverted after the 2011 earthquake destroyed large areas of the 
city. When presented with the opportunity to contribute to the rebuild plan, 
better cycling infrastructure featured top of the list for many residents. 
While only 3% of all trips in New Zealand are made by bike, inChristchurch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/sep/01/christchurch-earthquake-cyclopolis-redesign-city-cyclists-pedestrians>
 – once known as the “Copenhagen of the south” – 7% of people commute by bike. 
Results over in Australia are not so promising.Census data 
<http://chartingtransport.com/2012/10/30/trends-in-journey-to-work-mode-shares-in-australian-cities-to-2011/>
 shows that Canberra has the highest percentage of people who commute by bike 
at 2.8%, while other cities struggle to see this rise above 1.9%, with Sydney 
seriously lagging at 0.9%.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhere-world-most-cycle-friendly-city-amsterdam-copenhagen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F79e0aba13d5b515255f66383f5acb56cc6d0fafb%2F0_194_5100_3062%2F5100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Where%20is%20the%20most%20cycle-friendly%20city%20in%20the%20world%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhere-world-most-cycle-friendly-city-amsterdam-copenhagen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Where%20is%20the%20most%20cycle-friendly%20city%20in%20the%20world%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhere-world-most-cycle-friendly-city-amsterdam-copenhagen%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F79e0aba13d5b515255f66383f5acb56cc6d0fafb%2F0_194_5100_3062%2F5100.jpg>
 London’s £100mMini Holland 
<http://viewer.gutools.co.uk/cities/2015/oct/05/bike-lane-blues-london-local-businesses-cycle-enfield-green-lanes>
 scheme aims to transform three boroughs with Dutch-inspired segregated bike 
lanes. Photograph: Anthony Hatley/Alamy 
For cities such as Detroit and Christchurch, it may be easier to fly ahead 
when you’re starting from the bottom, but the message of their success is clear 
– build it andthey will come 
<http://www.citylab.com/commute/2014/06/protected-bike-lanes-arent-just-safer-they-can-also-increase-cycling/371958/>
.Buenos Aires 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/apr/02/c40-latin-america-climate-resilience-green-copenhagen>
 has also gone from zero to hero thanks to its implementation of over 140km of 
protected bike lanes (“bicisendas”), and a highly successful bike-share scheme, 
putting it in 14th place on the Copenhagenize list this year. Seville, too, has 
jumped up the ranks with the number of people on bikes multiplied 11-fold in 
the past few years, thanks to a combination of segregated lanes (80km in one 
go) and bike-share schemes. And in the Canadian city of Calgary, an entire 
bike-lane network was launched at once, rather than slowly trialling a handful 
of small pilot lanes, and was an overnight success. Other than quadrupling the 
number of cyclists on the routesalmost immediately 
<http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/calgary/downtown-cycling-spikes-since-track-installed-1.2495526>
, the project also gets gold stars for finishing C$1.35m (£650,000) under the 
projected $7.1mbudget 
<http://newsroom.calgary.ca/news/city-opens-cycle-track-pilot-network-ahead-of-schedule-under-budget>
.

It’s not about promoting it to lycra-clad riders. A strong voice is needed to 
encourage regular citizens to cycle
Mikael Colville-Andersen 
With most cycle-friendly rankings heavily stacked with European 
representatives (only three of Copenhagenize’s Top 20 were not from the 
continent), are there many Asian and African cities making waves with 
bikeability? One study found that bicycle use in the Chinese capital had fallen 
from around60% in 1986 to 17% in 2010 
<http://www.citylab.com/commute/2012/04/de-bikification-beijing/1681/>, while a 
new love for the car has seen ownership more than quadruplesince 2000 
<http://www.lta.gov.sg/ltaacademy/doc/13Sep040-Feng_CarOwnershipControl.pdf>. 
But while there may no longer be9 million bicycles in Beijing 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eHQG6-DojVw>, the government hope to restore 
the people’s faith in this now out-dated concept through infrastructure
improvements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jan/24/beijing-cycling-capital-plans> 
and bike-hire schemes.

Tokyo holds one of the highest modal shares for bikes in Asia, with 16% of 
journeys made on two wheels. But after appearing in fourth (2011) and12th 
(2013) place on the index, the city dropped off the list this year after 
bike-centred planning came to a stand-still.

For African cities, the data is much thinner on the ground. Data from the 
London School of Economics shows that non-motorised transport accounts for more 
than 70% of trips in some African cities, but this figure includes walking, 
riding a scooter and animal-drawn transport as well as bicycles.One 2014 study 
<http://www.joburg.org.za/images/stories/2013/May/CoJ%20SITPF%20Draft%2013%20May%202013.pdf>
 shows that cycling in Johannesburg accounts for only 0.2% of all trips in the 
city, while a rather outdated study suggests that the modal split for bikes in 
Nairobi, Dar es Salaam and Harare also fails to reachabove 3% 
<http://info.worldbank.org/etools/docs/library/110868/kampala/docs/TRANSPORT-%20T%20MBARA.pdf>
. In Cape Town,1% of residents 
<https://www.capetown.gov.za/en/PublicParticipation/Documents/HYS_Transport_ITP_Final_Draft.pdf>
 get around by bike, but the city is working to drive the development of 
non-motorised transportation through improved cycling infrastructure, 
integrated transport options andgrassroots empowerment 
<http://www.benbikes.org.za/> for bicycle culture.

Bike lane blues: why don’t businesses want a £30m cycle-friendly upgrade?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/oct/05/bike-lane-blues-london-local-businesses-cycle-enfield-green-lanes>
While the hard modal share stats might provide a clear indicator of the 
world’s most bike-friendly city, perhaps less quantifiable factors such as 
gender split, perception of safety and attitude can aid other cities to 
understand how they might get there. Take the attitude towards cycling, for 
example. Studies carried out by Danish researchers show that many Danes don’t 
even consider cycling exercise – for them, it’s a mode of transportation and 
not a workout activity. This also ties into political will, Colville-Andersen 
explains: “It’s not about promoting it to lycra-clad riders. A strong voice is 
needed to encourage regular citizens to cycle.” Having a high proportion of
women riding bikes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jul/09/women-cycling-infrastructure-cyclists-killed-female>
 may also be a sign of a cycle-friendly city. In Copenhagen, women make up 55% 
of those cycling, while the traffic-clogged streets of Manhattan hold only 20% 
female riders, reflecting the lack of infrastructure in New York.

Looking at the success of these cities – be it through modal share, the number 
of female cyclists or attitude towards biking – could it be as simple as just 
transplanting their models from one city to the next,Copenhagen to Jakarta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/sep/10/cycling-jakarta-dream-copenhagen-indonesia-bike>
, perhaps? Colville-Andersen thinks so: “What is a city? It’s just a bunch of 
homo sapiens living together and having to move from A to B … Take any city on 
the planet, it doesn’t matter about climate or topography. Best-practice 
infrastructure has been around for decades … It’s just copy and paste.” In 
London, this “copy and paste” method is taking form through theMini Holland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/oct/05/bike-lane-blues-london-local-businesses-cycle-enfield-green-lanes>
 scheme, which will see three boroughs transform into cycle-friendly spaces 
through the £100m funding of Dutch-inspired segregated bike lanes and 
human-scale infrastructure.

So, while it may be possible to name the “world’s most cycle-friendly city” 
based on modal share figures and other indicators, do these rankings really 
serve any purpose? Does Buenos Aires’ 14th place on the Copenhagenize index 
really make it more bike-friendly than, say, Munich, which failed to feature in 
this year’s top 20, despite over 14% of its residents getting around on two 
wheels? Maybe not, but what these examples do show is that efforts are being 
made around the world to make urban centres – big and small – more friendly for 
people on bikes, for businesses and for the community at large.

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 