
One of Tokyo’s many grey-haired taxi drivers once challenged me to guess his 
age. Trying to be polite, I pegged him at 64. “I’m 82”, he grinned.

Such an admission wouldn’t usually inspire confidence in a passenger. But in 
Tokyo, where almost a quarter of the population are over 65, working so late in 
life isn’t just a personal triumph; it’s fast becoming a social necessity.

Japan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan>, which has the highest 
proportion of people over 65 in the world, is ahead of other countries in 
embracing ageing as an urban phenomenon. Its capital city is a good example of 
an appropriate urban environment for older people: for one, you’ll rarely find 
steps in public buildings or train stations in Tokyo without an accompanying 
ramp or lift. Everything from the traffic lights to elevators to the ATMs talks 
at you, often in a squeaky voice. This isn’t a cutesy Japanese foible, as many 
foreign visitors assume – it’s to ensure that signals and instructions are also 
communicated to people with poor eyesight.

Cities have traditionally run on young blood, defined by energy, innovation 
and change, while getting older has been associated with embracing a quieter 
life in the suburbs or rural areas. And yet, as a result of the economic 
development and advances in healthcare in the 20th century, the world is both 
urbanising and ageing. These twin challenges are converging to create a new 
phenomenon: silver cities.

You’ll rarely find steps in public buildings or train stations in Tokyo 
without an accompanying ramp or lift

By 2020, the global population of people aged 60 and over will outnumber 
children younger than five years for the first time. TheWorld Health 
Organisation estimates 
<http://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/releases/2014/lancet-ageing-series/en/>
that by 2050, there will be 2 billion people aged 60 years and older, up from 
841 million today.

Older populations are expanding faster in cities 
<http://www.oecd.org/gov/regional-policy/Policy-Brief-Ageing-in-Cities.pdf> 
than in non-metropolitan areas in OECD countries. In Lisbon, Milan, Barcelona 
and Tokyo, nearly a quarter of the population are already over 65. Contrary to 
popular assumptions, it’s not just a problem for Japan and Europe: by 2050, the 
population aged 65 and over in developing countries is expected tomore than 
triple 
<http://www.cityindicators.org/Deliverables/Cities%20and%20Ageing%20Policy%20Snapshot%20-%20GCIF%20and%20Philips%20-%20Sept%202013_9-30-2013-1145908.pdf>
, outpacing the global growth rate. According to the WHO,80% of people 
<http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/43755/1/9789241547307_eng.pdf> over 
60 will be living in developing countries within five decades.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Foldest-residents-elderly-ageing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80ece0398759a9a6f74409f1b7201ea296ac0a3f%2F0_54_1803_1082%2F1803.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Which%20cities%20have%20the%20oldest%20residents%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Foldest-residents-elderly-ageing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Which%20cities%20have%20the%20oldest%20residents%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Foldest-residents-elderly-ageing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80ece0398759a9a6f74409f1b7201ea296ac0a3f%2F0_54_1803_1082%2F1803.jpg>
 In Barcelona, nearly a quarter of the population are already over 65. 
Photograph: Martin Godwin for the Guardian 
The ageing of the global population is something to celebrate, as it reflects 
the improved living standards that have raised average life expectancy from 47 
in the 1950s to around 70 today. At the same time, birth rates have fallen, 
resulting in a higher proportion of older people. In most countries, mortality 
fell before fertility did, creating a so-called “baby boomer” generation that 
was followed by generations of fewer and fewer children.

In cities with slow growth this effect is acute: in Tokyo, Milan, and 
Barcelona, the over-65s outnumber the under-14s by a factor of around two to 
one. These cities could be said to be the most elderly in the world.

By comparison, cities such as Shanghai, Seoul and Moscow may be relatively 
young, but their older populations are growing fast. In London – where 32% of 
the population is under 25 – the number of people over 60 is projected to 
expand by 48% by 2035, while the population of the under 60s will only increase 
by 12%, according to areport by the mayor’s Design Advisory Group 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/sites/default/files/mdag_good_growth_agenda_-_ageing_london_interactive.pdf>
.

A third category of cities still have a majority of young people and are 
ageing at a slower pace, although they will face similar demographic shifts in 
the future. Johannesburg, where 41% of people are under 25 and only 4% are over 
65, is one of these.

How does a city effectively support healthy ageing while remaining a vital 
centre of culture, commerce and innovation? The WHO defines an “age-friendly” 
city as one which ensures quality of life for people as they age by optimising 
opportunities for health, participation in society, and security. By improving 
access to both urban infrastructure and society, cities can ensure people 
remain active in work, family and civic life as they age, reaping the benefits 
of their experience and knowledge. Ageing societies also present opportunities 
for innovation – and therefore growth.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Foldest-residents-elderly-ageing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47b5102ffb3259f371220d437a4c9016f7815e52%2F9_0_3525_2116%2F3525.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Which%20cities%20have%20the%20oldest%20residents%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Foldest-residents-elderly-ageing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Which%20cities%20have%20the%20oldest%20residents%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Foldest-residents-elderly-ageing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47b5102ffb3259f371220d437a4c9016f7815e52%2F9_0_3525_2116%2F3525.jpg>
 The number of people over 60 in London is projected to expand by 48% by 2035. 
Photograph: Andy Rain/EPA 
However, ageing cities do face a challenge. They will need to balance a 
shrinking labour supply with increased costs for health and social care. In 
Calgary, where only 2% of older people participate in the labour force, a 
programme was established to hire retired city employees for limited-term 
projects that require particular skills. To respond to increasing care needs 
and to allow people to stay in their homes for as long as possible, Helsinki 
has launched a pilot programme to provide customised home services from public, 
private and voluntary associations that are in line with people’s personal 
budgets.

Cities will also have to deal with an increase in people suffering complex 
physical and mental health issues due to ageing. In Japan, dementia-related 
railway accidents are on the increase, which ledconvenience stores in Osaka to 
pledge 
<http://www.japantoday.com/category/kuchikomi/view/osaka-convenience-stores-to-help-wandering-dementia-sufferers>
 they would be “dementia supporters” by training staff to assist older people 
who appear disorientated.

Balancing the desires of different generations can be difficult: last year, 
Tokyochanged a law 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/wires/afp/article-3021232/Once-seen-not-heard-Tokyo-children-noisy-again.html>
 to stop children’s voices being considered noise pollution, after multiple 
complaints from elderly residents living near schools were upheld, preventing 
the construction of new nurseries in a city that suffers from a dire shortage 
of childcare facilities.

Older people <https://www.theguardian.com/society/older-people> – defined as 
those over 65 for the purposes of this article – are not a homogenous group, 
however, as Florian Kohlbacher, founding director of the Research Institute on 
Ageing and Society at Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University explains. People’s 
lifestyles, physical and mental capacities and personal preferences become more 
diverse as they age. That means that while some need round-the-clock care, many 
others are running businesses, or marathons. Fighting ageism – and the image of 
older people as physically or mentally impaired , or even “useless” – is one of 
the major challenges in developing a city in which older people can live life 
to the fullest and in which their accumulated skills and wisdom are properly 
harnessed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Foldest-residents-elderly-ageing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa3941c88c74ed2a13f060b57d9a29aad325a77b%2F0_19_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Which%20cities%20have%20the%20oldest%20residents%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Foldest-residents-elderly-ageing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Which%20cities%20have%20the%20oldest%20residents%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Foldest-residents-elderly-ageing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa3941c88c74ed2a13f060b57d9a29aad325a77b%2F0_19_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Fauja Singh, the world’s oldest marathon runner until retiring in 2013, 
prepares for a race in Edinburgh in 2011 at the age of 100. Photograph: Jeff J 
Mitchell/Getty Images 
That said, there is a higher statistical incidence of disability and illness 
in older people, and most of us become physically weaker as we age. Since lack 
of exercise can accelerate physical decline and lead to osteoporosis, obesity 
and other health problems, cities should encourage walking and cycling to 
prevent age-related declines in strength and fitness,according to an OECD report
 <http://www.oecd.org/gov/regional-policy/Policy-Brief-Ageing-in-Cities.pdf>. 
To that end, Yokohama, a city near Tokyo, has introduced awalking programme 
<http://www.city.yokohama.lg.jp/lang/koyoko/798/en.html> that offers free 
pedometers to people over 40 and awards points for steps walked. 152,670 people 
have signed up so far; 92,168 of the participants are over 65.

Since close proximity to shops and parks is associated with higher mobility, 
compact cities with public transport networks may be healthier environments to 
age in than rural locations, where a car is needed to get around. Inone study 
in Portland 
<http://journals.humankinetics.com/AcuCustom/Sitename/Documents/DocumentItem/2717.pdf>
, housing density was associated with greater levels of walking whileanother in 
Bogota 
<https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Diana_Parra2/publication/44622424_Built_environment_attributes_and_walking_patterns_among_the_elderly_population_in_Bogot/links/54872c0d0cf2ef34478ec39a.pdf>
 found that having pedestrianised corridors at the weekend was correlated with 
more walking among older residents.

But the downside of urban living can be a lack of personal contact. Isolation 
is a big problem for older people, who often become “invisible” in cities. Some 
are too frail or physically incapacitated to make their way around the city; 
others lack incentives, the financial capacity or access to social events. Many 
also live alone. Asthe WHO notes 
<http://www.who.int/ageing/publications/Global_age_friendly_cities_Guide_English.pdf>
, older people tend to prefer human contact to automated systems, and so a 
“smart city” in which the main interface is a touch-screen rather than a human 
face may be detrimental for older people’s mental health.

‘My neighbour avoids me ... I was very unhappy’: your tales of urban loneliness
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/mar/24/my-neighbour-avoids-me-i-was-very-unhappy-your-tales-of-urban-loneliness>
However, there are some ways in which technology can be leveraged to lessen 
isolation. Beşiktaş, a city in Turkey with double the proportion of over-65s as 
the rest of the country, launched a“wellness service” 
<http://nws.eurocities.eu/MediaShell/media/Citiesinaction_Besiktas_July15.pdf> 
in 2013 that provides senior citizens with a device through which they can 
order services such as meals or a haircut, phone friends and family, or even 
call an ambulance, at the push of a button.

Work is one way to tackle isolation. The mayor’s design advisory group in 
London recently released a report 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/sites/default/files/mdag_good_growth_agenda_-_ageing_london_interactive.pdf>
 advocating for the creation of an “intergenerational start-up culture” that 
would connect experienced older people with younger entrepreneurs. The report 
also acknowledged that many older people have the potential to become 
entrepreneurs themselves. Lisbon has started a Senior University, open to 
anyone over the age of 50, where senior volunteers offer lectures on the arts 
or computer sciences, while the Technical University of Lisbon (UTL) provides 
classes for over 50s that lead to a degree in science, technology or 
citizenship. Anew partnership in Manchester  
<http://www.ageing-better.org.uk/news/centre-ageing-better-announces-ground-breaking-partnership-tackle-inequalities-later-life-greater-manchester/>
between Centre for Ageing Better and Greater Manchester Combined Authority 
(GMCA) aims to develop and share innovative approaches to tackling social, 
economic and health inequalities in later life, includingsupporting people aged 
50 years and over re-enter the labour market 
<http://www.ageing-better.org.uk/our-work/other-activities/local-approach-ageing-better/>
.

Due to a low birth rate and the lack of mass immigration in Japan, it is 
estimated that by 2022 there will only be two people of working age for every 
person over 65. However, it also has one of the highest labour participation 
rates in older people in the developed world, with29.3% of men over 65 employed 
<https://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=LFS_SEXAGE_I_R>, versus 8.2% in 
Germany and 3.2% in France. Some work out of financial necessity, but many 
accept such jobs because work in Japanese culture is tightly correlated to 
personal self-esteem andikigai, or purpose in life.

That reality is evident on the streets of Tokyo, and not just with 
octagenarian taxi drivers. Many retired men find work painting fences, managing 
bicycle parks, or even on roadworks, where they are usually charged with waving 
a luminous stick to alert pedestrians and cyclists to the existence of a hole 
in the pavement.

Whether they’re working or not, older people are going to be an increasingly 
common presence in our cities in years to come. What we can hope is that our 
cities’ old age is, much like our own, not as bad as our younger selves feared; 
and that, with support from both the state and society, our cities will turn 
more silver than grey.

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 