
Jack White's estranged wife, Karen Elson, has reportedly sought and received a 
restraining order against the singer following a string of harassment 
allegations.

According to the Nashville City Paper 
<http://nashvillecitypaper.com/content/city-news/judge-slaps-jack-white-restraining-order-bars-contact-estranged-wife>
, White was served the order on 22 July, and is now only allowed to communicate 
with Elson over email. The order read that Elson has "fears for her and the 
children's safety as a result of this harassment," and that White is barred 
from having "any contact with wife whatsoever except as it relates to parenting 
time with the parties' minor children."

The famous model and singer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/may/16/karen-elson-interview-jack-white>
, who currently cares for the pair's two children, is said to have battled for 
months with White over parenting rights. Elson claims that the White Stripes 
founder is not fit to be a parent, despite his attempts to help raise the 
children.

According to Elson's application, White 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2012/apr/27/jack-white-problem-women-laura-barton>
 has a violent temper and sent harassing emails and texts. Elson complained to 
her attorney that in phone calls and emails White was allegedly "pressuring her 
about the settlement terms for divorce". White allegedly wrote in one email: 
"We're not getting lawyers involved to rip me off."

Elson claims that White berated her after she attended another unnamed 
musician's wedding who White claimed had "ripped off" his music. The 
38-year-old musician also allegedly wanted Elson to contact their children's 
private school to remove their kids from a class in which another entertainer's 
child was present, who he said had "ripped off" his music.

The news comes two years after the couple threw a divorce party 
<http://i.huffpost.com/gen/289392/KAREN-ELSON-DIVORCE.jpg> to celebrate the 
pair's mutually accepted breakup. Elson and White have a hearing on 29 August 
to discuss care of their children.

The model said in a statement: "This is a private matter. I thank you for 
respecting my family's privacy and will be making no further comment."
 