
John Kerry is due to lay out a US framework for a Palestinian-Israeli 
agreement as theObama administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/obama-administration> and its 
international allies scramble to protect what is left of the peace process 
before Donald Trump takes office.

The US secretary of state will outline the proposals on Wednesday, at a time 
when US-Israeli relations have reached their lowest point in decades. The 
government of the Israeli prime minister,Benjamin Netanyahu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/benjamin-netanyahu>, has accused Washington 
of conspiring against it when a UN security council vote on Friday demanded an 
end to settlement building in the West Bank.


The Kerry speech at the state department at 11am (4pm GMT) is expected to 
restate the Obama administration’s continued faith in a two-state solution to 
the chronic impasse. It is a parting shot after eight years in office, during 
which there has been a dearth of diplomatic progress. It is not expected to 
lead to any new initiative but rather lay down a marker on a longstanding US 
and international approach to the region before the US president-elect, whose 
commitment to such a solution is in doubt, assumes office.

Netanyahu 'told New Zealand backing UN vote would be declaration of war'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/28/netanyahu-told-new-zealand-backing-un-vote-would-be-declaration-of-war>
“What secretary Kerry will be doing is he will give a speech in which he lays 
out a comprehensive vision for how we see the conflict being resolved – where 
we see things in 2016 as we unfortunately conclude our term in office without 
there being significant progress toward peace,” the deputy national security 
adviser, Ben Rhodes, told Israel’s Channel 2 television.

The parameters outlined by Kerry are expected to draw international 
endorsement at a meeting of foreign ministers on 15 January, just five days 
before Trump moves into the White House. The meeting is supposed to reinforce a 
strategy of isolating Netanyahu in the hope it will push him towards reviving 
stalled negotiations with the Palestinians. Netanyahu has said his government 
will not attend.

In expectation of a more supportive administration in Washington next month, 
Netanyahu has reacted to the diplomatic manoeuvring in the last week’s of 
Obama’s term with defiance.

Israel responded furiously to the UN security council resolution passed on 
Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/23/us-abstention-allows-un-to-demand-end-to-israeli-settlements>
 that demanded an end to settlement building, threateningdiplomatic reprisals 
<https://www.yahoo.com/news/israel-says-reducing-ties-nations-over-un-vote-102205471.html?soc_src=social-sh&soc_trk=tw>
 against the countries that voted in favour.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fnetanyahu-john-kerry-friends-security-council-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Benjamin%20Netanyahu%20to%20John%20Kerry%3A%20friends%20don%E2%80%99t%20take%20friends%20to%20the%20security%20council%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fnetanyahu-john-kerry-friends-security-council-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Benjamin%20Netanyahu%20to%20John%20Kerry%3A%20friends%20don%E2%80%99t%20take%20friends%20to%20the%20security%20council%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fnetanyahu-john-kerry-friends-security-council-video&media=>
Benjamin Netanyahu to John Kerry: friends don’t take friends to the security 
council 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/27/netanyahu-john-kerry-friends-security-council-video>
Jerusalem authorities had been expected to discuss the issue of more than 600 
building permits for settlements in historically Palestinian east Jerusalem on 
Wednesday, but the planned vote was cancelled. Hanan Rubin, a member of 
Jerusalem’s Planning and Housing Committee, told Reuters the request to put off 
the vote came from Netanyahu.

Obama’s parting shot at Netanyahu is a futile gesture | Simon Tisdall
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/26/obama-netanyahu-un-resolution-israeli-settlements-peace>
Netanyahu has vowed to resist a peace framework imposed on his government, and 
observers warn that a threatened Israeli backlash in the form of thousands of 
new settler homes in east Jerusalem, combined with Trump’s plan to move the US 
embassy to the disputed city, could trigger a fresh wave of violence.

The Israeli government is reportedly fearful that any guidelines agreed in 
Paris would be turned into another UN resolution before Trump’s inauguration, 
and it has ratcheted up its rhetoric, presenting itself as the victim of an 
international conspiracy.


A spokesman for Netanyahu claimed to have “ironclad evidence” that the Obama 
administration had plotted behind the scenes to promote the UN resolution. 
Israel has said it willpresent evidence against the Obama administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/26/israel-un-resolution-settlements-obama-trump>
 to the incoming Trump team.

On Tuesday, Egyptian media published a document purporting to be a transcript 
of a meeting 
<http://www.timesofisrael.com/transcript-claims-to-show-us-worked-with-palestinians-on-un-resolution/>
 in which Kerry and the US national security adviser, Susan Rice, discussed the 
UN resolution and US proposals with Palestinian officials, who agreed to give 
the Kerry framework immediate support. The State Department spokesman, John 
Kirby, said no such meeting took place.

Meanwhile, Israel’s defence minister, Avigdor Lieberman, portrayed the Paris 
conference as a new “Dreyfus trial”, referring to an outburst of French 
antisemitism more than a century ago, and urged French Jews to move toIsrael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel>.

On Tuesday a French official denied there was any intention to pass a new 
security council resolution on the basis of the Paris conference. A foreign 
ministry spokesperson said the meeting would “give the participants an 
opportunity to present a comprehensive incentive package to encourage the 
resumption of negotiations between the Israelis and Palestinians. Only they 
will be able to conclude a peace deal directly.”

Palestinian leaders hope the UN resolution and the Paris conference will offer 
some degree of international protection against the encroachment of settlements 
in the Trump era.

The Palestinian president, Mahmoud Abbas, said he hoped the Paris meeting 
would establish an international mechanism to end Israeli settlement building.

Trump criticised Friday’s UN resolution, saying it would make it harder to 
negotiate a peace agreement. In a tweet on Monday, he described the UN as “just 
a club for people to get together, talk and have a good time”. Trump’s 
designated ambassador to Israel, his own bankruptcy lawyer David Friedman, has 
actively supported settlement building.

Aaron David Miller, a former US negotiator on the Middle East and now a 
scholar at the Wilson Centre thinktank, said Obama’s 11th-hour attempt at 
legacy building on the Israeli-Palestinian issue could trigger a backlash. “It 
risks the incoming administration walking away from whatever has transpired in 
December and early January, and not just walking away from [but] sending 
unmistakable signals to the Israelis that it would support and favour acts on 
the ground that go beyond what we’ve seen,” Miller said.

“The odds that Netanyahu will now press and Trump will respond positively to a 
move to push the embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem, I think have gone up.”

He said that if the highly emotive issue of Jerusalem’s status became the 
focal point of Israeli-Palestinian friction once more, “then I think the 
prospects for a serious, significant confrontation are high”.

Amir Oren, a liberal Israeli commentator, argued that the UN resolution could 
save the government from itself by bringing closer an end to settlement 
construction.

“Santa Obama delivered a wonderful Christmas present to Israel when the United 
States opted not to veto Friday’s United Nations security council vote 
condemning settlement policy,” hewrote in Haaretz 
<http://www.haaretz.com/israel-news/1.761269>. “The passage of the resolution 
won’t result in the immediate dismantling of any West Bank settlements, but the 
world is beginning to come to the rescue and try to save Israel from itself.”
 