
At first glance, the rigid bureaucracy of government and the agile approach to 
innovation at tech startups might appear wholly incompatible.

Where government is large and slow, startups are lean and work in sprints. 
Where governments resist failure, tech firms embrace it as a way of moving on. 
Where government avoids disruption at all costs, most tech startups actively 
pursue it as the end game. And that’s before considering the litany of poorly 
run government IT projects.

Yet, despite the differences, these two worlds are coming together. Rapidly 
changing technology and changing user demands and expectations are forcing 
governments to transform their digital services to keep pace. Most governments 
now share the same mission: to improve radically the user experience of 
interacting with government.

 To do this, a growing number of governments are setting up their own digital 
agencies. The aim? To apply principles used by tech startups to overhaul public 
services.

One of the early adopters of this model was the UK government, which in 2011 
launched theGovernment Digital Service (GDS) 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/government-digital-service>, 
developedGov.uk <https://www.gov.uk/>, a platform for all government websites 
and launched an online marketplace for government suppliers.

After that strong start, progress has slowed more recently, with the departure 
of senior GDS staff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2015/aug/12/government-digital-service-staff-resignations>
, but the GDS model is being copied by several other governments. In August 
2014 theUnited States Digital Service 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/participate/united-states-digital-service> was 
created as a startup in the White House and in July 2015, the Australian 
government launched theDigital Transformation Office (DTO) 
<https://www.dta.gov.au/who-we-are/>. Most recently, the Singapore government 
unveiled its own agency,GovTech <https://www.tech.gov.sg/>, in October.

GovTech is different from its peers in several respects. First, it is big. 
Where the likes of Australia’s DTO have a headcount of around 70, GovTech has 
1,800 people on the payroll. Second, it is centralised. Singapore has a single 
layer of government that is broken into 90 units and GovTech, born of the 
merger of two departments, is embedded into all of them, running all tech 
projects.

Jacqueline Poh, chief executive of GovTech, says that despite its scale and 
structure, the agency has integrated the lean and agile working practices so 
typical of tech start ups. To this end, teams of software engineers, data 
scientists, designers and user experience experts work in digital accelerators, 
where collaborative working is encouraged to speed up innovation, usually with 
people sharing workspace.

GovTech has a larger remit than other government agencies. As well as 
transforming the delivery of digital public services by using technologies such 
as analytics and artificial intelligence, it has been tasked with developing 
capabilities in other areas. So the team is working on apps extracting 
information from data government infrastructure, geospatial technology, 
cybersecurity and smart sensors, which pick up signals from the physical world.

Poh says GovTech is looking at applied technologies like these to see how to 
use them for improving healthcare or urban areas, as part of the Singapore 
government’sSmart Nation <http://www.smartnation.sg/> initiative. Launched in 
2014, Smart Nation encourages people, businesses and government to work 
together to use technological advancements to improve everyday life.

GovTech is now working on the development of a trade platform to simplify data 
exchanges between businesses, their partners and government. It is also 
considering piloting an extension of its MyInfo system, which enables citizens 
to share personal data with the state, to the banking industry next year.


Paul Shelter, chief executive of Australia’s DTO, says government agencies 
around the world are increasingly collaborating over innovation. “We look 
closely at what our colleagues are doing in the UK, in the US, in Singapore, in 
Estonia, in New Zealand, and other countries as well [including Korea], and we 
see what works,” he says. “We are seeing people from countries all around the 
world working in very similar ways, and, increasingly, sharing each other’s 
code.”

Bill Dutton, professor of media and information policy at Michigan State 
University, believes digital service transformation requires the top-down 
management support an agency model provides. But it can’t simply be imposed: “A 
central agency has to believe in and trust innovation at the edges of the 
bureaucracy, rather than top-down innovation. This is very difficult to achieve 
in practice.”

This was highlighted by a report titled Making a success of digital government 
<http://www.instituteforgovernment.org.uk/publications/making-success-digital-government>
, published in October by UK thinktank the Institute for Government. It found 
that the launch of the UK’s GDS created “a lot of conflict and resistance to 
change, some failure and some success” – the conflict being a result of the 
traditional way projects were implemented.


Poh acknowledges these cultural challenges. “Our motto is: act small, think 
big and do now. There is a tendency in government to do the exact opposite.”

But she is confident there is the political will to support delivery. In fact, 
that she suggests this agency model could become a digital disrupter, changing 
the way industries or organisers do business.Poh thinks adding robotics or 
augmented reality, which uses technology to enhance someone’s perception of 
reality, to some of the government’s services, “ would actually give us a 
disruptive edge”.

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 