
• Gina Miller <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gina-miller>, a UK 
investment manager. She is represented by the law firm Mishcon de Reya, Lord 
Pannick QC and Rhodri Thompson QC.

The 51-year-old lead claimant was born in Guyana but became a UK citizen. 
Miller has received death threats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/gina-miller-the-woman-behind-the-article-50-legal-challenge>
. She denies that her challenge is aimed at reversing Brexit.


She has commented: “All the people who have been saying ‘we need to take back 
control’, ‘we need sovereignty’, well you can’t have it with one hand and then 
with the other say, ‘I’m going to bypass it now and not seek consultation from 
the representatives in parliament’. You just can’t have it both ways.”

• Deir Tozetti Dos Santos, a hairdresser who holds UK and European 
citizenship, is represented by the law firm Edwin Coe, Dominic Chambers QC and 
Jessica Simor QC.


Dos Santos, 37, works at a salon in Belgravia, central London. He has kept a 
lower profile than Miller and has been targeted with online abuse. After 
winning the high court case, he told The Guardian: “I have never challenged the 
result of the referendum – in fact I voted for Brexit in the referendum for the 
sole reason that I wanted power to be returned fromEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> to the British parliament.


“But I did not think it was right for government then just to bypass 
parliament and try to take away my legal rights without consulting parliament 
first ... In her speech to the Conservative party conference, the prime 
minister attacked me for bringing these proceedings as a claimant. She said I 
was trying to subvert democracy. That was an unwarranted and irresponsible 
attack.”

• The People’s Challenge, a crowdfunded initiative, represented by the law 
firm Bindmans 
<https://www.bindmans.com/insight/brexit/fired-up-and-ready-to-go-the-peoples-challenge-legal-team-prepares-to-defen>
, Helen Mountfield QC and Gerry Facenna QC. It is the first fully-funded claim 
on CrowdJustice to reach the supreme court. One of the leading activists is 
Grahame Pigney, who lives in France. “The rights and privileges of Britons [who 
live in Europe] didn’t figure in the Brexit debate. The referendum was 
advisory. It must go back to parliament ... as parliament has granted us these 
rights, it is for parliament to decide when, how and under what circumstances 
they are taken away.”

The judges protect us. It’s time to stand up for them | Sarah Helm
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/05/parliament-supreme-court-judges-protest-us-brexiteers-media-war-on-judiciary>
• AB and a child, represented by the law firm Bhatia Best and Manjit Gill QC. 
Brought on behalf of children whose right to residence in UK depends on their 
EU treaty rights.

• Fair Deal for Expats, a group formed by British expatriates living abroad in 
10 EU states, represented by the law firm Crofts Solicitors and Patrick Green 
QC, has been given permission to intervene [join the case].

• Scotland’s lord advocate and Wales’s counsel general will be allowed to 
participate in the hearing.

• Aiden O’Neill QC, representing the Independent Workers Union of Great 
Britain, will argue that using the royal prerogative will undermine the 
“legislative competence” of the Scottish parliament.

• Lawyers for Great Britain, a pro-Brexit group led by Martin Howe QC, believe 
the result of the referendum should be implemented without further delay.

• Cases heard in Belfast on the constitutional impact of triggering article 50 
will also be joined up to the dispute in the supreme court. The Northern 
Ireland attorney general, John Larkin QC, argues that the Good Friday peace 
agreement “has nothing to do with EU membership”. The unsuccessful challengers 
in the Belfast high court disagree with him.
 