
The knee injury Danny Welbeck suffered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/10/arsenal-danny-welbeck-out-months-knee-surgery-england-euro-2016>
 in Arsenal’s match against Manchester City has ruled him out of this summer’s 
European Championship, which is a significant blow to Roy Hodgson. While the 
25-year old forward is far from prolific at club level, his international 
record is highly commendable and Welbeck has become a favourite of the England 
boss. He offers exceptional athleticism in attack but, as with other explosive, 
muscular players, his susceptibility to injury has hampered his career.

How Hodgson reacts to this setback will depend on the role he saw Welbeck 
occupying in his squad. Welbeck prefers to play as a central striker but 
Hodgson would have deployed him in a wide role, with the likes of Harry Kane, 
Jamie Vardy and Daniel Sturridge less flexible tactically. With three very good 
options to choose from in the No9 position, not to mention captain Wayne 
Rooney, Hodgson could opt to replace Welbeck with another player capable of 
fulfilling duties on the wing.

Arsenal’s Danny Welbeck faces months out and may need knee surgery
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/10/arsenal-danny-welbeck-out-months-knee-surgery-england-euro-2016>
Picking another wide player would rule out a number of strikers, the favourite 
perhaps beingAndy Carroll <https://www.theguardian.com/football/andy-carroll>. 
The 27-year-old has proven his fitness – touch wood – since returning from 
injury and has scored nine league goals for West Ham this season, with six of 
them in the last six weeks. With another two assists, his rating of 6.90 is a 
commendable one.

Carroll would no doubt be used as a substitute if picked by Hodgson this 
summer. With four goals from the bench, only Christian Benteke has scored more 
as a sub, proving that Carroll can have a real impact when a side needs an 
alternative and more direct outlet. Indeed, those four goals have all been 
decisive in one way or another, earning West Ham a total of six points.

Troy Deeney’s name has barely been mentioned regarding England but he also 
offers a direct approach and has put together an impressive debut campaign in 
the top flight. The Watford skipper is the fourth top scoring Englishman in the
Premier League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> with 11 
goals, and his tally of six assists is bettered by just four other English 
players: James Milner (11), Dele Alli (nine), Ross Barkley (eight) and Danny 
Drinkwater (seven).

The 27-year old is top of the pile when it comes to aerial duels won in the 
Premier League this season, while a tally of 53 chances created is the most of 
any striker in the league. His rating of 7.24 is the 10th highest of all the 
English players in league, so the way he has been bypassed in the conversation 
aboutEuro 2016 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2016> is a bit harsh.

Another player whose name hasn’t really come up is Jermain Defoe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/jermain-defoe>, but despite his superb 
15-goal tally for struggling Sunderland, that is more understandable. While the 
veteran striker has proven he is still a box finisher of the highest order, he 
offers less variety than his counterparts. His composure and experience could 
be valuable but when you consider that both Vardy (21.6%) and Sturridge (18.6%) 
have a better conversion rate than Defoe (18.5%), his skill set is probably 
already covered within the squad.

Theo Walcott <https://www.theguardian.com/football/theo-walcott> can play up 
front and on the wing but there are a number of players far more deserving of a 
place in the squad. Walcott’s rating this season of 6.58 ranks 81st of the 118 
Englishman to make 10 or more appearances in the Premier League.

Michail Antonio has an outside chance of recognition. After a slow start to 
life at West Ham, the 26-year-old has shown great versatility to exploit 
injuries in Slaven Bilic’s squad and earn the fifth-highest rating of all 
English players this season (7.31). Capable of playing in any position on the 
right, where the national team is perhaps at its weakest, Antonio has the 
physical attributes but may lack the technical quality to succeed at 
international level. Six goals and three assists have been very beneficial to 
West Ham’s European bid but a pass accuracy of 68.9% is extremely poor.

Andros Townsend would perhaps be a better fit then and his experience of not 
only playing forEngland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> but 
making significant contributions will no doubt make him a favourite to be 
included in the squad having missed the last World Cup through injury. With 
four goals and two assists in 12 appearances since his move to Newcastle, 
Townsend’s rating of 7.29 is just behind Antonio in sixth as far as Englishmen 
are concerned.

Andy Carroll, the man with a head like a foot, is a weapon England don’t need 
| Barney Ronay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/apr/15/andy-carroll-weapon-england-roy-hodgson-west-ham-euro-2016>
Marc Albrighton (7.07) is another option on the wing. The former Aston Villa 
man has featured in every game of Leicester’s title-winning campaign and has 
given Ranieri’s side exceptional balance. However, while the 26-year old’s 
early delivery into the box is among the best in the league, he is perhaps not 
as athletic a player as England need or at least Hodgson wants in his wide 
roles.

If Hodgson eschews Albrighton, who offers reliability but perhaps lacks flair 
and pace, he might be tempted by Wilfried Zaha (7.03). While it’s fair to say 
his career hasn’t panned out how he may have expected, the 23-year-old has had 
an important season in his development. The Crystal Palace winger is incredibly 
entertaining and a daunting prospect to face for any full-back – he has 
completed more dribbles than any other Premier League player (127) – but he 
still lacks end product. Indeed, his tallies of two goals and just one assist 
are still way down on expectations. If, however, Hodgson wants to stretch play 
on the counterattack, Zaha offers that pace if he recovers full fitness in time 
following a minor injury.

Welbeck’s injury has given a handful of players a glimmer of hope and Hodgson 
something of a headache. The England manager must opt for variety in striking 
positions or an in-form threat from wide, with his favoured squad from 
qualifying severely lacking as far as the latter is concerned.

Premier League team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
La Liga team of the week

 Infographic: WhoScored 
Bundesliga team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
Serie A team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
Ligue 1 team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
Follow WhoScored on Twitter <https://twitter.com/WhoScored> and Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/WhoScored>
 