
If you were to knock on the door of a random house in a random street in 
America and ask a random person if they voted for Donald Trump, chances are 
they would say no. That’s because three in four US adults didn’t check a box in 
November to say they approve of the president-elect. 

Some 63 million votes were cast for Trump out of America’s 250 million 
<http://www.census.gov/popclock/> adults. The rest of the population includes 
several different types of people. There are the 73.5 million people who voted 
against Trump. They includemore than 65.8 million 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/12/21/politics/donald-trump-hillary-clinton-popular-vote-final-count/>
 who cast a vote for Hillary Clinton – a majority by a straight popular vote 
count. Then there are those who didn’t have the right to vote, and those who 
didn’t exercise that right for various reasons. (Still others voted for 
third-party candidates.)

Some of these people raised their voices in the weeks after the election to 
say “not my president 
<https://www.facebook.com/groups/hillaryclinton2016president/>”, while others 
will surely not be part of the formal resistance movement against Trump and 
would never have had the chance to vote regardless of the choice of candidates. 
But probing the demographics within these groups reveals that many marginalized 
groups of US residents are disproportionately unrepresented by the 
president-elect, and may have to work harder to have their interests considered 
under a President Trump.

People of color 

Most non-white voters chose Clinton on 8 November. According to exit polls 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2016/11/08/us/politics/election-exit-polls.html>
, there were differencesbetween those non-white voters: 88% of black voters 
chose Clinton, compared with 65% of Hispanics and Asians. As a group though, 
their choices look very different than white voters, only 37% of whom chose 
Clinton.
 Exit polls in the 2016 presidential election. Photograph: New York Times 
But many adults in the US did not vote for Trump simply because they didn’t 
vote for anyone at all –136 million 
<https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1VAcF0eJ06y_8T4o2gvIL4YcyQy8pxb1zYkgXF76Uu1s/edit#gid=2030096602>
 ballots were cast in total, meaning that 45% of adults who live in the US did 
not participate on election day. There are many reasons why they didn’t vote 
but one takeaway is clear: the obstacles to voting disproportionately affect 
people of color.


Non-white Americans have typically 
<https://www.census.gov/prod/2013pubs/p20-568.pdf> had much lower turnout rates 
than white Americans. The Census Bureauasks 
<http://www.census.gov/data/tables/2012/demo/voting-and-registration/p20-568.html>
 eligible voters who don’t turn out to vote why they didn’t. Their responses 
show that white Americans are five times more likely than black Americans to 
say they didn’t vote simply because they “did not like candidates or campaign 
issues”. Meanwhile, black voters are more likely than white voters to cite 
obstacles to voting, such as “inconvenient polling place” or “transportation 
problems”.

According to the Center for American Progres 
<https://www.americanprogress.org/issues/democracy/reports/2016/11/11/292322/voter-suppression-laws-cost-americans-their-voices-at-the-polls/>
s 
<https://www.americanprogress.org/issues/democracy/reports/2016/11/11/292322/voter-suppression-laws-cost-americans-their-voices-at-the-polls/>
, “poll closures and limited voting hours disproportionately affect black 
voters”. And looking at early voting data, they found that trend was 
particularly noticeable in North Carolina, where there were 158 fewer early 
polling places in counties with large black communities and African American 
voter participation was down 16%.
 Mavis Wilson looks over a sample ballot as she waits to vote early with her 
husband, Ron, in Charlotte, North Carolina. Photograph: Brian Blanco/Getty 
Images 
Another reason, “registration problems”, was chosen by about 7% of eligible 
black voters and 5% of eligible white voters when explaining why they did not 
vote in the 2012 presidential election. Voter ID laws, which disproportionately 
affect black and younger votersaccording 
<http://www.gao.gov/assets/670/665966.pdf> to a report by the Government 
Accountability Office, are often the reason for this.

Laws such as these affect many people – about one in 10 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/courts_law/getting-a-photo-id-so-you-can-vote-is-easy-unless-youre-poor-black-latino-or-elderly/2016/05/23/8d5474ec-20f0-11e6-8690-f14ca9de2972_story.html?utm_term=.8f2c199f71ee>
 US adults does not have a government-issued photo ID, which31 states 
<https://ballotpedia.org/Voter_identification_laws_by_state> require in order 
to vote.

Answers like “too busy” are also more likely to be chosen by non-white voters 
who are questioned by the census, a fact which is often met with aneye-roll 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2015/07/17/why-dont-americans-vote-were-too-busy/?utm_term=.0fc82b3c57b2>
 as being an “excuse”. But people of color aremore likely 
<https://www.census.gov/prod/2013pubs/p20-570.pdf> than white people to live in 
single-parent households and aremore likely 
<https://www.bls.gov/opub/ted/2011/ted_20110914.htm> to work in roles with less 
pay and less job security. For many of those voters, heading to a polling 
station for a few hours on a Tuesday is particularly difficult.

People with felony criminal records

State felony laws prevent about one in 40 
<http://www.sentencingproject.org/publications/6-million-lost-voters-state-level-estimates-felony-disenfranchisement-2016/>
 US adults from voting. Those disenfranchised are more likely to be non-white 
because ofracial disparities 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2016/05/24/the-race-infused-history-of-why-felons-arent-allowed-to-vote-in-a-dozen-states/?utm_term=.7bf5662592c7>
 in the US criminal justice system.

Securing voting rights for former felons is a civil rights issue that has been 
fought piecemeal in many states. Two states – Maine and Vermont 
<http://felonvoting.procon.org/view.resource.php?resourceID=000286> – permit 
even current felons to vote, while 10 states have restrictions that mean felons 
may permanently lose their voting rights once they have been convicted. These 
laws limit the voices of key stakeholders in criminal justice reform and other 
related policy issues. In Florida, 21% of African Americans are not allowed to 
vote because of state felony laws; in Kentucky, the figure is 26%; in 
Tennessee, 21%; and in Virginia, it’s 22%.

Residents of the US territories


There is another group of Americans who are excluded from voting. Residents of 
the US territories – over 98% of whom are non-white – can pay taxes, serve in 
the military and can vote in the primaries, but cannot vote for the president 
in the general election.
 John Oliver looks at voting rights in the US territories. 
People with disabilities

Some of those who did not vote for Trump are people with disabilities – they 
represent nearlyone in five 
<https://www.census.gov/newsroom/releases/archives/miscellaneous/cb12-134.html> 
people in America, but the difficulty of accessing the polls contributes to 
depressing their turnout. In 2012, one in seven of those who didn’t vote in the 
presidential election said it was due to an “illness or disability”.

For those who did vote, though, the political views of an American with a 
disability are no more likely to lean Democrat or Republican than an American 
without a disability, according to research fromPew 
<http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2016/09/22/a-political-profile-of-disabled-americans/>
. Andpolls 
<http://respectabilityusa.com/2016/12/polling-shows-people-with-disabilities-split-vote-between-trump-and-clinton/>
 which specifically contacted voters with disabilities found that Trump 
received widespread support from those Americans. This is despite inflammatory 
comments from Trump during the election that seemed to be one of the few to 
affect the candidate’s poll numbers.

 At a rally in South Carolina in November 2015, Trump appeared to mock Serge 
Kovaleski, a reporter with a disability who had asked the then Republican 
presidential candidate a question.


As he moved his arms in a way which imitated the reporter, Trump said: “Now, 
the poor guy – you ought to see the guy.” In a Bloombergpoll 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/politics/articles/2016-08-10/bloomberg-politics-national-poll>
 that tested voters on several issues surrounding Trump, they were most likely 
to choose this incident and say it bothered them.

 Donald Trump mocks a disabled reporter during a presidential rally in South 
Carolina in November 2015. Photograph: Youtube 
Immigrants

One in six 
<https://factfinder.census.gov/faces/tableservices/jsf/pages/productview.xhtml?pid=ACS_15_5YR_B05003&prodType=table>
 adults who live in the US was born abroad. About half of all adult immigrants 
are naturalized citizens, meaning that they have the right to vote. But the 
others, some 20 million adults who live in the US, could not vote for Trump. 
Some are the unauthorized immigrants repeatedlybranded 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/fact-checker/wp/2015/07/08/donald-trumps-false-comments-connecting-mexican-immigrants-and-crime/?utm_term=.5a3a5ee35409>
 as criminals by the Republican nominee, including those brought here as young 
children, and those seeking asylum or other legal status. Others are legal 
permanent residents or live in the US temporarily.

Children

Considering the 74 million people in America who are under the age of 18 is 
not a facetious consideration. They make up 23% of the US population and, much 
like the other groups mentioned here, often have other people speaking on their 
behalf. But much like the groups mentioned here, just because these individuals 
did not vote for Trump doesn’t mean that they wouldn’t have if given the chance.


Hypothetical preferences are difficult to measure. But the results 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/11/01/health/students-mock-presidential-election-results/>
 from a mock election held for more than 300,000 high school students across 
all 50 states are illuminating. Channel One News, which organized the event in 
late October, found that Clinton won with 47% of the popular vote while Trump 
had 41%. Channel One News also held mock elections in five previous 
presidential elections and in all five, the winner chosen by students also won 
the White House. Another mock election organised by a private social network 
called After School found that Trump won with 47.1% of the vote. Clearly, 
polling kids is just as fraught with problems as polling adults.

 Still from Playing Politics, a video of a mock US election school debate. 
Photograph: Miguel Drake-McLaughlin and Jillian Schlesinger 
There are of course other groups who make up the 75% of the American 
population that did not vote for the president-elect, but limited data can make 
it hard to understand who they include. They may include Muslims who didn’t 
want to vote for a candidate who hasthreatened 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2015/nov/20/donald-trump-track-muslim-americans-video>
 to put them in a database. But it’s hard to know. 


After the election was over, exit polls analyzed the relationship between 
voting behavior and religion. But the breakdowns that were published – eg60% 
<http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2016/11/09/how-the-faithful-voted-a-preliminary-2016-analysis/>
 of white Catholics voters chose Trump;24% 
<https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2016/11/08/us/politics/election-exit-polls.html>
 of Jewish voters did the same – don’t include Muslims. That’s because, like 
the ethnic minorities, immigrants and former felons mentioned here, it’s hard 
to accurately capture the views of minorities in polls. They can be difficult 
to reach and distrusting of pollsters. So Muslims, who make up about0.9% 
<http://www.pewforum.org/religious-landscape-study/> of the US population, get 
lost in the “something else” category of these numbers.

The lack of information about these groups can also make it harder to 
represent their collective interests, including understanding what proportion 
of them actually voted for the president-elect. 
 