
Leicester City

If the most important factor for the judges is which team’s achievement was 
the most unlikely, they should look no further than Leicester City. Money 
doesn’t just talk in the Premier League, it stands an inch from your ear and 
shouts into it with a megaphone, and no one, probably not evenClaudio Ranieri’s 
mother 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/04/claudio-ranieri-rediscovred-himself-mother>
, had Leicester down as title contenders.Promoted from the Championship in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/apr/05/leicester-city-promoted-premier-league>
, they hadescaped relegation by the skin of their teeth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/16/sunderland-leicester-city-premier-league-match-report>
 and many tipped them to go down after they sacked Nigel Pearson to bring in 
Ranieri. Yet once Leicester gained momentum, they were unstoppable. Jamie Vardy 
could not stop scoring, Riyad Mahrez produced moments of pure beauty, N’Golo 
Kanté ruled central midfield and they played as a team, overcoming their lack 
of experience by maintaining their resolve until the end. Shocks on that scale 
are rare in modern football, which is why Leicester’s triumph was a victory for 
the little guy.

Team GB

In an Olympic year, it may prove difficult to look beyond Great Britain’s 
exploits in Rio. Team GB met and exceeded all expectations during the summer, 
pipping Chinato finish second 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/21/great-britain-team-gb-second-rio-2016-olympic-medal-table>
 in the medals table after winning 27 golds, 23 silvers and 17 bronzes. Their 
haul of 67 medals was their most since the 1908 Games, beating the 65 they 
claimed at London 2012. Perhaps the dilemma for the judges will be whether to 
give the award to Team GB as a whole or whether to give it to individual teams 
who made a particularly noteworthy contribution, such as the cyclists or the 
gymnasts. Then there is the matter of acknowledgingParalympicsGB’s stirring 
efforts in Rio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/14/gb-paralympians-rio-gold-medal-london-2012-sarah-storey>
. Britain won 147 medals during the Paralympics, easily beating the target of 
121, and finished second in the medals table. However it should be pointed out 
that TeamGB and ParalympicsGB have separate identities. Should one be placed 
above the other? That would feel unfair. Both teams received the award in 2012.

GB women’s hockey team

GB women win historic hockey gold with shootout victory over Netherlands
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/19/gb-women-hockey-historic-gold-shootout-final-olympics>
Then again, if we are looking for a standout team in Rio, Britain’s memorable 
victory in the women’s hockey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/19/gb-women-hockey-historic-gold-shootout-final-olympics>
 takes some beating. Hockey is a sport that often flies below the radar in 
Britain but the win over the Netherlands in the final captured the imagination. 
The Dutch were the heavy favourites and they dominated much of the game, only 
for the underdogs to demonstrate outstanding levels of resilience by 
frustrating the defending champions. A late equaliser from Nicola White forced 
penalties after a dramatic 3-3 draw. In a tense shootout, it was Hollie Webb 
who converted the decisive strike, earning Britain their first Olympic gold in 
women’s hockey. Danny Kerry’s team of fighters made history and there will be 
no complaints if they pick up one more gong. Unlike the cyclists, whose 
excellence has become a matter of routine, they were not expected to win.


Wales football team

When Daniel Sturridge scored England’s winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/16/england-wales-euro-2016-match-report>
 with the final kick in Lens, it seemed Wales had been given a Euro 2016 
reality check by opponents whose superior individual quality made the 
difference in the defining moments. Unable to hold on to their half-time lead, 
Wales’s resistance cracked at the end. As it transpired, though, the defeat by 
England in their second group match was no more than a minor inconvenience for 
Chris Coleman’s team. They recordeda stylish victory over Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/20/wales-russia-euro-2016-match-report>
 to reach the last 16 as group winners andsaw off Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/25/wales-northern-ireland-euro-2016-match-report>
 two days before England crashed out to Iceland. Like Leicester, their run owed 
much to their unbreakable unity, not to mention their impeccable organisation. 
Tempting though it is to focus on the genius of Gareth Bale and the drive of 
Aaron Ramsey, Wales provided a reminder of the value of teamwork, which was 
most evident inthe stunning victory over Belgium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/01/wales-belgium-euro-2016-match-report>
 in the quarter-final. Undermining their appeal, however, is thesemi-final 
defeat to Portugal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jul/06/portugal-wales-euro-2016>
.

England rugby union team

Ridiculed after the early exit from their own World Cup last year, England 
bounced back spectacularly,remaining unbeaten throughout the campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/03/england-australia-autumn-internationals-match-report>
. They knew they were on to a good thing under Eddie Jones when they dominated 
the Six Nations, ending their13-year wait for the grand slam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/19/england-win-six-nations-grand-slam-france-match-report>
, and their fine form continued with three assertive displays on their tour of 
Australia in June. England have developed an admirable hunger for winning. That 
mentality carried them to further successes in the autumn internationals. They 
madean impressive statement against South Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/12/england-south-africa-autumn-internationals-match-report>
 and finished the year in style, getting in one more win over Australia, the 
team who so ruthlessly exposed them at the World Cup. It has been a commendable 
effort from Jones’s side, 14 consecutive wins raising optimism about their 
prospects, although they look like outsiders next to Leicester and the 
Olympians.
 