
The problems with referendums are well known: they reduce often complex 
questions to a binary choice; they are a demagogue’s dream, allowing populists 
free rein to fan fears, distort realities and appeal to emotions; voters can 
see them as a chance to voice their unhappiness about something else entirely.

And yet referendums are on the rise. In June, the EU referendum for Britain; 
last week, in Hungary,a referendum concerning refugees and migrants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/02/hungarian-vote-on-refugees-will-not-take-place-suggest-first-poll-results>
; in Colombia,one about a peace deal to end the country’s 50-year armed 
rebellion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/02/colombia-referendum-rejects-peace-deal-with-farc>
; and this December Italians will be given a vote on constitutional reforms.

Why Colombians voted against peace with the Farc | Isabel Hilton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/03/why-colombians-voted-against-peace-farc-president-santos-better-deal>
As often as not referendums do not produce the result the politicians intend. 
So what explains their popularity?

A sharp increase in referendums is typical in periods of change and political 
uncertainty, according to Matt Qvortrup, professor of applied political science 
at Coventry University and author of Referendums Around the World. He estimates 
that, from roughly 10 a year worldwide in the 1960s, 70s and 80s, the rate is 
now “approaching 50 a year”.

Referendums were much in vogue after the French and Russian revolutions, in 
the aftermath of the second world war, and after the fall of communism, he 
said: “We see referendums when the political party system is in flux, when 
politicians feel unsure of who their supporters are and what they think.”

For politicians a referendum is “a way of kicking an issue into the grass”, a 
fairly safe means of resolving a problem that, in an election, might prove a 
major vote loser.

The trouble with democracy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/nov/08/trouble-with-democracy-david-runciman>
A lost referendum is rarely fatal. Before David Cameron stepped down in the 
wake of the UK’s Brexit vote, the last European prime minister to resign after 
ending up on the wrong side of a plebiscite was inNorway 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Norwegian_European_Communities_membership_referendum,_1972>
, in 1972.

From the 70s to the 90s, Qvortrup said, politicians largely felt confident 
about who was voting for them and why. Large, mainstream parties of the centre 
left and right dominated the political scene and most voters trusted them to 
make decisions. In many countries that is no longer so; politics are becoming 
increasingly fragmented, and voters sceptical and disaffected.

Research by Sören Holmberg, a Swedish academic, had shown that voters in the 
1970s agreed with up to 90% of their chosen party’s platform, Qvortrup said, 
whereas today that figure was 60%. Moreover, referendums are often confidence 
votes and statistics show the longer a party has been in power the less support 
it can expect in a plebiscite.

Most voters do not want too much of a good thing. Having “hired” politicians 
in much the same way as they hire an estate agency, Qvortrup suggested, the 
public expects their houses to be sold for them at the right price, without 
being constantly quizzed about the details.

'The question was stupid': Hungarians on the refugee referendum
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/04/the-question-was-stupid-hungarians-on-the-refugee-referendum>
But the recent return of the referendum may also fit with a move away from the 
“package deal”, he added. People, he said, were now more individualist than 
before: “We expect to be able to compile our own playlists, in politics too.”

All these factors help explain the disruptive votes in several recent 
referendums: in Britain andColombia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/colombia>
, where governments lost; and in Hungary, where although those who did vote 
overwhelmingly supported the government not enough voters turned out to make 
the referendum valid.

Referendums should, Qvortrup said, be confined to really big questions, 
“irreversible decisions that will really impact people’s lives”, and be held 
only in rare and exceptional circumstances.

Otherwise, politicians should simply be bolder, present their really 
significant policies at elections, and accept the outcome as a mandate or a 
rejection. Referendums were “kind of the chicken option”, he said.
 