
On the night of the EU referendum, photographer Andy Martin sat at home as the 
results flooded in. He didn’t usually watch television, but last June he kept 
the news on with the sound down. His home city of Sunderland prides itself on 
being the first to declare in a general election – but that night was 
different. Gibraltar, Newcastle upon Tyne and Orkney had all announced their 
results before, at 12.15am,Sunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/sunderland> finally declared it had 
overwhelmingly voted to leave the EU.

The following day, Martin again walked around the city in which he was born in 
1984, and where he has spent almost all his life. Sunderland’s urban landscape 
has been hisprincipal photographic subject 
<http://this-is-sunderland.co.uk/home/> for more than a decade, and the general 
mood that morning was unusually buoyant.

“I felt like a stranger in my home town,” Martin says.

Soon afterwards, he decided to leave Sunderland. First he took a long holiday 
in Europe, driving his van 4,000 miles around France, Switzerland, Germany, 
Belgium and Holland. By the time we meet in his photographic studio, he is 
about to move to London to start a new job.

The walls of Martin’s studio are lined with ghostly monochrome portraits of 
Sunderland’s present-day inhabitants – members of bands, artists, his friends: 
a collection of photos he calls his “census” of the city. These portraits 
contrast with his urban photos which are usually unpeopled, but share a 
similarly haunting atmosphere, as if he knows he is capturing something that 
will soon be gone.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fsunderland-stranger-home-town-brexit-andy-martin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63e94762503867152eb870b9e251b1587d1afcad%2F0_192_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Andy%20Martin%2C%20documenter%20of%20a%20changing%20Sunderland%2C%20has%20left%20his%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fsunderland-stranger-home-town-brexit-andy-martin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Andy%20Martin%2C%20documenter%20of%20a%20changing%20Sunderland%2C%20has%20left%20his%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fsunderland-stranger-home-town-brexit-andy-martin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63e94762503867152eb870b9e251b1587d1afcad%2F0_192_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
 CCTV screens in Gillbridge police station before it closed in 2015. 
Photograph: Andy Martin 
Sunderland was shaped by the rapid expansion of heavy industry in the 19th 
century. When a seam of high quality coal was struck in 1834 at Wearmouth 
Colliery, it became a boom town for mining. Shipbuilding thrived, and by 1901, 
one in every five employed men in Sunderland worked in the industry; they were 
the best paid workers in the city.

Workers – economic migrants, if you will – travelled to take up jobs here, and 
its population grew from 26,000 in 1801 to 182,000 a century later. The city 
expanded to accommodate these new inhabitants, with terraces of workers’ 
cottages constructed within walking distance of the docks and colliery.

After the depression of 1907-8 
<http://www.thegoldstandardnow.org/the-panic-of-1907>, however, shipbuilding 
went into a decline that ultimately ended in 1988, when the last ship on the 
river Wear was built. Coalmining at Wearmouth Colliery continued until the end 
of 1993; now it’s the site of Sunderland AFC’sStadium of Light 
<http://www.stadiumguide.com/stadiumoflight/>.

Martin’s studio is in an old warehouse near the river, reached by walking 
along dark streets past vacant lots, industrial units and empty pubs, then 
taking a sharp left at the Liebherr crane factory 
<http://www.sunderlandecho.com/news/business/sunderland-crane-firm-expands-securing-200-jobs-1-5299570>
. The nostalgia for lost industry is palpable in Sunderland, and physical 
traces of that era can still be found, especially along the river, with old 
buildings repurposed or empty, earmarked for demolition or already gone.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fsunderland-stranger-home-town-brexit-andy-martin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97b5daa1484b7d65c88bfd4d1a76e8db7b4eead7%2F0_340_2478_2160%2F2478.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Andy%20Martin%2C%20documenter%20of%20a%20changing%20Sunderland%2C%20has%20left%20his%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fsunderland-stranger-home-town-brexit-andy-martin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Andy%20Martin%2C%20documenter%20of%20a%20changing%20Sunderland%2C%20has%20left%20his%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fsunderland-stranger-home-town-brexit-andy-martin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97b5daa1484b7d65c88bfd4d1a76e8db7b4eead7%2F0_340_2478_2160%2F2478.jpg>
 TheTurbine Steam Ship Manxman 
<http://maritimematters.com/2010/08/tss-manxmans-final-hour/> in Pallion 
Engineering’s dry dock in Sunderland, 2007. Photograph: Andy Martin 
As a child, Martin would hear stories of the city’s industrial past – of the 
shipyards and coal mines. As an adult, he felt compelled to photograph these 
industrial spaces, and to picture “what they were like when they were inhabited 
… just imagining the shipyard buzzer going off and everyone dashing out at 
five. Almost to breathe a strange bit of life back into them.”

Photographing Sunderland at night became an obsession: “I just wanted to 
portray it a little bit differently,” he explains. “I think I’ve always been a 
night-time person.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fno-bregrets-sunderland-brexit-vote-nissan-european-union-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No%20Bregrets%3A%20Sunderland%20after%20the%20vote%20to%20leave%20the%20European%20Union%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fno-bregrets-sunderland-brexit-vote-nissan-european-union-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No%20Bregrets%3A%20Sunderland%20after%20the%20vote%20to%20leave%20the%20European%20Union%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fno-bregrets-sunderland-brexit-vote-nissan-european-union-video&media=>
No Bregrets: Sunderland after the vote to leave the European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/dec/08/no-bregrets-sunderland-brexit-vote-nissan-european-union-video>
In the dark, Martin says, the city felt like it was changed somehow. At night, 
“you become very aware that there’s nobody there. It’s a very lonely place. I 
think a lot of the time the photos are just trying to reflect that.”

He also liked the way film would capture night scenes when it was exposed for 
long enough to absorb the glow of available light. He would normally go out at 
10 or 11 at night, returning home three or four hours later.

In a report published earlier this year 
<https://www.jrf.org.uk/report/uneven-growth-tackling-city-decline>, the Joseph 
Rowntree Foundation named Sunderland as the 15th “most declining” city in the 
UK, and classified it as an “overshadowed city” because of its proximity to 
Newcastle upon Tyne. No city from the south featured in the report’s top 24.

Although its population is relatively high – 275,500, according to the last 
nationwide census in 2011 – its city centre has a considerably lower retail 
occupancy rate than the nationwide average. Small shops come and go, and some 
units remain vacant, while the centralBridges shopping centre 
<http://www.thebridges-shopping.com/> and out-of-town stores draw much of the 
trade. The vast department store Joplings has beenempty since 2010 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/10357209>, the hands of its eggshell-blue clock face 
stopped at five minutes to one. Empty buildings are a symptom of the economic 
difficulty Sunderland faces;regeneration 
<http://www.sunderland.gov.uk/index.aspx?articleid=10632> is generally 
considered to be the solution.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fsunderland-stranger-home-town-brexit-andy-martin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc947c181fc8c0e9ed35de7471cce2e4500f436b%2F0_186_2500_2314%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Andy%20Martin%2C%20documenter%20of%20a%20changing%20Sunderland%2C%20has%20left%20his%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fsunderland-stranger-home-town-brexit-andy-martin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Andy%20Martin%2C%20documenter%20of%20a%20changing%20Sunderland%2C%20has%20left%20his%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fsunderland-stranger-home-town-brexit-andy-martin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc947c181fc8c0e9ed35de7471cce2e4500f436b%2F0_186_2500_2314%2F2500.jpg>
 The pool is at Newcastle Road swimming baths, taken shortly after its closure 
in 2009. Photograph: Andy Martin 
Martin has explored this abandonment in his work, and witnessed the 
destruction that invariably precedes regeneration. His night walks took him to 
old buildings, rooftop car parks, disused railway lines and dry docks.

“I’d get into a building and the bulldozers would be almost there,” he 
recalls, “or you knew it was going to get redeveloped in a few months, so it 
was just recording it for posterity, really.”

These photos capture buildings at the very moment their life, their purpose, 
is slipping away. Budgetary cuts were leaving a trail of abandoned 
architecture. Martin’s photos make the buildings seem like they’ve been 
momentarily evacuated; like someone has just stepped out of the room.

A basket filled with children’s swimming floats sits in a drained pool at the 
vastCrowtree Leisure Centre <http://this-is-sunderland.co.uk/photos/crowtree/>, 
while atNewcastle Road swimming baths 
<http://this-is-sunderland.co.uk/photos/newcastle-road-swimming-baths/> the 
pool is still full (Martin got access to the building shortly after its 
closure). In March 2015, theGillbridge police station 
<http://this-is-sunderland.co.uk/photos/gill-bridge-police-station-and-cells/> 
was about to close – its services absorbed by another station outside the city 
centre – when he got in to photograph its holding cells, the low glow of the 
CCTV screens in its control centre, and the empty seats of its waiting room. 
The photos were taken at night, and the lack of natural light reinforces the 
building’s claustrophobia.

One night, Martin was on his rounds “looking for stuff to photograph” when the 
Hahnemann Court flat complex, in the Southwick area, caught his attention. “I 
was blown away by its weird, futuristic architecture,” he says. “There was 
nothing else like it in Sunderland.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fsunderland-stranger-home-town-brexit-andy-martin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f617164218eef18da04879182093acaaf17bc9a%2F0_0_2433_2500%2F2433.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Andy%20Martin%2C%20documenter%20of%20a%20changing%20Sunderland%2C%20has%20left%20his%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fsunderland-stranger-home-town-brexit-andy-martin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Andy%20Martin%2C%20documenter%20of%20a%20changing%20Sunderland%2C%20has%20left%20his%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fsunderland-stranger-home-town-brexit-andy-martin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f617164218eef18da04879182093acaaf17bc9a%2F0_0_2433_2500%2F2433.jpg>
 Martin spent more than five years documenting the closure anddemolition 
<http://www.sunderlandecho.com/news/sunderland-flats-flattened-hahnemann-court-reduced-to-rubble-1-3619835>
 of the Hahnemann Court flat complex. Photograph: Andy Martin 
Martin spent more than five years photographing this complex. The chain of 
four interlinked, six-storey blocks 
<http://s698.photobucket.com/user/manorpark_photos/media/Newcastle%204/Newcastle%205/Hahaneman%20Court_zpsxp8vkbhe.png.html>
 containing 208 flats had been constructed in the mid-1960s from a modular 
prefabricated concrete system; it sat on stilts above a ground-level car park.

Hahnemann Court <https://www.flickr.com/photos/interzone-inc/8577905915/> had 
been part of a wave of council housing constructed in Sunderland during a 
period of slum clearance in the mid-60s; a process of redevelopment that also 
gave the city a skyline punctuated by high-rise flats. These modern buildings 
broke dramatically with Sunderland’s dominant architectural form,the terraced 
house 
<http://www.sunderlandecho.com/lifestyle/retro/wearside-echoes-our-unique-house-history-1-2983248>
. Hahnemann Court was a concrete megastructure that stood out, especially when 
surrounded by redbrick streets.

Fifty years later, the complex was earmarked for destruction. When Martin 
began to take photographs of the building, it was already half empty. “There 
were whisperings they were going to redevelop it, to modernise the flats and 
the service areas – but that all evolved into ‘basically it’ll be cheaper to 
knock it down and build some new accommodation’,” he explains. The residents, 
some of whom had lived in the building from the beginning, were dispersed to 
other properties around Sunderland.

By 2011, demolition had begun 
<http://www.sunderlandecho.com/news/crushing-end-for-sunderland-s-hahnemann-court-flats-1-3348919>
. Hahnemann Court was lined with asbestos, so “it was a really drawn-out 
demolition”, according to Martin. “I got pally with the team who were stripping 
the asbestos out, and they basically gave us free run of the place.”

He was fascinated by the two suspended walkways that linked each building, and 
eventually climbed on to the roof of one to get a photo. He got into the 
service room for the building’s lifts, and found messages left by engineers 
over the years. Martin’s pictures show apparently uninhabited concrete hulks 
illuminated only by the automated lights in their communal areas. “It took them 
about 12 months to knock it down,” he says. Rather than new accommodation, an 
Aldi supermarket was built on the site.

It is impossible to look at Martin’s photographs without wondering about 
Sunderland’s future. After the EU referendum, worries about the city losing its 
Nissan factory wereassuaged by a secret deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/27/nissan-decision-to-stay-in-sunderland-averts-catastrophic-consequences>
 made between the government and the car manufacturer. But questions remain as 
to how the city, and the north-east region, will fare if a wider economic 
downturn occurs. The councilcontinues to cut services 
<http://www.sunderlandecho.com/news/environment/have-your-say-on-move-to-scrap-weekly-green-bin-collections-1-8257551>
 and, post-Brexit, EU structural funds won’t be available to help with further 
development.

Urban memories: share your old photos of cities around the world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/oct/26/urban-memories-share-old-photos-cities-around-world>
In September last year, Sunderland launched its bid 
<http://www.sunderland2021.com/launch-event/> to become the UK City of Culture 
2021. Plans for the revitalisation of the city centre, including the 
construction of anetwork of streets, shops and public spaces 
<http://www.sunderlandecho.com/news/raise-a-toast-as-multi-million-pound-transformation-plans-for-sunderland-s-vaux-brewery-site-are-approved-1-7862562>
 on the derelict site of the old Vaux brewery, have been unveiled, and a 
proposal to redevelop the old fire station as an arts centre given the go ahead.
According to the bid’s website <http://www.sunderland2021.com/about-our-bid/>, 
the award will “kickstart a four-year period of growth, innovation and 
creativity”.

“Maybe in a few years, things might have changed,” Martin tells me. “There 
might be a city of culture. I just feel exhausted with the city as it stands. 
There’s nothing to challenge us, or to do – creatively, at least. It’s a good 
time to go.”

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> to join the discussion, and 
explore our archive here <https://www.theguardian.com/cities>
 