
Next Tuesday, the European parliament is due to elect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/24/european-parliament-president-martin-schulz-to-stand-down-german-elections>
 its president for the remainder of this term and the contest is more open than 
it has ever been. Every political group has its own candidate and I have been 
nominated for the Greens/EFA (European Free Alliance).

With the UK set to leave the EU, my nomination has been met with raised 
eyebrows at home and in Brussels. One MEP described it as “surreal” – others 
are more enthusiastic. However, neither I nor my group feel that my nationality 
should disbar me. Indeed, it may well be the last chance MEPs have to elect a 
Brit to the post.

As a remain campaigner, I have thought a great deal about the value of the EU 
and the need to communicate that to people acrossEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. I believe I’m well-placed to 
understand what is happening in the UK, as well as the rest of the EU. I am 
proud to represent the UK and passionate about the EU, so I know that the UK’s 
exit must be, as far as possible, a win-win situation for Britain and our 
European neighbours. But the parliament’s president is not in charge of the 
negotiations – although MEPs have a vote at the end of the process, as I hope 
MPs will.

Guy Verhofstadt to run for president of European parliament
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/06/guy-verhofstadt-running-european-parliament-president-brexit>
There are many other issues facing the EU within a shifting political 
landscape, and the European parliament must be a global standard-bearer for 
human rights and democracy; solidarity and environmental progress. I want to 
help the EU to rediscover its place and purpose in the face of major challenges.

Principally, the EU must battle to maintain its position as a strong advocate 
of universal human rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2013/oct/09/human-rights-eu-law-powerful>, 
which are coming under continued threat internally and externally. The 
parliament, especially, must strengthen its commitment to promoting and 
defending democracy worldwide. I will fight to ensure the EU is working to 
safeguard people’s everyday needs, be it job security or the ability to provide 
a future for themselves and their families.

The EU must work for ordinary citizens – it cannot be seen as an ally of 
unscrupulous bankers and big business. We must also increase our willingness to
show solidarity with those people elsewhere in the world who are in need, 
including refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/libertycentral/2010/jun/20/asylum-system-destitution>
. The EU has been a leader on climate change, but it needs to pursue its goal 
of delivering a sustainable future for Europe and its citizens with a renewed 
vigour, if it is to maintain that role. The parliament must exploit its 
powerful role within the EU to ensure that happens.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fjean-lambert-president-european-parliament-brexit-eu-human-rights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe981a5d2bf374b2716286b541c3777b3f7f572da%2F0_130_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20I%2C%20a%20Brit%2C%20am%20standing%20to%20be%20president%20of%20the%20European%20parliament%20%7C%20Jean%20Lambert&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fjean-lambert-president-european-parliament-brexit-eu-human-rights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20I%2C%20a%20Brit%2C%20am%20standing%20to%20be%20president%20of%20the%20European%20parliament%20%7C%20Jean%20Lambert&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fjean-lambert-president-european-parliament-brexit-eu-human-rights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe981a5d2bf374b2716286b541c3777b3f7f572da%2F0_130_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 The European parliament at a meeting in Strasbourg: ‘I will fight to ensure 
the EU is working to safeguard people’s everyday needs.’ Photograph: Vincent 
Kessler/Reuters 
To fulfil our role as the directly elected representatives, we have to ensure 
our own house is in order and that we are an “open” institution. The parliament 
needs to be more transparent and, as president, I will ensure recent rule 
changes on opening up the law-making process, dealing with lobbyists and any 
conflicts of interest for MEPs are put into effect. I will also push for the 
creation of a strong ethics committee. With me at its helm, the parliament will 
be more independent and do a better job of holding theEuropean commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/european-commission> to account.

I also want to see it become more environmentally conscious 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/sep/22/oil.climatechange>: we 
can cut our use of plastic, promote energy efficiency and reduce our carbon 
footprint still further – a single seat for the parliament would help do this, 
although that’s not in our hands. Under my presidency, the parliament would be 
even more inclusive of civil society and we need to continue and develop the 
diversity programme that we have.

Electing a female president would certainly help the gender balance at the top 
level. I will also push for the parliament to take greater social 
responsibility, safeguarding the rights and wellbeing of workers, not least by 
improving the working conditions of those on precarious contracts.

I’m convinced that the parliament needs a president who isn’t one of the usual 
suspects; a stereotypical Brussels insider. I have been an MEP for a long time, 
and as a member of a smaller political group am often critical of EU policies 
and a passionate advocate for those who do not have the benefit of living in 
the world’s richest region.

I am a firm believer in the need for international cooperation to tackle many 
of the problems the world currently faces. We are stronger as a parliament when 
we promote the values of democracy, universal human rights and solidarity on a 
sustainable planet. It’s on that basis that I put forward my candidature for 
the post.
 