
The bar down the block from me uses George Michael’s Careless Whisper 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=izGwDsrQ1eQ> as a sign that it’s time for 
everyone to start gathering up their things – its saxophone blast is a hell of 
a way to snap the variously inebriated to attention. It’s also a very effective 
way to get me involved in a last-call monologue enumerating the reasons why 
George Michael is truly the greatest pop star of the MTV era, besting even his 
mononymic peers with his powerful songs and bullshit-averse attitude.

Encounters with George Michael – 'His publicist thought I was tabloid scum'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/dec/26/george-michael-press-encounters-publicist-tabloids>
Michael Jackson had the moves; Madonna had the moxie; Prince had the spry, 
shifting sexuality. George Michael had the voice, an instrument that balanced 
the smoothness of Sade Adu with the ebullience of Whitney Houston and 
supercharged any pop song it encountered, a voice that sounded relatable even 
as it leapt octaves.Wake Me Up Before You Go-Go 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pIgZ7gMze7A>, which shot him to the top of the 
charts in America, was a canny pop track with a ridiculous hook, but Michael’s 
giddy read of the song’s chorus and falsetto-heavy ad-libbing on the outro 
hinted at what his voice would later do.

Joining in on his songs, both with his duo Wham! and solo, was an irresistible 
prospect, an invitation to pop communion of the holiest kind. Michael’s voice 
could enter another dimension with zero notice at all, soaring into high 
octaves at crucial moments both heartbreaking and joyous, and going low when 
the situation called for it. When he exhorted the Wembley Stadium crowd to sing 
along with Queen’s passion-drenched Somebody To Love at the Freddie Mercury 
tribute concert in 1992, he was bestowing his pop-star power on the masses – “I 
want to hear every single person,” he yelled, inviting tens of thousands of 
people to join together and revel in music’s power to heal, if only for a 
little while.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoYAR8RigqDA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoYAR8RigqDA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoYAR8RigqDA&media=>
 Video:watch George Michael perform Somebody to Love with Queen 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oYAR8RigqDA> at 1992’s Freddie Mercury tribute 
concert 
His pop stardom was partially fuelled by his public chafing against the gig’s 
more aggravating aspects – the casting off of Wham!’s teenybopper shackles at 
the outset of Faith, which opens with a sombre church organ take on the 
flamboyant Freedom”; the ceding of the spotlight to his lyrics and a parade of 
supermodels during the Listen Without Prejudice era; the lawsuit he eventually 
lost against Sony, which he accused of “professional slavery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/gallery/2013/aug/17/popandrock>”; the way 
the video for Outside rebuked tabloid speculation about his sexuality; the 
cheeky interviews he gave in his later years. This reaction to stardom seems 
perfectly normal when you take a step back and realised what a pain in the ass 
being famous must have been; there’s no better proof of its relatability than 
Freedom ’90, probably his biggest karaoke-bar staple despite its detailing of a 
very specific set of problems. (Not many people have been invited to shake 
their ass “for the boys at MTV”, after all.)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fgeorge-michael-singer-songwriter-pop-superstar-dies-aged-53-video-obituary&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Singer%2C%20songwriter%2C%20pop%20superstar%3A%20George%20Michael%20dies%20aged%2053%20%E2%80%93%20video%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fgeorge-michael-singer-songwriter-pop-superstar-dies-aged-53-video-obituary>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Singer%2C%20songwriter%2C%20pop%20superstar%3A%20George%20Michael%20dies%20aged%2053%20%E2%80%93%20video%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fgeorge-michael-singer-songwriter-pop-superstar-dies-aged-53-video-obituary&media=>
Singer, songwriter, pop superstar: George Michael dies aged 53 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2016/dec/26/george-michael-singer-songwriter-pop-superstar-dies-aged-53-video-obituary>
But couching the specific in the universal is what pop does best, and Michael 
was a master of the form. (And a staunch defender of it: “How can you not 
realise the elation of a good pop record is an art form?” he demanded in 
Rolling Stone in 1988.) In comparison to other pop icons who died this year, 
Michael had a small recorded output; he released six studio albums, the last of 
which came out in 2004, and a smattering of live compilations and one-off 
singles. The albums, from Faith on, are stuffed with ideas and passion, driven 
by his surgical approach to writing and arranging songs for maximum effect. His 
live recordings further reveal his deep respect for pop as a form and as an 
ideology; his covers paid tribute to his elders –Stevie Wonder 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UfGKSUiiiVI>, Queen 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oYAR8RigqDA>, the Doobie Brothers 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fi9ljuZ_jNg> – with verve and revealed how he 
kept up with his contemporaries, taking on the work ofTerence Trent D’Arby 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eyULlVXKuYI> and Seal 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t2-YIGZas_8> while also taking detailed notes 
on howthey were pushing pop forward. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fwhy-george-michael-was-the-greatest-pop-star-of-the-mtv-era%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a2ebee6db27399d41c2a83aecae63c78c3b9fb7%2F0_0_3622_2321%2F3622.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20George%20Michael%20was%20the%20greatest%20pop%20star%20of%20the%20MTV%20era&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fwhy-george-michael-was-the-greatest-pop-star-of-the-mtv-era%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20George%20Michael%20was%20the%20greatest%20pop%20star%20of%20the%20MTV%20era&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fwhy-george-michael-was-the-greatest-pop-star-of-the-mtv-era%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a2ebee6db27399d41c2a83aecae63c78c3b9fb7%2F0_0_3622_2321%2F3622.jpg>
 Wham! boys … Andrew Ridgeley and George Michael in 1985. Photograph: Michael 
Putland/Getty Images 
Five great George Michael performances, from Young Guns to Jesus to a Child
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/dec/26/george-michael-five-great-performances-from-young-guns-to-jesus-to-a-child>
While he eschewed the later-career trend-chasing of his MTV-era peers, the 
devotion he had to his craft was apparent even to preteens who mooned over the 
moody image of him and his childhood chum Andrew Ridgeley on the cover of Make 
It Big. I know this because I was one of those youngsters, going so far as to 
write “Maura [hearts] Wham!” on my copy of the duo’s second album in order to 
mark it as mine. While I was initially drawn in by Ridgeley’s cheekbones, I 
stuck around through Wham!’s breakup, and Michael’s eventual solo career, 
because the songs were thrilling, spinning like tops perched on a ledge, ready 
to fly off in another direction at any moment. Michael displayed reverence for 
all the right things – compositional craft, searing vocals, kindness, writing 
pop songs to make the world feel, briefly, like everything was OK – while also 
feeling ambivalent toward the aspects of his job that distracted from them. It 
was a combination that made him a pop star who wasn’t so much down to earth as 
undeniably human, full of contradictions that fueled his undeniable, 
one-of-a-kind talent.
 