
On Monday, electoral college delegates convened in capitols across the 50 
states and the District of Columbia to cast their votes for the 45th president 
and vice-president of the United States. Some said that the future of a global 
superpower, and liberalism itself, hung in the balance. Reeling from reports of 
Russian hackers and confounded by a president-elect viewed by many as a 
fascist-in-making, desperate voices from both the left and right called on the 
electors to vote their conscience.

Conservative defectors 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/05/opinion/why-i-will-not-cast-my-electoral-vote-for-donald-trump.html?_r=0>
 pleaded for delegates to select a more competent Republican likeJohn Kasich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/john-kasich>. Liberals demanded that all 
electors align with the people and support Hillary Clinton, who pulled-in2.8 
million more votes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/14/the-guardian-view-on-donald-trumps-team-not-the-new-normal>
 than her rival. The electoral college, a systemoriginally designed 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Electoral_College_(United_States)> to bolster 
the power of slave states against the free, looked like the final fortress of 
progress.

When the dust settled, the electoral college fell in line with Trump and the 
ascendant right wing without much of a fight. In fact, in a largely unforeseen 
twist, by day’s end more voters had defected from Democratic candidate Hillary 
Clinton than from Donald Trump.

Among the democratic defectors, standing against the tide with his 
metaphorical fist in the air, was Washington State delegate and Puyallup tribal 
memberRobert Satiacum Jr <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robert_Satiacum_Jr.>. 
In a historic act of defiance, and with the forces of progress vanquished and 
in full retreat around him, Satiacum cast his vote for indigenous elder, 
activist and leaderFaith Spotted Eagle 
<http://www.seattletimes.com/seattle-news/politics/meet-faith-spotted-eagle-the-native-elder-voted-for-president-by-a-washington-state-elector/>
. Spotted Eagle, a member of theYankton Sioux 
<http://www.yanktonsiouxtribe.net/> tribe, head of the Brave Heart Society 
<https://indiancountrymedianetwork.com/news/brave-heart-women-fight-to-ban-man-camps-which-bring-rape-and-abuse/>
 and a leader in victories against theKeystone XL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/keystone-xl-pipeline> and Dakota Access
 
<http://www.cnn.com/videos/us/2016/11/01/faith-spotted-eagle-dakota-access-pipeline-mg-nccorig.cnn>
 pipelines, became the first Native American to receive a vote for president in 
the electoral college of the United States.

Spotted Eagle and Satiacum are members of the most oppressed and easily 
forgotten racial demographic in the United States

As an act of protest, Satiacum’s conscientious objection may not amount to 
much more than a$1,000 fine 
<http://www.seattletimes.com/seattle-news/politics/four-washington-electors-break-ranks-and-dont-vote-for-clinton/>
 from Washington State. But cast just weeks after an indigenous-led coalition 
won a remarkable victory against the Dakota Access pipeline – a struggle in 
which Spotted Eagle emerged as a key leader – his vote shines a light on the 
great and enduring injustices faced by the forgotten first people of America 
and the hope for our collective future that these same communities represent. 
Satiacum’s act of political theatre clapped back at the common sense of lesser 
evilism. His dissent calls upon all of us to question our assumptions about who 
rises to power and why. Why can’t we elect a Faith Spotted Eagle for president? 
And, what would it mean if someday we did?

Spotted Eagle and Satiacum are members of the most oppressed and easily 
forgotten racial demographic in the United States. Native Americans have some 
of thehighest rates of poverty 
<http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2014/06/13/1-in-4-native-americans-and-alaska-natives-are-living-in-poverty/>
 and the greatest likelihood of beingkilled by police 
<http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/police-violence-against-native-americans-goes-far-beyond-standing-rock/>
. Their people areoverrepresented in prisons 
<https://www.prisonpolicy.org/graphs/2010percent/SD_American_Indian_2010.html> 
and underrepresented in universities. On reservations, they often live in 
rundown andovercrowded housing 
<http://www.ncai.org/resources/ncai_publications/honor-the-promises-the-tribal-nations-in-the-federal-budget>
. The schools that they send their children to are severely underfunded and 
sometimesliterally falling down 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2015/03/03/bureau-of-indian-education-gao_n_6795568.html>
. The women in their communities are3.5 times more likely to be raped 
<http://mshoop.org/wp-lib/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/VAIWFact-Sheet.pdf> or 
sexually assaulted in their lifetime than women of other races. And 22% of 
their childrensuffer from post-traumatic stress disorder 
<http://www.motherjones.com/mojo/2014/11/native-children-have-same-rate-ptsd-combat-veterans>
 – a rate equal to that suffered by veterans of Iraq and Afghanistan.

Their economic opportunities are bleak. Their pain is intergenerational. Their 
reality is devastating. Every day, they struggle to create a world with greater 
opportunity, promise and justice for their children.

Nowhere are these injustices more apparent than in Spotted Eagle’s home state 
of South Dakota, where four of the 15 most impoverished counties in the United 
Statesencompass Sioux reservations 
<https://www.census.gov/did/www/saipe/data/statecounty/data/2014.html>. Until 
Native Americans rose up with the support of thousands of allies atStanding Rock
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/08/standing-rock-dakota-pipeline-transformation-stories>
 to fight for their land, rights and sovereignty, protecting the Missouri River 
and the Earth for all Americans, they were largely forgotten by the people who 
live on and profit mightily from lands, waters and resources stolen from their 
ancestors.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fdakota-access-pipeline-protesters-celebrate-after-permit-denied-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dakota%20Access%20pipeline%20protesters%20celebrate%20after%20permit%20denied%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fdakota-access-pipeline-protesters-celebrate-after-permit-denied-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dakota%20Access%20pipeline%20protesters%20celebrate%20after%20permit%20denied%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fdakota-access-pipeline-protesters-celebrate-after-permit-denied-video&media=>
Dakota Access pipeline protesters celebrate after permit denied 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/dec/05/dakota-access-pipeline-protesters-celebrate-after-permit-denied-video>
Standing Rock, Satiacum and Spotted Eagle remind us of a massive and 
fundamental injustice right below our feet. The fact that our colonial status 
quo does not lead us to daily outrage should give us pause and cause us to 
question why all of this must be so. But Standing Rock, Satiacum and Spotted 
Eagle are also pointing us to the path forward.

Their story is part of a remarkable and still unfolding narrative in which the 
most devastated among us lead an insurrection for what is right for the planet 
and its people. If we fail to pay attention, listen and stand with them, 
there’s no telling how far back we will retreat before the face of hate, for 
the sake of profit and in the name of lesser evils.

As bleak as the present might seem, there is still a future worth fighting 
for. In 10, 20, maybe even 100 years, we deserve a world where progress no 
longer seeks asylum in a fortress built by slaveholders. We deserve a world 
where a Faith Spotted Eagle, a wise woman and leader who stood with and for her 
people, is president of the United States.
 