
For Rolls-Royce, the stakes are high. 

One of Britain’s most celebrated companies is facing potential prosecution 
over allegations it spent years hiring middlemen who paid bribes all around the 
world.

For the company, prosecution could mean tremendous reputational damage. For 
any individuals implicated, it could mean jail. It is a humiliating prospect 
for a £13bn company widely regarded as one of the jewels of British business.

Rolls-Royce <https://www.theguardian.com/business/rollsroycegroup> is 
considered so essential to the UK’s economic wellbeing that the government 
retains a so-called “golden share” that allows it to veto decisions it 
perceives to threaten the national interest.

Ministers have met with the company’s representatives more than 200 times 
since May 2010, according to an analysis by theCampaign Against Arms Trade 
<https://www.caat.org.uk/>.


It also bears a proud history 
<https://www.rolls-roycemotorcars.com/en-GB/the-rolls-royce-story.html>. 
Founded more than a century ago with ambitions to create the finest motorcars 
in the world, Rolls-Royce later supplied the engines for the single-seater 
Supermarine Spitfire, which repelled the Luftwaffe during the darkest days of 
the Battle of Britain.

Following the second world war, the company began supplying equipment to 
aerospace, energy and marine industries all over the world. The Rolls-Royce car 
has been manufactured by a different company for years.


So how could a company with such a stellar history find itself in such a 
precarious position?

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fwhy-the-rolls-royce-investigation-is-so-important-to-the-sfo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F98ba6a1ae236faf7c7c1cee4e72bc5c652deed06%2F0_57_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20the%20Rolls-Royce%20investigation%20is%20so%20important%20to%20the%20SFO&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fwhy-the-rolls-royce-investigation-is-so-important-to-the-sfo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20the%20Rolls-Royce%20investigation%20is%20so%20important%20to%20the%20SFO&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fwhy-the-rolls-royce-investigation-is-so-important-to-the-sfo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F98ba6a1ae236faf7c7c1cee4e72bc5c652deed06%2F0_57_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Rolls-Royce staff working in air defence. Photograph: Rolls-Royce 
The modern Rolls-Royce seeks to land big contracts in highly competitive 
industrial arenas. Billions of pounds in profit are at stake, with many 
companies seeking the same contracts. Corruption is part and parcel of doing 
business in many of the countries in which Rolls-Royce operates, and with so 
much riding on each and every contract firms can come under enormous pressure 
to secure an advantage.

At the heart of the allegations against Rolls-Royce is the suggestion that the 
company may have secured multimillion-dollar contracts in foreign jurisdictions 
by using agents who paid bribes.


Rolls-Royce acknowledges it hired agents – otherwise known as commercial 
advisers, intermediaries or middlemen – to help sell its products.

The 12 countries where suspicious activity linked to Rolls-Royce has been 
identified
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/31/the-12-countries-where-suspicious-activity-linked-to-rolls-royce-has-been-identified>
It is not illegal to hire them. These agents often market themselves to 
multinationals as an essential part of doing business, purporting to have 
exclusive access to key decision-makers or unique insights into how a bid for a 
contract should be structured. However, middlemen can also provide a convenient 
channel by which illicit cash can change hands at arm’s-length.

Rolls-Royce has declined to comment in detail on the corruption allegations 
since they first emerged four years ago. In its annual report in 2014, the 
multinational revealed that it had “dramatically 
<http://www.rolls-royce.com/~/media/Files/R/Rolls-Royce/documents/investors/annual-reports/2014-annual-report-v2.pdf>
” cut the number of intermediaries through which it did business around the 
world, a tacit acceptance that such practices were either unnecessary or 
inappropriate.

As the Serious Fraud Office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/serious-fraud-office> inquiry into Rolls-Royce 
is about to enter its fifth year, dozens of investigators continue to examine 
the evidence against the company.

A fresh leak of documents from a firm of agents, Unaoil 
<http://www.theage.com.au/interactive/2016/the-bribe-factory/day-1/the-company-that-bribed-the-world.html>
, to investigative journalists at Australia’s Fairfax Media only adds to the 
complexity. Unaoil represented Rolls-Royce in at least five countries, 
according to those documents. As such, any decision about whether or not to 
prosecute Rolls-Royce and its staff or executives is unlikely to be made before 
2017, according to sources familiar with the investigation.

Sue Hawley, policy director at the monitoring group Corruption Watch 
<http://www.cw-uk.org/>, said: “This decision will be a key test of the UK’s 
ability, and willingness, to bring large and politically sensitive companies to 
book. If Rolls-Royce are found to have engaged in wrongdoing, they must also be 
barred from public procurement contracts for an appropriate length of time.”

The British government decisively failed the last such test. An SFO 
investigation into alleged bribery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/baefiles/story/0,,2231496,00.html> in Saudi Arabia 
by Britain’s biggest arms manufacturer BAE was haltedby Tony Blair’s government 
in 2006. <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/feb/15/bae.armstrade>

Though said to be motivated by fear that the Saudis would withhold 
counter-terrorism intelligence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/feb/15/bae.armstrade> should the 
investigation proceed, few anti-corruption specialists saw the decision as the 
UK’s finest moment.


So the Rolls-Royce inquiry is important for the SFO too.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fwhy-the-rolls-royce-investigation-is-so-important-to-the-sfo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9bfc7b7e10a20c79132b6704c3c18d2f0231a83c%2F0_87_4022_2413%2F4022.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20the%20Rolls-Royce%20investigation%20is%20so%20important%20to%20the%20SFO&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fwhy-the-rolls-royce-investigation-is-so-important-to-the-sfo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20the%20Rolls-Royce%20investigation%20is%20so%20important%20to%20the%20SFO&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fwhy-the-rolls-royce-investigation-is-so-important-to-the-sfo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9bfc7b7e10a20c79132b6704c3c18d2f0231a83c%2F0_87_4022_2413%2F4022.jpg>
 A Rolls-Royce seabed cutter. Photograph: Rolls-Royce plc 
Theresa May was widely reported to view the agency as an unsuccessful 
anachronism while home secretary, and taken with the idea that its fraud and 
bribery functionsmight be folded into her new National Crime Agency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/aug/06/sfo-chief-admits-agencys-future-is-in-doubt>
.

However, anti-corruption campaigners oppose such a move, and the agency may 
have earned a reprieve after this yearsecuring the convictions of bankers who 
manipulated the Libor rates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/04/barclays-libor-convictions-a-major-victory-for-sfo>
. The agency also appears to have become more proactive, establishing a new 
intelligence unit that follows up reports from journalists or NGOs rather than 
waiting for tip-offs to present themselves.


Even if the SFO were to conclude it possessed sufficient evidence to prosecute 
Rolls-Royce, it could opt for a course of action that would inflict less 
collateral damage to the many entirely innocent employees and suppliers that 
depend on Rolls-Royce for their livelihoods.


A deferred prosecution agreement (DPA) would, instead of a full criminal 
prosecution of the company, entail the presentation of an agreed statement of 
facts to a court, laying out the details of the company’s conduct, as well as a 
large fine.


Such an approach may be considered suitable for Rolls-Royce given the 
company’s parlous financial health: itsold its energy business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/may/06/siemens-buys-rolls-royce-fuel-industry>
 to Siemens in May 2014, and issued itsfifth profit warning (paywall) 
<https://www.ft.com/content/5d407f84-8911-11e5-9f8c-a8d619fa707c> in 20 months 
in September this year.


However, DPAs are controversial. After HSBC was awarded one, along with a 
record $1.9bn fine, in 2012 after it admitted laundering money for Mexican drug 
cartels, the New York Times damned the settlement as “a dark day for the rule 
of law 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/12/12/opinion/hsbc-too-big-to-indict.html?hp>” and 
an effective admission that the company was too big to prosecute.


As a less harsh outcome to a prosecution, such settlements are obviously 
attractive to companies that find themselves in the SFO’s crosshairs.


But to be seen to treat a defendant with kid gloves could prompt the SFO’s 
critics to accuse it of being soft on crime, and would raise questions around 
fairness were any of the company’s agents to be subject to full prosecution.

 * If you would like to pass on any confidential information, you can send a 
message via the Guardian’s SecureDrop service (see howhere 
<https://securedrop.theguardian.com/> and here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jun/05/guardian-launches-securedrop-whistleblowers-documents>
). 
 * Panorama: Rolls-Royce will be broadcast on BBC1 at 8.30pm on Monday 31 
October.  