
Roll your hands down a piano, from the high notes to the low, and you’ve 
mastered the intro to the most perfect pop song ever written. Feel free to 
congratulate yourself, although don’t get carried away – you’ve still got three 
minutes and 49 seconds of Abba’s Dancing Queen to learn, and trying to 
replicate the sheer joy and exuberance packed into that brief space of time may 
prove somewhat trickier.

It’s 40 years since the Swedish band released their masterpiece (fans of The 
Winner Takes It All might beg to differ, but does your great auntie leap out of 
her seat quite as quickly to that?). Back then, it hit No 1, not just inSweden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/sweden> and Britain, but in countries as 
diverse as Mexico, New Zealand, Belgium, South Africa and the US, where it was 
their only chart-topper.

It’s no mystery why – Dancing Queen is beautifully produced: catchy and 
euphoric, the perfect backdrop for a song that encapsulates the carefree bliss 
of youth. Certainly, the band knew they had struck gold before it was even 
finished. Frida Lyngstad told me in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/apr/10/abba-interview-bjorn-ulvaeus-frida-lyngstad>
 that hearing the music Benny Andersson and Björn Ulvaeus had created for her 
and Agnetha Fältskog to sing on was a eureka moment, so much so that she burst 
into tears: “Out of pure happiness that I would get to sing that song, which is 
the absolutely the best song Abba have ever done,” she said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2F40-years-abba-dancing-queen-people-just-surrender-to-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2320b911b1cee73a7fd198c2794db1daa61416f3%2F0_0_4620_3281%2F4620.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Abba%E2%80%99s%20Dancing%20Queen%20is%20the%20best%20pop%20song%20ever&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2F40-years-abba-dancing-queen-people-just-surrender-to-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Abba%E2%80%99s%20Dancing%20Queen%20is%20the%20best%20pop%20song%20ever&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2F40-years-abba-dancing-queen-people-just-surrender-to-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2320b911b1cee73a7fd198c2794db1daa61416f3%2F0_0_4620_3281%2F4620.jpg>
 Agnetha Fältskog arrives in The Hague, Netherlands to record the TV programme 
Eén van de Acht in 1976. Photograph: Gijsbert Hanekroot/Redferns 
What is it that elevates Dancing Queen above so many other beautifully 
produced, catchy, euphoric songs?Pete Waterman, who knows a thing or two about 
writing a hit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/jul/04/30-mins-peter-waterman>, 
believes it exemplifies how the best Swedish artists are able to soak up 
popular trends and regurgitate them as something fresh: “Listen to Dancing 
Queen and you can hear Elton John straight away, you can hear the Beatles, 
disco is coming along with the Bee Gees, and you can hear that,” he says. “It’s 
also got what all great pop songs have – a great first line. ‘Friday night and 
the lights are low’ … boosh! You’re away. All great records start with a bang.”

Indeed, the record starts with such a bang that, after that initial piano 
roll, it catapults you straight into the middle of the chorus: an explosive 
opening before the song has even officially started.

It could have all been quite different. An early version opened with the less 
immediate line: “Baby, baby you’re out of sight/Hey, you’re lookin’ alright 
tonight.” Back then, the song was called Boogaloo, too, before the band’s 
manager Stig Anderson earned his fee by suggesting an alternative title.

The music – which updated the laidback disco groove of George McCrae’s Rock 
Your Baby <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=arxhW1RgDDo> with Abba’s sparkling 
pop panache – was finished before the lyrics were considered, which was how 
most of Abba’s songs were developed: “I would play the songs over and over 
again,” Ulvaeus told me in 2014, “and I would literally see images of things 
coming up.”

In Dancing Queen’s case, these images told the story of a 17-year-old girl on 
a nightclub dancefloor – lost in the music and the moment. The sonic euphoria 
mirrors the freedom that the dancefloor can bring, although, as with all Abba 
songs, there’s a hint of what Ulvaeus called “that Nordic melancholic feeling” 
to it. The teenage girl isn’t the narrator, after all, so is the listener 
really just an observer, looking back on their lost youth?  
<https://thump.vice.com/en_us/article/abba-dancing-queen-essay>Ultimately, the 
song seems less concerned with making you gaze forlornly back than it does with 
bringing the abandonment of your teenage years into the present, at least for 
four glorious minutes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2F40-years-abba-dancing-queen-people-just-surrender-to-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35ed8a838778e6040bebbc5a62e6ed3442ed96f1%2F0_339_4950_2970%2F4950.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Abba%E2%80%99s%20Dancing%20Queen%20is%20the%20best%20pop%20song%20ever&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2F40-years-abba-dancing-queen-people-just-surrender-to-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Abba%E2%80%99s%20Dancing%20Queen%20is%20the%20best%20pop%20song%20ever&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2F40-years-abba-dancing-queen-people-just-surrender-to-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35ed8a838778e6040bebbc5a62e6ed3442ed96f1%2F0_339_4950_2970%2F4950.jpg>
 MGMT used the same tempo for Time to Pretend. Photograph: Graeme Robertson for 
the Guardian 
No wonder, then, that it’s such a wedding disco staple (there are only two 
kinds of wedding discos: ones that open with Dancing Queen, and terrible ones). 
No wonder that other artists have tried to channel its evergreen properties: 
the band may have been the definition of uncool at their peak – perma-smiling 
europop stars in sequinned jumpsuits – but that didn’t stop their more 
critically adored peers from borrowing from them. Chris Stein admitted to 
trying to replicate the song forBlondie’s hit Dreaming 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0xueCCyZ5V8>, while Elvis Costello – who once 
admitted he viewed Dancing Queen as“manna from heaven” 
<http://ultimateclassicrock.com/elvis-costello-spike/> – famously was inspired 
by the descending octave piano chords for his hit Oliver’s Army. More recently,
MGMT told the podcast Song Exploder <http://songexploder.net/mgmt> how they 
purposefully stuck to Dancing Queen’s relaxed 101 BPM tempo for their 
breakthrough hit Time to Pretend.

Australian/Swedish twin sister duo Say Lou Lou have a particular affection for 
the 70s pop/disco sound (their latest release isa cover of Saturday Night Fever 
<https://soundcloud.com/sayloulou/stayin-alive-bee-gees-cover-001>) but believe 
much of Dancing Queen’s magic rests in the lyrics: “Dedicating a whole song to 
a girl wanting to dance without it necessarily having to be about romance made 
us feel excited and thrilled,” says Elektra June Kilbey-Jansson. “Crowning a 
17-year old girl in a nightclub a queen feels so dramatic and 
attention-grabbing. They would find great song titles and work it through the 
song with memorable keywords – in this case swing, jive, rock, king and queen.” 
(Let’s be thankful once more that the band didn’t stick with Boogaloo).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2F40-years-abba-dancing-queen-people-just-surrender-to-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51575c53a0824233a699679ee0c505eae0b68d75%2F1171_4_1639_2049%2F1639.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Abba%E2%80%99s%20Dancing%20Queen%20is%20the%20best%20pop%20song%20ever&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2F40-years-abba-dancing-queen-people-just-surrender-to-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Abba%E2%80%99s%20Dancing%20Queen%20is%20the%20best%20pop%20song%20ever&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2F40-years-abba-dancing-queen-people-just-surrender-to-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51575c53a0824233a699679ee0c505eae0b68d75%2F1171_4_1639_2049%2F1639.jpg>
 Elvis Costello was inspired by the descending piano chords for Oliver’s Army. 
Photograph: IBL/Rex/Shutterstock 
While these artists have all helped Dancing Queen live on, there’s another, 
stronger force that’s kept it at the forefront of public consciousness: the 
musicalMamma Mia! <https://www.theguardian.com/film/mamma-mia>. Judy Craymer, 
who conceived the monster hit stage show and film, believes its success has 
helped pass the music of Abba on from generation to generation. “An 89-year-old 
would say ‘that’s our song’, but children can learn it, too, almost like a 
nursery rhyme, and it’s very attractive to them,” she says, pointing out how 
countless parents have told her that the soundtrack’s version of Dancing Queen 
is one of their school-run staples.

Craymer credits the way the song “explodes from the stage or screen” for its 
prominent role in the musical and film. She also recalls the runup toopening 
Mamma Mia! in New York back in 2001 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/apr/04/mamma-mia-abba-musical-record-setting-performances-15th-anniversary>
, when the cast were due to perform Dancing Queen as part of a free concert in 
Times Square. “But the police had heard that it could cause a euphoric frenzy 
in the crowd!” she says, laughing. “They had heard about the reactions the song 
had got in San Francisco, with people getting up out of their seats, and in the 
end I don’t think we were allowed to perform it.”

Winner takes it all: Abba's Dancing Queen piano up for auction
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/27/abba-dancing-queen-piano-glissando-auction>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2F40-years-abba-dancing-queen-people-just-surrender-to-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F872e7535ad630942b295771efc04ab37b8440ce5%2F0_222_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Abba%E2%80%99s%20Dancing%20Queen%20is%20the%20best%20pop%20song%20ever&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2F40-years-abba-dancing-queen-people-just-surrender-to-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Abba%E2%80%99s%20Dancing%20Queen%20is%20the%20best%20pop%20song%20ever&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2F40-years-abba-dancing-queen-people-just-surrender-to-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F872e7535ad630942b295771efc04ab37b8440ce5%2F0_222_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Mamma Mia! producer Judy Craymer. Photograph: Bobby Bank/WireImage 
A police clampdown might seem heavy-handed, but Dancing Queen is a song whose 
power is hard to resist. It’s the record Waterman calls his “get-out-of-jail 
card … Whenever I lost the floor as a DJ, I just stuck Dancing Queen on.” It’s 
a track even the Queen is supposedly fond of boogying to (Chris Evans claimed 
that she told him: “I always try to dance when this song comes on because I am 
the Queen and I like to dance”).

If you’re left in any doubt over Dancing Queen’s charms, then just consider 
the 1996 Sex Pistols reunion show in Finsbury park, north London. To remind the 
audience just how stale the music scene had grown before Johnny Rotten et al 
came along, the PA blasted out the likes of the Bay City Rollers and other 
cheesy 70s pop staples. Unfortunately, that playlist also included Abba’s 
Dancing Queen – when it came on, the old punks gathered together failed to 
sneer: instead they began singing in unison 
<http://www.philjens.plus.com/pistols/pistols/pistols_classicgigs.html>. As 
Craymer says: “That’s what people do with Dancing Queen – they just surrender.”
 