
Back for a new series, Later... with Jools Holland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/jools-holland> marks the 23rd year and 
46th series of a franchise that began under the umbrella (long ago thrown into 
broadcasting’s lost property office) of the pre-midnight BBC2 chin-stroker The 
Late Show. In TV years, that kind of endurance is equivalent to those people 
occasionally found in Himalayan villages, living on a morning handful of 
special berries and claiming to be 128.

In common with a near-contemporary survivor from the schedules of the early 
90s – Have I Got News for You? (Friday, 9pm, BBC1) which is two series ahead, 
having just begun its 48th run – Later... has scarcely altered its basic studio 
format in almost a quarter of a century, while making almost no concessions to 
new or social media. For a medium ever more obsessed with trending and 
refreshing, there may be a message here.

Certainly, Later... gives the impression of being, in the most positive 
possible sense, The Show That Management Forgot. There has been some fiddling 
over the decades with the shape of the transmissions – the live Tuesday 
half-hour set amid a non-live (though never dead) double-length show on Fridays 
at 11.35pm – but the content shows no sign of having been near a strategy 
meeting or focus group.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnkggNN1KNdg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnkggNN1KNdg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnkggNN1KNdg&media=>
Take the running order. Last night, the first two acts up were both all-male, 
all-white English rock bands of different vintages – Blur and the Vaccines – 
long before the first appearance of a woman (Natalie Prass) or non-white 
performers (Songhoy Blues), with the high-profile Laura Marling held back until 
the penultimate slot. Almost any other show on TV now would worry about the 
potential bias of such a line-up (and personally I would have placed Marling 
much higher) but, like everything else in the show, the decisions feel musical 
rather than tactical and calculations are complicated by the fact that, at gigs 
and festivals, going on towards the end can be a measure of respect.

Jools Holland’s own contributions must have the lowest words-to-timeslot ratio 
ever known in broadcasting. His total opening link last night ran: “Spring 
feels like it has sprung and we celebrate with Blur.” An obituary for an 
admired American soul singer whose death had been announced that day consisted 
of the words “Sad to say Percy Sledge has died”, followed by a a brief burst of 
When a Man Loves a Woman wafting down from the studio heavens.

 The brevity of the connecting material may be sensible, because the paradox 
of Holland is that he maintains an air of muso cool even while the actual 
content of his links would set off the cheese-ometer if delivered in the 
afternoon slot on Cotswolds Gold FM. “We’re thrilled to have the delicious 
sound of the next artist in the room,” was his buildup for Laura Marling, while 
he was “delighted and thrilled” to be welcoming Blur.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtO8XduS7VvA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtO8XduS7VvA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtO8XduS7VvA&media=>
 Nor is Jools’ interviewing technique likely to bring an emergency transfer to 
BBC News ahead of the next election debate. The most probing poser to Marc 
Almond was: “You’re touring, which is great, and also touring with us.” At 
least the host’s experience of being on the road with Almond brought the 
revelation that Almond searches towns on the tour circuit for the best cup of 
tea. The former Soft Cell man had drawn the format’s short straw of being 
talked to in the Tuesday live edition but only getting to perform in the Friday 
recorded version.

 Sometimes, I wanted Holland to say a bit more. Viewers were told that Natalie 
Prass was from Virginia and Songhoy Blues from Mali but, otherwise, Later 
devotes itself almost totally to the third part of the BBC’s historic pledge to 
“educate, inform and entertain”. It assumes either knowledge or access to a 
search engine.

 The reason that Later... appears completely untroubled by visits from the 
real-life equivalents of the characters in W1A is probably because of what 
happened to BBC bosses when they tried to remove BBC 6 Music: angry petitions 
and eventual restoration. Like 6 Music, Later... is made by people who know 
their music, for people who know it at least as well, and so it is left alone. 
At 128 in TV years, it looks a good bet for the double century.
 