
Ask yourself this. If Liverpool or Glasgow built a stunning new concert hall, 
would it be not just the talk – and the pride – of the town itself? Would its 
opening attract the Queen and the prime minister? Would a huge contingent of 
the world’s artistic press come for the occasion – and would they content 
themselves by asking respectful questions, and even applauding, in spite of the 
fact that the whole project came in at €866m, overdue and over budget, most of 
it paid for by the city itself?

I simply don’t think that any of this would happen in the UK, even in London. 

And yet in Hamburg on Wednesday evening a substantial part of official Germany 
– and surely everyone in the city itself – turned out in force for the opening 
of the dazzlingElbphilharmonie concert hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/nov/04/hamburg-elbphilhamonie-herzog-de-meuron-a-cathedral-for-our-time>
 stretching high into the heavens in the former port district. Germany’s 
president Joachim Gauck made a witty speech, chancellor Angela Merkel, 
Hamburg-born before her family emigrated to communist East Germany, sat in the 
front row of the stalls. The mayor of Hamburg, Olaf Scholz (a social democrat 
opposed to Merkel), glowed with civic pride.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fwhy-germany-is-proud-of-hamburg-elbphilharmonie-and-why-britain-should-care-about-that%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F249e9494e93470f7c666866c947e57049d47964f%2F0_0_4500_2998%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Germany%20is%20proud%20of%20the%20Elbphilharmonie%20%E2%80%93%20and%20why%20Britain%20should%20care%20about%20that&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fwhy-germany-is-proud-of-hamburg-elbphilharmonie-and-why-britain-should-care-about-that%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Germany%20is%20proud%20of%20the%20Elbphilharmonie%20%E2%80%93%20and%20why%20Britain%20should%20care%20about%20that&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fwhy-germany-is-proud-of-hamburg-elbphilharmonie-and-why-britain-should-care-about-that%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F249e9494e93470f7c666866c947e57049d47964f%2F0_0_4500_2998%2F4500.jpg>
 Relaxed … Chancellor Angela Merkel attends the opening concert of the 
Elbphilharmonie, with Hamburg mayor Olaf Scholz seated on her right. 
Photograph: Morris MacMatzen/Getty Images 
Elbphilharmonie Orchestra/Hengelbrock review – storming debut for hall of 
wonders
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2017/jan/12/hamburg-elbphilharmonie-orchestra-hengelbrock-review-opening-concert>
And they all sat through the opening concert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2017/jan/12/hamburg-elbphilharmonie-orchestra-hengelbrock-review-opening-concert>
 too. Not just suffering an evening of classical music in resigned silence, as 
the Queen would do in like circumstances here. Not just inwardly twitching with 
anxiety about the political message that the event might carry, as Theresa May 
might in the same situation. Not to a chorus of press hostility and sarcasm 
about fat cats and elitism, as would happen in the UK. To watch Merkel in 
particular, relaxed and chatty in the foyer at the interval, happy to do what 
seemed an impromptu TV interview was especially striking. Given what the German 
chancellor has on her mind politically right now — a tricky election, the rise 
of Putin, the arrival of Trump, the migrant crisis — she could have been 
forgiven for getting out of Hamburg as soon as the speeches were done. But she 
stayed because she enjoys the music, because she thinks culture matters and 
because there is not only no problem with having such tastes in Germany but 
because it would probably be regarded as antisocial if she had not stayed.

I’m not saying that I wish we in the UK could be like Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>, though I certainly think we would 
be better off, in all sorts of ways, if we were a bit more like Europe’s most 
thriving nation. But it is indisputable that Britain remains far more 
uncomfortable with investing in the arts than most other developed nations. 
This reflects many different things — social class divisions most of all, 
education, politics and our attitude to public goods, too. More than anything, 
though, it reflects the lack of a shared culture, a confidence that we can 
celebrate, as a people and as a nation, a great building, great music or even, 
more generally, a cultural patrimony that makes us proud to be who we are 
without having to apologise for it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fwhy-germany-is-proud-of-hamburg-elbphilharmonie-and-why-britain-should-care-about-that%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc20d3c5a468e2f9c885dd661a4343ee3aed516ab%2F0_0_3500_2333%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Germany%20is%20proud%20of%20the%20Elbphilharmonie%20%E2%80%93%20and%20why%20Britain%20should%20care%20about%20that&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fwhy-germany-is-proud-of-hamburg-elbphilharmonie-and-why-britain-should-care-about-that%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Germany%20is%20proud%20of%20the%20Elbphilharmonie%20%E2%80%93%20and%20why%20Britain%20should%20care%20about%20that&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fwhy-germany-is-proud-of-hamburg-elbphilharmonie-and-why-britain-should-care-about-that%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc20d3c5a468e2f9c885dd661a4343ee3aed516ab%2F0_0_3500_2333%2F3500.jpg>
 Up and running … the Elbphilharmonie’s opening concert. Photograph: Reuters 
Tickets are sold out for six months. The aim is that every child in Hamburg 
will see a concert in the first year

For sure, Germany is far too deferential for the British taste. It is too 
respectful, polite, orderly, above all too serious. At times, including in the 
course of my visit for the Elbphilharmonie opening, even I, a Germanophile, 
wanted to have a bit more naughtiness and surprise in the proceedings. And no 
British arts organisation would put seven white men on stage to conduct a press 
conference about a huge project – the way the Elbphilharmonie did this week – 
with not a woman nor a black face in sight. On social media, there is this 
week, certainly, a strong undercurrent of hostility to the Hamburg opening, and 
the amount of public money it has taken is eyewatering. But the fact remains 
that Germany’s readiness to spend on a project such as the Elbphilharmonie, 
though often controversial on matters like cost and the environment, is 
ultimately a unifying force.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fwhy-germany-is-proud-of-hamburg-elbphilharmonie-and-why-britain-should-care-about-that%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F300390607c816245c77726c58d67da17e2f8921a%2F0_96_3360_2016%2F3360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Germany%20is%20proud%20of%20the%20Elbphilharmonie%20%E2%80%93%20and%20why%20Britain%20should%20care%20about%20that&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fwhy-germany-is-proud-of-hamburg-elbphilharmonie-and-why-britain-should-care-about-that%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Germany%20is%20proud%20of%20the%20Elbphilharmonie%20%E2%80%93%20and%20why%20Britain%20should%20care%20about%20that&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fwhy-germany-is-proud-of-hamburg-elbphilharmonie-and-why-britain-should-care-about-that%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F300390607c816245c77726c58d67da17e2f8921a%2F0_96_3360_2016%2F3360.jpg>
 The Hamburg concert hall, designed by Pierre de Meuron and Jacques Herzog, on 
the Grasbrook peninsula of the Elbe River. Photograph: Thies Raetzke 
The civic pride and pleasure now that the concert hall is finally up and 
running was palpable. The tickets are all sold out for the next six months. The 
aim is that every child in Hamburg will get to a concert within the first year 
of the opening. The hall has already had half a million visitors before the 
first notes (by Benjamin Britten, as it happens) were heard in the opening 
concert, broadcast live on German television.

The Guardian view on culture and devolution: the Hamburg model | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/11/the-guardian-view-on-culture-and-devolution-the-hamburg-model>
By contrast, Britain is furtive and penny-pinching about cultural policy. 
Things are, for sure, better than they once were. But if you tried to 
transplant the Elbphilharmonie to Britain, as Simon Rattle has been keen to urge
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/mar/03/new-concert-hall-london-grand-ambition-orchestras-simon-rattle>
, where would you put it and how would you pay for it? Would it be yet another 
jewel in London’s already weighty crown, another reason for those in Liverpool, 
Glasgow, Bristol and elsewhere to complain the capital gets too many of the 
goodies while leaving the rest behind? Would it be conceived, built and opened 
as an embodiment of civic confidence, or as another venue for the corporate 
rich and the privately educated in the heart of the richest square mile in the 
UK? I’m all in favour of London having a really good concert hall, especially 
because the Royal Festival Hall is so poor and the Barbican so limited. But I’m 
not in favour of the capital prospering at the expense of the Hamburgs of 
Britain either. The Elbphilharmonie has lessons about wastefulness, but it also 
shows what we could do if we cared.

But the truth is we don’t care, not enough. Maybe Germany cares too much. But 
I’d rather care too much than too little. And it really is a stunner of a 
building in a city that it’s a joy to get to know.
 