
Business and government leaders worry about a multitude of issues these days. 
Climate change, weapons of mass destruction, water scarcity, migration, and 
energy are the greatest threats we face, according to the 750 experts surveyed 
for the World Economic Forum’s Global Risk Report 2016. And at the WEF’s annual 
meeting inDavos <https://www.theguardian.com/business/davos> this year, the 
sheer number of unsettled issues – the Middle East meltdown, the European 
Union’s future (particularly given the possibility of a British exit), 
America’s presidential election, the refugee crisis, China’s economic slowdown, 
oil prices, and more – was itself unsettling.

But consider this: none of the risks highlighted in the WEF report caused the 
recent spike in debt crises or the wave of scandals that engulfed – just in the 
last year – Volkswagen, Toshiba, Valeant, and Fifa. These developments (and 
many more) are rooted in a more pedestrian – and perennial – problem: the 
inability or refusal to recognise the need for course correction (including new 
management).

As anti-establishment parties and candidates gain ground with voters 
throughout Europe and in the United States, political leaders who continue to 
pursue a business-as-usual approach could find themselves looking for new jobs. 
And the same is true of business leaders: activist investors are fed up and 
determined to force change, either with a hands-on approach or by voting with 
their feet and divesting from companies that don’t meet their criteria.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcgoMJbUTVUU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcgoMJbUTVUU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcgoMJbUTVUU&media=>
 Davos 2016 briefing on ethics and corporate governance. 
As Barbara Novick, a vice chair of BlackRock, noted on a panel on corporate 
governance and ethics at this year’s Davos gathering, her firm looks carefully 
at whether the boards of companies in which BlackRock invests include people 
who are engaged and asking hard questions consistently throughout the year.
And yet the heads of some of the world’s largest companies still seem to be in 
denial. I spent several hours last year with the chief executive and chair of a 
bank who thought it unfair that investors were planning to vote against him 
holding both posts. Though he agreed that having one person in both roles is, 
in principle, a bad idea, he insisted that he was the exception.

I had a similar conversation this year with someone who noted that most of his 
company’s board had served for upwards of 20 years, and that his company had 
just established an age limit of 80 for board members. More rapid turnover 
might work for other companies, he conceded; but, again, his company was 
somehow exceptional.

On the other hand, Hiroaki Nakanishi, CEO and chairman of Hitachi, spoke 
eloquently to me about the importance of corporate governance and the changing 
demands that global companies faced. He noted the importance of having 
non-Japanese board members as Hitachi seeks to expand further internationally.

The problem is that those now speaking up for long-term investing, commitment 
to the community, and building companies that last are doing so over dinner, 
behind closed doors, or under the protection of the Chatham House Rule (which 
requires that reported statements remain unattributed to those who made them). 
Indeed, in the programme for this year’s Davos meeting, the phrase “corporate 
governance” appeared just once (for the panel with Novick that I was on). The 
same was true for “board” and “boardroom,” while a search for “ethics” turned 
up sessions on medicine and biotech. “Governance” was primarily about political 
governance, and “stewardship” referred to the planet.

Many people are cynical about Davos – and they aren’t completely wrong. Years 
ago, it was because the meetings were so openly secretive (much like the way 
people perceive board meetings). Nowadays, the WEF webcasts many of its 
sessions, and the cynicism comes from the sense that what is being discussed is 
not what business and government leaders need to think about.

That’s not the WEF’s fault. Davos has extraordinary convening power and the 
ability to bring important issues to the fore, including LGBT issues this year. 
There is no reason it cannot also include issues like the pay gap between 
executives and labour, the impact of corporate decisions on communities and the 
environment, and the growing loss of trust toward business and government. What 
it can’t do is force CEOs, board directors, investors, and policymakers to 
speak about such issues openly and on the record.

It is easy for companies to see far-off risks that they cannot control. It is 
a lot harder, but a lot more important, for them to acknowledge the risks 
stemming from how they operate. And it is harder still to persuade those 
business leaders who do comprehend such risks to talk about them on a public 
stage. That reluctance to speak openly about how to restructure corporate 
governance in a way that improves stewardship places all of us at risk.


• Lucy P. Marcus, founder and CEO of Marcus Venture Consulting, is professor 
of leadership and governance at IE Business School and a non-executive board 
director of Atlantia


 * Copyright: Project Syndicate <http://www.project-syndicate.org>, 2016.  