
I’m not going on Saturday. I follow AFC Wimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/afc-wimbledon> everywhere, but not on 
Saturday. Not when they’re playingthem, the enemy, the club that shouldn’t be. 
MK Dons.

I went to our first ever meeting – the FA Cup tie in December 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/dec/02/mk-dons-afc-wimbledon-match-report>
. There weremore than 3,000 of us 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/dec/02/mk-dons-afc-wimbledon-live> 
and we were there to make a point – that here we were, AFC Wimbledon, a club 
born out of a horrible decision made 10 years earlier and who belonged to the 
fans and would never be victim of the whims of owners who don’t have the best 
interests of the club and community at heart. In other words, the complete 
opposite of the team we were facing.

The experience was as upsetting as I expected it to be 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2012/nov/14/afc-wimbledon-fa-cup-mk-dons>
. The atmosphere was poisonous and it really did shock me to see just how 
clueless their fans were – some were wearing half-and-half scarves. It was 
astonishing and I told myself then that I would never return.

I stood by that decision when we played them again in the League Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jun/17/capital-one-cup-draw-wimbledon-mk-dons>
 and the Johnstone’s Paint Trophya couple of years later 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/aug/12/mk-dons-afc-wimbledon-capital-one-cup-match-report>
 and that will be the case again this weekend. Largely because I don’t want to 
accept their existence and put money into the pockets oftheir owner, Pete 
Winkelman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/30/mk-dons-pete-winkelman-sustainable-future-chelsea-fa-cup>
. I did it once, but never again.

Nothing crazy about AFC Wimbledon fans' grievances against MK Dons
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2012/nov/17/afc-wimbledon-mk-dons-grievances>
I have no problem with those AFC Wimbledon fans who are going to the Frenzy 
Dome – sorry, Stadium MK – on Saturday. Some 2,000 are expected to travel for 
what is the first ever league meeting between the sides and they will march 
there with moral superiority,table superiority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/09/afc-wimbledon-above-mk-dons-league-one>
 and the knowledge that the community spirit that defines club football is 
still alive and stronger than ever.

AFC Wimbledon has fought along through an amazing journey that is in no way 
over. It is returning home to continue the legacy of Wimbledon FC. The same 
fans who spent their lives showing up to Plough Lane and Selhurst Park continue 
to arrive at The Cherry Red Records Stadium and, in time, to the new Plough 
Lane. It is those people, and the new fans who dedicate their passions to the 
team, that keep Wimbledon FC, or AFC, the team it has always been.

MK Dons, meanwhile, remain a bastion of mediocrity - currently sitting 19th in 
League One, 12 places below us and with a new manin charge in Robbie Neilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/01/robbie-neilson-mk-dons-manager-terms-agreed-hearts>
 afterKarl Robinson was sacked for a poor run of results 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/02/charlton-athletic-karl-robinson-win-mk-dons-fa-cup>
. Those results have also seen crowds drop and those that do show up do so 
carrying the shame of being a franchise team.

MK Dons stole an organisation and what has it given them? For they could never 
steal Wimbledon’s fans or those fans’ love of the team. They couldn’t steal 
Wimbledon’s trophy or history. They couldn’t stealthe crazy gang 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/24/wimbledon-fc-crazy-gang-dave-bassett-plough-lane>
, the memories, or the success. They only thing they have is a soulless, 
unsuccessful team. We should pity them. I for one do. Pity for a pitiful club.

Their fans have been on AFC Wimbledon message boards this week trying to wind 
us up. Again – pitiful, and come the final whistle on Saturday I have no doubt 
we will well and truly have the last laugh. They’ve won once in the league 
since the start of November while we’re unbeaten during the same period and six 
days earlier showed just how much character and attacking quality there is in 
our team withthat amazing 4-3 win at Curzon Ashton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/04/curzon-ashton-afc-wimbledon-fa-cup-report>
. Our attacking trio of Tom Elliott, Dominic Poleon, and Lyle Taylor should be 
too much for MK Dons, even with the change of manager and the ‘bounce’ that can 
give a team.

But even if the worst happens and we lose it won’t change the fact that when 
it comes to this rivalry, AFC Wimbledon are and always will be the real 
winners. The future is being written by our great club and there are many more 
chapters to come.
 