
Whenever senior people in the social care sector gather together, one of the 
first topics of conversation is always the problem of recruiting and retaining 
staff.

When it comes to staying in the sector, money is certainly an important factor 
for social care professionals. You’re never going to get rich, or even be 
comfortably off, if you work in the social care sector. But it can’t be all 
about money. For example, a social care employer in London recently advertised 
for two jobs; one in administration and one as a support worker. Even though 
the job as a support worker was better paid, it attracted far fewer 
applications.

Part of the problem of recruitment and retainment in the social care sector 
must be caused by the perceived image of support workers. Let’s face it, the 
only time support or care workers appear in the news is when there is an exposé 
of wrongdoing on the television, or when mugshots of the miscreants appear in 
newspapers.

When was the last time a care worker appeared in the media, and they were 
simply doing their job? It is, of course, a good thing that these instances of 
wrongdoing are exposed, but surely there should be some positive images of 
support workers to balance out all of the negative ones? Other people who work 
in the social care or health sectors do, occasionally, appear on the news 
because of their misdemeanours, but negative images of negligent doctors or 
uncaring nurses are easily outweighed by more positive images of these 
professions.

Training and career opportunities vital to tackle care recruitment crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/nov/11/care-workers-training-tackle-recruitment-crisis>
 When there is an exposé of wrongdoing in the care sector, the programme will 
often end with a postscript, stating that the people don’t represent the vast 
majority of care workers who do their job in a caring and conscientious 
fashion. The problem is, you never actually see these people on television or 
in the newspapers.

Care work might not be considered as “sexy” a profession as working as a 
doctor or a nurse, so it is less likely to be the subject of a major drama. But 
wouldn’t you expect to see care workers in soap operas intended to represent 
ordinary lives in ordinary neighbourhoods? Why do we never see care workers in
Coronation Street <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/coronation-street> 
or any other television programme, apart from Panorama? It can’t be down to 
their numbers. Recent surveys suggest there are more than 1.5 million care 
workers in the UK, which means they outnumber that staple of programme makers – 
nurses – by a ratio of around five to one.

Someone I know who works in TV said that although care workers make up a 
substantial proportion of the UK workforce, the kind of people who work in TV 
are unlikely to have friends and families who work in the sector – hence their 
invisibility in the media.

So, come on all you programme makers out there. You may not know anything 
about us, and we may not be as glamorous as doctors and nurses, but you could 
occasionally feature us in your dramas and soaps. I wouldn’t expect care 
workers to be portrayed as mavericks, heroes or angels, but it would be nice to 
be occasionally shown as normal people, doing what can be a difficult job in a 
caring and conscientious manner.

The Social Life Blog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/social-life-blog> is written 
by people who work in or use social care services. If you’d like to write an 
article for the series, emailsocialcare@theguardian.com 
<mailto:socialcare@theguardian.com> with your ideas.

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
 