
Five years ago today, in one of his first announcements after entering No 10, 
David Cameron said he wasestablishing a “short and sharp” official inquiry  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2010/jul/06/cameron-torture-inquiry>into the 
UK’s involvement in so-called rendition and the torture of terrorism suspects.

The new prime minister told the Commons 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201011/cmhansrd/cm100706/debtext/100706-0001.htm>
 he was “determined to get to the bottom of what happened” during post-9/11 
counter-terrorism operations, and was appointing a judge to head what was 
billed as thedetainee inquiry <http://www.detaineeinquiry.org.uk/>.

Cameron gave short shrift to suggestions from Labour that the proper body to 
conduct such an inquiry was the intelligence and security committee, the panel 
of MPs and peers that is supposed to provide some oversight of the intelligence 
agencies. The ISC was facing widespread criticism for its failure to notice any 
real problems over the previous nine years.

From the outset, Peter Gibson faced demands from the agencies that he should 
respect the secrecy that shrouds their work

“I do not think for a moment that we should believe that the ISC should be 
doing this piece of work,” he said. Public confidence was paramount, and that, 
the prime minister explained, required an inquiry that would be “led by a judge 
and will be fully independent of parliament, party and government”.

Time, as well as credibility, was of the essence: “The longer these questions 
remain unanswered, the bigger will grow the stain on our reputation as a 
country that believes in freedom, fairness and human rights.” Fine words, and 
doubtless the intentions behind them were unimpeachable. But it seems they 
weren’t enough.

From the outset, Sir Peter Gibson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/jan/18/gibson-inquiry-torture-collusion-abandoned>
, the retired appeal court judge appointed to head the inquiry, faced demands 
from the agencies that he should respect the secrecy that enshrouds their work, 
concealing both their successes and their failings, and those of the ministers 
responsible for them. On the other hand, human rights groups and lawyers 
representing rendition victims said they would not cooperate with any inquiry 
hearing evidence in secret, and boycotted it.

MI6 'turned blind eye' to torture of rendered detainees, finds Gibson report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/dec/19/gibson-report-mi6-detainees-torture-cooperated>
With no obvious way to square this circle, the government instead seized upon 
an opportunity to change course. In January 2012, afterScotland Yard announced 
it was investigating joint UK-Libyan operations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jan/12/libya-rendition-torture-abduction-mi6>
 that had resulted in two of Muammar Gaddafi’s jihadi opponents being kidnapped 
and flown to Tripoli, along with their wives and children,the government said 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-16614514> it would be impossible for Gibson to 
continue his work while police were also on the rendition case – though it said 
it remained committed to an independent, judge-led inquiry at some point.

Gibson wrote an interim report 
<http://www.detaineeinquiry.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2013/12/35100_Trafalgar-Text-accessible.pdf>
, based on the mass of documentation he had examined, and sent it to Cameron’s 
office. And there it sat, unpublished, day after day after day. Five hundred 
and forty of them, in fact. There was a problem: lurking within the report was 
something that a handful of people in government did not wish the public to 
see. The judge had found that the UK’s intelligence agencies had indeed been 
involved in rendition operations, and that some of their officers had 
“supported” the mistreatment of suspects: assaults, sleep deprivation, hooding 
and the use of stress positions. Hisreport also listed 27 questions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/19/rendition-inquiry-questions-uk-involvement-unanswered>
 he had been unable to answer before his inquiry had been scrapped.

But Whitehall soon found a solution. In December 2013, the Cabinet Office 
hastily arranged for the report to be published as an Old Bailey jury was 
reaching its verdict on the Lee Rigby murder trial. The day’s headlines and 
airwaves were dominated, understandably, by reports about the horrific killing 
of the fusilier in Woolwich, south London: Gibson’sdamning conclusions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/dec/19/mi5-mi6-questions-torture-terrorism-rendition>
 about crimes committed by the state were largely overlooked.

The government quietly announced that the responsibility for answering 
Gibson’s outstanding questions would be handed to the ISC. This, of course, was 
the very body that the prime minister had said was not up to the task.

That was more than 18 months ago and the ISC still hasn’t completed its 
inquiry. As with theChilcot Iraq investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/apr/21/chilcot-inquiry-iraq-war-delay-2015-newsnight>
, no date has been fixed for the findings to be published. And even before any 
report does appear it will be redacted by No 10, in consultation with the very 
agencies that are being investigated.

In Washington DC last December, the US Senate select committee on intelligence 
published asummary 
<http://www.intelligence.senate.gov/sites/default/files/publications/CRPT-113srpt288.pdf>
 of its findings on the CIA’s use of unlawful detention and torture following 
9/11. It was a painful moment, but possibly a cathartic one, and the fact that 
the report was published at all reminded the world of the considerable capacity 
for self-correction within the US system of government.

By contrast, the “short and sharp” UK inquiry promised on 6 July 2010 has 
become an obtuse and interminable process. Moreover, the independence that was 
said to be essential to the process appears now to be dispensable.

Because of the manner in which Gibson’s report was published – and the 
deficiencies of the media’s coverage – few people in Britain are aware that a 
judge concluded their government was involved in the kidnap and mistreatment of 
a number of their fellow citizens. But the stain is still there. Perhaps the 
government is hoping nobody will notice?
 