
Nine out of 10 GPs have not been consulted about sustainability and 
transformation plans (STPs) in their area 
<http://www.gponline.com/nine-10-london-gps-not-consulted-stp-proposals/article/1414356arlier>
 by their CCGs. STPs aim to sustain and transform all NHS services for each of 
the 44 regions in England and implement thethe vision of the five-year forward  
<https://www.england.nhs.uk/ourwork/futurenhs/>view with its emphasis on 
self-care, prevention and collaborative working in large multi-disciplinary 
organisations. The GPs who have been involved in drawing up these five-year 
plans have roles on clinical commissioning groups (CCGs) and do not necessarily 
represent the views of their peers. This has generated criticism, particularly 
from the public and frontline staff who have been kept in the dark, despite 
many of them trying (and failing) to view the draft plans through several 
freedom of information requests.

STPs: Radical local modernisation plans or the end of the NHS as we know it? | 
Denis Campbell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/07/stps-local-modernisation-plans-nhs-four-years>
Two weeks ago our local STP for Bristol, North Somerset and South 
Gloucestershire 
<https://www.bristolccg.nhs.uk/about-us/sustainability-and-transformation-plan/>
(BNSSG) was published. It was the first time I’d had an opportunity to look at 
the five-year plan put forward by local NHS hospital trusts, clinical 
commissioning groups and local government to transform primary and secondary 
care provision (including mental health) as well as public-health services. 
There has been little input from grassroots GPs into the development of these 
plans. Like other STPs, its key priorities are prevention, early intervention, 
self-care and reducing health inequalities as well as primary, community and 
acute care collaboration. All worthy goals, so why keep the plan secret for so 
long?

It does mention consolidating neonatal services (there are two neonatal units 
in Bristol) and given thefurore that has greeted plans to close maternity 
services by other STPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/18/ae-cancer-and-maternity-units-to-close-in-major-nhs-overhaul>
, this could be one reason.

Most STPs start out with a baseline financial deficit running into hundreds of 
millions. Ours is no exception. We receive funding of £61m (for transformation 
and sustainability across all acute and community sectors) to implement the STP 
plan but it must tackle a deficit of £305m (by 2020/21). Our STP lists some 
potential outcomes: 27% reduction in demand on general practice, 30% reduction 
in hospital admissions and attendances by year three, a reduction in outpatient 
appointments by 15% and in length of hospital stay by 20%. Some of the projects 
that aim to integrate primary and community care look encouraging (such as 
those around long term conditions of diabetes, respiratory and frailty) but 
offer scant detail on finances.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsecret-plans-to-transform-nhs-zara-aziz%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6810661c7519048c50982c10b09ed05a015e82c5%2F7_372_3710_2226%2F3710.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20the%20big%20secret%20over%20plans%20to%20transform%20NHS%20services%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsecret-plans-to-transform-nhs-zara-aziz%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20the%20big%20secret%20over%20plans%20to%20transform%20NHS%20services%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsecret-plans-to-transform-nhs-zara-aziz%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6810661c7519048c50982c10b09ed05a015e82c5%2F7_372_3710_2226%2F3710.jpg>
 The GP profession (alongside many others in the NHS) is struggling to recruit 
and retain its workforce. Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
The plan talks of discharging patients as soon as they stop needing hospital 
care (but lacks detail on how our social care crisis and financial pressures 
would pose obstacles) and shifting care to community settings. There is 
national emphasis on bigger GP organisations (20-50,000 patients) being better 
and visionary (our practice is 18,000), whenwe know that one size does not fit 
all 
<http://www.nuffieldtrust.org.uk/publications/bigger-better-lessons-large-scale-general-practice>
.

The GP profession (alongside nurses, paramedics and so many others in the NHS) 
is struggling to recruit and retain its workforce – perhaps this has been the 
reason why we have not been asked to come to the table. We areimploding from 
workload and burnout 
<http://www.gponline.com/eight-10-gps-england-say-workload-unmanageable/article/1416845>
. Shifting work into the community is already happening without an increased 
workforce and there’s no plan to increase dwindling GP numbers 
<http://www.gponline.com/stp-plans-gp-numbers-fall-half-five-years/article/1416068>
.

These plans are setting alarm bells ringing. Involving frontline staff or the 
public in any meaningful way is likely to pose delays for their implementation. 
And as NHS England states in its own guidance, due to financial challenges“we 
do not have the luxury of waiting until perfect plans are in place” 
<https://www.england.nhs.uk/wp-content/uploads/2015/12/planning-guid-16-17-20-21.pdf>
. Certainly it could be argued that STP boards are trying to make the best out 
of the must-do mantras, rigid financial control and timescales stipulated by 
NHS England.

The greatest danger of STPs is that they become the focus not of improvement 
or innovation but of cost-cutting

Can there be any room for transformation at a time when many of the STP 
organisations are experiencing significant financial deficits? Can we moderate 
demand, promote self-care, roll out seven-day access, improve cancer and other 
health outcomes, reduce hospital and emergency nursing home occupancyand 
balance the books? The greatest danger of STPs is that they become the focus 
not of improvement or innovation but of cost-cutting: moving bottle-necks of 
demand from one setting to another and leading to poorer health.

Ultimately the level of NHS deficit will dictate how achievable these STPs 
become. In the end it seems thatNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> 
England is asking local organisations to deliver a sugar-coated pill that may 
look ambitious and futuristic, but will nevertheless still be bitter to swallow.

• Zara Aziz is a GP partner in north-east Bristol
 