
It’s the time of year when the baroque makes a comeback. Angels are 
everywhere, garlands are festooned about the place, and everything that can be 
decorated, is.

We tend to think of Christmas decorations as a 19th-century idea. In Britain, 
the first Christmas tree was installed by Queen Charlotte in 1800, andthe 
definitive Victorian Christmas image 
<https://www.awesomestories.com/images/user/672abdd19aa4d854c9c8dd6295132c4f.jpg>
 of the Queen and Prince Consort standing with their children around their tree 
appeared on the cover of the Illustrated London News in December 1848, 
launching the German-invented Christmas tree and its attendant decorations into 
English-speaking popular culture.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fbaroque-christmas-art-decorations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69120a9d9162cd461badeee07a3160341a6101b7%2F733_1430_1446_2596%2F1446.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20we're%20still%20baroque-ing%20around%20the%20Christmas%20tree&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fbaroque-christmas-art-decorations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20we%27re%20still%20baroque-ing%20around%20the%20Christmas%20tree&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fbaroque-christmas-art-decorations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69120a9d9162cd461badeee07a3160341a6101b7%2F733_1430_1446_2596%2F1446.jpg>
 The Throne of St Peter in St Peter’s basilica in the Vatican. Photograph: 
David Clapp/Getty Images/Arcaid Images 
Yet the gold and silver, lights and fairies, flamboyance and spectacle of 
modern decorations echo an art style that existed two centuries before the 
Victorian age – the over-the-top multimedia experience that was the baroque. 
Between roughly 1600 and 1750 (the dates vary depending where you look) 
spectacular baroque architecture, sculpture and painting filled Europe’s 
palaces, churches and city squares with giant cherubs, pyramidal ornaments, 
lashings of gold and opulent baubles.

If you think your Christmas tree looks bright and festive, consider the Throne 
of St Peter 
<https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chair_of_Saint_Peter#/media/File%3ARom%2C_Vatikan%2C_Petersdom%2C_Cathedra_Petri_(Bernini)_4.jpg>
, created in St Peter’s basilica in the mid 17th century by Gianlorenzo 
Bernini. Angels swarm in a molten cloud of gold that cascades upward in an art 
of pure decorative exuberance. Golden rays of light emerge from the heavenly 
host and instead of fairy lights – which obviously did not exist in 1648 – a 
luminous window completes the dazzlement.

Christmas decorations remind me of the baroque because there is something so 
beautifully gratuitous about both. At this time of year we suspend thousands of 
lights across city streets and trees in public squares. That collective will to 
party makes us all the heirs of Bernini. Inthe fountains this baroque genius 
built in Rome <https://bagnidilucca.files.wordpress.com/2010/11/img_9759.jpg>, 
flowing energetic masses of marble bring life to piazzas in a completely 
uninhibited way – just like putting up the Christmas decs, but in marble, and 
for ever.

Modern Christmas decorations echo baroque art in still more precise ways. The 
Christmas tree is a kind of sculpture, and the shape of fir trees makes it 
naturally pyramidal, tapering towards the top. This happens to be a favourite 
form of baroque public art.In the streets of Naples 
<https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spires_of_Naples#/media/File%3AGuglia_di_San_Gennaro_-_Napoli_-_2013-05-16_10-29-52.jpg>
 permanent Christmas tree-like decorations made of marble stretch towards the 
sky. These stupendousguglie were built to celebrate the end of outbreaks of 
plague. Like Christmas trees, theyexuberantly taper upwards 
<https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spires_of_Naples#/media/File%3AGuglia_di_San_Domenico.JPG>
 and are handsomely decorated.

Cherubs are another Christmas decoration that revives the baroque age. We 
might hang plastic cherubs on a tree.On the exterior 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-london-13792581> of St Paul’s cathedral 
in London, Sir Christopher Wren’s baroque architectural masterpiece, gigantic 
cherubic faces float among fruit and foliage delicately carved from stone. They 
are London’s greatest Christmas decorations and can be seen all year round.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fbaroque-christmas-art-decorations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe36c88662a9b28fb6a3578833a5cb38759e4a9f%2F0_0_5300_3548%2F5300.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20we're%20still%20baroque-ing%20around%20the%20Christmas%20tree&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fbaroque-christmas-art-decorations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20we%27re%20still%20baroque-ing%20around%20the%20Christmas%20tree&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fbaroque-christmas-art-decorations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe36c88662a9b28fb6a3578833a5cb38759e4a9f%2F0_0_5300_3548%2F5300.jpg>
 A cherub on the exterior of St Paul’s in London. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
Our own love of fairy lights and tinsel at Christmas can help to understand 
the energy and ecstasy of baroque art. Somehow, the bright lights ofChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> are both ridiculous and 
profound. The over the top urge to decorate is manic and merry, but it also has 
something truly beautiful and spiritual about it – a sense of wonder. That same 
sense of wonder flows in the fountains and ceiling paintings of baroque Europe.

Look closer at nativity paintings – and see visions of apocalypse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2016/dec/23/nativity-paintings-apocalypse-christmas-leonardo-da-vinci-botticelli-caravaggio>
Germany created some of the most brilliant manifestations of the baroque, 
including the music of Bach and Handel, as well as Bavarian architectural 
marvels such asEdelstetten Abbey 
<https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edelstetten_Abbey#/media/File%3AEdelstetten_St._Johannes_Baptist_und_Johannes_Evangelist_innen_344.JPG>
. It also invented the Christmas tree. Decorated Christmas trees are recorded 
in 16th-century Germany, and Protestant tradition even credits Martin Luther 
with being the first person to put candles on one. Sometimes people in 17th- 
and 18th-century Germany built wooden pyramids if they couldn’t get a tree. 
That sounds incredibly similar to the baroque street spires of Naples.

Christmas decorations don’t just happen to look baroque. They are a gift to 
the modern world from that age of artistic liberation.
 