
I don’t yet know what my song of the year is, but I can tell you without 
hesitation what the song I’ve heard the most is, albeit not always in its 
recorded version: the Oscar-winning Let It Go. Technically, the song from 
Frozen is sung by Broadway starIdina Menzel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/mar/31/if-then-idina-menzel-impresses-new-broadway-show>
 in the role of Elsa the Snow Queen, but as far as my seven-year-old daughter – 
who has been singing it several times a day for weeks – is concerned, it’s hers.

Like the snow in Frozen, Let It Go is everywhere, and it’s not disappearing 
without a fight. It’s the main reason why the Frozen soundtrack has been the No 
1 album in the US for nine weeks and counting –Beyoncé 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/apr/09/beyonce-double-standard-contemporary-sexuality-equality>
 only managed three – and a significant reason why the film became the 
highest-grossing animated movie of all time. On YouTube, where it sits 
alongside countless amateur cover versions, spoofs, supercuts and fan-made 
videos, the Let It Go sequence uploaded by Disney last December has attracted 
almost 180m views. Still, these mind-boggling statistics strike me less 
forcefully than my daughter’s unprecedented obsession. To her, an older sister 
at an age where boys are beginning to become a source of intrigue rather than 
irritation, and conventional Disney princesses are a prissy drag, it’s more 
than a song. It’s a glimpse of the future, a vessel for secret knowledge.

Reading on mobile? Click here to view Let It Go video 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=moSFlvxnbgk>

Critics are often accused of overthinking mainstream hits, but the songs that 
outstrip all expectations (Disney didn’t anticipate that Menzel’s original 
would eclipse Demi Lovato’s tamer pop version) always demand a closer look. One 
test of a truly great song is an ability to listen to it dozens of times 
without screaming. I’m not a musicologist (although this guy is 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lHQqNIGQIEE>), but anyone can understand why 
Let It Go is a bravura piece of musical storytelling: the nervous minor chords 
of the first verse, jumping to an emphatic major key with the line “Well now 
they know!”; the frantic, pulse-quickening syncopation of the bridge; the 
explosive leap of the chorus, mirrored in the animation’s rapid ascent; and the 
final imperious shrug of “The cold never bothered me anyway.” It’s uncommonly 
fast for a power ballad, too – 137 beats per minute – which is why it’s been 
recommended as a workout songand remixed, badly, into a club banger 
<http://www.billboard.com/articles/columns/code/5944616/idina-menzel-let-it-go-paperchaser-club-remix-exclusive-dance-track>
.

Let It Go is so undeniable that it changes the direction of the movie. When 
Kristen Anderson-Lopez and Robert Lopez were commissioned to write "Elsa’s 
Badass Song 
<http://www.awardsdaily.com/blog/frozen-composers-robert-lopez-and-kristen-anderson-lopez/>
", the Snow Queen was a more conventional villain, but the song’s emotional 
power forced a rethink. “The minute we heard the song the first time, I knew 
that I had to rewrite the whole movie,”said director Jennifer Lee 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/20/movies/awardsseason/oscar-nominated-songs-with-familiar-composers.html?_r=0>
. That’s pretty potent songwriting.

In the film, Let It Go is a moment of dark irony. Elsa’s liberation doesn’t 
just mean lifelong solitude but eternal winter for everybody else – although 
she doesn’t yet know it. Even before she realises the damage she’s done, her 
excitement is gleefully irresponsible: “No right, no wrong, no rules for me.” 
In one popular YouTube parodyElsa sings “Fuck it all 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3DlZdZYLCfU>," which is pretty much the gist of 
it. The viewer knows she’s wrong but gets carried away anyway.

I think this is why the song is so addictive for girls a few years away from 
puberty, already chafing a little at the parental reins. It serves as an 
aperitif for adolescence. Elsa’s leaving home and finding a place of her own 
(buck the house-price boom by building your own ice palace in minutes!), 
marking her rejection of social and familial pressure by swapping formal 
palace-wear for ice-minx couture.

Reading on mobile? Click here to view the Let It Go parody, Fuck It All 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3DlZdZYLCfU>

Slate’s movie critic Dana Stevens, who also has a Frozen-addicted daughter, 
has written about her 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/arts/movies/2014/02/_let_it_go_idina_menzel_s_frozen_ballad_it_sends_the_wrong_message.html>
“familiar sense of deflation every time that pulse-racing song culminates in a 
vision of female self-actualisation as narrow and horizon-diminishing as a 
makeover”. Like her, I usually dislike the makeover trope, but here it’s not 
designed to impress a man – it’s purely for Elsa. And this sequence isn’t a 
happy-ever-after resolution. It’s a moment of transition and upheaval which 
conveys the giddy, reckless buzz of expressing yourself without considering the 
consequences. At such moments, teenage girls are not famed for acting like 
feminist paradigms. Disney’s first movie without an unambiguous villain 
produces its first song to describe how young people really do behave rather 
than how they should behave.

I suspect girls like my daughter sense that the song’s emotional landscape is 
adolescent – somewhere over the horizon, not yet visible, but faintly palpable.
The Lopezes have said they were 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/20/movies/awardsseason/oscar-nominated-songs-with-familiar-composers.html?_r=0>
 “thinking from an emo kind of place”, inspired by the likes of Aimee Mann and 
Adele, when they wrote it. And, asIndiewire’s Sam Adams 
<http://blogs.indiewire.com/criticwire/frozen-let-it-go-idina-menzel-demi-lovato>
 notes, thrilling yet terrifying superhuman powers have been used as metaphors 
for hormonal uproar elsewhere, for example, in Carrie and X-Men.

Outside the film, Let It Go is also a coming-out anthem 
<http://www.dailykos.com/story/2014/02/21/1279401/-Top-Comments-A-Queer-Perspective-on-Disney-s-Frozen#>
 for lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people: “Conceal don’t feel, don’t 
let them know/ Well now they know!” The lines “It’s funny how some distance/ 
Makes everything seem small/ And the fears that once controlled me/ Can’t get 
to me at all” could almost be from anIt Gets Better video 
<http://www.itgetsbetter.org/>. “I was really excited to write an anthem that 
said, ‘Screw fear and shame, be yourself, be powerful,’” said Anderson-Lopez.

The titles of various international versions 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Let_It_Go_%28Disney_song%29#Other_languages> 
speak volumes about the different potential emphases: Let Out Your Secret 
(Arabic), Let It Be (Estonian), Let Go and Forget (Russian), Doesn’t Matter 
(Ukrainian), It Ends Now (Serbian), I Have This Power (Polish), I’m Free 
(Portuguese), Freed, Released (French) and, somewhat literally, Ice Heart Lock 
(Cantonese). IfPharrell’s Happy can be weaponised 
<http://www.policymic.com/articles/85423/how-this-became-the-surprising-protest-song-of-our-generation>
 as a protest song, I wouldn’t be surprised if Let It Go found its mutinous 
calling one day, studded as it is with the language of refusal: “not”, 
“couldn’t”, “can’t” (twice), “no” (three times), “never” (four) and “don’t” 
(five).

To me, it means something else. Whenever I hear my daughter singing it, swept 
up in its vertiginous intensity, belting out the chorus as loudly as someone 
trying to call for help in a high wind, I feel a tiny premonition of loss. She 
doesn’t know it yet, but some day she will rebel, fight for her independence, 
do brilliant things, do stupid things, learn about her power and the dangers of 
power, and what she’ll be letting go of, as she should and must, is her parents.
 