
Ten years in, and the metropolitan elite is at last receiving regular tuition 
in austerity, at the theatre. Often the plays make their way to the capital 
from other urban centres.Love, currently at the National Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/dec/14/love-review-homelessness-drama-alexander-zeldin-dorfman-national-theatre>
, was created using a devising process by Alexander Zeldin, associate director 
at the Birmingham Repertory Theatre. It starts playing there at the end of 
January.

Set in a hostel for homeless people, it features a disparate group of the 
desperate: a father of two whose new wife is 33 weeks pregnant, all four of 
them sharing one room; an adult son and his ailing, incontinent mother, sharing 
the room next door; plus a female refugee from Sudan and a male refugee from 
Syria who drift in and out of the claustrophobic lives of the central group. 
The action takes place in the inadequate communal area, where there’s a single, 
shared loo and basic kitchen area but no bath or shower.

Wish List review – lives boxed in by benefit cuts and relentless work
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/sep/28/wish-list-review-lives-boxed-in-by-relentless-work-and-benefit-cuts>
The play’s strength is that it has no truck with sentimental ideas of the 
blitz spirit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/sep/07/remembering-the-blitz-francis-beckett>
, with comrades in adversity helping each other out. The residents are all 
mistrustful of each other, resentful of the idea that the chronic needs of one 
might trump the chronic needs of another in the quest to bag that elusive 
council house. They are pitched against each other in a wretched competition, 
clinging to the purity of their helplessness. On the day I saw it, Love got a 
standing ovation.

Meanwhile, at London’s Royal Court, Wish List has just opened – written by 
Katherine Soper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/nov/17/bruntwood-prize-katherine-soper-wish-list-welfare-cuts-royal-exchange>
 and produced in acollaboration with the Royal Exchange in Manchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/sep/28/wish-list-review-lives-boxed-in-by-relentless-work-and-benefit-cuts>
. Tamsin is trying to flourish in her zero-hours job packing for an internet 
delivery company. Her strict supervisor constantly criticises her failure to 
hit highly ambitious production targets, which (he always points out) others 
seem able to achieve. Tamsin cares for her younger brother, who stays home 
being tortured by his obsessive-compulsive disorder and the fact that despite 
his terror of leaving the flat or meeting strangers he has just been declared 
fit for work.

Both plays explore competition among the marginalised as a force that further 
alienates people from each other. Any sense of community, of shared adversity, 
is fleeting and hard won, a luxury that is a threat to individual survival and 
not, therefore, to be indulged for long.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Ftelevision-plays-for-today-theatre-love-wish-list-boy-austerity-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2cc123192664c1ce2054e97ded9a44aec1b4766%2F0_207_2875_1725%2F2875.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20can%E2%80%99t%20TV%20tap%20into%20these%20plays%20for%20today%E2%80%99s%20marginalised%3F%20%7C%20Deborah%20Orr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Ftelevision-plays-for-today-theatre-love-wish-list-boy-austerity-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20can%E2%80%99t%20TV%20tap%20into%20these%20plays%20for%20today%E2%80%99s%20marginalised%3F%20%7C%20Deborah%20Orr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Ftelevision-plays-for-today-theatre-love-wish-list-boy-austerity-britain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2cc123192664c1ce2054e97ded9a44aec1b4766%2F0_207_2875_1725%2F2875.jpg>
 Play for Today writers like Alan Bleasdale (pictured above) ‘fostered insights 
among viewers in a way that appears beyond most TV today’. Photograph: Bob 
Thomas/Getty Images 
In Boy, at the Almeida 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2016/apr/15/poverty-porn-theatre-boy-yen-rehome>
 theatre last year, the Sheffield-born writer Leo Butler explored the awful, 
dehumanising effects of such alienation, through the fragmented meanderings of 
a school leaver around the kind of council estate that the people in Love dream 
of. This is a kid who has kept himself to himself so much that he is barely 
registered by others, troubling because of his troubles, and pretty much a 
ghostly presence in his own life. It was very much a psychological mood piece: 
disordered, disturbed and bleak. In all the plays, poor mental health is just 
another bitter fact of life.

I’m glad of these plays, which express the emotional and material lives of so 
many people in Britain so well. I believe in the power of creative expression. 
Yet I’m keenly aware that plays reach only their audiences and that a lot of 
people are hostile to theatre, even when they can afford it. I rememberPlay for 
Today <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2004/sep/05/broadcasting.arts> on the 
TV. It produced one of the British films I rate most highly –Just a Boy’s Game, 
written by Peter McDougall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jun/12/john-mackenzie-obituary> – and 
fostered such talents as Mike Leigh, Alan Bleasdale, Dennis Potter, Jack 
Rosenthal andAlan Clarke <http://www.britishtelevisiondrama.org.uk/?p=862> 
(though this was the 70s, so no women.)

Women who worked on Play for Today | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2017/jan/15/women-who-worked-on-play-for-today>
But it also fostered insights among its viewers in a way that appears beyond 
most TV today. I love a good drama series. But I do wish television would find 
the confidence and boldness truly to reflect Britain back at itself once more. 
The talent is there, the stories, the ideas. But the mass media seem unable to 
tap into it. Everything’s a genre piece.

'Poverty porn': how middle-class theatres depict Britain's poor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2016/apr/15/poverty-porn-theatre-boy-yen-rehome>
When a revival of the one-off drama was suggested in the mid-2000s, a certain 
Michael Gove declared that Play for Today had been “exercises in viewer 
patronisation <http://www.wow.com/wiki/Play_for_Today>”. One feels that if the 
BBC tried to do something like this again, it would be accused of disseminating 
propaganda. Ken Loach’s filmI, Daniel Blake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/20/i-daniel-blake-review-ken-loach-film-benefits-system>
 – to my mind not nearly as strong as any of the plays I’ve mentioned – was 
criticised on much the same terms.

It feels a bit sinister, narratives being deemed too political or didactic for 
the people they represent to have access to them. It seems even more sinister 
that the party in power is the one least likely to want such stories told.

The BBC now survives, politically, by carefully avoiding too much in the way 
of public service. And it’s weird beyond expression, surely, that one of the 
contemporary privileges of the liberal elite is the ability to sit in 
comfortable theatres in London, bearing witness to the misery of the 
dispossessed.
 