
The spectacle of Donald Trump repeatedly demeaning and insulting just about 
every minority group in the US during his campaign for the presidency has been 
toxic and unprecedented. High up on the long list of ignominious behaviour was 
the contempt he displayed for people with disabilities in his mocking of a 
disabled reporter,captured on video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2015/nov/26/donald-trump-appears-to-mock-disabled-reporter-video?CMP=edit_2221>
.

As with the battles disabled people have fought in Britain against austerity 
policies from the bedroom tax to thework programme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/mar/21/work-programme-creates-48000-long-term-jobs-three-years>
, Trump’s casual disdain is a potent reminder of how fragile inclusion and 
hard-fought-for disability rights can be.

Beyond the media focus on the race for the White House a new report 
<https://issuu.com/rudermanfoundation/docs/voting_accessibility_white_paper_fi> 
by theRuderman Family Foundation <http://www.rudermanfoundation.org/> explores 
evidence that, regardless of political rhetoric, people with disabilities in 
the US routinely encounter barriers within the broader electoral process. There 
are at least 35 millionvoting-age people [pdf] 
<https://www.supportthevoter.gov/files/2013/08/Disability-and-Voting-White-Paper-for-Presidential-Commission-Schur.docx_.pdf>
 with disabilities in the US – one in seven of the electorate. According to the 
study, co-authored by Norman Ornstein of theAmerican Enterprise Institute for 
Public Policy Research 
<https://www.aei.org/scholar/norman-j-ornstein/#https://www.aei.org/scholar/norman-j-ornstein/>
, many are treated like “second-class citizens” as a result of obstacles to 
voting. The wide-ranging paper points out how “despite a patchwork of 
legislation” to ensure access to voting serious problems persist.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F26%2Fdonald-trump-appears-to-mock-disabled-reporter-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Donald%20Trump%20mocks%20reporter%20with%20disability%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F26%2Fdonald-trump-appears-to-mock-disabled-reporter-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Donald%20Trump%20mocks%20reporter%20with%20disability%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F26%2Fdonald-trump-appears-to-mock-disabled-reporter-video&media=>
Donald Trump mocks reporter with disability – November 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2015/nov/26/donald-trump-appears-to-mock-disabled-reporter-video>
Pulling on an array of research and interviews it details the scope of the 
issue, including how in parts of the US people with disabilities are unable to 
reach polling stations because of a lack of public or adapted transport and 
inaccessible buildings. Alternative options such as absentee ballots or 
assistance with casting a vote aren’t adequate substitutes for a fully 
accessible, inclusive system it argues because, among other things, these can 
impede a voter’s right to choice and privacy.

Disabled people don’t matter to politicians. To change that we must vote | 
Sharon Brennan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/nov/27/operation-disabled-vote-politicians>
Other hurdles it lists involve election materials and online voter 
registration (for example for people with visual impairments), poll workers who 
are poorly trained in disability access and limited resources to improve 
services. In 2013, theUS Government Accountability Office [pdf] 
<http://www.gao.gov/assets/660/654098.pdf#http://www.gao.gov/assets/660/654098.pdf>
 estimated that in 2008 73% of polling stations had “a potential impediment”, 
something this latest report rightly concludes is “stunning and troubling”. 
Almost three-quarters translates as millions of disabled voters possibly being 
denied their vote.

The report also says stigma is a huge problem, especially for people with 
learning and mental disabilities. According to research, in27 US states 
<http://www.bazelon.org/LinkClick.aspx?fileticket=1kgFTxMFHZE%3D&tabid=315> 
large numbers of people in these groups are barred from or haverestrictions 
placed on voting <http://disabilityjustice.org/right-to-vote>.

It might be tempting to think of voting access for people with disabilities as 
a predominantly US problem but as the last UK general election showed, it is 
far from alone. During that election activists including Operation Disabled 
Vote, whichcampaigned 
<http://www.disabilitynewsservice.com/election-2015-bus-tour-highlights-disabled-peoples-voting-power>
 on voter registration,highlighted the obstacles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/mar/25/disabled-people-shut-out-lack-access-polling-stations>
 in place across Britain. Meanwhile a report from the charity Scope, found 
two-thirds of polling stations had at least one significant barrier to access.
Research 
<https://www.mencap.org.uk/press-release/people-learning-disabilitys-passion-politics-thwarted-system-excludes-them>
 published in 2014 by Mencap revealed that 60% of people with a learning 
disability reported difficulties registering to vote.

When it comes to mental health, charities including Mind and Rethink Mental 
Illness have argued for years that vulnerable people such as those who are 
homeless with mental health problems can face multiple barriers to voting. None 
of these problems, be they in Britain or the US, are universal or irreversible. 
During the 2016 presidential campaign it has been encouraging to see positive 
perspectives on disability. Hillary Clinton has repeatedly highlighted disabled 
people’s employment rights and other areas where exclusion and 
underrepresentation are common.

EU referendum: push to improve voting turnout for psychiatric inpatients
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/19/eu-referendum-push-to-improve-voting-turnout-for-psychiatric-inpatients>
And in the run-up to next week’s election, activists in the US have been 
mobilising andpolitical engagement is high.  
<http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2016/09/22/a-political-profile-of-disabled-americans/>
The American Association of People With Disabilities launched a successful 
campaign in the summer promoting voting accessibility and registration among 
the millions of people with disabilities who are eligible to vote. Grassroots 
activism has also been spurred into action with networks such asSignVote 
<http://signvote.org/>, for people who are deaf and hard of hearing, and Crip 
the Vote <https://disabilityvisibilityproject.com/tag/crip-the-vote>, an online 
campaign encouraging disabled people to participate in local and state 
elections as well as voting for president.

The right to vote, and not being precluded from exercising that right, is 
fundamental to citizens in any society wishing to call itself democratic or 
inclusive. It is intolerable that people continue to face barriers to voting 
because of their disability.

• This article was amended on 3 November 2016 to add a reference to the 
Ruderman Family Foundation.
 