
The wife of the Bali <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bali> police officer 
allegedly killed by Sara Connor and her British boyfriend has rejected the 
offer of a “donation” by the Australian, saying she won’t accept “even a cent 
from her”.

“I want the court to give the maximum punishment that fits what she did, based 
on Indonesian laws,” widow Ketut Arsini told Denpasar court on Tuesday.

The comments came after Connor read sections of a handwritten letter out to 
the court, in which she offers Arsini a “donation” of 25 million rupiah (about 
A$2,500).

Australian Sara Connor ​fails​ to get Bali murder case thrown out
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/24/australian-sara-connor-fails-to-get-bali-case-thrown-out>
Expressing her sadness over the death of Wayan Sudarsa, whose battered body 
was discovered on Kuta beach in the early hours of 17 August, Connor said: “I 
feel great pain when I remember the tragedy.

“I came to Bali on this little holiday, to relax ... often I think, is it 
maybe destiny that wanted to change our lives so dramatically,” Connor said. 
“I’m deeply sorry for you and your family now left alone without Mr Sudarsa to 
care for you and your children. You have been always in my prayers.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fwidow-of-bali-policeman-rejects-compensation-offer-from-sara-connor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc84de5ba97d6661ad127e13379067066fee44fb8%2F0_151_4521_2713%2F4521.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Widow%20of%20Bali%20policeman%20rejects%20compensation%20offer%20from%20Sara%20Connor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fwidow-of-bali-policeman-rejects-compensation-offer-from-sara-connor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Widow%20of%20Bali%20policeman%20rejects%20compensation%20offer%20from%20Sara%20Connor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fwidow-of-bali-policeman-rejects-compensation-offer-from-sara-connor%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc84de5ba97d6661ad127e13379067066fee44fb8%2F0_151_4521_2713%2F4521.jpg>
 Ketut Arsini (right), the widow of Bali police officer Wayan Sudarsa, gives 
evidence at the trial saying: ‘I want the court to give the maximum punishment 
that fits what she did.’ Photograph: Putra Sinulingga/AAP 
Connor reiterated her innocence, saying all she had tried to do was separate 
her British boyfriend David Taylor and Sudarsa after the pair got into a fight 
over her lost purse.

Arsini said her husband was working the night shift when he died and that when 
she heard there had been an “accident” she couldn’t believe it.

“[My] son came back from the hospital and he cried ... He said his father has 
gone.”

Prosecutors allege Taylor became embroiled in a fatal fight with Sudarsa after 
the British DJ confronted the police officer over the loss of Connor’s wallet.

Sara Connor looked ‘messy’ and ‘pale’, Bali murder trial told
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/07/sara-connor-looked-messy-and-pale-bali-trial-told>
Taylor, the court has heard, hit Sudarsa numerous times, including with a beer 
bottle.

Before they were arrested on 19 August, Connor and Taylor allegedly burnt 
their clothes and destroyed a number of Sudarsa’s personal belongings in an 
what prosecutors claim was a bid to cover up evidence.

Both are facing charges of murder, fatal assault in company and assault 
causing death.

Taylor will face court on Thursday before Connor’s matter is expected to 
return next week.
 