
Who Melania wears at the inauguration on Friday will be as important, if not 
more so, than what she wears. There is little doubt that she will look 
polished, expensive and chic in her two outfits – a day outfit for the 
swearing-in, and a ballgown for evening. Anyone expecting an excess of cleavage 
or bling has not been paying attention to the makeunder (tone-it-down makeover, 
as also undergone by Kim Kardashian) that has seen Trump embrace a new look: 
neutrals (the camel coat shewore on election day 
<http://www.latimes.com/fashion/la-ig-wwd-melania-trump-20161108-story.html>), 
on-trend statement sleeves (the white Roksanda dress shewore last summer 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/style/2016/07/melania-trump-rnc-dress-sold-out>) and 
unexpected fashion flourishes (who can forget thePussygate pussy bow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/nov/28/melania-trump-betty-ford-first-lady-feminist-liberal>
?).

But to dress such a divisive figure is a bold fashion statement that will put 
a designer indirect opposition 
<http://www.teenvogue.com/gallery/tom-ford-marc-jacobs-wont-dress-melania-trump-sophie-theallet>
 to Tom Ford and Marc Jacobs, two very influential figures in the American 
fashion world, who have both said they will not dress her. So, her choice of 
designer name is a loaded one.

Ralph Lauren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/feb/18/ralph-lauren-new-york-fashion-week-autum-2016>
 has emerged as the front runner. 2017 marks Ralph’s 50th anniversary, and an 
inauguration outfit would ensure he starts the landmark year on the front 
pages. Moreover, such is Ralph’s stature in the American fashion industry that 
even those opposed to dressing Melania would be unlikely to directly criticise 
him – especially on his anniversary. This would be a coup for the Trumps, as 
the Ralph Lauren aesthetic – navy blazers, suede belted jackets, blanket coats, 
Gatsby-esque gowns – represents a highly sophisticated, idealised version of 
the American dream, one that the Trump baseball caps speak of.

Karl Lagerfeld <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/karl-lagerfeld> is being 
mooted as a contender. Lagerfeld, who has always taken a mischievous delight in 
being politically incorrect, is not to be ruled out, although it would be a 
boldly unpatriotic move on the part of the Trumps. If it were under theChanel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/chanel> label, this would be a provocative 
choice, asCoco Chanel’s controversial political connections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2009/apr/22/coco-chanel-second-world-war>
 during the second world war would be likely to bring the word “Nazi” brought 
back into the conversation, while a bold line of comparison would be drawn 
between Melania and the Chanel-wearingJackie Kennedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2017/jan/17/jackie-kennedy-pink-wool-suit-dark-side-first-lady-fashion-dallas-glamour-power>
. However, Lagerfeld also designs for Fendi, whose proprietor Bernard Arnault 
had a meeting with Trump recently.

Tommy Hilfiger’s name appears to have fallen down the shortlist, but he must 
still be in the running, having been the most high-profile American designer to 
state publicly he would be proud to dress her. The Tommy Hilfiger brand has 
always been a firmly populist one, championing mass consumption over 
exclusivity. In September,Hilfiger staged a funfair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/13/gigi-hadid-emoji-fashion-new-york-fashion-week-new-generation-designers-sexy-skin-dancing-lady-dress>
, rather than a catwalk show, at New York fashion week. And Hilfiger, like 
Trump, has embraced the power of social media, hiring Insta-model Gigi Hadid to 
co-design a collection.

The rumour mill is in full swirl. And there is another debate yet to be had: 
who will dress Ivanka?
 