
Far be it from me to come over all Freudian, but there has to be latent 
significance in the manifestation of a group of men boring through the ground 
inside a giant, phallic-shaped machine with a woman’s name. And not just one 
group of men: we’re talking eight, for eight phallic-shaped machines, all of 
which bear women’s names.


True, to be fair to the Crossrail project, there are women working these big 
drilling dicks as well – the evening before I visited theCrossrail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/crossrail> site in east London I watched the 
The Fifteen Billion Pound Railway <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b04b7h1w> on 
BBC2, and the senior engineer working on the particularly tricky job of 
tunnelling under the Thames was a woman, as was her deputy. However, for now, I 
suspect these are the exceptions that prove the rule: thegrands projets of the 
built environment have a tendency to be pushed forward by a distinctively 
masculine combination of grandiosity, obsessive single-mindedness and either 
brute or mechanical strength.


And, as projects go, they don’t get much grander than Crossrail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/crossrail>. I’m not going to bore into you with 
the statistics here – God knows they’ve been dinned into you enough already; 
really as noisy background justification for the fact that the vast amount of 
that £15bn comes out of London taxpayers’ pockets. What exactly are we getting 
for our buck? Why, big, phallic-shaped machines banging into Mother Earth, 
that’s what.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F02%2F-sp-crossrail-will-self-london-railway-bankers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F26%2F1409071824523%2Fe0d98163-4161-41b0-966f-e1214cf5fe93-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20Self%20on%20Crossrail%3A%20%E2%80%98Projects%20don't%20get%20much%20grander%20-%20or%20more%20phallic%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F02%2F-sp-crossrail-will-self-london-railway-bankers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20Self%20on%20Crossrail%3A%20%E2%80%98Projects%20don%27t%20get%20much%20grander%20-%20or%20more%20phallic%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F02%2F-sp-crossrail-will-self-london-railway-bankers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F26%2F1409071824523%2Fe0d98163-4161-41b0-966f-e1214cf5fe93-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Work continues day and night inside the Crossrail project’s Whitechapel 
tunnel, 35 metres below ground. Photograph: Graham Turner for the Guardian 
Oh, and if you’re not happy with my psychoanalytic take on it, why not hearken 
to what Terry Morgan, the Crossrail chairman, sold to me as the benefit of the 
new railway while I was taking my trousers off in front of him. (Purely, I 
might add, in order that I could put some high-vis ones on before we went down 
his hole together.) According to Terry – a bluff, genial, highly likable fellow 
who spent a part of his career in the arms industry – once Crossrail is up and 
running, it will cut journey times from Reading to the City by 30 whole 
minutes; not only that, but the harassed commuters won’t have to change trains, 
they can just sit there playing Angry Birds, or reading the FT the entire time.

 I didn’t dance with joy when Terry vouchsafed this – nor, I confess, was I 
overly impressed by the news that the new Canary Wharf Crossrail station will 
include three whole subterranean levels chock full of retail outlets. Indeed, I 
was slightly surprised the chairman was quite so proud of what, on the face of 
it, went against his earlier statement that “I don’t think of this as an 
engineering project, it’s building a railway.” I forbore from remarking that it 
didn’t sound like a railway to me – more like a series of retail opportunities 
connected by a giant travelator; forbore because, as I say, I liked Terry, and 
felt rather honoured that he’d decided to accompany me personally as I entered 
his hole.

Of course, Crossrail’s benefits shouldn’t be anatomised quite so cursorily – 
there will be new houses, apparently, and millions of ex-urbanites will find 
themselves within 45 minutes travel time of centralLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> (and its outstanding opportunities to 
both earn and spend a buck). Overall, London’s public transport infrastructure 
will receive a 10% boost in capacity – so that’s all right, isn’t it?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F02%2F-sp-crossrail-will-self-london-railway-bankers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F26%2F1409072334821%2Fa3a0b8a8-2888-4f17-925e-bb62b55c4986-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20Self%20on%20Crossrail%3A%20%E2%80%98Projects%20don't%20get%20much%20grander%20-%20or%20more%20phallic%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F02%2F-sp-crossrail-will-self-london-railway-bankers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20Self%20on%20Crossrail%3A%20%E2%80%98Projects%20don%27t%20get%20much%20grander%20-%20or%20more%20phallic%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F02%2F-sp-crossrail-will-self-london-railway-bankers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F26%2F1409072334821%2Fa3a0b8a8-2888-4f17-925e-bb62b55c4986-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The view back to the surface from the Limmo Peninsular shaft, east London. 
Photograph: Graham Turner for the Guardian 
Well, it’s all right so long as you agree with a conception of the city that’s 
embodied in such crude economic metrics. I’ve written for Guardian Cities 
before about thespatialisation of capital in London’s built environment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/jun/09/londons-high-rise-future-skyline-will-self>
, and Crossrail represents this just as much as the Shard. There are already 
three railway lines connecting the western periphery of London with the city 
centre; the requirement for an entirely new and fast one is a function of one 
factor alone: the pre-eminence of the financial services industry in the city’s 
economy, and its ability to get what it wants. Along with high-frequency 
trading comes the requirement for traders themselves to be transported at high 
frequencies. Terry Morgan thinks of it as a railway – but I’m more inclined to 
view it as a colossal cable-router, through which digitised humans will be 
streamed.

 But as I say, I kept my lip buttoned during the security briefing; and stayed 
shtum as we picked up our oxygen re-breather units, donned hard hats and 
protective spectacles, and clanked along to the lift that would drop us down 
into the hole. I didn’t even twit the Crossrail PR flak when he kept on at me 
about how all the muck that was being scooped out of the ground was being 
floated downriver and piled up on Wallasea Island, to help construct the RSPB 
reserve. Nowadays, everyone engaged on grand projects feels the need to cover 
up the priapism of their endeavours with such environmental fig leafs; but 
really, I ask you, do we really feel better about being compelled to the daily 
grind because some Essex birds aren’t getting their feet wet? I think not.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F02%2F-sp-crossrail-will-self-london-railway-bankers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F26%2F1409071967542%2F5c08b476-3084-4a09-8286-3d009e5b7a1c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20Self%20on%20Crossrail%3A%20%E2%80%98Projects%20don't%20get%20much%20grander%20-%20or%20more%20phallic%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F02%2F-sp-crossrail-will-self-london-railway-bankers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20Self%20on%20Crossrail%3A%20%E2%80%98Projects%20don%27t%20get%20much%20grander%20-%20or%20more%20phallic%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F02%2F-sp-crossrail-will-self-london-railway-bankers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F26%2F1409071967542%2F5c08b476-3084-4a09-8286-3d009e5b7a1c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Terry Morgan, Crossrail chairman, with tunnel boring machine ‘Jessica’. 
Photograph: Graham Turner for the Guardian 
Morgan, quite reasonably, is cock-a-hoop at what his big drilling dicks have 
done. New laser and hydraulic technology means that the tunnels arrive at the 
future station locations with margins of a millimetre or less; so precise is 
their boring, that they were able to pass within inches of St Paul’s. It had 
taken the Crossrail team a mere eight months to get under the Thames from 
Plumstead to North Woolwich, whereas poor old Marc Brunel took 16 years.

Instead of workers labouring in unspeakable conditions behind potentially 
faulty Greathead shields, the Crossrail tunnellers have been safe inside Ada, 
Phyllis, Victoria, Elizabeth, Mary, Sophia, Ellie and Jessica. Scores of lives 
were lost tunnelling under London in the past, now safety is paramount. The 
hole and tunnel, instead of looking – as it would’ve done in Brunel’s day – 
like somethingSebastiao Salgado 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/series/sebastiaosalgadogenesis> might 
want to photograph, is instead an orderly working environment, just like any 
surface-level construction site, except perhaps a little tidier.

 We rode a little train along the tunnel and directly into the tunnelling 
machine itself. I thought about Thunderbird 2 and the Mole, but all the while 
Terry and his colleagues kept up a steady stream of information regarding the 
brilliance of their own equipment, and the efficiency of their labours. I 
didn’t doubt any of it for a moment – I was even impressed. Sort of.

Great cities are indeed the product of grand projects, among other things; it 
doesn’t matter how much of an eco-fiend you are, there’s still no disputing the 
unutterable beauty to be found in the sight of the lights of Los Angeles coming 
on in the evening smog haze, so that – if you’re standing at the Griffiths 
Observatory – you see the great reticulation of the streets and freeways flung 
towards the horizon.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F02%2F-sp-crossrail-will-self-london-railway-bankers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F26%2F1409072581162%2F21b16985-354c-4162-a24a-03edaaf47cfa-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20Self%20on%20Crossrail%3A%20%E2%80%98Projects%20don't%20get%20much%20grander%20-%20or%20more%20phallic%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F02%2F-sp-crossrail-will-self-london-railway-bankers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20Self%20on%20Crossrail%3A%20%E2%80%98Projects%20don%27t%20get%20much%20grander%20-%20or%20more%20phallic%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F02%2F-sp-crossrail-will-self-london-railway-bankers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F26%2F1409072581162%2F21b16985-354c-4162-a24a-03edaaf47cfa-2060x1236.jpeg>
 One of the eight 1000-tonne tunnel boring machines, which are so precise they 
tunneled within inches of St Paul’s. Photograph: EPA 
 Of course, the greatest of London’s civil engineering projects aren’t quite 
so visible: Bazalgette’s sewers, the deep-level tube system and now Crossrail. 
To persist with my Freudianism: arguably, Londoners are the least discontented 
of the civilised, given that we spend so much of lives contemplating the Tube’s 
lavatorial tiling, and smelling our fellow citizens’ flatulence.

At the business end of whichever woman-borer we were inside of, we encountered 
Tom Donahue from Lancaster. Like many of the tunnellers, he’s a former miner – 
in his case, his early career was marked by mopping-up operations after the 
Abbeystead disaster of 1984, in which 16 people died when methane gas exploded 
in an underground water-pumping station. According to Morgan the joy of the 
work for his team consists in large part simply in the act of tunnelling.

 Again: I don’t doubt this – and frankly, given the raw deal miners got from 
globalisation, I wouldn’t mind if my taxes went to fund lots of their 
tunnelling. Hell, I wouldn’t care if they bored through the undersides of the 
city until it resembled nothing so much as a giant emmental cheese. The eight 
machines used for Crossrail were purpose-built in Germany, and while there’ll 
be some payback when they’re returned to the manufacturer, basically they’ll 
soon be pretty much obsolete. Terry mused as to whether or not there might be 
another use for them, and I suggested they could bore out a large hole in Boris 
Johnson’s ego. I think Terry smiled at this – but it could have been that the 
bright sunlight as we regained the surface deceived me.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F02%2F-sp-crossrail-will-self-london-railway-bankers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F26%2F1409072795961%2F273525f6-0734-4eb4-8d55-5fd813771af9-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20Self%20on%20Crossrail%3A%20%E2%80%98Projects%20don't%20get%20much%20grander%20-%20or%20more%20phallic%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F02%2F-sp-crossrail-will-self-london-railway-bankers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20Self%20on%20Crossrail%3A%20%E2%80%98Projects%20don%27t%20get%20much%20grander%20-%20or%20more%20phallic%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F02%2F-sp-crossrail-will-self-london-railway-bankers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F26%2F1409072795961%2F273525f6-0734-4eb4-8d55-5fd813771af9-2060x1236.jpeg>
 An architect’s impression of the new Paddington station that will serve the 
Crossrail line. Photograph: EPA 
Terry also wondered aloud what this part of London would look like in 10 years 
time, as we stood looking over the gallimaufry of plant and the piles of 
concrete tunnel sections spreading along the bank of Bow Creek. I said I 
thought it might well be a full-achieved urban scene – but at what cost, given 
that by then hardly any of the current inhabitants on low incomes will be able 
to afford to live there.

At this, Terry expostulated: “You’re right there, we’ve got to find a way of 
providing affordable housing in London.” Ah, yes, we do indeed – and if only it 
could be done with a bloody great tunnelling machine. But the problem is, it 
requires a much more intangible and inaccurate piece of equipment: political 
will.


• Will Self on London’s high-rise future: ‘thrusting, exhilarating, yet 
strangely insubstantial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/jun/09/londons-high-rise-future-skyline-will-self>
’
 