
William Hill <https://www.theguardian.com/business/williamhill> has been 
accused of “appalling” behaviour after encouraging torch-waving staff to visit 
rival bookmakers and lure gamblers into its own shops with the promise of free 
bets.

The bizarre tactic is part of William Hill’s efforts to exploit a dispute 
between two of its competitors –Ladbrokes-Coral 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ladbrokes> and Betfred – and horse-racing 
TV channel the Racing Partnership.

The row, over the fee that the Racing Partnership charges bookies to show 
races, has left Ladbrokes-Coral and Betfredunable to broadcast the channel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/09/racing-tv-blackout-in-uk-betting-shops-a-concern>
 to punters.

An internal William Hill <https://www.theguardian.com/business/williamhill> 
memo seen by the Guardian encourages staff to exploit the impasse by taking 
part in what it calls the “torch challenge”. This involves turning up at a 
rival bookmaker wielding a torch and shining it through the shop window to 
attract the attention of gamblers.

William Hill staff then inform the customers that its stores still have rights 
to show the Racing Partnership channel and offer them a free bet as an 
enticement to defect.

“Let’s get disruptive and make sure their punters see the light!” the internal 
memo reads. “Grab a torch and shine it around your local competitor,” it 
continues, adding: “Take your free bets down too.”

William Hill insisted the scheme was harmless, saying: “It is a bit of fun to 
highlight that we have a product that our competitors don’t.”

But Carolyn Harris, Labour MP for Swansea East, said it displayed bookmakers’ 
lack of respect for gamblers, some of whom are addicts.

“This is indicative of the way they treat people. It’s like two dogs fighting 
over a piece of meat and they’re prepared to go to any lengths. It’s pretty 
appalling.”

Harris leads a cross-party parliamentary group advocating a reduction in the 
maximum stake from £100 to £2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/08/cut-fixed-odds-betting-stakes-to-2-mps-urge>
on fixed odds betting terminals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/08/cut-fixed-odds-betting-stakes-to-2-mps-urge>
 (FOBTs) – sometimes referred to as the “crack cocaine” of gambling due to 
their addictive nature.

She said bookmakers were nervous about the impact an ongoing parliamentary 
review might have on the profit they make from FOBTs.

“Maybe they’re worried the days of FOBTs are numbered so they’re trying to get 
more racing customers,” she added.

Ladbrokes <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ladbrokes> said: “We’re a big 
high street operator and we’re not surprised a competitor will sink to any 
tactics to try and pinch our customers. We’re confident our customers will 
appreciate what they’ve already got.”

Betfred declined to comment.

The behaviour of gambling firms <https://www.theguardian.com/society/gambling> 
has come under increasing scrutiny following a year in which industry regulator 
– the Gambling commission – sanctioned several firms over their failure to 
prevent problem gambling and money-laundering.

Last year, the commission arranged voluntary settlements with bookmakers such 
as Paddy Power, whichagreed to pay £280,000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/29/paddy-power-encouraged-gambler-lost-home-jobs-family-gambling-commission-report>
 after it was found to have encouraged a problem gambler until he lost five 
jobs, his home and access to his children.

Betfred reached an £800,000 settlement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jun/14/gambling-commission-orders-betfred-to-pay-800000-pounds>
 in June after admitting it had failed to implement proper 
anti-money-laundering controls in accepting stolen cash from a “VIP” customer.

In a similar case, the regulator announced an £880,000 settlement with Coral  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/27/gala-coral-fined-over-gambler-who-stole-850000-to-feed-habit>
in April, after the bookmaker took hundreds of thousands of pounds from a “VIP” 
problem gambler who was using the proceeds of theft to feed his habit.
 