
When Oslo revealed plans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/19/oslo-moves-to-ban-cars-from-city-centre-within-four-years>
 to ban all private vehicles from the centre by 2019, it joined a lengthening 
list of cities seeking to shift the focus away from cars and towards greener, 
citizen-focused mobility solutions.

Around 7 million people globally are estimated to die from air pollution 
<http://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/releases/2014/air-pollution/en/> every 
year, not to mention the millions more killed in accidents involving motor 
vehicles.

In response, cities around the world are trying out car-free initiatives. 
Helsinki has ambitious plans to make its “mobility on demand” service so good 
that nobody will want to drive a car in the centre by 2025, while Paris’s 
car-free days have successfully reduced high pollution. New cities – such as the
Great City 
<http://www.dezeen.com/2012/10/24/great-city-by-adrian-smith-gordon-gill-architecture/>
 on the outskirts of Chengdu, China, andMasdar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/apr/28/end-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile>
 near Abu Dhabi – plan to focus on mass transit or electric cars as 
alternatives to gas-guzzling private cars. But will cars in cities ever be 
consigned to the history books?

The Norwegian capital’s announcement came last month as part of a wider 
political initiative by the newly elected leftist municipal government to halve 
the city’s emissions by 2020. On top of implementing a no-car zone within the 
city’s central ring road, Oslo plans a number ofother proposals, including 
<http://www.osloby.no/Dette-blir-de-viktigste-politiske-endringene-i-Oslo-8208407.html>
 building at least 40 miles of new bike lanes, introducing rush-hour charges 
(on top of existing congestion fees) and removing parking spaces. These 
initiatives, coupled with the city’s move todivest fossil fuels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/mar/02/oslo-divests-from-coal-companies>
 from pension funds, are all in an effort to slash emissions. The city also 
plans to be fossil-fuel free by 2050.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Fcar-free-city-oslo-helsinki-copenhagen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0bb57328efebcb6a902cd6a0b35e5edf10533e8a%2F444_0_2736_1643%2F2736.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20we%20ever%20get%20a%20truly%20car-free%20city%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Fcar-free-city-oslo-helsinki-copenhagen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20we%20ever%20get%20a%20truly%20car-free%20city%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Fcar-free-city-oslo-helsinki-copenhagen%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0bb57328efebcb6a902cd6a0b35e5edf10533e8a%2F444_0_2736_1643%2F2736.jpg>
 People on the Champs-Élysées in September when central Paris went car-free for 
a day. Photograph: Philippe Wojazer/Reuters 
It’s certainly no secret that removing gas-guzzling vehicles will work 
wonders. When smog levels were at a dangerous high in Paris earlier in the 
year, mayor Anne Hidalgogave the red light 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/23/paris-smog-pollution-emergency-measures-traffic>
 to half of the city’s diesel vehicles. After just 24 hours, PM10 particle 
pollution fell back to well below 80mg per cubic metre and traffic jams were 
reduced by almost 40%.

Paris's mayor Anne Hidalgo has vowed to permanently ban all diesel-powered 
vehicles from the centre ​by 2020

France tops the European list for the highest percentage of diesel cars on the 
roads, thanks to government subsidies making the fuel cheaper than petrol. So, 
in December last year, Hidalgo vowed to implement a permanentban on 
diesel-powered vehicles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/07/paris-mayor-hidalgo-plans-ban-diesel-cars-french-capital-2020>
 from the heart of the city by 2020. In tandem with this initiative, cycling 
and pedestrian infrastructure will be greatly improved, beginning with an €8m 
(£5m)walkable transformation of the River Seine’s right bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/06/paris-mayor-plans-to-pedestrianise-seine-anne-hidalgo>
, and the doubling the cycling network to 870 miles.

Before this radical initiative comes into play, Parisians were offered a brief 
taste of what their city might look like in 2020 when Hidalgo rolled out a 
car-free day across one-third of the French capital in sunny September.Air and 
noise pollution was significantly reduced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/03/pariss-first-attempt-at-car-free-day-brings-big-drop-in-air-and-noise-pollution>
, and major arteries such as the Champs Élysées transformed into temporary 
public spaces for bikes, pedestrians andimpromptu yoga sessions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/sep/27/all-blue-skies-in-paris-as-city-centre-goes-car-free-for-first-time>
. Hidalgo has alsoconfirmed plans to implement emergency traffic bans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/03/paris-to-stop-traffic-when-air-pollution-spikes>
 during periods of high air pollution.

Venice is often cited as the largest car-free city, but they have it easy, 
with canals and rivers instead of streets.Hamburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/hamburg-answer-to-climate-change>
, on the other hand, is currently making waves by enforcing an auto-ban on a 
number of urban roads to develop a network of route for pedestrians and bikes 
that link parks and open spaces together. This “green network 
<http://www.hamburg.de/gruenes-netz/>” will span 40% of the metropolis, 
transforming Germany’s second largest city into a more human-friendly 
environment, while also playing a role in absorbing CO2 and bringing the city 
closer to its goal of an80% reduction 
<http://www.hamburg.de/contentblob/4028914/data/booklet-englisch).pdf> in 
greenhouse gas emissions by 2050.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Fcar-free-city-oslo-helsinki-copenhagen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8dc5353a9b2dd6357094530d9b0dc28173543e64%2F0_0_4568_3045%2F4568.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20we%20ever%20get%20a%20truly%20car-free%20city%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Fcar-free-city-oslo-helsinki-copenhagen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20we%20ever%20get%20a%20truly%20car-free%20city%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Fcar-free-city-oslo-helsinki-copenhagen%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8dc5353a9b2dd6357094530d9b0dc28173543e64%2F0_0_4568_3045%2F4568.jpg>
 Madrid plans to pedestrianise the urban core by 2020. Photograph: Daniel Ochoa 
De Olza/AP 
Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/sep/26/madrid-plans-city-centre-car-ban-masdar-brussels-athens>
, too, is focusing on the city at a human level, and recently hatched a plan to 
pedestrianise the urban core and expel cars by 2020. Beginning in early 2015, 
the Spanish capital introduced a limit on non-residential vehicles from 
entering a 1.36 sq mile area of the centre, expanding on an already existing 
zone. To strike a balance for the city’s residents, Madrid will be enlarging 
its bus network and building new pedestrian infrastructure, and it has already 
launched Europe’s first fully electrice-bike scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/jul/11/madrid-electric-bike-share-scheme-cyclists-cars-pedestrians-highways>
. To top this off, the city recentlyannounced plans 
<http://www.citylab.com/cityfixer/2015/11/madrids-bold-new-pollution-plan-ban-cars-and-make-transit-free/413878/?utm_source=SFTwitter>
 similar to those in Paris, to ban 50% of cars when air quality levels were 
breached – free public transit will be provided on those days.

Madrid is expanding its bus network and has launched Europe’s first fully 
electric bike share

Dublin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jun/19/dublin-proposes-ban-private-cars>
 andBrussels 
<http://www.citylab.com/commute/2014/01/europes-most-congested-city-contemplates-going-car-free/8027/>
 are also toying with the idea of kicking the habit through city centre 
diesel-car bans, with similar ideas proposed by Liberal Democratsin London 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-london-34681638> following the VW 
emissions scandal.Milan 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/2963c26a-7ca7-11e4-b944-00144feabdc0.html#axzz3panH1XDK>
 is offering public transit tokens to residents for every weekday they 
surrender their cars, andRome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/mar/13/pedestrianisation-rome-italy-car-parking-ban>
 is slowly progressing with parking bans. But there’s one European city that’s 
opting for an ambitious approach to render car ownership completely pointless.

Forget closing off streets to cars; Helsinki is going all out on a plan to 
provide its citizens “mobility on demand” by 2025, by fusing together access to 
carpools, buses, taxis, bikes and ferries through one smartphone app. The 
software would function both as a payment platform and journey planner, 
equipping residents with an advanced array of cheap and convenient travel 
options that, asAdam Greenfield reported 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/jul/10/helsinki-shared-public-transport-plan-car-ownership-pointless>
, “would be so good that nobody would have any reason to own a car”.

And then there’s bike-friendly Copenhagen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/dec/08/jan-gehl-make-cities-liveable-urban-rethinker>
. Unsurprisingly, large swathes of the Danish capital have been closed to 
vehicles for decades, with bicycle infrastructure reaching into every corner. 
Pushing to becomecarbon neutral by 2025 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/apr/12/copenhagen-push-carbon-neutral-2025>
, Copenhagen will continue to prioritise bikes over cars through a series of 26 
suburban commuter arteries known as “cycling superhighways 
<http://www.npr.org/2012/09/01/160386904/in-bike-friendly-copenhagen-highways-for-cyclists>
”. However, car ownership in the city is currentlyon the rise 
<http://cphpost.dk/news14/business-news14/car-ownership-rises-as-prices-plummet.html>
, and Copenhagen’s lord mayor, Frank Jensen, isincreasing the number 
<https://twitter.com/FrankJensenKBH/status/642317675520262145> of parking 
spaces, much to the discontent of somevocal residents 
<http://www.copenhagenize.com/2012/11/lord-mayor-of-car-penhagen.html>. “I 
don’t want to say to Copenhageners that ‘I don’t like your lifestyle because 
you’re buying a car’,” says Jensen. “Our ambition is to have one third of trips 
made by bike, one third by transit and one third by car. We are investing in a 
new metro system … and we’re improving the seamless transition between the 
three modes in order to reach that goal.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Fcar-free-city-oslo-helsinki-copenhagen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0127723f2d275dcb67fcf754cab69c14ef495f0c%2F0_768_2939_1763%2F2939.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20we%20ever%20get%20a%20truly%20car-free%20city%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Fcar-free-city-oslo-helsinki-copenhagen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20we%20ever%20get%20a%20truly%20car-free%20city%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Fcar-free-city-oslo-helsinki-copenhagen%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0127723f2d275dcb67fcf754cab69c14ef495f0c%2F0_768_2939_1763%2F2939.jpg>
 Copenhagen is pushing to become carbon neutral by 2025. Photograph: Slim 
Allagui/AFP/Getty Images 
Paris, Helsinki and now Oslo – European car-free efforts have really held the 
limelight in recent years. But in Latin America, there’s one city that’s been 
championing the idea of car-free streets since 1974. And that’s Bogotá.

Every week in the Colombian capital, over 75 miles of urban roads are shut to 
vehicles. The routine event –Ciclovía 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/green-living-blog/2010/jun/16/cycling-ethical-living>
 – began in 1974, and has aided the city’s transformation into a cycling 
paradise. Thanks to ex-mayor Enrique Peñalosa’s commitment to creating a 
healthy, car-free city, a network of over 200 miles of bike-only lanes serves 
Bogotá. For Peñalosa, “a citizen on a $30 bicycle is equally important to one 
in a $30,000 car”. After leaving office in 2001, he waselected as mayor once 
again 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/the_americas/the-latest/2015/10/25/849236ca-7b1c-11e5-837b-2c3f2478487e_story.html>
 this weekend.

In Hyderabad’s IT corridor (dubbed “Cyberabad”), a recently launched weekly 
car ban 
<http://indianexpress.com/article/india/india-others/cyberabad-it-corridor-becomes-first-indian-road-to-be-free-of-cars-every-thursday/>
 marks a first for Indian cities. And in South Korea, aSuwon neighbourhood 
<http://www.sustainablecitiescollective.com/david-thorpe/332966/one-year-car-free-month-suwon-what-has-changed>
 recently trialled a full month ban in September 2013, which inspired the 
wealthy Sandton area ofJohannesburg 
<http://www.mediaclubsouthafrica.com/democracy/4365-sandton-goes-car-free-for-a-month>
 to hosts its own car-free experiment last month.

Every week in the Colombian capital, Bogotá, more than 75 miles of urban roads 
are shut to vehicles

But during the dawn of the automobile age, when cities were designed around 
the beloved family motor, it takes a lot of effort to make a U-turn. The 
average US commuter spends around42 hours 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2015/08/26/us-usa-traffic-study-idUSKCN0QV0A820150826>
 a year stuck in a traffic jam (or double that, if youlive in LA 
<http://time.com/2821738/los-angeles-traffic-study/>), but Portland hopes to 
change this by having 25% of trips made on two wheelsby 2030 
<https://www.portlandoregon.gov/transportation/44671>. The city also opened a 
pedestrian, bike and public transit-onlybridge across the 
<http://www.citylab.com/commute/2014/08/why-portland-is-building-a-multi-modal-bridge-that-bans-cars/378665/>
 River.


While the rest of the country was building cities where the car is king, Davis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/aug/03/davis-california-the-american-city-which-fell-in-love-with-the-bicycle>
, the largest city in Yolo County, California, adopted a carefree, car-free 
attitude when it came to urban infrastructure. While modal share for cycling 
just scrapes an average of 2% in the US, in Davis it’s 20%.

Over to Canada, where Toronto’s commuter congestion costs the city C$6bn 
<http://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/toronto/constant-gridlock/article18406658/?page=all>
 (£2.9 bn) annually. Alongside the expansion of the subway system, segregated 
bike lanes are slowly creeping into North America’s fifth largest city, and 
there arewhispers 
<http://torontoobserver.ca/2014/12/04/car-free-king-st-proposal-still-faces-a-long-battle/>
 around a potential car-free street during rush hour. This is certainly a 
turnaround from the city’s direction under the leadership of former mayorRob 
Ford 
<http://www.thestar.com/news/gta/2009/05/25/council_approves_jarvis_bike_lanes.html>
, who spent C$300,000 to remove a major bike lane (which had seen a300% 
<http://old.cycleto.ca/news/2012/05/03/bike-collision-rates-are-down-jarvis-street>
 increase in cycling) in order to save car-commuters two minutes on their 
journey home.

'My children are suffering but what can I do?' Delhi's polluted air, by the 
people who live there
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jun/25/delhi-india-pollution-air-quality-most-polluted-city-children-suffering>
Kicking the car habit in well-developed municipalities poses a challenge, but 
built-from-scratch cities provide urban planners with the opportunity to start 
completely afresh.Great City 
<http://www.dezeen.com/2012/10/24/great-city-by-adrian-smith-gordon-gill-architecture/>
, a development on the outskirts of Chengdu, China will be constructed from 
scratch with space for 80,000 residents – none of whom will need a car to get 
around thanks to a mass-transit system rendering cars nearly useless. Home to 
some of the world’smost polluted cities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/gallery/2015/may/22/how-chinas-pollution-problem-impacts-on-its-people-in-pictures>
, China’s newest conurbation will generate 60% less CO2 than a more 
conventional city of a similar size.Masdar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/apr/28/end-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile>
, an eco-city rising from the desert near Abu Dhabi will also keep non-electric 
(and driverless) cars out of the centre, encouraging walking and cycling 
instead.

Across the globe, it’s estimated 
<http://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/releases/2014/air-pollution/en/> that 
around 7 million annual deaths are linked to air pollution exposure, not to 
mention the millions more killed in accidents relating to cars each year. The
European commission 
<http://ec.europa.eu/transport/themes/strategies/2011_white_paper_en.htm> has 
already unveiled desires for a “single transport area” in 2011 with a primary 
focus on eliminating “conventionally fuelled” cars in cities, geared towards a 
60% cut in CO2 emissions by 2050.

With so many car-free measures taking shape across the globe – from heavily 
polluted Hyderabad to green, utopian Copenhagen – city leaders are waking up to 
the importance of planning places for citizens that both aid sustainable urban 
development, while also improving quality of life. In a few weeks, world 
leaders will assemble in Paris for what’s set to be the world’s biggestclimate 
conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/cop-21-un-climate-change-conference-paris>
 yet, seeking to come to an international agreement on measures to keep global 
warming below 2C. Will car-free cities be high on the agenda?

 * Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 