
On a weekend packed with goals and entertaining football, Jamie Vardy’s first 
hat-trick in thePremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> stole the headlines, but 
his wasn’t the only standout display. Wilfried Zaha made his mark in another 
six-goal thriller, between Hull and Crystal Palace.

The winger outfoxed Robert Snodgrass to earn a penalty, laid on the assist for 
Fraizer Campbell’s late equaliser and scored a sensational goal himself in 
between. His thunderous strike will be remembered, butAlan Pardew 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/alan-pardew> was right to be full of 
praise for the 24-year-old after the game. “Even take the goal out of the 
performance and you’ve got an outstanding display,” said the Palace boss. “How 
many English players, offensive players, would have done what he did today?”

Given that Zaha recently confirmed he had switched his international 
allegiance to theIvory Coast <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ivorycoast>, 
his manager’s insistence that England have missed out may seem redundant now, 
but Pardew’s own frustration with England’s decision to overlook him is 
understandable. Still seemingly hopeful that both Zaha and England will have a 
change of heart, Pardew will be without his player of the season for a crucial 
period if that is not the case.

If Zaha does receive a call-up for the African Cup of Nations, he could miss 
more than a month of the season. With Palace set to face Manchester United, 
Chelsea and Arsenal in their next four games, there’s a realistic chance they 
could be in the relegation zone by the time Zaha flies out to Gabon.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fwilfried-zaha-england-ivory-coast-crystal-palace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4b69d4e083465130bd292c667fcce277d3489d7%2F0_0_650_493%2F650.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20England%20regret%20missing%20out%20on%20Wilfried%20Zaha%20if%20he%20plays%20for%20Ivory%20Coast%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fwilfried-zaha-england-ivory-coast-crystal-palace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20England%20regret%20missing%20out%20on%20Wilfried%20Zaha%20if%20he%20plays%20for%20Ivory%20Coast%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fwilfried-zaha-england-ivory-coast-crystal-palace%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4b69d4e083465130bd292c667fcce277d3489d7%2F0_0_650_493%2F650.jpg>
 Infographic:WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
While Pardew is clearly frustrated by the snub from England, the player 
probably felt he had little option. Zaha must have wondered what he needed to 
do to get the call. When team-mate Andros Townsend was selected ahead of him 
for the previousEngland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> squad – 
despite having fallen out of favour at club level – it proved the last straw. 
Zaha could either wait and risk continuing to be left out or opt to appear in a 
major international tournament before Southgate had the chance to name another 
squad.

On current form, Zaha deserves a place in the England squad. Pardew is right 
to say there are few players in the Premier League that possess the same 
ability to terrorise full-backs, and even fewer who are eligible for the 
national team. The Hull defence were petrified of Zaha’s pace, power and 
trickery on Saturday. He has shown all three of these attributes for some time 
now, but he seems to have finally married them together.

He has only scored three goals in the Premier League this season, which is 
unspectacular, but only Kevin De Bruyne has registered more assists than Zaha’s 
six, five of which – along with two goals – have come in his last seven 
appearances. And he is not producing the goods because of his team-mates. It 
took Zaha to play a significant role in three goals at the weekend for Palace 
to earn a point. An assist and man of the match rating against Leicester was 
not enough to avoid defeat – nor were assists against Liverpool, Burnley, 
Manchester City or a goal against Swansea in the four matches that followed. 
Over a seven-game stretch in which only the current top three have scored more 
goals than Palace’s 16, they have conceded a league high of 20 goals, meaning 
Zaha’s efforts have largely gone unrewarded. Of players who haven’t played for 
the majority of the season as a striker, only Philippe Coutinho and Gylfi 
Sigurdsson (both 10) have had a direct hand in more goals than Zaha’s nine.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fwilfried-zaha-england-ivory-coast-crystal-palace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5649e67b3c80a0376e30fa20c75f61069ec17a3%2F0_0_658_260%2F658.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20England%20regret%20missing%20out%20on%20Wilfried%20Zaha%20if%20he%20plays%20for%20Ivory%20Coast%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fwilfried-zaha-england-ivory-coast-crystal-palace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20England%20regret%20missing%20out%20on%20Wilfried%20Zaha%20if%20he%20plays%20for%20Ivory%20Coast%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fwilfried-zaha-england-ivory-coast-crystal-palace%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5649e67b3c80a0376e30fa20c75f61069ec17a3%2F0_0_658_260%2F658.jpg>
 Infographic:WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
With all three of his goals and four of his assists coming away from home this 
season, only Alexis Sánchez (8.63) has earned a higher rating on the road. 
Zaha’s score of 8.23 from seven appearances ranks among the top five in Europe, 
alongside Sánchez, Lionel Messi, Neymar and Cristiano Ronaldo.

Reassessing Tony Pulis, a manager who has gone on the attack this season
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/who-scored-blog/2016/dec/06/tony-pulis-west-brom-stoke-city>
It’s not just his direct contribution to goals that has improved this season. 
His cross accuracy of 35.6% is double that of his first season back at Selhurst 
Park and he ranks second of the 50 players who have attempted at least 30, when 
excluding corners. By rounding three opponents at the weekend, Zaha became the 
first player in Europe’s top leagues this season to attempt 100 dribbles. While 
that has always been his greatest strength, it’s another area in which he has 
made significant strides this season, with a dribble success rate of 60.8% 
again at a high for his Premier League career.

Despite all this, Zaha still has his doubters, with Southgate clearly among 
them. Concerns over his end product in seasons gone by had merit but all that 
has changed having this campaign. The winger’s decision to opt for the Ivory 
Coast suddenly looks like England’s loss – as well as Palace’s.

Premier League team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
La Liga team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Bundesliga team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Serie A team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Ligue 1 team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Liga Nos team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
• Follow WhoScored on Twitter <https://twitter.com/WhoScored> and Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/WhoScored>
• Follow Martin Laurence <https://twitter.com/martinlaurence7> on Twitter
 