
Earlier this November, an NFL executive gave a fascinating, if bewildering, 
quote to Bleacher Report’s Mike Freeman 
<http://bleacherreport.com/articles/2675925-mike-freemans-10-point-stance-dak-prescott-has-look-of-an-all-time-great>
 regarding the future of the nation’s most popular sports league under Donald 
Trump.

“Under President [Barack] Obama, the country was intellectual and looked at 
facts. I think that’s why our ratings fell,” said the anonymous executive. 
“People read a lot about our scandals or CTE and didn’t like what they saw. 
Under Trump, the country will care less about truth or facts. It’ll be [more 
raw] and brutal. Football will be more of an outlet. We’ll go back to liking 
our violent sports.”

On the campaign trail, Trump spoke out about his distaste for the NFL’s recent 
rule changes, made to prioritize safety and protect players from head injuries. 
In October, when a woman fainted at one of Trump’s rallies but returned after 
receiving medical attention,Trump declared 
<http://www.si.com/nfl/2016/10/12/donald-trump-concussion-policy-soft-rules>, 
“That woman was out cold and now she’s coming back. See? We don’t go by these 
new, and very much softer, NFL rules. Concussion. Oh no! Got a little ding on 
the head. No, no, you can’t play for the rest of the season. Our people are 
tough.”

It echoed a sentiment from a Trump speech during primary season back in January
 
<http://screengrabber.deadspin.com/trump-endorses-brain-damage-in-speech-that-claims-footb-1752141045>
. “So I’m watching the game yesterday. What used to be considered a great 
tackle, a violent, head-on, violent. If that was done by Dick Butkus, they’d 
say he’s the greatest player ... if that was done by Lawrence Taylor, it WAS 
done by Lawrence Taylor and Dick Butkus! ... and Ray Nitschke, right? You used 
to see these tackles, and it was incredible to watch. Now they [effeminate 
voice] tackle ... head on head collision ... 15-yard penalty. The whole game is 
all screwed up!”

Trump mocks 'soft' NFL concussion rules at Florida rally
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/13/trump-mocks-soft-nfl-concussion-rules-at-florida-rally>
For Trump, football served as a perfect example of why America needed to be 
Made Great Again. As Trump tells it, America is losing the toughness it had in 
the days of real men like Taylor, who iscurrently serving probation for 
pleading guilty to sexual misconduct 
<http://content.usatoday.com/communities/thehuddle/post/2011/03/lawrence-taylor-sentenced-to-probation-no-jail-time/1#.WD8677IrKCo>
. Trump’s promise to restore that kind of toughness to a nation seen as gone 
soft was a major part of his appeal for many of the white men who supported him 
and made up by far his largest voting block.

Natalia Petrzela, assistant professor of history at The New School, says this 
treatment of football has a grand tradition in America’s political history. 
“Positioning football as under attack by meddling, effeminate liberals – rules 
about contact and violence, letting little girls play, insisting on 
repercussions for players who are violent off the field,” Petrzela wrote via 
e-mail, “is a vivid way of making a broader point about the unfortunate 
feminization of American culture that has been a plank of American conservatism 
for decades. But it’s important to note that this version of masculinity is not 
all about unrestrained savagery; football is also seen as encouraging hard 
work, sportsmanship, and discipline, other values seen to be under attack.” The 
trick for politicians is to tie all these things together, for which football 
is uniquely suited.

Populist presidents in particular have seized on football as a political tool. 
Teddy Rooseveltchampioned the game 
<http://www.smithsonianmag.com/history/score-one-for-roosevelt-83762245/> for 
its ability to ward off creeping feminization of America’s youth in what he saw 
as a sedentary age. “The sports especially dear to a vigorous and manly nation 
are always those in which there is a certain slight element of risk,” Roosevelt 
wrote in 1893 for Harper’s Weekly. “It is mere unmanly folly to do away with 
the sport because the risk exists.”

Ronald Reagan, of course, was known for his performance as Notre Dame football 
coach George Gipp in the filmKnute Rockne, All American 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Knute_Rockne,_All_American> before beginning his 
political career. He praised football for its ability to engender “clean 
hatred,”telling the Washington Post 
<https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=1298&dat=19810303&id=k1MQAAAAIBAJ&sjid=h4sDAAAAIBAJ&pg=5185,207171>
: “It is the last thing left in civilization where two men can literally fling 
themselves bodily at each other in combat and not be at war. You hate the color 
of his jersey, but there’s a mutual respect that develops while you’re playing 
on the field.”

But perhaps no politician used football like Max Rafferty 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1982/06/14/obituaries/max-l-rafferty-65-conservative-who-ran-california-schools-dies.html>
, a populist conservative in 1960s California state politics. Rafferty 
“passionately celebrated football as one of the few legitimate forms of campus 
activity that built moral and physical strength,” Petrzela writes, “as opposed 
to the walkouts and demonstrations he denigrated as representing an opposite 
sensibility.”

Rafferty was not always a Trump-esque politician. For example, he initially 
fought for bilingual education in California schools. But in the late 1960s, as 
the culture wars reached their peaks, Rafferty came down squarely on the side 
of traditionalism – anti-communist, anti-immigrant, and pro-authority. He saw 
patriotism as an “emotional” duty and believed football and fraternities were 
the only true and positive forms of campus organization. And in response to the 
idea that programs such as Spanish classes were necessary for the Latino 
students in California’s public schools, Rafferty took the position that 
education was there to perpetuate “the cultural heritage of the race”. Or, you 
might say, Rafferty thought education was there to serve as a cultural wall.

'This game is under attack': Rutgers' Chris Ash uses rugby to tackle football 
safety
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/30/rutgers-chris-ash-football-rugby-tackle-safety-atavus>
Football was part of that platform for Rafferty, a keystone in his cultural 
wall. The late 1960s saw football go through an injury crisis similar to 
today’s after 36 high school kids died on the playing fieldin one horrific 
season in 1968 <http://time.com/3387798/football-deaths/>. Despite those 
deaths, Rafferty espoused the values of the game in a speech in front of the 
1969 California State Conference of Athletic Directors. He warned against the 
threat posed to football by leftist agitators. But he added, “I’m not too 
worried about the outcome. The love of clean, competitive sports is too deeply 
embedded in the American matrix, too much a part of the warp and woof of our 
free people, ever to surrender to the burning-eyed, bearded draft-card-burners 
who hate and envy the athlete because he is something they can never be – a 
man.”

As Petrzela writes: “It seems that especially in contentious moments, football 
is prized as a bastion of traditional, masculine, sensibilities that are 
themselves under threat.” Whether that threat is real or perceived doesn’t 
necessarily matter. “In Rafferty’s generation, there was a kind of moral 
revulsion at what he called ‘The Sick 60s’ – boys wearing long hair, kids 
protesting the US government and walking out of school, and drug use. Today, we 
see Trump fanning similar disgust about campus politics: young people 
questioning the gender binary, demands for ‘trigger warnings’ and ‘safe spaces’ 
and the climate of political correctness that has moved out of educational 
contexts to the broader culture.”

Will our anonymous NFL executive’s prediction of a football renaissance in 
Trump’s America prove true? It’s hard to say. With regards to concussions and 
CTE, Pandora’s Box has already been opened. Growing numbers of American parents 
are saying they would not allow their children to play football, undoubtedly 
influenced by the steady stream of reports of CTE findings in deceased football 
players – youths and professionals alike. Trump can’t stop that alone. But will 
the research into concussions, often funded with federal dollars, continue 
under his administration? And certainly any movement into ending youth football 
in public schools, as two University of Minnesotabioethicists have proposed 
<https://sports.vice.com/en_us/article/vice-sports-qa-the-bioethicists-saying-take-tackle-football-out-of-schools,%20would%20struggle%20to%20gain%20a%20foothold%20under%20Trumpism.>
, would struggle to gain traction in a government helmed by Trump.

“If Trump’s election taught us anything, it’s that predictions about his 
ability to shape public consciousness are precarious,” Petrzela writes. “I do 
think that it will be hard for him to push back on the safety regulations for 
younger players, since the science is persuasive and it is hard to convince 
parents, no matter their politics, that subjecting to their children to 
potential brain injury in service of building character is defensible, much 
less desirable. But in Trump’s America, who knows?”
 