
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> finally built a 
wall on Wednesday. A literal wall of paperwork that he claimed would protect 
his presidency from allegations of conflicts of interest.

It is unlikely to do any such thing.

Pointing at a desk piled with seven stacks of papers at his first press 
conference since his victory, the president-elect said: “These papers are just 
some of the documents that I’ve signed turning over complete and total control 
to my sons.”

Trump and one of his advisers, Sheri Dillon, a partner at the global law firm 
Morgan, Lewis & Bockius, then set out a series of moves designed to head off 
his critics:

 * The president-elect will shift his assets into a trust managed by his sons 
and other Trump executives and give up management of his private company and 
resign from all official positions within it

 * Trump’s companies will make “no new foreign deals whatsoever” during 
Trump’s presidency

 * Any new domestic deals will need the approval of an independent ethics 
adviser

 * Profits from foreign government officials staying at Trump hotels will be 
donated to the US treasury

Additionally, Dillon said that Trump, whose tweets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/04/trumps-tweets-keep-us-manufacturers-on-their-toes>
 have briefly wiped billions off the market values of companies he has 
criticized, had already disposed of all publicly traded and “easily liquidated” 
investments, and had cancelled all 30 pending deals his company was involved in.

“President-elect Trump should not be expected to destroy the company he 
built,” Dillon said.

Under the plan, the new president will be fully isolated “from the management 
of the company” – his sons Donald Jr and Eric, along with the Trump 
Organization chief financial officer, Allen Weisselberg, will take over – and 
“take all steps realistically possible to make it clear that he is not 
exploiting the office the presidency for his personal benefit”.

Ivanka Trump – whose husband Jared Kushner was named senior adviser to the 
president on Monday and facesconflict of interest questions of his own 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/10/ivanka-trump-jared-kushner-nepotism-conflicts-of-interest>
 – will resign from all her positions with the Trump Organization and the 
Ivanka Trump brand, and will move to Washington and concentrate on her 
children, Dillon said.

This plan was published in writing in a six-page document 
<https://www.dropbox.com/s/a2k3xr77a1vwx41/MLB%20White%20Paper%201.10%20pm.pdf?dl=0>
 issued by the Trump transition team later on Wednesday.

Trump's conflicts of interest: a visual guide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2016/dec/01/donald-trump-business-interests-conflicts>
As if to prove just how squeaky clean his presidency will be, Trump announced 
he turned down a $2bn deal a few days ago. “Over the weekend, I was offered 
$2bn to do a deal in Dubai” with “a friend of mine”. “Great guy,” Trump said.

“I turned it down. I didn’t have to turn it down, because as you know, I have 
a no-conflict situation because I’m president,” Trump said, referring to the 
fact that Congress exempts the president and vice-president in most cases from 
conflict-of-interest laws in order not to limit their freedom to act in the 
country’s best interests.

Trump is, however, subject to the constitution’s emoluments clause, an 
anti-bribery provision that forbids the president from accepting “any present, 
Emolument, Office, or Title, of any kind whatever, from any King, Prince, or 
foreign State”.

Given Trump’s business empire, foreign officials might be tempted to test the 
limit of that clause by booking Trump hotels, for example, in order to curry 
favor. The move to give Trump hotel profits from foreign dignitaries to the US 
treasury is meant to prevent such a crisis. But in light of Trump’s 
international portfolio, the little-tested clause is unlikely to be scotched so 
easily.

“President-elect Trump today has set a very dangerous path for himself and for 
the country,” Fred Wertheimer, president of the government watchdog group 
Democracy 21, said in a statement.

It was clear that Trump would maintain ultimate ownership of his business 
empire, he said. “This approach is bound to result in serious conflicts of 
interest and appearances of conflicts for his presidency. Conflicts of 
interest, furthermore, can easily end up in corrupt practices and scandals.

“President-elect Trump is setting the stage to abuse his office for his own 
personal financial interests in a way that has never been done before. With 
President Trump in a position to personally benefit financially from his 
world-wide business enterprises, the American people will not be able to tell 
whose interests are represented by the president’s policy decisions: Trump’s 
financial interests, his benefactors’ interests, or the interests of the 
American people.”

Nor is the long-awaited plan likely to appease Trump’s government critics. 
Walter M Shaub, director of the Office of Government Ethics, compared the plan 
unfavourably with secretary of state nomineeRex Tillerson’s decision to cut 
ties with ExxonMobil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/04/rex-tillerson-exxon-mobil-retirement-package-secretary-state>
.

“It’s easy to see that the current plan does not achieve anything like the 
clean break Rex Tillerson is making from Exxon,” said Shaub. “Stepping back 
from running his business is meaningless from a conflict of interest 
perspective. The presidency is a full-time job and he would’ve had to step back 
anyway. The idea of setting up a trust to hold his operating businesses adds 
nothing to the equation. This is not a blind trust—it’s not even close.”

The OGE said in December 
<https://www.oge.gov/web/oge.nsf/Congressional%20Correspondence/092B59EFD6EC27608525808800724288/$FILE/Carper%20response.pdf?open>
 that its view was that the “president should conduct himself ‘as if’ he were 
bound by this financial conflict of interest law [18 U.S.C. § 208]”.


“Given the unique circumstances of the Presidency, OGE’s view is that a 
President should comply with this law by divesting conflicting assets, 
establishing a qualified blind trust, or both,” the agency wrote in response to 
questions from the Democratic senator Thomas Carper. “However, although every 
President in modern times has adopted OGE’s recommended approach, OGE has no 
power to require adherence to this tradition.”

Peter Henning, professor of law at Wayne State University Law School, said 
that even if Trump himself were legally free from conflicts of interest 
charges, a debatable point, the new arrangement would do little to address 
those conflicts.

“These are his sons and he has been their mentor. Is he not going to talk to 
them for four or eight years?” Henning said. Dillon told reporters that Trump 
would only learn about new Trump deals “if he reads about it in the paper or 
sees it on TV”.

“Given the media attention he will attract, to say Trump will only hear about 
this in the media is to say he is always going to hear about it,” said Henning. 
In deciding not to hand control of his business to outside executives, Trump 
had created a“Rube Goldberg” device 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rube_Goldberg_machine> – an unnecessarily 
complicated machine for solving a simple problem – that was unlikely to serve 
its purpose, said Henning.

“Will his business affect his decisions? Quite possibly not. The problem is 
perception,” Henning said. Trump has handed his children the keys to a business 
with his name emblazoned in gold above the door. “Any federal statute on 
nepotism or conflicts of interest talks not just about your own interests but 
that of your family. Just because it doesn’t apply to him doesn’t mean it’s not 
wrong,” Henning said.

Trump himself seemed to undermine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2017/jan/11/trump-dossier-russia-has-compromising-material-on-president-elect-live-updates>
 quite how independent his children would be at the helm of his empire. “I hope 
at the end of eight years I’ll come back and I’ll say, ‘Oh, you did a good 
job,’” he said. “Otherwise, if they do a bad job, I’ll say: ‘You’re fired.’”

Morgan, Lewis & Bockius, the law firm used by Trump, won Russia’s “judicial 
Oscar” in 2016,according 
<http://www.vedomosti.ru/economics/articles/2016/04/26/639053-chambers-2016-rossiiskie-yurfirmi-trudom-tesnyat-mezhdunarodnie>
 to business newspaper Vedomosti. Chambers and Partners, which rates law firms 
in countries around the world,named 
<http://www.chambersandpartners.com/chambers-europe-awards-2016> Morgan, Lewis 
and Bockius Russia law firm of the year, noting its strong work in energy, 
banking and mergers and acquisitions there.

Additional reporting by Alec Luhn in Moscow
 