
This week on Guardian Cities we've explored the future of cars in cities. Our 
fiery debate on whether cars should be banned from city centres 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/jul/10/live-debate-ban-cars-city-centres-pedestrianisation>
 brought together a variety of experiences, opinions and ideas.

But the topic was equally popular elsewhere around the web over the last seven 
days. From Madrid to Syracuse, NY, urban transport is on a lot of minds at the 
moment, so we've collected some of the best stories below. Should we demolish 
motorways in cities or use them to ease congestion? Build protected lanes for 
cyclists, or reduce their domination of the roads? Could we rethink 
"transport-led development" altogether?

We'd love to hear your responses on these and our Guardian Cities series on 
cars <https://www.theguardian.com/cities>: share your thoughts in the comments 
below.

Madrid goes electric

Madrid is the latest city to launch a public bike share scheme; but these are 
not your average "Boris bikes". The new shareable bicycles in Spain are 
electric, meaning you get that extra push to navigate a hilly urban landscape.
Gizmodo heralds the BiciMAD initiative 
<http://www.gizmodo.com.au/2014/07/why-dont-more-cities-have-e-bike-shares/> as 
a "brave jump ahead of other cities".

In the US, CityLab describes how the case for bike share as transport is 
getting easier 
<http://www.citylab.com/commute/2014/07/we-need-to-think-bigger-about-transit-oriented-development/373838/>
, and argues that development should also orient itself around bike-share hubs, 
instead of just train stations. Yetother reports claim 
<http://online.wsj.com/articles/city-bike-sharing-programs-hit-speed-bumps-1404959467>
 cycle share schemes are hitting their own speed bumps, struggling to secure 
money and riders.

Demolishing urban highways

Developers and city leaders in Syracuse, NY, want to tear down its highway, 
relocate it to the outskirts of the city and introduce a wide, ground-level 
boulevard in its place. But,as Daniel C Vock in Governing argues 
<http://www.governing.com/topics/transportation-infrastructure/gov-highway-through-city.html>
, demolishing highways in cities can cost billions and worsen traffic 
congestion, with no guarantee that their removal will lead to positive urban 
revitalisation.

Smart bike lanes

Studies in Auckland, New Zealand have suggested that bike lanes save lives and 
money <http://grist.org/cities/bike-lanes-save-lives-and-money/>. Protected 
bike lanes certainly help encourage a higher rate of cycling in cities, though 
more work could be done to enhance road safety.As Fast Co Exist reports 
<http://www.fastcoexist.com/3032399/a-protected-bike-lane-that-extends-through-the-intersection-so-cars-really-cant-hit-you>
, urban planner Nick Falbo has proposed intersections where cyclists can wait 
for the light in a protected section in the middle of the street, becoming more 
visible to cars and getting a head start crossing the intersection.

Cyclists: bullies or victims?

Not all people are in favour of helping out cyclists, however. In an 
impassioned opinion piece in the Washington Post 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/local/bicyclist-bullies-try-to-rule-the-road-in-dc/2014/07/08/f7843560-06e3-11e4-bbf1-cc51275e7f8f_story.html?tid=pm_local_pop>
, Courtland Milloy criticises the behaviour of cyclists in the DC area as 
dangerous and inconsiderate. He even suggests that some drivers feel it is 
"worth" the fine incurred by hitting a cyclist purely because of the 
revenge-like satisfaction gained by doing so.

CityLab have responded 
<http://www.citylab.com/commute/2014/07/strange-as-it-seems-cycling-haters-are-a-sign-of-cycling-success/374275/>
 by suggesting that the rise of "cycling haters" is in fact a sign of cycling's 
success in a changing urban landscape. Others, meanwhile, insistpedestrians 
should have ultimate priority 
<http://www.herald.ie/news/cars-or-bikes-why-cant-we-just-rid-our-city-streets-of-both-30362390.html>
.

New York's "dollar vans"

New York is well known for its subway system, but this week the New Yorker 
shone a light on a less-heralded form of transport: the city's "dollar vans" 
<http://www.newyorker.com/sandbox/projects/nyc-dollar-vans/>, the unofficial 
shuttles that operate where the subway and buses do not, predominantly in 
low-income urban neighbourhoods. The interactive report invites readers to 
explore the history and geography of this responsive "shadow" transportation 
system.


Are we seeing the slow death of cars in cities? Will electric vehicles – from 
cars to bike share schemes – become the norm? Have your say in the comments 
below.
 