
Was Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> a country or was it a 
nation? Growing up there I heard it referred to more often as the first – a 
great wee country, a bonnie country, sometimes a ghastly country. “Nation” was 
what nationalists called it: Scottish nationalists, that is – the British 
nationalism of the rest of us was a norm that went largely unarticulated and 
unremarked.

In some ways, the difference was only semantic. If being a nation meant having 
separate educational and legal systems, distinctive banknotes, a definite 
boundary, and a church and sports teams it could call its own, then Scotland 
had all of those. Still, the word “national” when it prefixed emergencies, 
economic indicators and political scandals implied that the nation in question 
was the United Kingdom – the notion that the UK comprised four virile national 
identities held together by a ghostly underlay of Britishness was some way in 
the future. Sometimes, in house-price bulletins and poverty indices, Scotland 
wasn’t even a country but a “region”, like the East Midlands. Beyond cultural 
and social markers, such as poetry and football, Scotland’s status was 
ambiguous, and for quite a long time only a minority of its citizens cared.

The trouble is that to redistribute wealth, a state needs to have it in the 
first place

For many people it was devolution that initiated the change. I have a memory 
of Peter Mandelson in Edinburgh in the late 1990s, either after the result of 
the devolution referendum or when the new Scottish parliament had its first 
session. “A nation once again,” he happily told a reporter, intentionally or 
accidentally referencing an early anthem of Irish nationalism (And then I 
prayed I yet might see / Our fetters rent in twain / And Ireland, long a 
province, be / A nation once again). It was surprising to hear an English 
politician, especially one as metropolitan as Mandelson, give such a jaunty 
opinion; because if Scotland was now definitely a nation rather than something 
mistier and less certain, why shouldn’t it be a nation state, like Ireland in 
the song?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fscotland-oil-money-nationalist-dream-nicola-sturgeon-independence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F296d9366ce1b6507d9622fd6658174d698ac1519%2F0_273_2478_1487%2F2478.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20unromantic%20truth%3A%20oil%20money%20is%20vital%20to%20the%20Scottish%20nationalist%20cause%20%7C%20Ian%20Jack&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fscotland-oil-money-nationalist-dream-nicola-sturgeon-independence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20unromantic%20truth%3A%20oil%20money%20is%20vital%20to%20the%20Scottish%20nationalist%20cause%20%7C%20Ian%20Jack&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fscotland-oil-money-nationalist-dream-nicola-sturgeon-independence%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F296d9366ce1b6507d9622fd6658174d698ac1519%2F0_273_2478_1487%2F2478.jpg>
 Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister: the case for self-government 
‘transcends the issues of oil, of national wealth and balance sheets’. 
Photograph: Jeff J Mitchell/Getty Images 
The Scottish National party, of course, thinks that it should be. It’s why the 
party exists. And yet it owes a good part of its recent success to ignoring the 
tenet of nationalism that says a nation deserves to be independent if its 
population can muster a strong, shared sense of identity. This is what the 
legal philosopher Neil MacCormick, the son of one of the SNP’s founders, John 
MacCormick, called “existential” nationalism – independence for its own sake – 
as opposed to the “utilitarian” nationalism that seeks sovereignty as the basis 
of social, economic and cultural change.

The late Stephen Maxwell, one of the SNP’s liveliest intellectuals, set out 
the utilitarian case in 1981 when he argued that the party needed to disregard 
“romantic” conceptions of nationhood and instead make an “unsentimental [appeal 
to] the social and economic interests of the Scottish people”, and particularly 
to the industrial working class, who had suffered most from Britain’s economic 
decline.

Scotland's North Sea oil revenues collapse, US crude stocks rise - as it 
happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/aug/24/german-economy-grows-by-04-in-second-quarter-business-live>
Alex Salmond was among the group of SNP members in the 1980s who held a 
similar view, though it wasn’t until 2012 that the party’s deputy leader, 
Nicola Sturgeon, compared the two kinds of nationalismin a significant speech 
written by Salmond’s policy director, Alex Bell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/scottish-independence-blog/2012/dec/03/scottish-independence-nicola-sturgeon>
. Sturgeon said that “the fact of nationhood or Scottish identity is not the 
motive force for independence”; nor did she think that independence was 
essential to preserve “our distinctive Scottish identity”.

In fact, she felt that feeling British, “with all of the shared social, family 
and cultural heritage that makes up such an identity”, should present no 
barrier to voting for independence, even though a successful outcome would mean 
the end of Britain as a political entity. Sturgeon had just been put in charge 
of the SNP’s referendum campaign. She promised that over the next two years the 
debate would focus on the question being asked across all mature western 
democracies: how to build a thriving but sustainable economy that benefits the 
many, not the few.

As for the real or imagined victimhood that has fuelled independence and 
separatist movements everywhere, Salmond wrote in the referendum’s consultation 
document that Scotland wasn’t oppressed and had“no need to be liberated” 
<http://www.gov.scot/Publications/2012/01/1006/1>. Independence mattered 
because without it Scotland lacked “the powers to reach our potential”.

Four years after they were written, these equable statements now look even 
more remarkable than they seemed at the time; the Brexit campaign – the first 
significant eruption of modern English nationalism – was a disturbing populist 
storm by comparison.

Independent or not, Scotland’s financial future looks shaky | Alex Bell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/14/independent-scotland-financial-future-westminster-holyrood-government>
Of course, the rank-and-file of the yes campaign didn’t always share the 
leadership’s avowed interpretation of nationalism, in which political 
calculation had a part: to win, the SNP needed to persuade wavering unionists 
that a big constitutional change was no social change at all. (As Salmond wrote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/commentisfree/2014/sep/16/-sp-is-this-the-end-of-britishness>
: “Much of what Scotland will be like the day after independence will be 
similar to the day before …”) But by putting social justice at the centre of 
its campaign, the SNP harvested yes votes in Scotland’s poorest districts, and 
repoliticised large parts of the population that had been alienated by a 
sclerotic and self-serving Labour party.

The trouble is that to redistribute wealth, a state needs to have it. North 
Sea oil that in the summer of 2014 sold for $115 a barrel now sells for $47, 
and in the months between has sold for much less. Scotland’s share of oil tax 
revenues collapsed from £1.8bn in 2014 to £60m in 2015. In that year,Scotland’s 
fiscal deficit rose to nearly £15bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/aug/24/german-economy-grows-by-04-in-second-quarter-business-live>
 – that’s equivalent to 9.5% of Scotland’s GDP, or more than twice the 
proportion for the UK as whole. Utilitarian nationalism had prospered on the 
promise that there would be more money (or at least, not less money) for 
everyone, as well as well-funded social provision. For the foreseeable future, 
that looks impossible.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fscotland-oil-money-nationalist-dream-nicola-sturgeon-independence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1be08fb65a0be68d0f1106929688a983ca844f4e%2F0_115_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20unromantic%20truth%3A%20oil%20money%20is%20vital%20to%20the%20Scottish%20nationalist%20cause%20%7C%20Ian%20Jack&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fscotland-oil-money-nationalist-dream-nicola-sturgeon-independence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20unromantic%20truth%3A%20oil%20money%20is%20vital%20to%20the%20Scottish%20nationalist%20cause%20%7C%20Ian%20Jack&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fscotland-oil-money-nationalist-dream-nicola-sturgeon-independence%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1be08fb65a0be68d0f1106929688a983ca844f4e%2F0_115_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 A show of support for the remain campaign in Edinburgh. ‘Brexit has probably 
made independence more attractive than ever, even to those like me who no 
longer live in Scotland.’ Photograph: Clodagh Kilcoyne/Reuters 
An important moment of revisionism came last Sunday, when in an article 
published to mark the second anniversary of the independence referendumSturgeon 
wrote that the case for full self-government 
<http://www.dailyrecord.co.uk/news/politics/nicola-sturgeon-says-independence-more-8865885>
 “ultimately transcends the issues of Brexit, of oil, of national wealth and 
balance sheets and of passing political fads and trends”. Perhaps “passing 
political fads” referred to the existential-v-utilitarian formulation, which 
can easily be criticised as a false opposition; whatever you do with 
independence, it needs in the first instance to be won.

Brexit has probably made that prospect more attractive to more people than 
ever before, even to those like me who no longer live in Scotland and have no 
voting rights there. So we have a paradox. On the one hand, never hasScottish 
independence <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/scottish-independence> 
seemed so reasonable and desirable, and not just to the Scottish nationalist. 
On the other hand, never in the modern era has it seemed less viable; as well 
as declining oil revenues there is the problem of the hard/soft border with its 
neighbour and biggest market, England, should Scotland rejoin the EU after the 
UK leaves.

An older fashioned nationalism may be the consequence: a movement that can 
call itself a “struggle” and promises no certain material gain; nothing, in 
fact, other than the hopefully metaphorical sacrifice of blood, sweat and 
tears. Either that, or the Scottish independence dream collapses with the oil 
price.
 