
I have just finished binge-watching Occupied 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/oct/02/tv-drama-russian-invasion-occupied-premiere-norway>
, a Norwegian political TV drama that imagines a point in the near future when, 
with Nato collapsed and the US in isolationist withdrawal, an emboldened Russia 
invades Norway for its energy supplies.

TV drama depicting Russian invasion premieres in Norway
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/oct/02/tv-drama-russian-invasion-occupied-premiere-norway>
What’s fascinating about this show, apart from the weird solace I get from 
spending even imaginary time in Scandinavia, is the representation of the EU as 
a craven and hollowed-out thing. Norway, of course, isn’t in the EU, but is 
often cited in reference to post-Brexit Britain, as it is in the European 
Economic Area and part of theSchengen agreement 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-13194723> governing freedom of movement.

And it was chilling, even after the British leave campaign’s furtherance of 
similar ideas, to watch another country’s depiction of the mechanism designed 
to keep peace inEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> as a 
bunch of toothless bureaucrats selling out to the Russians. The message from 
Norway seemed to be less that the EU is in and of itself useless, than that a 
weakened EU, without the US behind it, is easy prey.

Free speech and freebies

Meryl Streep was talking to a global audience when she launched her attack on 
Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/09/meryl-streep-golden-globes-trump>
 at the Golden Globes at the weekend. But given the occasion, her cry for press 
freedom was somewhat ironic. The Hollywood Foreign Press Association, a group 
of entertainment journalists who vote on the awards, are not obvious candidates 
for the barricades. If Washington lobby journalists were overwhelmed by the 
free steaks and sparkling wine atTrump’s holiday party 
<http://theweek.com/speedreads/668172/donald-trump-holds-offtherecord-christmas-party-reporters-but-photos-okay>
, it is hard to imagine the junket-veterans of southern California fighting the 
good fight against him.

To them, Streep issued the reminder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2017/jan/09/good-on-you-meryl-streep-in-your-new-role-as-press-freedom-champion>
 that the “founders enshrined the press and its freedoms in our constitution”, 
which of course includes the freedom to reprint verbatim everything a movie 
star says, whether or not it’s true, and accept the limitations laid down by 
their publicist. She is a dignified figure, but this disparaging lecture was 
only just tolerable.

Famous last words

I listened to Barack Obama’s farewell speech on the radio this week, which 
gave it an almost wartime feel, the sense of a political address transcending 
time and space to reach into an uncertain future. For the best part of an hour, 
all the shortcomings of his administration were put aside while people wept and 
quoted Shakespeare on Twitter. Specifically, Horatio’s “he was a goodly king”, 
and Hamlet’s response: “He was a man, take him for all in all/ I shall not look 
upon his like again.”

The one certainty of Trump’s presidency is that it will elevate the memory of 
Obama. Lots of outgoing presidents have used versions of his line about the 
importance of citizenship over high office, not least George W Bush,who during 
his own farewell speech said 
<https://georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.gov/news/releases/2009/01/20090115-17.html>
, “I will always be honoured to carry a title that means more to me than any 
other – citizen of the United States of America.” But Obama’s appeal to 
citizenship wasn’t mere sentiment. It was a call to action, if not to fight 
them on the beaches, then to fight them via letters, calls and petitions.

At times one imagined Obama’s frustration that Franklin D Roosevelt had 
already nabbed the line “The only thing we have to fear is fear itself”, since 
the overwhelming theme was resisting the threat that Trump poses to the 
national psyche. Instead, he quotedAtticus Finch 
<https://www.theatlantic.com/entertainment/archive/2017/01/obamas-atticus-finch/512789/>
: “You never really understand a person until you consider things from his 
point of view.”

He appealed for 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2017/jan/11/barack-obamas-farewell-speech-in-full-annotated>
 the “middle-aged white man” to be given as much empathy as “the refugee, the 
immigrant, the rural poor, the transgender American” and for us to talk to one 
another in real life rather than argue online.

The impression he left was of someone trying to do the impossible in 
unthinkable times: to forearm a nation against its own incoming president.
 