

Until he was humbled in Iowa on Monday night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/02/donald-trump-iowa-caucus-supporters-voters-new-hampshire-celebrity-entertainment>
, it appeared that nothing could stop Donald Trump in his bid to become the 
Republican party’s nominee.

However, a folk singer who died in 1967 is also unexpectedly proving to be a 
thorn in the side of Trump’s candidacy. Over 60 years ago, Woody Guthrie, the 
totemic Dust Bowl balladeer who penned the timeless paean to equal rightsThis 
Land Is Your Land <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wxiMrvDbq3s>, became the 
tenant in New York of housing magnate Fred Trump, father of Donald. Guthrie’s 
unhappy two-year tenancy led him to write a series of bitter missives,which 
have only just come to light 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/22/woody-guthrie-donald-trump-real-estate-empire-racist-foundations>
, accusing his landlord of having encoded in his contracts regulations evincing 
not just a cynical treatment of the working class but a bigotry towards black 
Americans. The implication is that Trump Jr’s real estate empire is built on 
exploitative, even racist, foundations, while hisscattershot derogatory memes 
<http://www.liberalamerica.org/2015/11/30/donald-trump-racist-memes-youve-ever-seen/>
 are a matter of genealogy.

Woody Guthrie, 'Old Man Trump' and a real estate empire's racist foundations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/22/woody-guthrie-donald-trump-real-estate-empire-racist-foundations>
British singer-songwriter and renowned leftwing activist Billy Bragg  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2013/sep/20/billy-bragg-americana-british-teenagers>
– who in the late 90s,with Americana band Wilco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/wilco>, set previously unheard Guthrie 
lyrics to music on theMermaid Avenue album series 
<http://www.popmatters.com/review/157588-billy-bragg-and-wilco-mermaid-avenue-the-complete-sessions/>
 – knows better than most the value of a good folk song. But are we 
overestimating the power of a lyrical broadside, issued well over half a 
century ago?

“It’s very seldom that a song can cut through, but a song can evoke a moment 
and come to signify a movement,” Bragg says, citing as an example protest 
anthem We Shall Overcome – and, of course, This Land Is Your Land. “For some in 
the US This Land is Your Land is an alternative national anthem. And when 
you’re faced with a threat to democracy and liberty likeDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, to find out that the guy who 
wrote it was on to this shit 70 years ago, it gives you the sense that we are 
right to take a stand. There’s a connection here between Trump Sr and Trump Jr, 
and that connection is the exploitation of working people. And at the moment 
Trump Jr is exploiting working people’s fears. He’s a classic blowhard.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwxiMrvDbq3s&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwxiMrvDbq3s>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwxiMrvDbq3s&media=>
Bragg is keen to emphasise that there was far more to Guthrie than proletarian 
laments; there is a Guthrie to suit everyone, whatever their perspective. Yes, 
he was the proverbial hick from the sticks with a “rough-arse upbringing”, but 
he spent the second half of his life surrounded by beat poets and jazz 
musicians in the bustling, multicultural metropolis that was New York – “a 
fabulous melting pot and arguably the first modern city”, says Bragg – where he 
wrote about everything from “riding on flying saucers and making love to Ingrid 
Bergman on the slopes of an Italian volcano, to getting drunk with sailors and 
chasing women, one of whom claimed to be the niece of Walt Whitman”. He also 
points out that Guthrie’s own fatherhad a murky involvement in the lynching of 
a black man 
<http://monthlyreview.org/2011/05/01/woody-guthrie-redder-than-remembered/>. 

The other irony of his life was that Guthrie only really became visible after 
he receded from view. “He never had a hit record, he was never really that 
famous in his lifetime, he never did gigs like I do or went on tour – his 
greatest album,Dust Bowl Ballads 
<http://www.folkways.si.edu/woody-guthrie/dust-bowl-ballads/american-folk-struggle-protest/music/album/smithsonian>
, failed to sell out its first pressing of 5,000 copies,” says Bragg. “He only 
really became known after he became incapacitated byHuntington’s disease 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/dec/21/inheriting-huntingtons-disease>
 [a progressive genetic neurological disorder]. Being in hospital allowed 
people like Bob Dylan, [Ramblin’] Jack Elliott and Pete Seeger and the others 
who followed on after him to imagine their own Woody Guthrie. And that’s the 
Woody Guthrie that still speaks to us.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgxzMbAMO73k&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgxzMbAMO73k>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgxzMbAMO73k&media=>
And he does so from beyond the grave. Is it plausible that this ghost might 
cause problems for Donald Trump?

“I think anybody who comes along and starts to chip away at your reputation 
[might do],” he replies. “Anything that reminds usthat he came from money and 
isn’t a self-made person 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/22/the-national-review-donald-trump-attack-will-backfire>
, he inherited his whole empire – I think that starts to put a question mark 
over his relationship with the ordinary working people he’s attracted. Guthrie 
has highlighted something that nobody else had spotted. That’s his job in our 
culture, and he’s done it very well.”

Bragg compares and contrasts Guthrie’s love of his country as refuge for 
all-comers with Trump’s narrow-minded patriotism. “You need people like Woody 
Guthrie who really loved their country and refused to have it dragged down into 
the mud by people like Donald Trump,” he asserts. He describes Guthrie as “the 
first punk rocker”,his famous daubing of This Machine Kills Fascists on his 
guitar <http://farm1.static.flickr.com/130/338645625_93cb98a9c4.jpg> an early 
sign of the sort of incendiary sloganeering later employed by insurrectionary 
rockers such as the Clash.

Can he imagine Trump Jr reading these new stories about Guthrie’s songs 
directed at his father and feeling a frisson of discomfort? “Oh, I do hope so,” 
he says. “I don’t think they’ll prevent him [from attaining power], but I do 
think it must be good for those forces ranged against Trump to know that Woody 
is standing shoulder to shoulder with them. That’s what music does: it gives 
you encouragement. When you know that one of your heroes is stood beside you, 
even one who’s no longer around, that gives you inspiration to keep on 
fighting.”

Fighting against fascism? “Well, according to my definition of the word, a 
fascist is someone who tries to blame all the problems of the world on a single 
powerless minority,” he says of the would-be demagogue and star of US reality 
TV series The Apprentice. “So in that sense, Trump is a fascist. I’m just 
hoping ‘reality’ is waiting for him round the corner in the shape of the 
American people. And their message to him will be: ‘You’re fired.’”
 