
The record-breaking worldwide heat of the first six months of 2016 has turned 
to abnormally severe seasonal flooding across Asia with hundreds of people 
dying in China, India,Nepal <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nepal> and 
Pakistan and millions forced from their homes.

In India <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>, the Brahmaputra river, 
which is fed by Himalayan snowmelt and monsoon rains, has burst its banks in 
many places and has been at danger levels for weeks. Hundreds of villages have 
been flooded in Bihar, Assam, Uttar Pradesh and other northern states.

Some of the heaviest rains in 20 years have forced nearly 1.2 million people 
to move to camps in Assam. Floods have submerged around 70% of the Kaziringa 
national park, home to the rare one-horned rhino which wasvisited by Prince 
William earlier this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/14/rhino-shot-dead-poachers-india-duke-duchess-cambridge>
.

“The situation is still very bad. We are taking measures to help people in 
every possible way,” the Indian forest minister, Pramila Rani Brahma,told 
Reuters <http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-nepal-india-floods-idUKKCN1081PR>. 

In the state of Bihar, 26 people have died, nearly 2.75 million people have 
been displaced or affected, and 330,000ha of land inundated. Many major rivers 
are still flowing at or above danger levels.


In China, the summer monsoon which started in June after a series of heatwaves 
is said to have caused $22bn of damage so far. State officials say it has 
killed more than 500 people, destroyed more than 145,000 homesand inundated 
21,000 sq miles of farmland. 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/capital-weather-gang/wp/2016/07/21/this-years-monsoon-floods-are-the-second-costliest-on-record-in-china/>


Around 500,000 people were last week still displaced in the hardest-hit 
central Chinese provinces of Henan and Hebei. According to the Chinese ministry 
of civil affairs, 125,000 people were in urgent need of basic assistance.


This monsoon season has been one of the strongest in China’s recent history, 
with 150 towns and cities reportedly suffering record rainfall. The Yangtze 
river basin has been particularly hard hit, with 22 inches of rain falling in 
24 hours last month at Wuhan, the Hebei state capital.

The city, which is downstream of the Three Gorges dam and protected from 
flooding, was inundated after its drainage system and flood controls failed. 
Much of the damage is thought to have occurred because the city’s rapid 
expansion in the past 20 years filled in many small lakes and wetlands which 
used to store water.

Elsewhere, Nepal has been lashed by torrential monsoon rains, flash floods and 
landslides. The government says 14 of the mountainous country’s 75 districts 
have been affected by floods, 54 people have died and many major rivers are 
running at dangerous levels. Tens of thousands of Nepalese are still living in 
tents following devastating earthquakes last year.


The army has been deployed to repair dams and helicopters are being used to 
distribute food and medicines to homeless people who have taken shelter on 
roads and in upland areas.


Meteorologists say that the 2016 Asian monsoon is one of the strongest in many 
years, and has been intensified by theEl Niño natural phenomenon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/mar/05/what-is-el-nino> which 
sees Pacific water temperatures rise and leads to droughts and severe weather 
worldwide.


The summer heatwaves that have affected much of the Middle East, north Africa 
and north America have slackened in the last few days.

“At the [north American] heatwave’s peak on July 22, almost 124 million people 
in north America were under heat-related warnings or advisories. Additionally, 
high overnight low temperatures meant little relief from the oppressive heat,” 
said the World Meteorological Organisation (WMO).

The WMO has set up a committee 
<http://public.wmo.int/en/media/news/wmo-examines-reported-record-temperature-of-54%C2%B0c-kuwait>
 to examine whether a 54C temperature recorded in Kuwait in July has set the 
new highest temperature for Asia, as well as for the entire eastern hemisphere.

Climatologists at the WMO said they expected more heatwaves because of climate 
change. “The length, frequency and intensity of heatwaves will likely increase 
further during this century, according to the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change,” said the agency.

But they said it was likely that only a weak “La Niña” will follow the strong 
El Niño phenomenon later this year. La Niña is the opposite of El Niño and is 
marked by cooler temperatures worldwide.
 