
The World Bank has downgraded the Indian economy’s growth forecast as sharp 
falls in the country’s automobile and real estate sales flagged the short-term 
impact of recalling India’s two most-used bank notes.

The Washington-based financial institution predicted India’s economy would 
grow by a “still robust” 7% in the fiscal year to March 2017 – a 0.6% drop from 
its earlier forecast but still the fastest rate of any major economy in the 
world.

It attributes the fall to November’s decision to recall all 1,000 and 500 
rupee currency bills from circulation, a surprise demonetisation move intended 
to weed out untaxed wealth, hasten the digitisation of India’s economy and 
disrupt terrorist and other criminal networks.

India withdraws 500 and 1,000 rupee notes in effort to fight corruption
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/08/india-withdraws-500-1000-rupee-notes-fight-corruption>
“Continued tailwinds from low oil prices and solid agricultural output [were] 
partly offset by challenges associated with the withdrawal of a large volume of 
currency in circulation and subsequent replacement with new notes,” the World 
Bank said on Wednesday.


Demonetisation has suffocated the vast informal economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/02/indias-bank-note-ban-how-modi-botched-the-policy-yet-kept-his-political-capital>
, which employs up to 80% of Indians, but the World Bank said the impact of the 
policy was likely to be short term. “India is expected to regain its momentum, 
with growth rising to 7.6% in fiscal year 2018-19 and strengthening to 7.8% in 
fiscal year 2019-20,” the bank said.

Automobile industry data also released on Wednesday showed the largest fall in 
sales in 16 years. Nearly 300,000 fewer vehicle were purchased last month than 
in December 2015, a drop of 19%, according to the Society of Indian Automobile 
Manufacturers.

Sales of two-wheelers – which require less paperwork to buy and are more 
popular in rural areas, so are more likely to be bought in cash – fell by 22%, 
the steepest rate since Siam began collecting data in 1997.

Property sales also came to a complete standstill, according to a report by 
property consultants Knight FrankIndia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>
. Sales fell by 44% across eight major Indian cities between October and 
December 2016, compared with the same period in 2015, the report said.

Delhi was particularly badly hit, with sales in the capital slumping by more 
than 50%, and 73% fewer new residential developments being launched than in the 
last quarter of 2015. “The effect of demonetisation on all segments of the real 
estate sector across all markets has been fairly brutal to say the least,” said 
Shishir Baijal, the chairman of Knight Frank India.

Speaking at the Vibrant Gujarat summit on Wednesday, the Indian finance 
minister, Arun Jaitley, continued to defend demonetisation, linking the policy 
to the goods and services tax the government is aiming to introduce in April. 
“The combination of a more digitised economy with a more efficient tax system 
... will make our economy look much cleaner and bigger,” he said.

Jaitley said the rupee recall was “a major step toward integration of [the] 
informal economy with the more formal economy”. He said: “This itself is going 
to increase the transactions which are covered within the banking system, 
transactions which may lead to higher [tax] revenue in the future.”
 