
World Rugby will seek further information from the Rugby Football Union about 
an “apparent non-compliance” with its protocols over the handling ofGeorge 
North’s recent head injury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/03/george-north-northampton-awkward-fall-leicester>
.

A joint RFU and Premiership Rugby investigation chose not to charge Northampton
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> or their medical staff 
with misconduct for allowing North to resume playing, despite the Saints winger 
appearing to have been knocked unconscious in a Premiership match on 3 December.

Failure to sanction Northampton over George North injury a ‘cop out’, says 
Hargreaves
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/23/failure-sanction-northampton-george-north-head-injury-cop-out-alistair-hargreaves>
In a statement released on Friday World Rugby said it was “disappointing” that 
its protocols appeared not to have been followed, with North remaining on the 
pitch in the match against Leicester at Welford Road. Replays appeared to show 
that North had been knocked out in an aerial collision with Leicester’s Adam 
Thompstone, yet he passed a head injury assessment (HIA) and resumed playing.

Saints’ defence was that not all replay angles of the incident were available 
at the time of assessment and that the Wales wing denied any loss of 
consciousness, had immediate recall of events and stayed motionless due to 
concerns for his neck pain. The Concussion Management Review Group found that, 
while North should have been removed from play, medical staff were not wilfully 
negligent.

“World Rugby’s number one priority is player welfare and our primary concern 
is the welfare of George and all players,” read a statement. “It is therefore 
disappointing that apparent non-compliance with the sport’s elite head injury 
protocols led to George remaining on the field of play when he should have been 
immediately and permanently removed.

“World Rugby recognise and remove protocols state in no uncertain terms that 
any player displaying clear or suspected signs of loss of consciousness should 
be permanently and immediately removed from the field of play. In this case the 
Head Injury Assessment should not have been undertaken.

“Unions and tournament organisers can access the Head Injury Assessment 
process for elite competitions, subject to World Rugby’s player welfare 
tournament standards criteria being met.


“In this incident it is clear that there was a failure to comply with these 
robust and well-established protocols, which continue to successfully protect 
players around the world. Specifically failure in the identification and 
management of the injury and due consideration of risk when considering North’s 
history were at fault in this unfortunate case.”

The statement added: “While recognising that there is always a risk of human 
error, we will seek further information from the RFU regarding the factors 
behind the apparent non-compliance with World Rugby protocols and the outcomes 
reached by the independent review group.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fworld-rugby-to-seek-further-information-from-rfu-over-george-north-head-injury-northampton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e566960cf6f7d0040c4e146294359a37a6785cf%2F95_207_4374_2625%2F4374.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=World%20Rugby%20to%20speak%20to%20RFU%20over%20George%20North%20head%20injury&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fworld-rugby-to-seek-further-information-from-rfu-over-george-north-head-injury-northampton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=World%20Rugby%20to%20speak%20to%20RFU%20over%20George%20North%20head%20injury&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fworld-rugby-to-seek-further-information-from-rfu-over-george-north-head-injury-northampton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e566960cf6f7d0040c4e146294359a37a6785cf%2F95_207_4374_2625%2F4374.jpg>
 Tom Wood goes over for Northampton Saints in their victory against Sale. 
Photograph: Stephenson/Rex Shutterstock 
Northampton opted against selecting North for Friday’s Premiership match with 
Sale at Franklin’s Gardens. Jim Mallinder, the club’s director of rugby, 
revealed this week that the 24-year-old British and Irish Lions wing was in 
contention to start but would be omitted as Saints sought the victory that will 
ease the pressure heading into Christmas.

Ben Foden gave Northampton the lead after four minutes, crossing the line in 
the corner after great work from Louis Picamoles, and the 7-0 lead became 14-0 
on the half-hour, with Tom Wood touching down after a nicely worked lineout.

Saints withstood early Sale pressure in the second half and Stephen Myler 
slotted home a penalty to make it 17-0 just before the hour. A Denny Solomona 
try gave Sale hope but the home side were comfortable 22-5 winners as Luther 
Burrell added a further try for Northampton.
 