
Wycliffe "Steely" Johnson, who has died aged 47 after complications related to 
diabetes, was half of Steely and Clevie, one of Jamaica's most successful 
production teams of the digital dancehall era. Over the last 25 years, the duo 
had been responsible for countless hits, their captivating rhythms made 
outstanding through the irresistible blend of Steely's melodic keyboard sounds 
and Clevie's technological harnessing of beats.

Steely was born in the Trench Town ghetto in Kingston, where, like many of his 
peers, his main exposure to music came through the heavily amplified sound 
systems that blasted the latest releases at open-air dance events and 
nightclubs. In the mid-1970s, Steely met his future production partner, 
Cleveland "Clevie" Browne, by hanging out at a sound system that was briefly 
operated by Clevie's eldest brother Glen at a club called the Penthouse, though 
Steely later said he found Clevie to be aloof when they first met.

Glen Browne was also beginning to make a name for himself as a bassist, while 
another brother, Dalton, was making an impact as a guitarist; at their home in 
uptown Kingston, the brothers formed a band called the Browne Bunch, and began 
tutoring Steely and Clevie on keyboards and drums respectively. According to 
Dalton, Steely's recording debut came at Lee Perry's Black Ark studio for a 
session with the singer Earl 16, yielding the spirited track Freedom.

After playing on Sugar Minott's 1978 album Ghettoology and Hugh Mundell's Time 
and Place, Steely became a keyboardist in the Roots Radics, the ace team of 
session players that came to the forefront of Jamaican popular music during the 
late 1970s and early 1980s; in this period, he notably backed Gregory Isaacs, 
Bunny Wailer, Mikey Dread and Prince Fari. Clevie, meanwhile, went on tour with 
the In Crowd and later joined the Studio One house band.

Then, in 1985, following the computerisation that revolutionised Jamaican 
music overnight, Steely and Clevie joined forces at King Jammy's studio (with 
Clevie now handling drum machines and Steely on synthesizers), where they 
fashioned hit rhythms for the rising stars of the dancehall movement. Breaking 
away in 1988, they formed the Steely and Clevie label as a vehicle for their 
own productions, scoring a series of further hits with Johnnie P, Foxy Brown, 
Tiger, Red Rose and Anthony Malvo, and built rhythms for other leading 
producers such as Gussie Clarke, Bobby Digital, Redman, Winston Riley and 
Donovan Germain.

Overall, between 1986 and 1990, Steely and Clevie were reportedly responsible 
for 75% of the Jamaican top 100.

Working out of their own Studio 2000 during the 1990s, Steely and Clevie 
issued some of the first "one rhythm" albums, in which every song made use of 
the same rhythm track, as well as one of the few purely digital dub albums, 
Mount Zion the Highest Region. They also scored a top 10 UK chart hit with Dawn 
Penn's remake of the 1960s smash No No No.

They went on to work with many notable artists, including Jimmy Cliff, Shabba 
Ranks, Maxi Priest, Buju Banton, Heavy D and Billy Ocean, though they were less 
active in recent years once Clevie became chairman of the Recording Industry 
Association ofJamaica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/jamaica>.

Steely is survived by five children and his mother, Alice.

â€¢ Wycliffe "Steely" Johnson, musician and record producer, born 18 August 
1962; died 1 September 2009
 