
They called him England’s answer to Claude Monet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/monet>. “Nothing could be more 
delightful on a cold, dreary day than Mr Wynford Dewhurst’s landscapes imbued 
with sunlight,” wrote the Daily Express in 1910.

Yet just over a hundred years later, the Mancunian artist is unknown to all 
but the most enthusiastic scholars of European impressionism. A new exhibition 
at theManchester <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/manchester> Art Gallery aims 
to change that with the first retrospective of Dewhurst’s work.

The show, called Manchester’s Monet, celebrates one of the most colourful and 
controversial characters on the Anglo-French art scene at the turn of the 20th 
century. It also invites visitors to ask whether Dewhurst was more than just a 
Monet obsessive – he named his youngest son Claude and painted a suspicious 
number of pictures round the corner from Monet’s lily pads in Giverny – and 
worthy of veneration in his own right, not just as a painter but also an art 
historian who introduced Britain to the joys of impressionism.

Wynford Dewhurst was not his real name. It probably just sounded more romantic 
than boring old Thomas William Smith, the identity he was given on birth in 
1864 in grubby Newton Heath in north Manchester. He changed it by deed poll at 
the start of his final year of art training in Paris, where he had gone after 
abandoning a career in law.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fwynford-dewhurst-art-of-manchester-monet-goes-on-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9506e62efd0e81d670e961efb039d1a13525025%2F0_0_6570_3942%2F6570.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wynford%20Dewhurst%3A%20art%20of%20%E2%80%98Manchester's%20Monet%E2%80%99%20goes%20on%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fwynford-dewhurst-art-of-manchester-monet-goes-on-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wynford%20Dewhurst%3A%20art%20of%20%E2%80%98Manchester%27s%20Monet%E2%80%99%20goes%20on%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fwynford-dewhurst-art-of-manchester-monet-goes-on-show%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9506e62efd0e81d670e961efb039d1a13525025%2F0_0_6570_3942%2F6570.jpg>
 Detail of a painting by Wynford Dewhurst. Photograph: Christopher Thomond for 
the Guardian 
Dewhurst approached his creative endeavours with what one can only imagine was 
the same no-nonsense approach he took to his legal cases. He had no time for 
dreamers wearing daft outfits who spent more time trying to look arty than 
actually producing any art. “One is much more an artist or poet when clean in 
mind, body and attire, living and sleeping the regulation number of hours. The 
wearing of one’s summer wardrobe in winter is no proof of talent, and a man can 
be a veritable genius on dry feet and three good meals a day,” he counselled 
students during a talk at Manchester School ofArt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> in 1908.

The anecdote is recalled in an eponymous monograph about Dewhurst by the art 
historian Roger Brown, co-curator of the new Manchester show. Brown owns a few 
Dewhurst originals and says his subject is far more than just a second-rate 
Monet. “They are quite pleasing pictures which show there was a British artist 
at that time who was more than capable of matching some of the great 
impressionist painters,” he said, giving the Guardian an early preview this 
week. The original Monet wasn’t so sure, and took such offence to the Daily 
Mail referring, somewhat misleadingly, to Dewshurst as his “pupil” that he 
wrote to Dewhurst to complain. He had notactually taught Dewhurst, the 
Frenchman noted.

But arguably more interesting than his landscapes were Dewhurst’s ideas about 
art. In 1904, he published the first English language exploration of 
impressionism. Dedicated to Monet – who else? – ImpressionistPainting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/painting>, its Genesis and 
Development explored the thesis that the English landscape tradition tradition 
of Turner and Constable inspired Monet and chums.

Unsurprisingly, this theory did not go down terribly well over the Channel: 
Camille Pissarro was so narked that Dewhurst dared to suggest he and Monet had 
“no concept of light” until they visited London in 1870 that he dismissed the 
Englishman for understanding “nothing of the impressionist movement”.


Nonetheless it found a receptive audience among the French-hating 
intellectuals of turn-of-the-century Britain. Hannah Williamson, co-curator of 
the Manchester show, thinks he may have over-egged the idea somewhat. “He was 
selling it to people who were mildly xenophobic and anti-French, so he perhaps 
oversold the theory,” she said, noting that the Entente Cordiale was only 
reached the same year Dewhurst’s book came out. “You need to remember that the 
French were considered our enemies until then.”

Wynford Dewhurst: Manchester’s Monet opens at the Manchester Art Gallery on 
Friday
 