
Notre-Dame de la Paix, built in Ivory Coast’s administrative capital 
Yamoussoukro between 1985 and 1989, is a church of such national pride that, 
during the country’sdecade of periodic civil conflict 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ivorian_Civil_War>, citizens often sought refuge 
within its walls, knowing it would never be attacked.

 Bishop Siméon Ahouna recalls one visitor in particular, General Guéï 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/sep/21/guardianobituaries1> – who 
fronted the west African country’sfirst coup in 1999 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1999_Ivorian_coup_d%27%C3%A9tat> and then ruled 
for 10 months – turning up at the basilica late one night. “It was in 2000, and 
he came to pray. My advice to him was not to cling to power,” says Ahouna, who 
heads the foundation charged with looking after theworld’s largest basilica 
<http://www.ndpbasilique.org/>. “It wasn’t just him, either; whenever there 
were political crises, people would come and shelter because nobody would 
ransack here.”

Guéï’s assassination two years later plunged the country into a decade of 
civil turmoil, the seeds of which had been sown by ageing former presidentFélix 
Houphouët-Boigny 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/africa/2008/10/houphouet-boigny-yamoussoukro>, 
Ivory Coast’s “founding father” and the man who built Notre-Dame de la Paix.

As the 1980s drew to a close, Houphouët-Boigny was nearing the end of three 
decades in power. Under his regime,Ivory Coast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ivory-coast> had grown rich on the back of 
cocoa exports and soaring world commodity prices. Not one to do things by 
halves, the leader affectionately known as “The Old Man” lavished much of that 
money on monuments – mostly in honour of himself.

Modelled on St Peter’s in Rome, John Paul II requested the cupola be slightly 
lower so as not to surpass the papal one
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F15%2Fyamoussoukro-notre-dame-de-la-paix-ivory-coast-worlds-largest-basilica-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-37%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F11%2F1431354854144%2Fe00144c2-9e50-43da-ab9c-49854a358236-2060x1364.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Yamoussoukro's%20Notre-Dame%20de%20la%20Paix%2C%20the%20world's%20largest%20basilica%20-%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2037&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F15%2Fyamoussoukro-notre-dame-de-la-paix-ivory-coast-worlds-largest-basilica-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-37%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Yamoussoukro%27s%20Notre-Dame%20de%20la%20Paix%2C%20the%20world%27s%20largest%20basilica%20-%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2037&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F15%2Fyamoussoukro-notre-dame-de-la-paix-ivory-coast-worlds-largest-basilica-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-37%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F11%2F1431354854144%2Fe00144c2-9e50-43da-ab9c-49854a358236-2060x1364.jpeg>
 Notre-Dame de la Paix is topped by a giant pearl dome that rises to 158 
metres. Photograph: Alamy 
In the economic capital, Abidjan, he built the towering Hôtel Ivoire, a 
favourite for French expatriates which for a time possessed the only 
ice-skating rink in west Africa. His birthplace, Yamoussoukro – formerly a 
small agricultural village – became home to a palace surrounded by a 
crocodile-filled lake; a visit there inspired VS Naipaul’s celebrated essay“The 
Crocodiles of Yamoussoukro” 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/1984/05/14/the-crocodiles-of-yamoussoukro>, 
in which the writer suggested the reptiles symbolised Houphouët-Boigny’s 
mystique over his people.

Elsewhere in Africa, other strongmen whose coffers were swelling on the 
commodity boom were doing similar things. Ivory Coast’s 3,000-metre airport 
runway was one of only two on the whole continent that was long enough to land 
a Concorde; the other was in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (then Zaire), 
where President Mobutu Sese Seko built the “Versailles in the Jungle” in his 
birthplace ofGbadolite 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/gallery/2015/feb/10/inside-gbadolite-mobutu-ruined-jungle-city-in-pictures>
.

In 1983, Houphouët-Boigny rechristened Yamoussoukro as his country’s new 
capital. Another crop of grand monuments followed, including the five-star 
Hôtel Président and a marble-floored, rarely-used convention centre. But 
neither embassies nor ministries ever relocated from Abidjan, so Notre-Dame de 
la Paix’s chosen location was a near-deserted, forest-surrounded town of empty 
six-lane highways that led nowhere.

The resulting building was – and still is – staggering, nonetheless. A sudden 
mirage rises on a stretch of lonely scrubland; kaleidoscopic stained-glass 
windows and ivory-white columns are topped with a giant pearl dome that rises 
158 metres above the bush. Inside there is standing room for 11,000, while each 
of the 7,000 seats in the nave has its own personal (Italian-built) 
air-conditioning system. Five-thousand shades of stained glass make up the 
windows, including one depicting Houphouët-Boigny kneeling in front of Jesus.

Inside there is standing room for 11,000 people, yet attendances usually only 
number in the few hundreds
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F15%2Fyamoussoukro-notre-dame-de-la-paix-ivory-coast-worlds-largest-basilica-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-37%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F11%2F1431354961959%2Fb7a30d68-8902-4ede-b9c5-9e377d55b8dc-2060x1364.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Yamoussoukro's%20Notre-Dame%20de%20la%20Paix%2C%20the%20world's%20largest%20basilica%20-%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2037&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F15%2Fyamoussoukro-notre-dame-de-la-paix-ivory-coast-worlds-largest-basilica-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-37%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Yamoussoukro%27s%20Notre-Dame%20de%20la%20Paix%2C%20the%20world%27s%20largest%20basilica%20-%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2037&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F15%2Fyamoussoukro-notre-dame-de-la-paix-ivory-coast-worlds-largest-basilica-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-37%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F11%2F1431354961959%2Fb7a30d68-8902-4ede-b9c5-9e377d55b8dc-2060x1364.jpeg>
 Each of the 7,000 seats in the basilica’s nave has its own personal 
air-conditioning system. Photograph: Alamy 
The history behind Notre-Dame de la Paix’s construction is no less dramatic; 
negotiations with Rome were apparently fraught. Loosely modelled after St 
Peter’s basilica in the Vatican, Pope John Paul II requested the cupola be 
slightly lower so as not to surpass the papal one. Houphouët-Boigny complied, 
but instead topped it with a giant golden cross, making this the world’s 
tallest church.

Pierre Fakhoury 
<http://www.rfi.fr/afrique/20100926-entretien-pierre-fakhoury-architectes-basilique-notre-dame-paix-yamoussoukro/>
, the celebrated Lebanese–Ivorian architect behind the monument, frequently 
batted away claims that the basilica was intended to be the world’s largest. 
“This project from Houphouët was fundamentally driven by his faith. He had a 
deal with Ivory Coast, but most of all he had a deal with God,” Fakhoury said 
in an interview on the basilica’s 20th anniversary. “The intention was never to 
surpass [St Peter’s in] Rome. But we surpassed it because evolutions in 
architecture … allowed us to go much further than previously possible.”


In light of the basilica’s brash imitation of the Vatican’s holy shrine, a 
reluctant John Paul II consecrated the building in 1990 only on the condition 
that a hospital be constructed near the church. To date,that hospital remains 
unfinished 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/africa/2008/10/houphouet-boigny-yamoussoukro>.

Johannesburg's Ponte City: 'the tallest and grandest urban slum in the world' 
– a history of cities in 50 buildings, day 33
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/may/11/johannesburgs-ponte-city-the-tallest-and-grandest-urban-slum-in-the-world-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-33>
Controversy also surrounded the financing of Notre-Dame de la Paix. By the 
time the basilica was finished, the Ivorian economy was reeling from a crash in 
world commodity prices, and so its estimated US $300 million tag raised 
eyebrows. The cost of the church’s construction had doubled the country’s debt.

Maintenance today costs around $1.5m annually, paid for by the foundation set 
up by the former president. “He thought about everything, because this was 
inspired by God,” says Bishop Ahouna.

With less than one-third 
<https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/iv.html> of 
the nation’s population Christian, attendances at the basilica’s services are 
low – usually numbering in the “few hundreds”, according to 63-year-old 
businessman Jean Baptiste Golly, a regular attendee. “But you know what? I 
remember when this site was just farmland and yam plantations. It’s incredible 
to think that today, it is a place which inspires prayer and soothes the soul.”

Which other buildings in the world tell stories about urban history? Share 
your own pictures and descriptions with GuardianWitness 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/cities/2015/mar/23/50-buildings-great-stories-urban-history>
, on Twitter and Instagram using #hoc50 or let us know suggestions in the 
comments below
 