
There are countless fabulous stories about the Swiss electronic duo Yello, 
particularly about their frontman, Dieter Meier. One of the best-known is the 
one about the time in 1972 – years before Yello became popular – when he 
installed a commemorative plaque at Kassel railway station in Germany which 
read “On 23 March 1994, from 3-4pm, Dieter Meier will stand on this plaque.” 
And 22 years on from that unveiling, Meier kept his promise, to the delight of 
fans (at least one of whom had traveled specially from England) and general 
befuddlement of curious passersby.

My own favourite Meier story is the one about him being refused entry to a 
fetish club in London in the 1990s, because he wasn’t wearing the specified 
rubber outfit. Meier duly reached into his elegantly tailored suit pocket and 
pulled out a pencil, at the end of which was a small rubber eraser. He was 
allowed into the club.

There are loads of similar tales – you may wish to share your own below – and 
they all illustrate a central fact: that Yello are an electronic act unlike any 
other, and have been bringing a sense of style, character, lateral thinking and 
deadpan,humorous eccentricity <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6h9VW4ugXqM> to 
electropop for nearly 40 years. Their latest video – for Limbo, their first new 
music since 2009 – is a case in point. Meier and his bandmate Boris Blank are 
sporting their trademark elegant tailoring and moustaches in a short film that 
seems to bring together industrial espionage and warehouse rave.
 Watch the video for Yello’s new track Limbo 
The song itself is inimitable Yello, a gradually unfolding collage of 
electronics, funky guitar and beats with several melodies going on at once. 
Meier is a narrator-crooner rather than a conventional singer, drily intoning: 
“Why don’t you leave me alone / Why don’t you answer your phone? … I’m in 
limbo” in a voice that seems more knowing homage to movie hardmen than the kind 
of vocals that usually exist in electronic pop.

It's been claimed Dieter Meier is a millionaire industrialist, poker player, 
golfer … but he is also a conceptual artist

It was forever thus – and you can hear similar collisions of electronics and 
manipulated or narrated vocals on their best-known tracks, such as 1985’sOh Yeah
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sYGngLcS0u4> (which featured in films from 
Ferris Bueller’s Day Off to The Secret of My Success) or 1988’s No 7 smash 
Grand Prix homage, The Race. In that (fantastic) song’saccompanying video 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y4QbJRAWvRU>, Meier bears an uncanny 
resemblance to the comic actorTerry-Thomas 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RNz8iQN4xfk>, and there’s something of the 
movie role about his life – it’s been claimed he is a millionaire industrialist 
and professional poker player, and international golfer, though the fact he is 
also a conceptual artist should be remembered when assessing claims about his 
life.


Boris Blank was a truck driver, and transformed himself into a pioneer of 
sampling using found sounds. He has 100,000

However, the stories shouldn’t obscure Yello’s status as genuine musical 
pioneers. Blank was initially a truck driver, but transformed himself – 
“without musical training or manuals” – into one of the pioneers of sampling 
culture. However, he doesn’t sample other people’s music, but uses found 
sounds, beginning (in his teens) with a splashing bucket of water. Over many 
years, he has built up an enormous library of more than 100,000 noises, which 
he delves into to help create the music. There was originally a third Yello 
man, but tape operative Carlos Peron left in 1983, by which time they had 
already defined their trademark style on 1980’s Solid Pleasure. Guest vocalists 
are now commonplace in pop, but Yello have been using them for years, 
collaborating with often highly unlikely but always genuinely great singers, 
from late Associates man Billy Mackenzie toShirley Bassey 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M8sFupDAwvo>.


Now 71 and 64 respectively, Meier and Blank are showing no signs of packing it 
in – they recently announced their first ever live shows, which will take place 
in Berlin this October, to promote their new album, Toy. Quite what can be 
expected from a Yello performance can only be guessed at. All we know so far is 
that Meier promises 20 songs and “operatic staging of the aesthetics of the 
Yello videos”, which sounds like it will be something special. After all, as 
one of their album titles once put it, You Gotta Say Yes To Another Excess.

 * You can preorder Yello’s new album, Toy, here 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Toy-Yello/dp/B01HFRBHNE/ref=sr_1_2?s=music&ie=UTF8&qid=1469024608&sr=1-2&keywords=yello+toy>
.  