
Last week, a video surfaced of Young Thug berating two black female airline 
workers for not allowing him to board a flight he was late for. Inthe footage 
<http://www.tmz.com/2016/12/07/young-thug-alaska-air-flight-blasts-employees/>, 
he calls the women “bum ass hoes”, “ants” and “peasants”. As they turn their 
backs to the camera he chuckles, informing the viewer that their hair is “nappy 
as a motherfucker” and that they looked like “Africans” that had “been 
deported”. Later on, he clarified in a tweet that his comments hadn’t been an 
indictment on all black women, rather just those “two black, burnt” ones.


The backlash was swift and incongruously culminated in a brief interview with 
Paper 
<http://www.papermag.com/young-thug-and-jerrika-karlae-speak-out-on-the-fight-against-poverty-2143407177.html>
 on 12 December in which he spoke about “the fight against poverty”. But amid 
the anger was an overriding sense of disappointment. It was as if it was a 
surprise to find Young Thug reverting to the egotistical, misogynistic 
braggadocio present in his entire discography.

Young Thug: 'I like everything people say about me – you gay, you a punk, you 
can't rap, you're the hardest'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/oct/08/young-thug-hits-bring-money-lil-wayne>
For some time now, Young Thug has been posited as the poster child for 
progression within rap. His “carefree black boy 
<http://www.mtv.com/news/2936762/on-carefree-black-boys/>” aesthetic made him a 
fashion-world darling and a mascot for an emerging wave of renaissance rappers. 
Gushing profiles rattled on about his services to patriarchy-smashing, with 
little mention of anything else besides his outfits. It’s troubling how the bar 
is set so low that he has been lauded for changing rap without really changing 
anything other than his clothes.

It’s as if critics couldn’t hear the tired misogyny and hypermasculinity in 
his music over the sound of their own applause for his breaking of barriers. “I 
got 50 foreign hoes on my dick / I’m a nut in all ’em hoes”, “She ain’t gettin’ 
shit unless she suckin’ dick”, “She suck on that dick on the plane/ And I just 
called her airhead” among other equally demeaning lines, come from a man 
apparently changing the game for the better.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNoDRROeGo-8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNoDRROeGo-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNoDRROeGo-8&media=>
 Young Thug: With Them – official video 
In a recent Calvin Klein campaign 
<http://www.xxlmag.com/news/2016/07/young-thug-frank-ocean-calvin-klein/>, the 
rapper made much-celebrated comments denouncing gender: “In my world, of 
course, it doesn’t matter. You could be a gangster with a dress, you could be a 
gangster with baggy pants,” he mused. “I feel like there’s no such thing as 
gender.” In similarly open-minded moves, he wore a prettyperiwinkle gown on the 
cover of his Jeffery mixtape 
<http://www.ibtimes.com/young-thug-sports-dress-new-jeffrey-mixtape-see-best-memes-twitter-reactions-2407676>
 and modelled a piece from theCalvin Klein women’s collection in a polarising ad
 
<http://uk.complex.com/style/2016/07/young-thug-models-womens-clothing-calvin-klein-ad>
. The very same gender he claims not to buy into was swiftly weaponised, 
though, when he began referring to women as “hoes”. Gender also matters when, 
in his music, women only exist on bended knee and voiceless.

This isn’t an attempt to undermine the effect his outfit choices have had on 
the scene. He’s received his fair share of stick for how he dresses and has 
been a victim of homophobia from the public and his peers. His attire may be a 
pushback against the toxic masculinity often present in the genre, but that 
doesn’t mean he isn’t just as toxic. Painfully, the very black women he 
denigrates have been those continually championing his flamboyance. And though 
we are by now used to raising glasses in clubs to songs about how little we 
mean to the men whose pockets we continually line, his denigration stings far 
more than others. The disappointment lies in the fact that he was billed as an 
eccentric, effeminate exception from the usual woman-bashers. The problem is, 
he never really was.

Heralded as the new face of more inclusive rap, he is merely the old face in 
fancy new clothes. He said it himself: “You can still be a gangster in a 
dress”. A costume change is easier than a change of content. Patriarchal 
strictures stay entirely unchallenged, women remain nothing more than canvases 
for cum shots. But hey, the new dress code is fabulous.


 