
A YouTube <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/youtube> star known for 
filming elaborate hoaxes was escorted off a Delta flight on Wednesday morning 
after he claimed that other passengers complained when they heard him speaking 
in Arabic.

Adam Saleh, a 23-year-old YouTube star from New York, posted multiple videos 
to Twitter and Periscope on Tuesday, showing himself being escorted from a 
plane by Delta flight attendants.

Saleh said in the videos that after passengers heard him speaking Arabic, they 
“felt uncomfortable” and called flight attendants. However, while it is clear 
that he was removed from the flight at London’s Heathrow airport, the 
circumstances leading up to the video – retweeted more than 644,000 times – are 
not known and cannot be verified.

Saleh has created videos in the past that involved staged scenes on airplanes 
and with actors playing authority figures.

Saleh was on a flight from London to New York with his friend Slim Albaher, 
another YouTube personality, who was also escorted off the plane.


“They kicked us off the plane because a lady, because a lot of people felt 
uncomfortable,” Saleh said. “Delta Air Lines just kicked us out for speaking 
Arabic.”

Adam Saleh (@omgAdamSaleh) 
We got kicked out of a @Delta <https://twitter.com/Delta> airplane because I 
spoke Arabic to my mom on the phone and with my friend slim... WTFFFFFFFF 
please spreadpic.twitter.com/P5dQCE0qos <https://t.co/P5dQCE0qos>
 <https://twitter.com/omgAdamSaleh/status/811531782982078464> December 21, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/omgAdamSaleh/status/811531782982078464> 
Saleh told the Guardian that he was calling his mother before his flight from 
Heathrow on Wednesday morning.

“Usually before I take off I speak to my mom,” he said. “My mom is 66 years 
old and she only speaks Arabic, so I was speaking to her in Arabic – it was a 
30-second phone call.”

After the phone call, he said, he was speaking with Albaher in Arabic and in 
English when “this lady that was sitting maybe four seats ahead of us turns 
around and says: ‘Oh my, you need to speak English, I’m feeling very 
uncomfortable.’” Saleh said after another passenger defended the two, an older 
man the woman was travelling with also got involved.

According to Saleh, he said: “Chuck them off the f-ing plane!” before other 
men stood up and called for the captain.

The woman who originally complained told the captain: “We feel uncomfortable – 
something happened in Germany. If they don’t leave, I leave,” according to 
Saleh.

Saleh said the captain then asked to speak to them outside, which is when he 
started filming.

Saleh, who has millions of followers subscribed to his YouTube channels 
<https://www.youtube.com/user/ASAvlogs>, posted numerous times from an airport 
in London where he said Delta had asked them to wait. His latest tweet said 
they had been rebooked on another flight to New York with a different airline 
after going through the security check a second time.

Saleh is known for orchestrating pranks in his YouTube videos. He recently 
created 
<http://www.nzherald.co.nz/travel/news/article.cfm?c_id=7&objectid=11768595> a 
video that appeared to show himself traveling from Melbourne to Sydney inside a 
suitcase in the plane’s baggage hold. The airline later said that Saleh had sat 
in a regular seat on the flight and that travelling via the baggage section 
would have been impossible.

Saleh and a colleague admitted 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/10/21/nypd-frisk-muslim-clothes_n_6014964.html>
 that another video was exaggerated after it went viral and its authenticity 
was questioned. The 2014 video appeared to show a New York police officer 
intervening in an argument when the Muslim men wore “cultural clothing” but 
ignoring the same men when they were dressed in T-shirts and jeans. Saleh later 
said the video was a “dramatization of previous events that occurred with us in 
our traditional clothing while filming in NYC”.

When asked about his previous hoaxes, Saleh defended the authenticity of 
Wednesday’s videos.

“You can exactly see in the video a person sticking a middle finger up at the 
back, you see a guy defending us. The captain was quiet when I said what had 
happened,” he told the Guardian. “We wouldn’t be here joking around.”

One passenger, who spoke to BuzzFeed News, said he had talked to five 
passengers who witnessed Saleh’s behavior. They questioned whether he had 
really made a telephone call. Passenger Marvin Avilez also said that witnesses 
described Saleh’s friend prompting him to say Arabic words and to pump his 
fists in the air, which apparently led to an argument with a female passenger.

In the video, several passengers jeered at him as he recorded the incident. 
Saleh said a few passengers came to his defense. One man can be heard 
criticizing the flight attendants.

“I spoke to my mom, I told her I’m going to see you in six to seven hours,” he 
said. “Now everything is literally upside down.”

Why speaking Arabic in America feels like a crime | Sinan Antoon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/19/why-speaking-arabic-america-feels-like-crime>
In later videos, Saleh said that the flight attendants told him and Albaher 
they were “too loud” and that they asked to speak to them outside the plane.

“All the racist people in there, they were like: ‘We feel uncomfortable,’ but 
because there were like 20 of those racist people, the captain came and he 
kicked us out,” he said. “I’m not letting this slide … They were screaming at 
us like we were terrorists.”

Delta released a statement saying “two customers” had been removed from a 
flight and later rebooked after “a disturbance in the cabin resulted in more 
than 20 customers expressing their discomfort”.

The airline later said, after collecting statements from passengers, that the 
pair “sought to disrupt the cabin with provocative behavior, including 
shouting”.

“This type of conduct is not welcome on any Delta flight. While one, according 
to media reports, is a known prankster who was video recorded and encouraged by 
his traveling companion, what is paramount to Delta is the safety and comfort 
of our passengers and employees. It is clear these individuals sought to 
violate that priority.”

In a statement, London’s Metropolitan police said they were called to Heathrow 
around 11am, “after two passengers were removed from a plane by crew at 
Heathrow Airport.

“Officers attended and the passengers were escorted to the terminal where they 
were assisted with making alternative travel arrangements.
“They were not arrested and no offences were disclosed.”

Saleh later tweeted: “Yes, we’re pranksters and it sounds like the boy who 
cried wolf but today you can clearly see it’s as real as it gets.”
Adam Saleh (@omgAdamSaleh) 
Thank you for all your support pic.twitter.com/ukQ4EGVQ6r 
<https://t.co/ukQ4EGVQ6r>
 <https://twitter.com/omgAdamSaleh/status/811751108959961088> December 22, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/omgAdamSaleh/status/811751108959961088> 




The Council on American-Islamic Relations said 
<http://theislamicmonthly.com/protected-flying-while-muslim/> that in the last 
year it had received nearly a dozen reports of Muslim travelers, or travelers 
who were perceived to be Muslim, being questioned or removed from flights after 
complaints.

Italian economist Guido Menzio was questioned 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/rampage/wp/2016/05/07/ivy-league-economist-interrogated-for-doing-math-on-american-airlines-flight/?utm_term=.8186e09508f8>
 during a domestic flight when a passenger complained that a differential 
equation he was working on made her suspicious. Khairuldeen Makhzoomi, a 
student, wasremoved 
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2016/04/iraq-refugee-airplane-southwest-arabic>
 from a Southwest Airlines flight and questioned by the FBI in April after a 
passenger heard him speaking in Arabic to his uncle, he said.

• This article was amended on 21 December 2016, to acknowledge in the opening 
sentence that Adam Saleh has a track record of making prank videos and to 
acknowledge more explicitly that it is not possible to verify his account of 
what happened to lead to his removal from the flight, and to correct Adam 
Saleh’s age. He is 23, not 22 years old.
 