
Party politics: why grime defines the sound of protest in 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/18/party-politics-why-grime-defines-the-sound-of-protest-in-2016>
The year 2016 in music may be remembered for grime going global and Frank Ocean
 <https://www.theguardian.com/music/frank-ocean> sawing some wood, but it’s 
also been a year that’s seen young musicians starting to write about the world 
beyond their bedroom. But while grime has long been a socially conscious genre, 
but now a new wave of artists across musical styles are ditching yarns of love 
and longing in favour of wider issues, from gender identity to generational woe.

One millennial upstart, pink-haired rapper GIRLi 
<https://soundcloud.com/girlimusic>, is taking cyber-electro aim at asbos, 
using the Met police guidelines on antisocial behaviour as the basis for her 
song of the same name.Walsall teen Jorja Smith 
<https://soundcloud.com/jorjasmith>, meanwhile, started the year with Blue 
Lights, a future-R&B nugget about unjust policing.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5o1QrgjGMZQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5o1QrgjGMZQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5o1QrgjGMZQ&media=>
So, the kids aren’t all right; they’re pissed off again. None more so, 
perhaps, thanindie-ska scallywag Rat Boy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/27/rat-boy-review-cheeky-chappy-ska-punk-heaven-london>
. Rejected by McDonald’s and fired from Wetherspoons, the 20-year-old 
musician’s has channelled his experiences of being young and broke into tracks 
like Get Over It (think Jamie T in Madchester) and Sign On, in which he ponders 
a life on JSA. Unsurprisingly, he seems to be resonating with a generation for 
whom zero-hours contracts are quotidian rather than dystopian.

Declan McKenna is another singer-songwriter with something to say 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/may/11/declan-mckenna-the-story-behind-paracetamol>
. He tackled Fifa corruption in 2014’s Brazil, and his latest post-post-Britpop 
single, Isombard, addresses US law and order in the age of#Blacklivesmatter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/black-lives-matter-movement>.

“I wrote it last year when there were all these cases, one after the other,” 
says the 17-year-old. “I kept seeing videos of rightwing US TV anchors trying 
to say why [the police] were the good guys, but they didn’t have anything 
intelligent to say about them”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DB2Dcgq9ri-c&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DB2Dcgq9ri-c>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DB2Dcgq9ri-c&media=>
Why are so many of his peers engaging with real-world issues, rather than 
snogging behind the bus shelter? “The idea of young people being seen but not 
heard and trying not to say anything too offensive isn’t such a thing any 
more,” he says. “I feel like young people aren’t afraid to make their voices 
heard and try and make changes in the world, especially through art and music.”

Maybe it’s the rallying cry of the defeated Remain camp, maybe we’re just sick 
of mindless EDM, but whatever the reason, Generation Z want songs that call for 
change and artists they can believe in. We might not be living through an age 
of protest bangers to rival the late 1960s yet, but this renewed sense of 
lyrical outcry is an antidote to a time of increasing uncertainty among young 
people. More than ever, we need fewer Voice contestants and more voices of our 
generation.

Rat Boy is on tour to 28 September 
<http://www.ticketmaster.co.uk/Rat-Boy-tickets/artist/2178357>; Declan McKenna 
is on tour 23 September to 8 October 
<http://www.songkick.com/artists/8488148-declan-mckenna>; Jorja Smith plays 
Afropunk, Alexandra Palace, N22, 24 September 
<http://www.alexandrapalace.com/whats-on/afropunk/>
 