
Wednesday's decision 
<http://www.supremecourt.gov.uk/current-cases/CCCaseDetails/case_2012_0142.html>
 by the UK supreme courtin the case of Yunus Rahmatullah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2012/oct/31/supreme-court-rendition-uk-us>, a 
man detained by the British in Iraq, might seem to be about the hallowed writ of
habeas corpus. In truth, its main significance may lie elsewhere. The court 
identifies this as the first instance in 150 years where the US has 
"dishonoured" an international agreement with the UK. As the US has given 
similar assurances in a spate of extradition cases in recent years, Britain 
must unfortunately ask the question: is the United States to be trusted?

Rahmatullah, along with Amanatullah Ali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/apr/15/terror-suspects-afghanistan-bagram>
, was detained in Iraq by British forces in February 2004. They were turned 
over to the US pursuant to a 2003 memorandum of understanding (MoU) that gave 
the UK the right to demand their return if there was any violation of their 
Geneva convention rights. Ali had been erroneously identified – by the British 
and later by the US – as a man called Ahmad Dilshan, the leader of a Sunni 
extremist group calledLashkar-e-Taiba 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lashkar-e-Taiba>. This was simply fatuous. Ali is 
a Shia rice farmer and therefore could not have been a member of LET, let alone 
its emir. He had a perfectly innocent reason for being in Iraq, as the Shia 
holy sites there were accessible for the first time in many years after the 
fall of Saddam Hussein. Rahmatullah likewise denies being a member of LET, and 
no evidence has been produced to prove otherwise. Indeed, he was cleared for 
release by the US two years ago, reflecting a finding that he was no threat to 
anyone.

The supreme court has ruled that the UK violated the Geneva conventions in 
various ways – it is, justices wrote, an "extreme" case. Rahmatullah should 
have been set free "years ago". The MoU provided that the US would return 
Rahmatullah to the UK upon demand, and the UK was bound to make that demand 
given the violations of Geneva.

The UK government represented to the court that such a demand would be futile, 
because the US would not comply. The court was nonplussed by this argument. An 
MoU is "a well-established and much used tool of international relations". A 
nation – particularly a "mature democracy" such as the US – is not at liberty 
simply to ignore its commitment. Indeed, the court noted, the UK and the US 
have entered into many such arrangements in the past 150 years. "Over this 
period" – until today – "there was no instance of any assurance having been 
dishonoured."

In any event, the 2003 MoU merely reflected the international obligations 
imposed by the Geneva conventions, which the US signed on12 August, 1949 
<http://www.icrc.org/ihl.nsf/WebSign?ReadForm&id=375&ps=P>. Yet – as predicted 
by the UK government barrister – the US simply refused to fulfil its agreement. 
Rahmatullah and Ali therefore continue to face illegal detention eight years on.

What, then, does this case mean for other US-UK commitments? Can Britain trust 
the US to honour its promise to comport with human rights law, and not apply 
the "death penalty to prisoners" sent there for trial? Will thefive Muslim 
prisoners <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-19852506> who were extradited four 
weeks ago end up in an execution chamber, notwithstanding US assurances to the 
contrary? PerhapsRichard O'Dwyer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/richard-o-dwyer> will end up in a Guantánamo 
cell for conspiracy to commit copyright infringement?

The British government – pusillanimous as ever – thinks it is too sensitive a 
subject for us to ask the US why it is flouting an international agreement. The 
true explanation seems to be that the US and the UK have been caught committing 
another crime together – sadly one of a parade of conspiracies involving 
rendition, torture and targeted killings – and are now trying to evade the rule 
of law. As two justices noted: "It may be that both the UK and the US would 
prefer to leave the problem with the US authorities, rather than face up to 
what the UK would do with the applicant if he were to be transferred to them. 
That again is not a factor which should impress the court."

Indeed, it is not. Neither should it impress those of us who vote, or who care 
about justice.
 