
I saw him once on that sweltering July afternoon when I went to see a rock 
festival and ended up covering aterrorist attack that killed 16 people 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/europe/suicide-bombers-kill-16-at-moscow-rock-festival-585950.html>
 and wounded around 50. He swooshed past me and other corralled journalists 
with his 50-strong entourage of guards, aides and senior police officers, 
barking orders and generally looking tough and effective. This was the manwho 
lent his name to an architectural style 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/sep/28/yuri-luzkhov-moscow-russia> 
(albeit in an ironic way) and a whole era.

Yuri Luzhkov is not simply a political survivor, staying in office for 18 
years, the same time as Leonid Brezhnev, his trademark round cap is now as much 
a historical symbol as the late secretary general of the CPSU's bushy eyebrows 
and senile mumblings. His political ambitions far exceeded one of the biggest 
cities in the world: Luzhkov is famous for his megalomaniac projects, such as 
divertingSiberian rivers 
<http://www.newscientist.com/article/dn4637-russia-reviving-massive-river-diversion-plan.html>
 to the south. Although officially he's the second mayor of Moscow, hardly 
anyone remembers the first, the humble and almost facelessGavriil Popov 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gavriil_Kharitonovich_Popov> from who Luzhkov 
inherited a grim, litter-strewn, barely illuminated city and turned it into a 
glowing, bustling metropolis. Future mayors of Moscow will have to try very 
hard to outdo his achievements, both positive and negative.

And now he's finally gone. The Cap, The Beekeper, the "sturdy manager", the 
bane of gay people and conservative architects, the mayor of Russia's capital 
who outlived two presidents and defied the third. It is this defiance – and not 
his blatant disregard of common sense, architectural aesthetics or public 
opinion – that proved to be Luzhkov's undoing and resulted in what many regard 
asPresident Medvedev's first serious political decision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/sep/28/russia-president-fires-moscow-mayor>
. Conspiracy theorists and pundits are having a field day, generating page 
after page in an attempt to untangle the impossibly complicated knot of 
opposing forces between the Moscow administration and the Kremlin.

On the ground, Moscow greeted the news with cheers in blogs and smiles on the 
streets, sarcastic gifts of prison biscuits laid in front of the mayoral office 
(hinting at countless allegations of corruption that many hope will result in a 
sentence) and a record-breaking traffic jam, the dramaticcrimson-streaked map 
<http://lh3.ggpht.com/_XuHfQYF06AU/TKIGH-nBYRI/AAAAAAAABEE/UuyrHUCAgCM/Screen%20shot%202010-09-28%20at%207.10.58%20PM.jpg>
 of which has already been dubbed "Luzhkov's Farewell". Now everybody's waiting 
for the new mayor to be announced – as of 2004, Muscovites, as well as all 
other Russians, have no say in choosing their own regional leaders. Luzhkov, 
with his typical militant posture,has already announced that he is not 
abandoning politics <http://www.newkerala.com/news/world/fullnews-51569.html>, 
and political commentators expect him to run for president in 2012 or form an 
opposition party (he has quit United Russia of which he was one of the founding 
fathers). It is worth remembering what happened toMikhail Khodorkovsky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/sep/19/mikhail-khodorkovsky-human-rights-putin>
 when he had similar ambitions. One doesn't have to be a fortune-teller to 
predict that the ex-mayor will be reminded of each and every one of the 
allegations made against him while in the office.

And, by God, does he have many. Most anti-Luzhkov commentators deride his 
forced eviction as a half-measure: if even a fraction of the allegations voiced 
in petitions, books, TV features and blogs posts are to be tried in court,Rod 
Blagojevich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/aug/18/rod-blagojevich-guilty-one-count-corruption-trial>
 will seem a beacon of moral integrity compared to Moscow's ex-mayor. For 
thousands of campaigners against Luzhkov's countless evils – gay-bashing, 
obliteration of historic Moscow and allegations of corruption, etc – it's now 
painfully obvious that none of their efforts have made the slightest difference 
and there's absolutely no guarantee that the next mayor will do any better. If 
there isn't a medical condition called obsessive-compulsive construction, the 
world health organisation should introduce one, if only for Luzhkov's sake: 
throughout his 18 years as mayor he spent every Saturday personally overseeing 
one of Moscow's epic construction sites,shaping the city to his own chaotic and 
kitschy taste <https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2010/sep/28/russia>. 
According to an entry in the Russian Wikipedia, the "Luzhkov style" encompasses 
elements of postmodernism and eclecticism, borrows the style of anything from 
rococo to Stalinist Empire and hi-tech and is characterised by an inefficient 
and unsystematic arrangement. To many Muscovites it's just goddamn ugly. We 
feel like strangers in our own city, we hate the infamous "infill development" 
ruining our parks and courtyards, these behemoths of bad taste with faux towers 
and balusters.

To be fair to him, he did some good things too: the reconstruction of Moscow's 
circular road, once a pothole-ridden, two-lane "highway of death", and the 
addition of another orbital route. He was responsible for a change in social 
funding too – although if you aren't a pensioner for who the extra 500 roubles 
(£11) really matters, or don't regularly ride the circular, you will have 
hardly noticed. Ah, yes: the streets are much cleaner than they used to be – at 
the expense of hundreds of thousands of semi-legal immigrant workers whose 
presence did cause its own problems. His almost comical obsession with 
apiculture (comical, that is, until the infamous story about himshowing more 
concern for his beloved bees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/sep/12/moscow-mayor-luzhkov-tv-documentary>
 than Muscovites when a deadly blanket of smoke engulfed Moscow this August) 
has been the stock of countless jokes, and every caricature of him invariably 
features an angry swarm buzzing over his "helicopter pad 
<http://de.trinixy.ru/pics4/20100929/luzhkov_05.jpg>" headgear, ready to defend 
their master.

Now, I have received dozens of amused and outraged comments from both Russian 
and foreign readers tomy last Cif article 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/sep/24/russia-blogging-revolution>
 where I called Luzhkov a "rebellious mayor". So what do you think now, after 
his angry letter to Medvedev where he blasts the president for failing to 
uphold democracy (although Luzhkov's own democratic record is far from clean, 
to say the least)? It reminds me ofAndrey Kurbsky 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Andrey_Kurbsky>, once Ivan the Terrible's close 
friend and ally who later became his arch-enemy. The correspondence between him 
and the infamously ill-tempered monarch, where Kurbsky calls for greater 
accountability of the tsar and against autocracy, is a classic of political 
epistolary verse. Kurbsky is called by many historians the first Russian 
dissenter – Luzhkov may well be the last. I couldn't help but feel a tinge of 
sympathy towards a man so suicidally reckless and anti-authoritarian in the 
present atmosphere of all-encompassing lick-spittling. A few years ago, when I 
signed petitions and went to rallies calling for Luzhkov's resignation, I 
didn't pause for a second when asked whether or not I wanted to see him as the 
mayor of Moscow. Now I've just caught myself thinking that I'm not quite so 
sure.
 