
For a brief period at London’s Architectural Association in the 1980s, 
sparkling Perrier water was in vogue. Not for drinking, but for mixing acrylic 
paints. Students had watched in mystified awe as a steady supply of the bulbous 
green bottles were shuttled upstairs to the cramped third-floor studio, where 
recent graduateZaha Hadid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/mar/31/zaha-hadid-maverick-architect-designer-appreciation>
 was busy conjuring apainting for an exhibition 
<http://www.zaha-hadid.com/design/the-world-89-degrees/>, a world of skewed 
perspectives and jagged forms making a bid for freedom. If they used the same 
fizzy water, her acolytes hoped, it might give their work the same magic Zaha 
lustre. But the bottles, Hadid later admitted, merely contained tap water: they 
were just a means of her assistants transporting it from the bar downstairs.

“Even as a student, Zaha had a kind of mythological aura around her,” recalls 
the artistMadelon Vriesendorp <http://madelonvriesendorp.com/>, who taught 
Hadid in painting workshops at the AA in the 1970s, introducing her to a 
vibrant colour palette beyond the smudgy greys and browns she had favoured. 
“She was an incredible creature, always dressed in spectacular layers of 
scarves and feathers and Perspex heels. And she had this strange habit of 
burning the edges of her drawings. They looked like futuristic treasures dug up 
from the ground, with all these crazy forms bending, twisting and warping. I 
loved her images, but I didn’t even try to understand what they meant.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fzaha-hadid-architect-legacy-sketchbooks-serpentine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa2979d4df0fdc374fbeb6ec5d92c844c05c73a84%2F457_521_5919_3552%2F5919.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zaha%20Hadid%3A%20from%20flaming%20sketchbooks%20to%20global%20phenomenon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fzaha-hadid-architect-legacy-sketchbooks-serpentine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zaha%20Hadid%3A%20from%20flaming%20sketchbooks%20to%20global%20phenomenon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fzaha-hadid-architect-legacy-sketchbooks-serpentine%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa2979d4df0fdc374fbeb6ec5d92c844c05c73a84%2F457_521_5919_3552%2F5919.jpg>
 Whoosh factor … the Heydar Aliyev Centre in Baku, Azerbaijan. Photograph: Alamy
Visitors to the Serpentine Sackler Gallery 
<http://www.serpentinegalleries.org/exhibitions-events/zaha-hadid-early-paintings-and-drawings>
 in London might have the same reaction. Nine months after the globetrotting 
Iraqi-born architectdied 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/mar/31/star-architect-zaha-hadid-dies-aged-65>
 suddenly from a heart attack in Miami, aged just 65, her dazzling early output 
of paintings and drawings – produced before herfirst building 
<http://www.zaha-hadid.com/architecture/iba-housing/> was completed in 1993 – 
has gone on show. Housed in Kensington Gardens’ old gunpowder store, which 
Hadid herself transformed into the Sackler Gallery in 2013 with aswooping white 
canopy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/sep/25/serpentine-sackler-gallery-marquee-battling>
, the pages bristle with explosive energy, the singed corners of her 
sketchbooks revealed in public for the first time alongside 3m-high canvases.

The exhibition provides an unparalleled insight into the creative process of 
the architect’s early years, revealing how a strange calligraphy was incubated 
in her notebooks, an esoteric universe of dots, dashes and swirls that would 
gradually evolve into something resembling a spatial proposition. Like 
spermatozoa infiltrating an egg, her wiggles would burrow their way into the 
embryonic form of an interior perspective, or an idea about how a building 
might occupy a site, before leaping off the page into working drawings and 
wall-sized paintings.

“When we opened the box of notebooks, it was like seeing an enormous battery 
of energy,” says the gallery’s director Hans Ulrich Obrist who, despite 
collaborating with Hadid for over 20 years, only sawpages from her sketchbooks 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BNpe2u2ggiy/?hl=en> for the first time in her 
lecture for theRIBA royal gold medal 
<https://www.architecture.com/Awards/RGM/RGM2016/ZahaHadid.aspx> earlier this 
year. “It was an incredible discovery,” he says, “encountering this reservoir 
of ideas behind her work, which anticipated the digital age long before the 
computer.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fzaha-hadid-architect-legacy-sketchbooks-serpentine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07bd313ce5ee00dbecd8c5f4fe4f575b2b1ce862%2F582_766_4648_2789%2F4648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zaha%20Hadid%3A%20from%20flaming%20sketchbooks%20to%20global%20phenomenon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fzaha-hadid-architect-legacy-sketchbooks-serpentine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zaha%20Hadid%3A%20from%20flaming%20sketchbooks%20to%20global%20phenomenon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fzaha-hadid-architect-legacy-sketchbooks-serpentine%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07bd313ce5ee00dbecd8c5f4fe4f575b2b1ce862%2F582_766_4648_2789%2F4648.jpg>
 Esoteric universe … one of Hadid’s notebooks. Photograph: Graeme Robertson for 
the Guardian 
While Hadid’s buildings became known for their sinuous computer-generated 
forms, as though sculpted from stiff peaks of whipped cream, her early work was 
full of the intersecting angles and dagger-sharp geometries of Russian 
constructivism. For her, modernism was an unfinished project. At a time when 
postmodern pastiche was in the ascendant, she said she found the Soviet avant 
garde offered a mine of “yet untested compositional innovations, full of 
complexity and dynamism”. As her former tutorRem Koolhaas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/aug/11/rem-review-documentary-rem-koolhaas-tomas-koolhaas>
 remarked at her memorial service, held in St Paul’s Cathedral in October: 
“Zaha took a 50-year-old substance – constructivism – and in a triumph of 
personal alchemy, turned it into the architectural language of the 21st 
century, smooth and contemporary, as if it came out of a spray can.”

We would turn her sketches into models and she would tell us, very forcefully, 
which ones she did and didn't like

It wasn’t a spray can, but tiny eyeliner-size brushes that produced these 
exquisite paintings, which have the precision and delicacy of Persian 
miniatures, pored over by teams of assistants over weeks and months. Shumon 
Basar, who joined Hadid’s studio in the mid-90s as an impressionable 
twentysomething fresh from university, recalls the office having the atmosphere 
of a Renaissance artist’s workshop, the paintings being the product of a grand 
collective effort, often late into the night.

“At around midnight, Zaha would finally settle down,” says Basar, whose duties 
included shuttling Hadid around in her own black cab. “She would call one of us 
and go through her latest sketches, with very few words, and we would go away 
and photocopy them and develop each idea into a drawing or relief model. The 
next morning she would come back and tell us very forcefully which ones she did 
and didn’t like.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fzaha-hadid-architect-legacy-sketchbooks-serpentine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15d0bd080c4f3ff9f2b19450a8b5d9d35807b4b1%2F478_543_2801_3307%2F2801.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zaha%20Hadid%3A%20from%20flaming%20sketchbooks%20to%20global%20phenomenon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fzaha-hadid-architect-legacy-sketchbooks-serpentine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zaha%20Hadid%3A%20from%20flaming%20sketchbooks%20to%20global%20phenomenon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fzaha-hadid-architect-legacy-sketchbooks-serpentine%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15d0bd080c4f3ff9f2b19450a8b5d9d35807b4b1%2F478_543_2801_3307%2F2801.jpg>
 Hadid’sThe World (1983). Photograph: Graeme Robertson for the Guardian 
The paintings were the product of a collaborative effort, made through a 
laborious sequence of transferring and enlarging, drafting 0.35mm ink lines on 
tracing paper, then using scalpels to sharpen the intersections of the lines, 
before tracing a final time and transferring on to the canvas with carbon 
paper. Hadid directed her loyal assistants with her trademark combination of 
charm and terror, and was always present to paint the key parts herself. 
“People say you can tell which bits of Rembrandt’s paintings he actually 
painted, and I think you see Zaha’s hand,” Basar says. “She was especially good 
at the ‘whoosh’, making the transition between colours extremely smooth.”

The “whoosh”, it emerges, was a key part of the Hadid lexicon. Floors would 
whoosh into walls, public space would whoosh into private, deep indigo skies 
would whoosh into sharp tongues of vermilion. Little whooshes appear in the 
sketchbooks, alongside other hieroglyphs to which she assigned names such as 
“tic tics” and “slabettes”, a visual code that would one day evolve into the 
canted walls and precipitous cantilevers of her buildings.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fzaha-hadid-architect-legacy-sketchbooks-serpentine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa18e35fd7f47d19e8185aa9d162862bed7e02384%2F434_740_4960_2666%2F4960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zaha%20Hadid%3A%20from%20flaming%20sketchbooks%20to%20global%20phenomenon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fzaha-hadid-architect-legacy-sketchbooks-serpentine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zaha%20Hadid%3A%20from%20flaming%20sketchbooks%20to%20global%20phenomenon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fzaha-hadid-architect-legacy-sketchbooks-serpentine%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa18e35fd7f47d19e8185aa9d162862bed7e02384%2F434_740_4960_2666%2F4960.jpg>
 Collaborative effort … Grand Building, 1985. Photograph: Graeme Robertson for 
the Guardian 
“She invented so many words, because she could never remember the actual names 
of anything or anyone,” recalls Vriesendorp. “It was always ‘thingamajiggy’ 
this and ‘tic tic’ that.” New recruits to the office would at first be referred 
to as “Pupsi”, before a more fitting nickname was found. Her collaborators’ 
aliases included Licky, Sleazy, Yawn, Potato, RawMan and Clinton – the last 
having something to do with interns.

The teasing and power games extended to her clients, too. In a book of 
reminiscences published for the exhibition, one client recalls how Hadid 
threatened not to turn up to the opening of her building when she saw the list 
of invited journalists that had been invited, and at first refused to climb the 
stairs to the dinner. Her confidantBrian Clarke 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/context-comment/video/brian-clarke-and-zaha-hadid-conversation>
 describes encountering a group of Japanese clients waiting in Hadid’s 
apartment for her to appear, trying to sit on her latest sofas, “politely 
contorting themselves into crevices or trying to stop themselves sliding down 
ramps of polished fibre glass, or balancing themselves next to upholstered 
stalagmites”. When Hadid finally appeared, “she was followed by a lady carrying 
a perfectly conventional chair for her to sit on. Which she did.”

*

The Serpentine exhibition is hung as a fine-art show, so there is little text 
to help decode what you’re looking at, but Hadid’s stylistic evolution is clear 
to see. Beginning with her graduation project,Malevich’s Tektonik 
<http://www.zaha-hadid.com/architecture/malevichs-tektonik/>, in 1977 – a 
proposal for a structure over the Thames that could have come straight from the 
Russian revolution – the exhibition shows how the geometries of her early 
constructivist influences became gradually more wild as time went on. A scheme 
for aMuseum of the Nineteenth Century 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Zaha_Hadid_-_Museum_of_the_Nineteenth_Century.jpg>
 in 1978 has something of the flattened cubist manner favoured by Koolhaas, but 
only two years later, in a proposal for theIrish prime minister’s residence 
<http://www.zaha-hadid.com/architecture/irish-prime-ministers-residence/>, her 
angular forms are spiralling off into space, threatening to transport the 
taoiseach to another dimension.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fzaha-hadid-architect-legacy-sketchbooks-serpentine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F92a6f3ef63f80747c985ddf5fb5e2c3b6b3197d2%2F612_304_2193_3131%2F2193.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zaha%20Hadid%3A%20from%20flaming%20sketchbooks%20to%20global%20phenomenon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fzaha-hadid-architect-legacy-sketchbooks-serpentine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zaha%20Hadid%3A%20from%20flaming%20sketchbooks%20to%20global%20phenomenon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fzaha-hadid-architect-legacy-sketchbooks-serpentine%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F92a6f3ef63f80747c985ddf5fb5e2c3b6b3197d2%2F612_304_2193_3131%2F2193.jpg>
 Constructivism on Thames … Malevich’s Tectonic, 1977. Photograph: Graeme 
Robertson for the Guardian 
By the 1980s, the paintings depict fractured landscapes teeming with 
splintered shards and oblique planes, fields of flotsam zooming towards 
multiple vanishing points, as if being sucked into a wormhole. Her 1983 
competition-winning proposal for thePeak Leisure Club 
<http://www.zaha-hadid.com/architecture/the-peak-leisure-club/> in Hong Kong 
shows the building exploding in a snowstorm of confetti. Fora scheme in Hamburg 
<http://images.adsttc.com/media/images/5735/e98a/e58e/ced3/0000/0014/slideshow/00893_PA_N2.jpg?1463150961>
 in 1989, different views of her project dance like sailing boats buffeted by 
the wind, the facades, sections and plans collapsing into each other like a row 
of dominoes frozen mid-tumble. You begin to understand why clients might have 
been wary to build her structures, given she preferred to depict them smashed 
to smithereens.

“Her early structures always looked considerably heavier than she wanted,” 
recallsNigel Coates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2010/oct/11/nigel-coates-architect>, her 
contemporary at the AA. For the anti-gravity artist, steel and concrete never 
quite bent to her will. But the trust gradually came, computers caught up, and 
by the time of her death, Hadid had completed 56 projects in 45 cities around 
the world, from theBMW headquarters 
<http://www.zaha-hadid.com/architecture/bmw-central-building/> in Leipzig to the
Heydar Aliyev centre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/jun/30/zaha-hadid-architecture> 
in Baku, Azerbaijan. Her futuristicmathematics gallery at the Science Museum 
<http://www.sciencemuseum.org.uk/visitmuseum/plan_your_visit/exhibitions/mathematics>
 opened this week, and about 30 of her live projects remain to be completed. 
However, since her death, several major clients have got cold feet and the 
office has shed staff as a result. Plans tomove the practice to the former 
Design Museum building 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/jul/09/design-museum-sale-zaha-hadid>
 in Shad Thames, London, are now on hold; no longer commercially viable, the 
site is likely to be sold on.

It will be a rocky road for the 400-strong company, made no easier by the 
recent public outbursts of Hadid’s long-time collaborator andpractice director 
Patrik Schumacher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/nov/24/zaha-hadid-successor-patrik-schumacher-art-schools-social-housing>
, who took to the stage in Berlin last month to call for the abolition of 
social housing and the wholesale privatisation of cities.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fzaha-hadid-architect-legacy-sketchbooks-serpentine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa58a0ca95dd21a948522e40ffd612f3279a1b544%2F0_278_2331_1398%2F2331.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zaha%20Hadid%3A%20from%20flaming%20sketchbooks%20to%20global%20phenomenon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fzaha-hadid-architect-legacy-sketchbooks-serpentine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zaha%20Hadid%3A%20from%20flaming%20sketchbooks%20to%20global%20phenomenon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fzaha-hadid-architect-legacy-sketchbooks-serpentine%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa58a0ca95dd21a948522e40ffd612f3279a1b544%2F0_278_2331_1398%2F2331.jpg>
 ‘The danger is that she merely becomes a brand that can be leaned on’ … Zaha 
Hadid. Photograph: Mary McCartney 
“I was so angry by the end of his speech,” says a close friend of Hadid’s who 
was in the audience. “It was really shocking. Zaha wouldn’t have agreed with 
any of it.” The trustees of the Zaha Hadid Foundation and executors of her 
estate released a damning statement in response: “Knowing Dame Zaha as well as 
we did, we can state categorically that she would have been totally opposed to 
these views and would have disassociated herself from them. We personally also 
totally disagree with these views.” The practice was quick to follow suit, 
declaring that Schumacher’s manifesto “does not reflectZaha Hadid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/zaha-hadid> Architects’ past – and 
will not be our future”.

Joining the firm in 1988, Schumacher was instrumental in introducing 
computer-aided design techniques to the office and scaling the business to the 
worldwide empire it became. But, to many critics’ eyes, his “parametric 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solid_modeling#Parametric_and_feature-based_modeling>
” modelling techniques and the scale of the practice have seen the strength of 
the work diluted to a fraction of its earlier power. Construction is almost 
complete on aluxury apartment block beside the High Line in New York 
<http://www.520w28.com/>, which has seen the sinuous lines reduced to a flimsy 
appliqué. A lumpenglass block <http://www.omniyat.com/project/theopus/> is 
under way in Dubai, designed as an office, but now to be serviced apartments, 
conceived as a generic slab with a wavy hole bored through the middle – a 
molten geometry that the rectangular glazing panels can’t quite match.

“Some of the things the office has produced recently have been way off,” says 
an old friend of Hadid’s. “Zaha would dismiss this stuff quite openly. I don’t 
think she really liked the squirmy towers that were being proposed. The 
practice now faces the same challenge as a fashion house like Alexander McQueen 
or Yves Saint Laurent, to keep the output rolling in such a way that it is both 
innovative and true to its DNA. The danger is that Zaha merely becomes a brand 
that can be leaned on. If they were wise, they would think very carefully about 
what the legacy is.”

• Zaha Hadid: Early Paintings and Drawings is at the Serpentine Sackler Gallery
 <http://www.serpentinegalleries.org/press/serpentine-sackler-gallery>, London, 
until 12 February.
 