
The 25-year-old Zedd, aka Russian-born Anton Zaslavski, may look like 
everyone’s third favourite member of a middling US boyband, but in the world of 
EDM he’s big news. Having originally signed to Skrillex’s OWSLA label in 2011 
(he’s now with Interscope) following a series of successful remixes, he’s gone 
on to win a Grammy for the US top 10 single Clarity, has released a debut album 
of the same name featuring the likes of Ryan Tedder, Paramore’s Hayley Williams 
and Ellie Goulding, and was personally asked to produce three songs on Lady 
Gaga’s Artpop album. Oh and he’s also scored massive global hits producing for 
reformed egg-thrower Justin Bieber (Beauty and a Beat) and mini-Mariah, Ariana 
Grande (Break Free). This month he’ll release his new single,I Want You to Know 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X46t8ZFqUB4> featuring ex-girlfriend Selena 
Gomez, a plinky-plonky, squelchy synthed squiggle of a song with more 
signposted drops than you can shake a glow stick at.

To celebrate his forthcoming second album True Colors, he gives us a 
eight-point guide to becoming a massively successful EDM producer.

1. Extensive electronic knowledge is not essential

The first album that got me interested was Daft Punk’s Discovery. There was 
something about this type of music that was interesting to me even though I was 
listening to metal and rock at the time. I knew nothing about electronic music 
or club culture because I never went to clubs, so I bought Discovery and 
listened to it hundreds of times. Then, while I was in a studio recording drums 
for a rock band, I heard Cross by Justice. That album pretty much changed my 
life. It reminded me of Discovery – it was this sort of very musical electronic 
music, but the sounds were so futuristic. It made me want to make that kind of 
music.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DX46t8ZFqUB4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DX46t8ZFqUB4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DX46t8ZFqUB4&media=>
2. Focus on the M part of EDM

I don’t even see myself as EDM or a DJ. I started making classical music, then 
jazz and then I made rock. There’s a point where you have success and then 
suddenly you’re in a box and you ask yourself “Well, why wasn’t I in a box when 
I made classical music or rock or metal?” I will admit that there’s a lot of 
very simple music out there. EDM has a stigma. If I hear EDM, the first thing I 
think of is the main stage at a festival and glow sticks and rave, but really 
that’s not what it means. Electronic dance music is what I am. I make dance 
music for the most part and it’s mostly electronic so I shouldn’t feel weird 
about that genre but it feels like it’s been narrowed down to some very simple 
repetitive music where everyone steals from each other and barely uses any 
music, just sounds. I want to be just M. Just music.

3. Branch out into other genres

I was recently asked to produce a country album, which I think would have been 
interesting because it’s something I’ve never done before. My journey in the 
electronic world started by wanting to do something I didn’t know how to do, 
because I love learning. I have no clue about the country world but I’d love to 
just dive in and see how it works. I never had time: my albumTrue Colors 
<https://zeddtruecolors.com/> took longer than I was expecting. I think it 
would be really interesting to see where the genre might go.

4. Massive pop stars help things along a bit

If we take Justin Bieber’s Beauty and a Beat 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ys7-6_t7OEQ> song as an example, I made that 
not knowing it was going to be for Bieber. I started it as a song around the 
same time I made the singleClarity <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IxxstCcJlsc>
, but it didn’t fit the album. If there’s not the right space for a song then 
usually my first port of call will beMax Martin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/feb/18/max-martin-pop-producer-10-of-the-best-tracks>
. He’s a genius. I called him up and said I had a song that he might like and 
he wrote the top line and then we decided to give it to Bieber. But making the 
track was the exact same process [as with all my own songs].Lady Gaga’s Artpop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/nov/07/lady-gaga-artpop-review> was a 
different story because she called me and said “I want you to produce my 
album”, so in that case it’s not about your art, it’s about hearing out an 
artist and trying to paint that picture of his or her art in your head. 
Sometimes she would email me with words and ask me to make it into a song. 
Words like “metallic”, “sexy”, “dark”, “mysterious”. So it was like, “How do 
you write that?” I’d never worked like that. I learned a lot from working with 
her because it was a totally different experience.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYs7-6_t7OEQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYs7-6_t7OEQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYs7-6_t7OEQ&media=>
5. It doesn’t really matter if the song doesn’t make grammatical sense

When it comes to lyrics, Max Martin and I are really similar because we’re 
European and we hear English lyrics a little differently. So while someone who 
is native English-speaking will listen to the meaning of something, we listen 
to how it sounds and how it feels to say something. With Ariana Grande’s Break 
Free (key lyric: “Now that I’ve become who I really are”), I didn’t even 
realise the errors until very late! Because it sounds so good. It just felt 
right. Beauty and a Beat, that line was the same thing, the rest of it was just 
mumbled and we built everything around that one line.

6. Matching the right vocalist to the right song is crucial

You can ruin an entire song by putting the wrong vocalist on it. The vocal 
carries the emotion and meaning of a song and either you believe it or you 
don’t. There will be cheesy vocalists here and there and then suddenly they’ll 
sing something and I’ll believe it. When I made the song with Bieber I was 
worried because he had a bad image and all those things, but then he really 
delivered and that’s all that matters to me.



7. It’s better to make an album than a collection of singles

I think the art of making a good album is very difficult. Making 10 songs is 
easier than making an album. Sometimes you have to make the decision of making 
a song that you know isn’t going to be successful, but that’s fine because it 
makes an album into an album. It’s also not about working with the biggest 
vocalists; Clarity had Foxes on it and at that time no one knew her. No one 
knew Matthew Koma either, but their voices gave me so much. I worked with Logic 
on this new album, who’s a rapper, and he’s super tight with his timing. And 
Echosmith had one of the best vocals I’ve ever worked with.

8. Broaden your sartorial choices once the money starts rolling in

My outfit in the Break Free <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L8eRzOYhLuw> 
video was very on the edge of what I can wear. I used to wear plaid every day 
for probably two years and now I’m starting to experiment with wearing 
sweaters. I loved the idea. For me it was important not to be the classic DJ, 
so I needed it to have a funny touch. It’s something I’ve never done before – 
DJing on somespaceship equipment <https://youtu.be/L8eRzOYhLuw> – but I thought 
it turned out really great.
 