
Discs of Walter Zimmermann <http://home.snafu.de/walterz/>’s works seem to 
come alongevery few years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/nov/29/zimmermann-sonar-quartett-review>
, providing reminders of what a quietly singular and enigmatic figure in 
contemporary European music he is.Nicolas Hodges <http://www.nicolashodges.com/>
’ collection covers Zimmermann’s most recent piano pieces, all composed between 
2001 and 2006. There are six works here, but easily the most substantial is 
Voces Abandonadas, a two-part cycle lasting almost 40 minutes that was inspired 
by the writings of the Italian-born Argentinian poetAntonio Porchia 
<https://web.archive.org/web/20070928130609/http://www.lameziastorica.it/saggi4aing.htm>
 (1885-1968).

 Porchia’s aphorisms circulated widely in Argentina during the years of 
military dictatorship and were eventually published in Spain in 1982 as Voces 
Abandonadas. Zimmermann made sound representations of each of them, and these 
musical “sentences” – 514 altogether, rarely more than one bar long and 
composed, diary-like, over the course of a year – follow one another without 
breaks, sometimes resulting in stark contrasts of mood and style. The 
dedicatees of the two parts of Voces Abandonadas are Helmut Lachenmann and
Morton Feldman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2012/nov/12/morton-feldman-contemporary-music-guide>
, perhaps defining the twin poles of Zimmermann’s music, yet the music never 
remotely echoes either composer. Though he has always distanced himself from 
the serialism of the 1945 postwar avant garde, this terse music seems to hark 
back most of all to the world of Stockhausen’s early piano pieces of the 50s, 
which Stockhausen referred to as his “drawings”. Despite its multi-layered 
allusiveness, Zimmermann’s compendium has a similar kind of monochrome 
spareness.

 The other pieces, to which Hodges also brings utter structural clarity and 
his usual punctilious care for every gradation of tone and dynamic, are 
generally much slighter. But the earliest, three movements from Aimide (an 
acronym from a Latin saying about the persistence of friendship and the 
transitory nature of enmity), the first of which was composed in the wake of 
9/11, make a beautifully poetic 20-minute triptych that closes a hugely 
rewarding disc.
 