
ZZ Top <https://www.theguardian.com/music/zz-top> don’t exactly carry the 
image of being introspective, deep-thinking individuals. In fact, on stage they 
look like nothing other than a bunch of dumb shits from Texas, three boys who 
just walked off the set of Bonanza and are heading out after the show to eat 
three sirloins apiece.


 But when big Billy Gibbons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/05/billy-gibbons-and-the-bfgs-perfectamundo-review-zz-top-guitarist-goes-latin-hip-hop>
 throws down his two-ton spurs and ten-gallon hat, takes off his stacked cowboy 
boots and removes his padded Nudie suit, behold this rock’n’roll shrimp. He 
doesn’t even look big enough to hold a flute, never mind play the heaviest 
guitar made by Gibson, the Les Paul. Hell, this guy is even shorter thanme.

It’d shock a lot of our fans if they saw how short I really am
Billy Gibbons 
 “I guess it’d shock a lot of our fans if they saw how short I really am,” 
explains Little Willie G. “The other night I was backstage after the show and 
this chick comes up to me and asks me if I worked for the band.” This writer 
must confess to a similar incident whereupon I failed to recognise Monsieur G 
at a reception for the Top when he was standing only a few feet away. Durn, 
I’ll be damned if he didn’t look more like a Yale student than a Texas Gittar 
Hero.

 But there’s at least one portion of Billy Gibbons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/aug/11/zz-tops-billy-gibbons-teams-up-david-guetta-ibiza>
’ body which is hardly undersized. “I’ve got lumberjack fingers,” complains 
Gibby Billons. “Those wiry Englishmen piss me off. It gives me a lot of grief, 
you know, my hands being so big.”

 OK, so much for the ZZ Top physical image. The next question you all probably 
have is: “Are they really all that stupid that all they can write about is sex, 
drinking and the other follies of a non-Christian nature which eventually lead 
to the disintegration of the soul and which will doubtlessly prevent one from 
entering into the kingdom of heaven?” I decided that to research a query so 
crucial, so basic to finding the true nature of ZZ Top and mankind, was of the 
utmost importance and proceeded to pop the question to Gabby. I didn’t propose 
marriage, Lord forbid, but merely asked the boy precisely whatZZ Top 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/25/zz-top-review-see-arena-wembley-london>
 was all about, where it was heading, and how he intended to save the white 
world from disco music.

 “I’ve been able to meet a lot of artist/musician types, especially in Paris. 
Back in 1973, I lived in Italy and Paris for three months and I got a taste for 
the artist’s life, I used to be fairly active in the visual arts, and some of 
my old friends are into the mandala formula. You have to understand that the 
ultimate end, in terms of an artistic exchange, is to impart a consciousness 
which will elevate the listener/viewer without scaring him. In ZZ Top, we’ve 
developed a sound which a lot of people can relate to, and I don’t want to even 
think of altering that too much. We’ve thrown the idea around of adding a 
musician or musicians, maybe a horn section or a steel guitar, not all the way 
through but on a cut-by-cut basis – I don’t want to get too eclectic.”

It doesn’t take much to be good, but it takes a lot to be real good
Dusty Hill 
 Now if you’ve been paying close attention, you’ll notice that he said some 
words which exceed one syllable, and in fact many a word which you wouldn’t 
even find in the vocabulary of your average college grad-u-ate. “Impart,” for 
instance, is no hick term nor a current fad word (such as “existential” or 
“obnoxious” – these words may be multisyllabic, but are used commonly by even 
the dumbest twerps) … this journalist would have to conclude that the mentality 
behind ZZ Top extends far beyond “I’m just looking for some tush”. If I was to 
put ZZ Top in a certain intellectual school, it wouldn’t exactly be the same as 
that of Queen (who actually have degrees in astrophysics, visual design and 
dentistry) but it would probably be above that of Lynyrd Skynyrd, Black Oak 
Arkansas, and even above that of those grey-matter giants from England: Slade.

Billy Gibbons: 'We're available as the space shuttle's lounge band'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/17/billy-gibbons-zz-top-solo-album-perfectamundo-interview>
 Question: How do they rate as musicians? Answer: Respectably.

 After all, how many three-man heavy-metal outfits have done an answer tune to 
a jazz song? Not many, you say – in fact, practically none. But as the 
Detergents gave us Leader of the Laundromat to respond to the Shangri-Las’ 
classic Leader of the Pack, ZZ Top have answered Weather Report’s Man in the 
Green Shirt with Mexican Cutting Cross Field.

 Billy Gibbons is, all kidding aside, an exciting guitarist and singer. He’s 
one of the few terrific blues players that white American culture has produced. 
An admirer of Clapton to the hilt, Gibbons is yet another generation removed 
from the black bluesers who re-energised the rock’n’roll scene in 1967, and 
Gibbons sees the next source of Delta-type musical purity as the Jamaican 
scene. “I knew about the Rastafarian cult before I became acquainted with the 
music, actually. It’s so fresh, man, and they’re radical cats – I wouldn’t be 
surprised if Marley’s put away a few people in his time. The Wailers are my 
favourites, they’re one of the most professional of the reggae groups. I have 
heard some very primitive Marley sides cut years ago, and they’re really raw.

 “It’s another challenge to the white man, like the blues was. There are 
already some white reggae artists, but it hasn’t been broken through to the 
masses yet. Most of the reggae awareness is still among music industry people 
and people who are already into all types of music.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fdec%2F16%2Fzz-top-billy-gibbons-from-rocks-backpages-classic-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2ad7f663db7c2f0fc889e5ef1276a2ce459165b%2F0_19_2826_1877%2F2826.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=ZZ%20Top's%20Billy%20Gibbons%3A%20'I%20don%E2%80%99t%20want%20to%20get%20too%20eclectic'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fdec%2F16%2Fzz-top-billy-gibbons-from-rocks-backpages-classic-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=ZZ%20Top%27s%20Billy%20Gibbons%3A%20%27I%20don%E2%80%99t%20want%20to%20get%20too%20eclectic%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fdec%2F16%2Fzz-top-billy-gibbons-from-rocks-backpages-classic-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2ad7f663db7c2f0fc889e5ef1276a2ce459165b%2F0_19_2826_1877%2F2826.jpg>
 ZZ Top in 1979. Photograph: Chris Walter/WireImage 
 Frank Beard doesn’t like your typical average rock band, either. He’s got 
fairly odd tastes for a drummer (most drummers are ape over Billy Cobham, Cream 
or Yes) – he actually named Allen Toussaint’s album of last year, entitled 
Southern Nights, among his most-played records. “I don’t listen to that many 
new releases,” claims Beard, “but I do listen to a lot of my older records. I 
still go back to the Flying Burrito Brothers and Gram Parsons’ Grievous Angel.”

 Gram Parsons?!? The Flying Burrito Brothers!?!

 Then there’s the burly Dusty Hill, bass-guitar man for ZZ Top. Of playing the 
bass, he remarked: “It doesn’t take much to be good, but it takes a lot to be
realgood.” So you’d think he’d spend all his time listening to Stanley Clarke 
and the other purveyors of futuristic bass techniques, but no! “When we first 
got together I was listening to a lot of old bluesers,” says Hill, “but I’ve 
been doing more listening recently to old rockers and country and western 
records. Elvis Presley’s Sun stuff – there’s an album out in England with just 
about all those sides on it – you know, the sound of that upright bass slapping 
away: that’s what I like to listen to. “That and Richard Pryor, that is.”

Billy, he’s either picking a guitar or his nose
Frank Beard 
 All right, so now most of your misconceptions of ZZ Top being a triad of 
brainless rednecks have been quelched and you’re wondering just where Billy, 
Dusty and Frank are at, strictly in terms of how they function as a rock’n’roll 
band. How well do they relate to being on the road, how they proceed to make a 
record, what do they do when they’re on the road, aside from their more famous 
vices, et cetera.

 Q: How are you taking to your more universal success … are you slowing down 
your work schedule and taking it easy, baby?

 A: We’re on the road 250 days a year but we work 365 days a year. We’re 
always doing something musical.

 Q: Frank, what do you do when you’re not on stage?

 A: Man, I’m just playing all the time. And Billy, he’s either picking a 
guitar or his nose.

 Q: Billy, how’s the new album coming along?

 A: It’s still in the preparation stage – we’re taking a full month off to 
rehearse. The tunes are things we’ve been working on individually, which we’ve 
toyed with in hotel rooms and at sound checks but still have a few bugs to work 
out. But we’ve got a full catalogue of songs to work with this time, and I sort 
of doubt that we’ll be doing anybody else’s material this time around, even 
though we won over a lot of fans with our version of Jailhouse Rock. It could 
happen, but I doubt it.

 Q: Dusty, you’ve lasted as a three-piece band quite a while. How does it feel 
to have two other musicians to depend on?

 A: You can look at it two ways: you have only two people to fall back upon, 
but then again it gives you the freedom of having two other musicians torelate 
to. Sometimes it’s tough … but it’s nice.

 And then there was one last question that lurked beneath my deepest thoughts, 
one philosophical bit of mambo-jambo which was anxiously trying to extricate 
itself from the furthest bits of my subconscious. I swallowed hard, thought for 
a second, and queried: “Billy Gibbons, could you just tell me What Do You See 
As The Future of ZZ Top for 1976?”

 He barely had to ponder my inquisition for a moment, and bellowed forth: “I 
predict a set of some more rip-roaring tunes. As much as I hate to get caught 
up in the bicentennial excitement … I think I will.

 “Falstaff has a new beer can with an American flag on it – I think we should 
tell everybody to drink it in one of our songs.” Yes, if Harry Nilsson can be 
the Hoagy Carmichael of 1976, then ZZ Top must surely be able to claim the 
throne as the worthy successors to Irving Berlin, Francis Scott Key and Kate 
Smith. Amen, and good night America, wherever you are.

 © Jon Tiven, 1976
 