
2016 will very likely be the hottest year on record and a new high for the 
third year in a row, according to the UN. It means 16 of the 17 hottest years 
on record will have been this century.

The scorching temperatures around the world, and the extreme weather they 
drive, mean the impacts of climate change on people are coming sooner and with 
more ferocity than expected, according to scientists.

The World Meteorological Organization (WMO) report, published on Monday at the 
global climate summit in Morocco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/cop-22-un-climate-change-conference-marrakech>
, found the global temperature in 2016 is running 1.2C above pre-industrial 
levels. This is perilously close to to the 1.5C target included as an aim of 
the Paris climate agreement last December.

The El Niño weather phenomenon helped push temperatures even higher in early 
2016 but the global warming caused by the greenhouse gas emissions from human 
activities remains the strongest factor.
Paris explainer 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=e0baea36-2bf8-4f56-8f46-ef7c35de261b>
“Another year. Another record,” said WMO secretary-general, Petteri Taalas. 
“The extra heat from the powerful El Niño event has disappeared. The heat from 
global warming will continue.”

“Because of climate change, the occurrence and impact of extreme events has 
risen,” he said. “‘Once in a generation’ heatwaves and flooding are becoming 
more regular.”

The WMO said human-induced global warming had contributed to at least half the 
extreme weather events studied in recent years, with the risk of extreme heat 
increasing by 10 times in some cases.

“It is almost as if mother nature is making a statement,” said climate 
scientist Michael Mann, at Penn State University in the US. “Just as one of the 
planet’s two largest emitters of carbon has elected a climate change denier 
[Donald Trump] - who hasthreatened to pull out of the Paris accord 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/09/us-election-result-throws-paris-climate-deal-into-uncertainty>
 - to the highest office, she reminds us that she has the final word.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.facebook.com%2Ftheguardian%2Fvideos%2F10154187550331323%2F&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.facebook.com%2Ftheguardian%2Fvideos%2F10154187550331323%2F>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.facebook.com%2Ftheguardian%2Fvideos%2F10154187550331323%2F&media=>
 April 2016 was the hottest April on record globally. 
“Climate change is not like other issues that can be postponed from one year 
to the next,” he said. “The US and world are already behind; speed is of the 
essence, because climate change and its impacts are coming sooner and with 
greater ferocity than anticipated.”

The record-smashing heat led to searing heatwaves across the year: a new high 
of 42.7C was recorded in Pretoria, South Africa in January; Mae Hong Son in 
Thailand saw 44.6C on 28 April; Phalodi inIndia reached 51.0C 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/20/india-records-its-hottest-day-ever-as-temperature-hits-51c-thats-1238f>
 in May andMitribah in Kuwait recorded 54.0C 
<https://www.wunderground.com/blog/JeffMasters/eastern-hemispheres-alltime-temperature-record-kuwait-fries-in-54>
 in July. Parts of Arctic Russia also saw extreme warming - 6C to 7C above 
average.

Arctic ice reached its equal second-lowest extent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/16/arctic-sea-ice-shrinks-to-second-lowest-level-ever-recorded>
 in the satellite record in September while warm oceans saw coral mortality of 
up to 50% in parts ofAustralia’s Great Barrier Reef 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/07/the-great-barrier-reef-a-catastrophe-laid-bare>
.

Extreme weather and climate related events have damaged farming and food 
security, affecting more than 60 million people, according to the UN Food and 
Agriculture Organization. The level of CO2 in the atmosphere has also broken 
records in 2016, with May seeing the highest monthly value yet - 407.7 ppm - at 
Mauna Loa, in Hawaii.

The world passes 400ppm carbon dioxide threshold. Permanently
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/28/the-world-passes-400ppm-carbon-dioxide-threshold-permanently>
The forecast for 2017 is another very hot year, but probably not a record 
breaker.

“As the El Niño wanes, we don’t anticipate that 2017 will be another 
record-breaking year,” said Dr Peter Stott at the UK’s Met Office. “But 2017 is 
likely to be warmer than any year prior to the last two decades because of the 
underlying extent of [human-caused] warming due to the increasing atmospheric 
concentration of greenhouse gases.”

However, another analysis released at the UN summit in Morocco showed that 
globalcarbon emissions have barely grown in the last three years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/14/fossil-fuel-co2-emissions-nearly-stable-for-third-year-in-row>
, following decades of strong growth. The main reason isChina burning less coal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/25/china-coal-peak-hailed-turning-point-climate-change-battle>
.
Global emissions graphic 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/nov/2016-11-11T14:52:54/embed.html>
Professor Corinne Le Quéré, at University of East Anglia in the UK, who led 
the analysis, said: “This third year of almost no growth in emissions is 
unprecedented at a time of strong economic growth. This is a great help for 
tackling climate change but it is not enough. Global emissions now need to 
decrease rapidly, not just stop growing.”

The WMO’s temperature analysis combines the three main records, from the Met 
Office, Nasa and theNational Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 
<http://www.noaa.gov/>, and stretches back to 1880.
 