
Everyone likes cuddling babies, but doing it before the baby is actually born 
is a bit weird. We don’t mean wrapping your arms around a pregnant woman’s 
bulge – we mean cuddling a 3D model of a foetus, taken from an ultrasound scan 
and turned into an actual plastic object. Yet, according to the UK’s top video 
UK’s top video parenting website,Channel Mum <http://www.channelmum.com/>, this 
will bethe baby trend for 2016 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V-8Dlasw_aY&index=1&list=PLqYu0GJ_UGMkBKd-eXsk-Ly66eTSfIvJx>
. Expectant parents can pay about £400 for a full eight-inch “baby” before the 
real thing is born. If that’s too much, a mere £170 will get you a small cast 
of your unborn child’s head and shoulders, made with a 3D printer. Which is 
cute, right? Just a little sawn-off sculpture of the head of your foetus to 
take to work? No?

Well, steel yourselves, because a quarter of British parents have apparently 
shown interest in getting their hands on one of these oddities, inspired by the 
US trend for “gender-reveal parties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/apr/28/british-mothers-party-cakes-babys-sex>
’”. Yes, just when you thought this was bad enough already, it links in with an 
American craze for gathering together everyone you know to announce that your 
baby is going to be one of two things. (You know, you’re either having a boy or 
a girl, you’re not going to give birth to a wardrobe.) Anyway, there’s no point 
asking if Bowie died for this, because before you know it, well-meaning bearded 
men will be swaddling these fake babies in slings and popping to Waitrose with 
them strapped to their chests to get some practice in before the birth. Just 
imagine – you might find yourself going round to a friend’s house and being 
asked if you’ve ever held a newborn, before being handed a small perspex 
print-out of their zygotes.

In other parenting predictions for 2016, Channel Mum has also discovered that 
a full 77% of parents would consider giving their child aStar Wars-inspired name
 <http://qz.com/572039/star-wars-has-renamed-american-babies/>, which makes you 
wonder if they did this survey while standing outside the local Odeon the week 
before Christmas. The most popular names this year are set to include Finn, 
Ezra and Rey, all characters inThe Force Awakens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/star-wars-episode-vii>. Then there’s the 
trend for theHeartbeat Bear Kit <http://mybabysheartbeatbear.com/pink-bear.html>
, a £25 gadget that records the sound of your unborn baby’s heartbeat as a 
pregnancy keepsake. Meanwhile, 68% of mums say they would consider adopting a 
local pensioner as a granny stand-in, apparently inspired by theMan on the Moon 
Christmas ad for John Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2015/nov/06/man-on-the-moon-john-lewis-christmas-ad-2015-industry>
. This combats the loneliness of both old people and new mothers, with websites 
to link up interested parties on both sides. Though it’s a trend that will 
presumably only last until they invent a 3D printer to print out an OAP of your 
very own instead.
 