
With 60 Minutes keen to rebuild its reputation after the child kidnapping 
incident in Lebanon, you’d think the last thing they would do is pay for an 
interview with the man a jury cleared of killing his Tinder date in 2014. But 
Nine had no such qualms, paying Gable Tostee about $150,000for his exclusive 
account of his date with Warriena Wright 
<https://www.9now.com.au/60-minutes/2016/clip-civa36gf200fg0gpdkls5vsum>, who 
died after falling from his apartment balcony. The teaser for the Sunday night 
show doesn’t spare the Wright family any grief, replaying in all its horror her 
bloodcurdling screams before she plunged 14 floors to her death. Queensland 
police who worked on the distressing case are appalled by the six-figure media 
deal.

“There’s a lot of anger among police about this,” one told the Courier Mail 
<http://www.couriermail.com.au/news/queensland/social-media-reacts-to-snippet-of-gable-tostee-interview-with-60-minutes/news-story/b67806f5e8a25c3a199f15db1f9e9c3e>
. “Of course we respect the court’s decision to find him not guilty but for him 
to now do a paid interview, after everything this poor girl’s family has been 
through, is horrific. It might be legally OK but for Tostee to profit from 
Warriena’s death is morally repugnant.’’

There was so much interest in the Tostee story from the media that his lawyers 
had to hire a public relations firm to cope with all the requests.

Australian senators Cory Bernardi and Malcolm Roberts pledge support for 
Donald Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/02/australian-senators-cory-bernardi-and-malcolm-roberts-pledge-support-for-donald-trump>
Satirists’ Trump card

The rightwing Australian senators Cory Bernardi and Malcolm Roberts were two 
high-profile Australians who supported Donald Trump, coming out before the US 
election in support of the Republican president-elect. Bernardi said Trump was 
the “least bad candidate”. So when Trump responded to the support from down 
under and released a statement distancing himself from Bernardi, News Corp 
tabloids were quick to pick it up. Trump’s “carefully-worded statement” 
appeared in the Herald Sun and the Courier Mail earlier in the week: “I have 
standards,” Trump said. “This is not the type of company I want to keep – I 
have an image to maintain here. People are free to make endorsements but that 
doesn’t mean I have to accept them”. Unfortunately the Trump statement, 
faithfully reported in Rupert Murdoch’s popular newspapers as news, was satire. 
Liftedstraight from satirical website The Shovel 
<http://www.theshovel.com.au/2016/11/03/trump-releases-statement-distancing-himself-from-cory-bernardi-endorsement/>
.

On the trail of the Kelly gang
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2F60-minutes-payout-to-gable-tostee-for-story-of-death-and-dating%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc006e5a20c886a5297b90b6cedd2e2b8590f5998%2F301_359_3464_2079%2F3464.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=60%20Minutes%20payout%20to%20Gable%20Tostee%20for%20story%20of%20death%20and%20dating&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2F60-minutes-payout-to-gable-tostee-for-story-of-death-and-dating%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=60%20Minutes%20payout%20to%20Gable%20Tostee%20for%20story%20of%20death%20and%20dating&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2F60-minutes-payout-to-gable-tostee-for-story-of-death-and-dating%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc006e5a20c886a5297b90b6cedd2e2b8590f5998%2F301_359_3464_2079%2F3464.jpg>
 Radio National’s Breakfast presenter Fran Kelly meets B1 and B2. Photograph: 
Mike Bowers for the Guardian 
In more bad news for ABC staff, Radio National’s flagship programs Breakfast 
with Fran Kelly and Drive with Patricia Karvelas are being carved off the ideas 
network and will be housed in the news department from January next year. The 
top secret project is called JACA for “joint audio current affairs”, Weekly 
Beast is told, and the idea is to get all the radio current affairs shows in 
one department. Sounds sensible enough but insiders say Breakfast’s distinctive 
tone and style – which is more analytical, highbrow and leisurely paced than 
news – is at risk. The JACA plan is to produce Breakfast through a central news 
desk like all other news and current affairs programs such as AM, PM and The 
World Today. The same fate awaits Drive, Extra, Saturday Extra and Background 
Briefing. The public may not notice at any difference at first but there are 
internal fears changing editorial controls to outside of Radio National could 
change the programs.

“We need to collaborate with News to achieve our stated ambition – delivering 
distinctive current affairs reporting and analysis,” an internal RN document 
said. “We want more agile staff and resources and greater diversity of content 
to meet the increasing audience appetite for CAFF content on-demand.”

Radio National’s anthem

 Perhaps to prevent staff falling into depression at this time of year, 
commonly known as the killing season, ABC Radio director Michael Mason has come 
up with a morale boosting exercise called the “Rawards: radio plus rewards”. 
Geddit? With changes to Radio National to be unveiled on 21 November, the 
Rawards will hopefully give the staff something positive to focus on. Up for 
grabs are “ABC Radio diversity champion”, which will be awarded to the person 
who “has made tangible progress to advance workplace inclusivity of gender, 
religion, ethnicity and ability” and “People’s choice award” for best half hour 
of radio: “This is your chance to let us know about the time you couldn’t get 
out of the car, or the time you let an ice cream melt over your hand, because 
you were so caught up with what you were listening to”.

Should you be lucky enough to win one of these Rawards, the prizes could not 
be more underwhelming: two days’ leave; conference passes for relevant events; 
the option to work in another capital city; ABC Shop vouchers and a 
personalised masterclass by a nominated mentor within Radio.

Fairfax chief wants media ownership rules relaxed, even if it helps News Corp
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/24/fairfax-chief-wants-media-ownership-rules-relaxed-even-if-it-helps-news-corp>
News Corp cuts 

There are cuts everywhere, including News Corp Australia, which this week 
announced a further $40m in savings had to be found. According to the 
Australian’s media editor, Darren Davidson,this exercise is going to be a cake 
walk 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/business/media/news-corp-embarks-on-cost-cuts/news-story/41a304c3c5528ed1a9fe4fd624e54b59]>
 and will involve a “modest redundancy program”. The chief executive, Michael 
Miller, was a little more blunt, telling staff in an email that the “new cost 
initiatives” would include a freeze on new hires, cuts to travel and 
entertainment and, of course, redundancies.

 Further to our report last week about the pay packets of TV chiefs, we wanted 
to tell you how much the print execs earn but because News Corp is based in the 
US we can’t bring you those figures. We can, however, tell you that Fairfax 
Media’s Greg Hywood got the highest bonuses, almost double the next highest. 
Hywood took home $2,735,051 including $600,000 in shares and $700,000 in cash. 
Not bad for a CEO who presided over a company which dropped out of the ASX100 
and is now in the 101-200 list. The highest-paid woman in media was Nine’s 
Amanda Laing on $1,267,279 and the average media CEO had a base salary of 
$1,248,517 with short and long-term bonuses of $549,403.

 But before you think it’s all doom and gloom in media – unless you’re a 
highly-paid executive – Nine has teamed with regional broadcaster Southern 
Cross Austereo to produce 15 dedicated local Nine News bulletins viewers across 
regional markets in Queensland, southern NSW and Victoria. The hour-long 
weekday broadcasts will feature local news and sport and to produce them Nine 
is hiring 80 news staff, a source of great joy for regional journalists.

Plugging Leak
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2F60-minutes-payout-to-gable-tostee-for-story-of-death-and-dating%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53912caa59b3d0b330c436df2c747624a5449b95%2F0_0_940_564%2F940.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=60%20Minutes%20payout%20to%20Gable%20Tostee%20for%20story%20of%20death%20and%20dating&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2F60-minutes-payout-to-gable-tostee-for-story-of-death-and-dating%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=60%20Minutes%20payout%20to%20Gable%20Tostee%20for%20story%20of%20death%20and%20dating&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2F60-minutes-payout-to-gable-tostee-for-story-of-death-and-dating%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53912caa59b3d0b330c436df2c747624a5449b95%2F0_0_940_564%2F940.jpg>
 The Australian’s cartoonist Bill Leak is being investigated by the Human 
Rights Commission for breaching section 18C of the Racial Discrimination Act 
with his Don Dale cartoon. Photograph: ABC 
Every day someone pops up in support of the cartoonist Bill Leak, whose 
employer, the Australian, is waging a war against the Human Rights Commission. 
Leak and the Australian are being investigated by the commission for breaching 
section 18C of the Racial Discrimination Act for the infamous Don Dale cartoon 
and the Oz is furious. This week Leak’s cartooning peers stuck their heads up 
in support of him, seemingly without being prompted by the Oz.

The Australian Cartoonists Association expressed its concern about the 
commission’s investigation. “Australian cartoonists have enjoyed artistic 
freedom for many decades, which has led to a rich and diverse political cartoon 
culture,” they said in a statement. “While ACA members may have differing 
opinions over Leak’s cartoon they recognise the value of protection of artistic 
freedom under Australian law and throughout the western world. This have been 
unsuccessfully challenged in Australian courts numerous times. The ACA 
questions to what effect the HRC (which is not a court) can have on cartoonists 
as protected under section 18D of the Racial Discrimination Act. The merits of 
any political cartoon should be openly debated in public. Questioning the very 
existence of cartoons, whether we agree with them or not, is not the answer.”
 