
Less than a year after the world promised to leave no one behind by signing up 
to anambitious 15-year blueprint 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive>
 to end inequality, the UN children’s agency says that 69 million children will 
die from mostly preventable causes by 2030, and 167 million will be living in 
extreme poverty, unless world leaders turn rhetoric into reality.

In its latest State of the World’s Children  
<http://file:///Volumes/Downloads/Internet%20Downloads/UNI204348.PDF>report, 
Unicef also says 750 million women will have beenmarried as children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/05/bangladesh-educating-girls-cut-child-marriage-by-a-third-study-pilot>
 by 2030, the date by which thesustainable development goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-united-nations>
 to tackle poverty and secure the planet’s future are supposed to have been 
achieved.

Nearly half of the 69 million children whose deaths the report foresees will 
be in sub-SaharanAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, where at 
least 247 million children – two in every three – are deprived of what they 
need to survive and develop.

“Before they draw their first breath, the life chances of poor and excluded 
children are often being shaped by inequities. Disadvantage and discrimination 
against their communities and families will help determine whether they live or 
die, whether they have a chance to learn, and later earn a decent living,” 
Unicef’s executive director, Anthony Lake, writes in the report.

UN hails impressive gains on education and reducing child mortality in Africa
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/sep/28/united-nations-hails-impressive-mdg-gains-on-education-reducing-child-mortality-africa>
“For the most part, the constraints on reaching these children are not 
technical. They are a matter of political commitment. They are a matter of 
resources. And they are a matter of collective will – joining forces to tackle 
inequity and inequality head-on by focusing greater investment and effort on 
reaching the children who are being left behind. The time to act is now.”

Although substantial progress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/sep/28/united-nations-hails-impressive-mdg-gains-on-education-reducing-child-mortality-africa>
 has been made in tackling child mortality, school enrolment and poverty 
reduction – key targets under themillennium development goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/24/the-big-reckoning-how-many-people-did-the-millennium-goals-save>
 that expired last year – the report says that the world’s most disadvantaged 
are still missing out: the poorest children are still twice as likely to die 
before their fifth birthday, and be chronically malnourished, as the richest.

In sub-Saharan Africa, that figure is even bleaker: children will be 10 times 
more likely to die before their fifth birthdays than children in high-income 
countries by 2030. The continent will also be home to nine out of 10 children 
living in poverty.

The report’s lead author, Kevin Watkins, said there was a risk that progress 
on child survival could falter because of a lack of commitment to reducing 
inequality, despite lip-service being paid to the sustainable development 
goals, which were adopted at the UN last September.


“The truth is that governments have signed up to these commitments on leaving 
no one behind with absolutely no intention, for the most part, of doing 
anything that will promote the interests of those who are being left behind … 
The challenge really is how do we use this new framing, the ‘no one left 
behind’ language … to galvanise the movement that can push governments to 
deliver,” he says.

Despite the myriad of ways that education 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics-blog/2016/apr/10/africas-great-opportunity-for-reform-education-trade>
 boosts opportunities for children, the number who do not attend school has 
increased since 2011. Again, sub-Saharan Africa fares badly with the report 
forecasting that by 2030 the region will account for more than half of the 60 
million children of primary school agewho are not in school 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/24/why-are-so-many-children-around-the-world-out-of-school-podcast-transcript>
.

Watkins, who is executive director of the Overseas Development Institute 
<https://www.odi.org/experts/1177-kevin-watkins> and will become chief 
executive of Save the Children UK 
<http://www.savethechildren.org.uk/2016-06/kevin-watkins-appointed-chief-executive-save-children-uk>
 in September, says particular attention must be paid to tackling child labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2016/jun/12/world-day-against-child-labour-nice-cup-of-tea-products-may-be-linked-child-labour-in-pictures>
 and early or forced marriage, and getting vulnerable youngsters back into the 
classroom.

“We’ve already hit the buffers on education so out-of-school numbers are not 
coming down any more unless we can shift the focus on to these issues like 
child labour and early marriage,” says Watkins.

One hotspot for child labour can be found among millions of young Syrians 
<http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=53145#.V3Ey5DYrKUk> who have been 
displaced andtaken poorly paid jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/06/war-to-sweatshop-for-child-refugees>
 to support their families. Watkins says that once these children reach the age 
of 12 or 13, they quickly move away from the education system, sometimes 
permanently. Despite the length of the conflict in their home country, he says, 
donors had failed to come up with a coherent strategy on education for these 
displaced children.

“To be honest, it’s a travesty. We have one summit after another, we have all 
these headline pledges, but nothing gets done. [We have] this talk of no lost 
generation. Unfortunately, we’ve already got a lost generation now and we need 
to start moving very urgently to repair that damage.”

The Unicef report proposes five ways to improve the state of children: 
increase information on those being left behind; integrate efforts across 
sectors to tackle the many deprivations faced by children; harness innovation 
to accelerate progress; find new ways to finance efforts to reach the most 
disadvantaged children; and involve communities, businesses and citizens.

One proposed solution involves using cash transfers  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/27/humanitarian-crises-cash-not-commodities-un-economic-and-social-council>
to provide incentives for children to stay in school rather than enter labour 
markets, or early marriages. Watkins says cash transfers would address monetary 
poverty among children as well as create incentives for schooling.

“Unfortunately, despite all of the evidence, donors and governments in 
developing countries have been slow to reap all the benefits that are 
available,” he says. “It’s another example of where the gap between the 
rhetoric of leaving no one behind, and the reality of what donors and 
governments do is very, very stark.”
 