
Schools were barricaded, Halloween celebrations banned. Knife-wielding “creepy 
clowns” have been terrorising the citizenry of suburban America and Europe. 
What’s it all about? And whither the art form ofGrimaldi 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/J._S._Grimaldi> and Grock 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grock>, of Chaplin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/charliechaplin> and, er, Krusty 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Krusty_the_Clown> from The Simpsons? Who better 
to ask than the world-renowned clown teacherPhilippe Gaulier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/02/philippe-gaulier-clown-school-emma-thompson-sacha-baron-cohen-edinburgh-festival-interview>
, whiskery homunculus of funny to whose ashram in Étampes, Paris, wannabe 
comedy stars flock.

​The great clown panic of 2016: ‘​a volatile mix of fear and contagion’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/oct/31/the-great-clown-panic-of-2016-a-volatile-mix-of-fear-and-contagion>
“It doesn’t mean anything,” says Gaulier via Skype from Étampes. Notoriously 
brusque, the clown guru isn’t wasting words on the craze. “It’s just gangsters 
taking the mask of clowns to be gangsters. Some people put on police costumes 
to be gangsters. Bon,” he croaks, sending a great Gallic shrug coursing down my 
broadband. “It’s just that gangsters change how they work.”

South-west of Paris, it seems, is blissfully immune to the white-faced, 
red-nosed terror that has swept the western world. But not to coulrophobia 
(fear of clowns) generally, which Gaulier acknowledges – if not for the reasons 
you’d expect. “Some children are scared because the clown, for example, breaks 
plates or does something forbidden. So the children go ‘Aaargh! Your family is 
going to be pissed off because you break plates!’” I’m not sure Gaulier has the 
full measure of the current clown terror. “I once did a 10-minute TV routine in 
Switzerland with my partnerPierre Byland 
<http://burlesk-center.ch/page38/page21/page21.html>,” he says. “We broke 20 
plates, and the children who watched it did the same at home, breaking all 
their family’s plates. It was a scandal!”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fcreepy-clown-craze-philippe-gaulier%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F145bf102c1362fffaea21d1e86fe36959369fa56%2F0_0_2268_3504%2F2268.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='A%20clown%20is%20innocent'%3A%20Philippe%20Gaulier%20tips%20a%20bucket%20of%20water%20over%20creepy%20craze&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fcreepy-clown-craze-philippe-gaulier%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27A%20clown%20is%20innocent%27%3A%20Philippe%20Gaulier%20tips%20a%20bucket%20of%20water%20over%20creepy%20craze&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fcreepy-clown-craze-philippe-gaulier%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F145bf102c1362fffaea21d1e86fe36959369fa56%2F0_0_2268_3504%2F2268.jpg>
 ‘A clown doesn’t need any of that stuff’ … Tim Curry in Stephen King’s It. 
Photograph: Allstar/Lorimar Television 
I’m not sure that crockery was foremost in the mind of the eight-year-old 
Swedish boy who leapt from a balcony last month to escape a clown-costumed 
intruder. But Gaulier may be on to something: the idea that clowns are beyond 
social norms, anarchic bordering on transgressive. But surely it’s the inhuman 
painted face, the lurid wigs and candy-coloured costumes that give us the 
heebie-jeebies. “The makeup is sometimes exaggerated,” he confesses, “and it 
could create some fear for young children.”

“When I was a kid,” says Gaulier, who is now 73, “I saw the best clown in 
Paris, inCirque d’hiver <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cirque_d%27hiver>. In 
those days, the spotlights were really primitive, there were two thousand of us 
and we didn’t see the clowns very well, so they had to exaggerate the makeup.” 
To a grotesque degree? “Oui, grotesque,” he says.

White-face clown tends to be credited to the legendary pre-Victorian pantomime 
act Joseph Grimaldi, the tension between whose depressive personality and 
leering features is the sine qua non of the scary (or, at least, unsettling) 
clown. But Gaulier traces its origin further back. “Like the white face of a 
mime, it comes from the colour of flour. Always the village idiot in rural life 
was falling down in the flour, and he would come away completely white, and 
everyone would say, ‘Ho ho, he’s the village idiot’ – or the clown.”

But painted face, rainbow-hued jumpsuit, outsize shoes – these are yesterday’s 
news in clown world, says Gaulier. “That’s more or less finished. As a teacher, 
I like to work with a red nose because, when a student puts one on, I see 
better how he was when he was a child. But, outside of school, I don’t so much 
like clown costumes, makeup, red nose.” As the creepy clown craze continues, 
he’s not alone. “Once a student has discovered his clown,” Gaulier concludes, 
“I love it when he no longer announces with his outfit, ‘Hello, I’m a clown’. A 
clown doesn’t need any of that stuff: a clown is innocent.”
 