
The Panama Papers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/03/panama-papers-money-hidden-offshore>
 have pulled back the curtain, revealing how tax wizards push and pull the 
levers of the global system to benefit elites. The fact that tax havens and 
offshore accounts are used by powerful individuals and corporations to wriggle 
out of tax obligations is no surprise; some developing countries and activists 
have long called for reforms, and their fight is gaining momentum.

Poor countries lose huge sums of money every year – more than $100bn 
<http://0.0.7.223/03/26/unctad-multinational-tax-avoidance-costs-developing-countries-100-billion/>
 (£70bn) in corporate tax alone – because of discrepancies in the global tax 
system. They say a worldwide shift in how and where tax policies are decided is 
urgently needed.

Many want a global body on tax cooperation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jun/25/ten-reasons-why-european-governments-should-back-global-tax-body>
, under the auspices of the UN, to allow developing countries to be at the 
table when tax policy is decided. This has hitherto been done inside the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) 
<http://www.oecd.org/>.


This month, officials meet in New York 
<http://www.un.org/esa/ffd/ffd-follow-up/ecosoc-ffd-forum.html> for a follow-up 
to last year’sfinancing for development summit in Addis Ababa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jul/16/financing-for-development-summit-outcome-addis-ababa-milestone-millstone-poverty>
, which was meant to come up with ways to fundthe sustainable development goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive>
. Calls at the summit to set up aUN body on tax were largely ignored 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jul/15/addis-ababa-talks-risk-deadlock-over-un-agency-for-tax-ffd3-financing-for-development>
.

“We hear from developing countries that they feel it is the unresolved issue 
from Addis Ababa,” says Tove Maria Ryding, policy and advocacy manager at the
European Network on Debt and Development <http://www.eurodad.org/> (Eurodad).

“Developing countries are very aware that they have signed a climate agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/13/paris-climate-deal-cop-diplomacy-developing-united-nations>
 and a lot ofSDGs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive>
, and there is no financing mechanism,” she says.


“They’ve been told, ‘Well, you can just collect taxes and mobilise money 
domestically’ – and their answer to that is, ‘We want the global tax body’. But 
the rich countries have so far blocked this proposal. They seem to cling to the 
misunderstanding that they will be able to decide the global tax rules on their 
own and then get all other countries to follow their rules. That’s not only 
immoral. It’s also quite naive.”

Tax revenues help countries develop, and such flows – sometimes dubbed 
domestic resource mobilisation – are increasingly critical as the world 
grapples with multiple crises that are putting unprecedentedstrain on aid 
budgets. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/17/fix-the-aid-system-or-you-will-fail-the-poor-experts-warn-world-leaders>

Financing emergency relief and development will be one of the top talking 
points 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/17/fix-the-aid-system-or-you-will-fail-the-poor-experts-warn-world-leaders>
 at theworld humanitarian summit <https://www.worldhumanitariansummit.org/> 
next month in Istanbul.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fsystem-privilege-benefits-global-tax-body-oecd%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d1c6114b77298ec0b3ef72a074a7f5c6fed3009%2F0_0_3000_1997%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='A%20system%20of%20privilege%20and%20benefits'%3A%20is%20a%20global%20tax%20body%20needed%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fsystem-privilege-benefits-global-tax-body-oecd%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27A%20system%20of%20privilege%20and%20benefits%27%3A%20is%20a%20global%20tax%20body%20needed%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fsystem-privilege-benefits-global-tax-body-oecd%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d1c6114b77298ec0b3ef72a074a7f5c6fed3009%2F0_0_3000_1997%2F3000.jpg>
 Women gather grain spilled by Zambian cargo trucks along a road in Magunje, 
Zimbabwe. In February, President Robert Mugabe declared a state of disaster in 
rural parts of the country hit by severe drought. Photograph: Philimon 
Bulawayo/Reuters 
The OECD, sometimes described as the rich countries’ club, has embarked on a 
two-year reform process 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/05/oecd-hopes-reforms-will-end-era-of-aggressive-tax-avoidance>
 to combat aggressive tax avoidance, particularly by multinationals that 
exploit differentials to move money across borders. The package of reforms is 
known as thebase erosion and profit-shifting 
<http://www.eurodad.org/Entries/view/1546260/2014/09/22/OECD-BEPS-process-Minor-victories-in-the-battle-against-tax-dodging-but-we-risk-losing-the-war>
, or Beps <http://www.oecd.org/ctp/beps-frequentlyaskedquestions.htm>, project.


In February, developing countries were finally given a seat at the OECD table 
<http://www.eurodad.org/OECD_inclusive_framework>. But Ryding says the process 
is still not democratic, because most of the decisions – nearly 2,000 pages of 
reforms – have already been adopted, and developing countries must accept the 
reforms already agreed.


Savior Mwambwa, the head of ActionAid <http://www.actionaid.org/>’s 
international tax campaign, describes the OECD move as “tinkering at the edges 
of a huge injustice”. He argues that while it might be based on a genuine 
desire for inclusiveness, it does not go far enough.


“It still doesn’t touch the core of global international governance in terms 
of who really is involved in making the rules,” says Mwambwa, noting that most 
wealthier countries would rather others moved first than be trendsetters 
themselves.

“A lot has to do with the political will of countries to resolve this in a 
much more decisive, radical way that would bring about meaningful change. The 
small steps that are being taken are positive but if they are so small, and 
they take so much time, it is not good enough.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fsystem-privilege-benefits-global-tax-body-oecd%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2265ed4d89fe1b8b959c924f15ed537f8f58c85f%2F0_0_3500_2329%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='A%20system%20of%20privilege%20and%20benefits'%3A%20is%20a%20global%20tax%20body%20needed%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fsystem-privilege-benefits-global-tax-body-oecd%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27A%20system%20of%20privilege%20and%20benefits%27%3A%20is%20a%20global%20tax%20body%20needed%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fsystem-privilege-benefits-global-tax-body-oecd%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2265ed4d89fe1b8b959c924f15ed537f8f58c85f%2F0_0_3500_2329%2F3500.jpg>
 Families live in concrete pipes used as makeshift dwellings along a street in 
Manila. A quarter of the nation’s 100 million people live in poverty. 
Photograph: Noel Celis/AFP/Getty Images 
Mwambwa, who was in London last month to speak before an all-party 
parliamentary group on responsible tax 
<http://www.appgresponsibletax.org.uk/about/>, says unfair or opaque tax 
systems do a disservice to everyone, and reflect the increasing power of 
corporations and a wider global inequality.

“We are not just talking about tax … There is also the banking system, which 
aids and abets flows out ofAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>. 
There is the trade component … When you talk about tax or trade, you are up 
against very powerful forces. It’s not just multinational companies acting on 
their own. It’s the whole system working collectively to maintain a system of 
privilege and benefits. It’s very much a political question. It’s the essence 
of politics,” he says.

In poor countries, corporate taxes can fund education and healthcare, pay for 
roads and railways and increase gender equality.

The Panama Papers offer empirical evidence 
<https://www.actionaid.org.uk/blog/campaigns/2016/04/04/panama-papers-and-the-broken-global-tax-system>
 of the cost of tax evasion, shedding light on a number oftax-related stories 
in Africa <https://panamapapers.investigativecenters.org/#stories/>, including 
missing taxes from oil revenue in Uganda, secrecy surrounding diamond mining in 
Sierra Leone, and hidden players in Angola’s sovereign wealth fund.

Aggressive tax avoidance is not just a problem for developing countries. There 
is aheightened awareness in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/23/eu-tax-transparency-plans-campaigners-google-amazon>
 and elsewhere of themillions lost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/29/european-commission-unfairly-targeting-us-companies-starbucks-mcdonalds-amazon-apple-taxes-treasury>
 because of complex tax deals and havens. Thedecade-defining refugee crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/02/refugee-crisis-europe-eu-countries-greece-receive-700m-extra-aid-funds>
, mainly due to the war in Syria, has also focused minds on international and 
domestic needs for additional financing.


Ryding says she has noticed more civil servants speaking in favour of an 
intergovernmental tax body, but the official EU position has not shifted.


“The sad part is that we are losing time and that actually means we are losing 
a lot of money. We estimate that in the EU alone we are losing between €50-70bn 
every year,” she says.

One long-standing obstacle to global tax reform is the way countries compete 
with each other to offer preferential tax deals in order to attract investment 
from multinationals.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fsystem-privilege-benefits-global-tax-body-oecd%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe6371f988a53d1bcc58a32d9a9d5187d58e23dc6%2F0_0_4750_3114%2F4750.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='A%20system%20of%20privilege%20and%20benefits'%3A%20is%20a%20global%20tax%20body%20needed%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fsystem-privilege-benefits-global-tax-body-oecd%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27A%20system%20of%20privilege%20and%20benefits%27%3A%20is%20a%20global%20tax%20body%20needed%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fsystem-privilege-benefits-global-tax-body-oecd%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe6371f988a53d1bcc58a32d9a9d5187d58e23dc6%2F0_0_4750_3114%2F4750.jpg>
 Migrants looks at a fisherman as they sit at the Franco-Italian border near 
Menton, south-eastern France. Photograph: Lionel Cironneau/AP 
Mwambwa says African countries have realised they can combat this by working 
together, and are doing so through regional bodies such as theEast African 
Community <http://www.eac.int/> and the African Tax Administration Forum 
<http://www.ataftax.org/en/Pages/default.aspx>.

“A number of African countries have seen that only by cooperating with each 
other can they beat this race to the bottom … they have begun to discuss how 
they can have something that is very specific to Africa, a model treaty for 
example … A lot of them are rethinking the role of tax incentives and tax 
holidays.”

Given the powerful vested interests involved, Mwambwa says civil society has a 
key role to play in demanding reforms.


“Tax is a technocratic issue, but it’s much more a political process. Citizens 
need to get involved. You can’t have a few corporations having so much power, 
not just over their own businesses but also over the way the world is run.”

Ryding feels developing countries will eventually reach breaking point and 
ditch the “immoral” global system – but this will just create more 
opportunities for multinationals.

“Developing countries are not just going to accept the rules that have been 
given, and that means we are going to have a very confusing mess of different 
tax rules – and that is a big advantage for companies that want to find 
loopholes.”
 