
“If you had turned the television off after 35 minutes, you’d never believe 
it,” Luis Enrique said. What he did not say was why anyone would turn off a 
match that was as much fun as this: “The best football in Europe at the 
moment,” El Mundo Deportivo called it, while Sport described it as “veryPremier
”: dizzying, fast, confused. A game that ended withManchester City beating 
Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/01/manchester-city-barcelona-champions-league-match-report>
 for the first time; with Pep Guardiola beating them for the first time too. 
“At last,” opened the match report in Marca. The second half had been a 
“citizens’ recital”, it read.

Manchester City weren’t perfect but have never had a better European night | 
Paul Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/02/manchester-city-barcelona-champions-league-pep-guardiola>
What had changed, everyone wondered? “Don’t ask me what Pep said,” Nolito 
replied, “my English still isn’t up to much.” Something certainly had. 
“Barcelona surrendered to their chaotic end, so different to their stupendous 
start – a contrast that makes their performance at the Etihad Stadium 
indecipherable,” Ramón Besa wrote in El País. City shifted too, catching them. 
This was a different Guardiola team, a little countercultural: swifter, more 
direct, Guardiola explaining the value of “verticality”, beyond the pressure of 
Ivan Rakitic and Sergio Busquets.

“Pep hits back,” AS said. “Pep returns the going-over,” Marca agreed. David 
Sánchez claimed that the former Barcelona manager had “shown why everyone – 
except Madrid fans – thinks he is the best coach in the world”. Not that 
everyone followed the same line. Never one to pass up the opportunity to have a 
go at Guardiola, the editor of El Mundo Deportivo, Santi Nolla, suggested that 
this was all aboutSergio Agüero 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sergio-aguero>, the man who should never 
have been on the bench in Barcelona.

“With him, they played better, had more incision, carried more danger and 
attacked with more sense,” Nolla wrote. “With Agüero they’re a very serious 
proposition.” Naturally enough, others agreed, even if their pens were not so 
poisonous. Marca asked and answered a question: “Is it possible to explain Kun 
not playing at the Camp Nou? With great difficulty.”

Manchester City stun Barcelona in breathless Champions League victory
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/01/manchester-city-barcelona-champions-league-match-report>
El Mundo Deportivo had a dig too at Ferran Soriano, who had suggested that 
City’s aim was not to win theChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> this season as theirs is 
a long-term project. “We don’t trust him,” Xavier Bosch said. “A wolf in 
sheep’s clothing”, Soriano’s “nose is growing: City will fight, and they are 
fighting, for the Champions League”. The paper’s cartoon showed two fans 
walking from the ground. “If it’s any consolation, they could get Real Madrid 
next,” one says.

When it came to Barcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona>, 
there was less consolation. “Barcelona’s blues,” the headline said on the front 
of Sport. Inside they called it a “Pepsadilla”: Pep + nightmare = not a 
particularly inspired headline, but you get the point.

Another writing in AS, Juan Cruz even went so far as to suggest that Guardiola 
appeared perturbed to be attending the “funeral” of the team he helped to build.

“This is not a one-off bad night,” Moi Llorens wrote in AS. There is concern 
in Catalonia, some of it crystallising around Busquets, a barometer for this 
team, cause and consequence of how they play. His form has fallen; so too, it 
appears, has the structure around him; this midfield doesn’t look quite the 
same now. Was the second half another sign of a team losing its religion? A 
superb side, sure, as talented as any other – more so – but without the control 
it once exercised.

Pep Guardiola says beating Barcelona can transform Manchester City future
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/02/pep-guardiola-barcelona-manchester-city-future-champions-league>
Only in the first half, it did. Not that it helped much; if the average 
football fan is pessimistic, some Barcelona supporters take that a step or five 
further. “There are few things more understandable than losing at the home of 
the Premier League leaders, but nothing more incomprehensible than doing so 
having led 1-0, dominating the game and having chances to go in at half-time 
two or three goals up,” Sport’s editorial said. “This is a defeat without 
sporting consequences: unless there’s an unimaginable catastrophe, they will 
qualify for the next round and the most probable scenario is that they will do 
so top of the group. But it concerns; it would be a mistake not to take lessons 
from this.”

Their match report opened the way the night closed: with Oasis. “Liam 
Gallagher once said that Oasis were like a Ferrari: great to look at. Great to 
drive. And it’ll fucking spin out of control every now and again. That’s 
Barcelona right now.”
 