
An intriguing theory has recently taken hold, fast calcifying into received 
wisdom.Hillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>, 
so it goes, lost the US election because she “played identity politics”.

This idea has been enthusiastically endorsed by, among others, Bernie Sanders 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/onpolitics/2016/11/21/sanders-identity-politics/94221972/>
 (“It is not enough for somebody to say, ‘I’m a woman, vote for me,’” he said, 
as if Clinton ever – even once – argued this), andMark Lilla 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/20/opinion/sunday/the-end-of-identity-liberalism.html?_r=0>
 in the New York Times (who described as “a strategic mistake “Clinton’s 
tendency “to slip into the rhetoric of diversity, calling out explicitly to 
African-American, Latino, LGBT and women voters at every stop”).

Like I say, it’s a fascinating theory, in its underlying insinuations and its 
demonstrable wrongness. (To point out that – in the vast, vast main –the 
identity politics sceptics are white men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/01/blame-trump-brexit-identity-liberalism>
, whose articles are filled with quotes from other white men, doubtless sounds 
like I’m playing the identity game, too; and yet it is one of those awkward 
things   called “facts”.)

Leaving aside that far more people voted for Clinton than Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> (an inconvenient truth for 
any sweeping argument about why Clinton lost), the real issue is not that 
Clinton lost the election. On the contrary, it’s that playing identity politics 
is precisely how Trump won the election. Anyone who can’t see that is revealing 
that they think the white straight male as the baseline norm. Thus anyone else 
– women, people of colour, LGBT people – is merely a niche distraction, a 
gimmicky aberration, a game (“as if the centuries’-long push toward 
enfranchisement, civil rights, equal pay, and reproductive autonomy, and 
against domestic, sexual, and police violence were a game”, Rebecca Traister 
recently wrote). They are not, as the political phrasing goes, real people.

It boggles my brain that this even needs pointing out: political elections 
have always played identity politics. The difference is that the game was 
heretofore entirely weighted towards the white straight male, which I guess is 
why it comes as such a shock to that demographic when they are not at the 
absolute forefront of every single political discussion now.

Lilla, for example, in his much-discussed article, suggested that the 
politicians who “very skilfully” bridged identity divides were – wait for it – 
Ronald Reagan and Bill Clinton. Ah yes, this would be Reagan, who 
enthusiastically blew the racial dog whistle by referring to “a Chicago welfare 
queen 
<http://www.salon.com/2014/01/11/the_racism_at_the_heart_of_the_reagan_presidency/>
” and “a strapping young buck” who used food stamps to buy steaks. And Clinton, 
who to prove that he was tough on crime interrupted his own 1992 campaign to 
return to Arkansas to preside over the execution ofRicky Ray Rector 
<https://www.jacobinmag.com/2016/11/bill-clinton-rickey-rector-death-penalty-execution-crime-racism/>
, an intellectually impaired black man. Both reinforced discrimination against 
LGBT people.

But this was not divisive identity politics, apparently, because white 
straight voters don’t have an identity – they are just people. This, I guess, 
is why some seem unable to see that Trump (and his new BFF, Nigel Farage, this 
country’s most expert practitioner in the sport) ran campaigns this year 
entirely predicated on identity politics.

No, no, Trump’s campaign was about the economy, his defenders cry! And indeed 
it was, in that Trump promised the old manufacturing jobs would come back to 
the overwhelmingly white rural areas (which almost certainly won’t happen), and 
massive tax cuts to the white super-rich (which almost certainly will). See if 
you can spot the common denominator in those demographics.

Discussions about identity politics are the new arguments about political 
correctness, which, asMoira Weigel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/30/political-correctness-how-the-right-invented-phantom-enemy-donald-trump>
 detailed at length in this paper this week, have long been a means for the 
male, white and right mainstream to shut down any suggestion that others are 
worthy of a voice. For Clinton even to acknowledge that she was the first 
female candidate of a major political party – which is very different from 
saying people should vote for her because she is a woman – was, according to 
the sceptics, to play the identity game.

What is less acknowledged by these people – and can be fatally forgotten by 
some on the left – is that class is as much a part of identity politics as 
race, religion and sexuality. This has been Sanders’s point since the election: 
“Yes, we need more candidates of diversity, but we also need candidates to be 
fighters for the working class,”he says 
<http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2016/12/what-bernie-sanders-gets-right-about-identity-politics.html>
, which is all well and good. But the working class is not an ethnically 
homogeneous group, and within those divisions there are distinct differences 
and needs. As Jamelle Bouie wrotethis week 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/cover_story/2016/11/jesse_jackson_s_presidential_campaigns_offer_a_road_map_for_democrats_in.html>
, “not all inequality is created equal. On average, inequality and poverty 
among black Americans (as well as native groups and undocumented Americans) is 
of a different scale and magnitude than inequality and poverty among white 
Americans.”

And yet 88% of African-Americans and 65% of Latinos voted for Clinton 
<https://www.brookings.edu/blog/fixgov/2016/11/16/economic-marginalization-reality-check/>
. That Clinton lost the election is further evidence that the electoral college 
system is itself bogged down in identity politics, given itsbias towards white 
voters 
<http://www.peoplesworld.org/article/the-system-is-rigged-the-electoral-college-and-the-2016-election/>
, with one vote in the white rural states worth as much as three votes in 
states such as California with racially diverse big cities.

The so-called alt-right – which I think is Latin for “old racism” – movement 
likes to suggest that identity politics are just about overly sensitive 
minorities whining over hurt feelings: college students protesting against the 
cultural insensitivity of servingsushi in the school cafeteria 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2015/12/the-food-fight-at-oberlin-college/421401/>
, say. It is to the left’s detriment that it has allowed these absurd extremes 
to obscure the real point, which is that where one begins in life – and how far 
one can generally go – is still determined by identity: racial, economic, 
gender and sexual, in pretty much that order.

In general, a white man automatically has an economic advantage over a woman 
or person of colour from the same class, although God help anyone who dares to 
point that out to certain white men. As writer Ta-Nehisi Coates tweeted on 
Thursday, “Notion that white dude’s issues are ‘economic’ and everyone else is 
just trying to discuss their feelings is, well, sorta deplorable.”

Identity politics sceptics ask why we can’t just emphasise what we have in 
common instead of focusing on the differences. And what a delightfully kumbaya 
vision of the world that is. Sadly, that’s a little tricky, given that white 
American voters just elected a man whose campaignrepeatedly insulted Muslims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/07/donald-trump-ban-all-muslims-entering-us-san-bernardino-shooting>
,Jews 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/anti-semitism-is-no-longer-an-undertone-of-trumps-campaign-its-the-melody/2016/11/07/b1ad6e22-a50a-11e6-8042-f4d111c862d1_story.html?utm_term=.99d90810a0ec>
 andwomen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/donald-trump-leaked-recording-women>
, and whose cabinet choices unanimouslyoppose LGBT rights 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/americas/donald-trump-cabinet-appointments-lgbt-records-stances-president-elect-white-house-a7446886.html>
.

So when people say identity politics exacerbates differences, it’s hard not to 
suspect that what they’re objecting to is not the acknowledgement of 
differences but the existence of differences, full stop.
 