
Europe’s extraordinary political turbulence, triggered by the Brexit 
referendum, has caught the attention of the world. But the longer-running and 
far deadlier crisis in the continent’s backyard bleeds on while precious little 
is being done to help end it.

Syrians fighting to overthrow Bashar al-Assad are close to despair: Russia and 
Iranian intervention has bolstered the president’s position while Washington 
and Moscow have moved closer together - perhaps to the point where they will 
seek to impose a solution to end the five-year war. The UN deadline for 
agreement on a “political transition” in Damascus is looming on 1 August.


Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, argues the country’s 
main western-backed opposition movement, can and must do more – however badly 
it is distracted by problems closer to home. That was the message it took this 
week to the EU’s foreign policy chief, Federica Mogherini, who played a key 
role in last year’s landmark nuclear talks with Iran but has failed to make 
much impact on Syria, where 400,000 people have been killed and millions made 
homeless.

“This last year has proven that Europe is the first continent that is paying 
the price of a lack of serious management of the Syrian crisis – because of the 
refugees and security issues, and this is unlikely to stop,” said Basma Kodmani 
of the Higher Negotiations Committee. “Russia has not seen any terrorist 
attacks – isn’t that interesting?”


The links between European instability and the carnage in Syria have never 
been clearer – the atrocity atIstanbul airport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2016/jun/29/istanbul-ataturk-turkey-airport-attack-explosions-rolling-report-updates>
 the latest grim reminder. “It is time to acknowledge the grave cost of 
inaction and that what happens in Aleppo reverberates in Molenbeek and London,”
commented 
<http://english.alarabiya.net/en/views/news/middle-east/2016/06/28/A-lesson-from-Brexit-Stop-ignoring-Syria.html>
 the al-Hayat columnist Joyce Karam. “Not recognising this reality will only 
play into the hands of the Trumps and Farages of the west, who drive – 
unopposed – a narrative built on fear, continued suffering and isolationism.”

In the immediate foreground is a possible return to Geneva, where the UN envoy 
Staffan de Mistura has overseenthree fruitless rounds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/19/syria-peace-talks-flounder-after-dispute-over-transitional-government>
 of separate “proximity” talks with both Syrian sides and wants them to resume 
in July. Optimism is in short supply.


In the last round in April Assad’s negotiators failed to engage at all while 
the rebel team, under pressure from fighters on the ground, walked out in 
protest against continuing attacks and sieges of opposition-held areas – and 
the failure to release thousands of detainees.

The cessation of hostilities agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/12/syria-ceasefire-munich-talks-us-russia>
 brokered by the US and Russia in February never encompassed the whole country. 
And it has broken down repeatedly, with the Russians continuing to bomb rebel 
targets – very different from their declared aim of fighting Isis and Jabhat 
al-Nusra.

“We need to ask the Russians some hard questions,” insisted Kodmani. “If you 
are violating the cessation of hostilities agreement you agreed to what is your 
strategy? Do you support Assad when he says Geneva is dead. Do you think it is 
dead? We need a renewed commitment from Russia on support for a negotiated 
solution.”


The EU, the Syrians hope, can pressure Moscow by imposing targeted sanctions – 
on top of those agreed over Ukraine – because of its backing for Assad. The 
threat of war crimes prosecutions – despite UN security council deadlock over 
the use of the international criminal court - is another lever, suggests the 
HNC.


Yet recent attempts to get tougher on Syria have gone nowhere slowly: two 
months ago the International Syria Support Group, prodded by the UK,resolved 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/17/syria-vienna-meeting-agrees-aid-airdrops-but-fails-to-set-date-for-talks>
 to use air drops of food to relieve hungry civilians, but that never happened 
because the UN was not prepared to act without agreement from Damascus.

“The Americans and Russians are discovering that they cannot resolve this 
crisis on their own,” argues Kodmani. “They need their allies. The Syrian 
opposition and the Gulf countries have been sounding the alarm bell. But they 
also need to hear this more forcefully from the EU.”

The obvious response is that in the current disarray in Europe, with the very 
future of the union now at stake, it is a big ask to expect diplomatic 
boldness, ambition and unity when they have been so conspicuously absent 
before. The bandwith is simply not available.


“Of course we are aware of Brexit,” Kodmani said. “If Europeans think about 
the developments destabilising the EU they are notbecause of Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>, but there is some Syria in every 
negative development in the last two years - refugees fleeing and jihadis 
coming and going. That’s only going to grow. It’s an issue that is imposing 
itself on Europe. Europe has no choice. And if the UK has left it the EU still 
needs to prove it is a political player on the international scene.”
 