
After more than a year of turmoil, Burundi is suspended in a “fake calm” with 
risks of further instability exacerbated by aneconomic slowdown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/11/burundi-economic-turmoil-unrest-fourfold-increase-bad-debt>
, regional tensions and destructive ethnic rhetoric, a British parliamentary 
committee has heard.

Human rights and aid experts painted a chilling picture of a state ruled by 
fear, where authorities have become increasingly sophisticated in concealing 
repression and where high inflation,flooding linked to El Niño 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-burundi-aid-idUSKCN0X51YX>, and the 
political crisis have conspired to make it harder than ever for most people to 
make ends meet.

During its session on Burundi, the International Development Committee 
<http://parliamentlive.tv/Event/Index/ccfffaa4-8580-491f-b0e0-15be97c664e1> 
(IDC) heard that the UK’s priorities include supporting hobbledpeace talks in 
Tanzania 
<https://www.irinnews.org/analysis/2016/05/24/burundi%E2%80%99s-peace-talks-going-nowhere>
 and pushing at the UN for the deployment of aninternational police contingent 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-35949633>. 

A failed coup and Facebook: the story of Burundi's elections
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/17/failed-coup-and-facebook-story-elections-burundi-biography-of-a-small-african-country-nigel-watt>
In April last year, President Pierre Nkurunziza declared he would stand for a 
third term 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/26/protest-burundi-president-third-term-bujumbura-pierre-nkurunziza>
, triggering street protests, a failed coup and months of terror during which, 
human rights activists say,scores were killed or abducted and tortured 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/05/burundi-pierre-nkurunziza-police-protest-crack-down>
 by intelligence services.More than 285,000 people 
<http://data.unhcr.org/burundi/regional.php> have fled to neighbouring 
countries.


On Wednesday, a former government minister and BBC journalist, Hafsa Mossi, 
was shot dead <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-36783069> in Burundi’s 
capital, Bujumbura, by unknown gunmen – the latest in a series of apparently 
politically motivated assassinations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/08/burundi-opposition-spokesman-patrice-gahungu-shot-dead-as-violence-escalates>
. Nkurunziza said the murder was a “vile and cowardly act”.

In her testimony, Carina Tertsakian, a senior researcher at Human Rights 
Watch, said: “The government of Burundi has shown no sign of relenting and the 
repression towards anyone suspected of being an opponent or critic is 
absolutely brutal,” citing arecent HRW report 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2016/07/07/burundi-intelligence-services-torture-suspected-opponents>
.

“Some of the torture techniques that we have documented are so vicious it’s 
unbelievable that anyone survives: for example, intelligence agents use metal 
bars, hammers to smash people’s bones, to smash their jaws, pulling out their 
teeth with pliers, tying ropes to the genitals of male detainees and pulling 
them, and other acts of torture that are just horrific. For these abuses, there 
is complete impunity,” she said.

Richard Moncrieff, project director for central Africa at the International 
Crisis Group <http://www.crisisgroup.org/>, said Nkurunziza’s government had 
become increasingly radicalised whilestop-start peace talks 
<https://www.irinnews.org/analysis/2016/05/24/burundi%E2%80%99s-peace-talks-going-nowhere>
 were unlikely to succeed, not least because of the fragmentation of the 
opposition.

“I would describe the situation as a fake calm,” Moncrieff told the panel of 
MPs, describing a toxic “ethnicisation from above” that he said had yet to take 
hold in the general public or in the army but was present at the top levels of 
government, and among the ruling party’s armed youth wing, theImbonerakure 
<http://www.irinnews.org/report/101418/who-are-imbonerakure-and-burundi-unravelling>
.

Although this latest crisis is political in origin, there is concern it could 
revive the divisions of a12-year internal conflict 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/sep/29/burundi-war-veterans-peace-poverty>
, during which 300,000 people were killed as Hutus rebelled against the 
Tutsi-dominated armed forces.


Burundi turns to WhatsApp as political turmoil brings media blackout
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/14/burundi-turns-to-whatsapp-as-political-turmoil-brings-media-blackout>
“The regime is trying to push the ethnic card to shore up its support among 
its core supporters, its Hutu supporters but also in the security forces … All 
the evidence shows that the general population is quite resistant to that … But 
we see that the police and … the Imbonerakure are clearly using ethnic rhetoric 
… we see top levels of government continuing to use very unpleasant ethnic 
rhetoric,” Moncrieff said.


“This poses a very serious threat to long-term social cohesion and an 
immediate threat to the stability of the country … because the poisoning of the 
atmosphere in this way, when it enters the security forces and informal militia 
… can have catastrophic consequences.”

In January, the UN warned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/15/burundi-all-alarm-signals-flashing-red-warns-un-as-reports-of-atrocities-mount>
 that “a complete breakdown of law and order is just around the corner” and 
said it was investigating allegations of gang-rapes, enforced disappearances 
and the digging of mass graves during an eruption of violence last December.

Nick Hurd, Britain’s minister for international development, said the UK 
government was putting diplomatic pressure on players to attendpeace talks 
<http://www.voanews.com/content/five-political-parties-boycott-burundi-peace-talks/3415626.html>
.

“There’s a process under way that is frustrating and slow. We’re a player in 
that and also through the UN, we’re working those channels to keep the focus on 
this situation, not least to get agreement on the police contingent we’d like 
to see deployed,” Hurd said, adding that one problem was the need for approval 
from Burundi’s government, whichreportedly opposes 
<http://allafrica.com/stories/201604120948.html> the UN deployment.

Benjamin Chemouni, of the London School of Economics, said Nkurunziza’s 
administration was becoming more professional in its repression. “They are much 
better in targeting people and doing that behind closed doors,” he said.

'Why does no one mention Burundi?' asks winner of new humanitarian award
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/11/marguerite-barankitse-why-does-no-one-mention-burundi-winner-humanitarian-award>
In June, Zeid Ra’ad al Hussein, the UN high commissioner for human rights 
<http://www.ohchr.org/EN/AboutUs/Pages/HighCommissioner.aspx>, said there had 
been at least348 extrajudicial killings 
<http://www.africanews.com/2016/06/30/burundi348-extrajudicial-killings-in-a-year-un/>
 in the year to April, and he spoke ofa climate of fear 
<http://www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=20215&LangID=E>
.

There are reports 
<http://static1.squarespace.com/static/506c8ea1e4b01d9450dd53f5/t/566b3f97c647adfeee2374e5/1449869207555/20151214+Rwanda.pdf>
 (pdf) that Burundians are being recruited in refugee camps in Rwanda to join 
anti-government militias.

“If Rwanda is training people in camps, that would give the regime in 
Bujumbura a reason to say, ‘Look, these people are just puppets of a Tutsi 
government’, and then it would give them a base for having this inflammatory 
rhetoric of ethnicity,” Chemouni said.

Hurd said: “We have sent very clear signals to Rwanda that we want their 
interventions in this situation to be constructive.”

The expert panel called for sanctions on hate speech, an international inquiry 
into crimes, the deployment of the police contingent and greater support from 
donors.

The IDC’s chair, Stephen Twigg, said strong action was needed from bilateral 
partners, including the African Union and the UN, to prevent further violence, 
adding: “We must not let this quiet crisis fall off the international agenda.”
 