
Men are afraid to talk about feminism. If that sounds melodramatic, I’d ask 
you to count the number of articles written by male writers tackling the big 
and small issues around gender and women’s equality. You’ll be hard pressed to 
find a strong selection.

This is not acceptable. Men have a stake in gender equality, from promoting 
fair pay and no-fault divorce laws, all the way to stopping honour killings and 
sexual violence. We are boyfriends, husbands, fathers or friends, and yet too 
many of us shy away from these sensitive matters, fearing opprobrium. Too 
often, men worry they’ll be attacked by women for questioning a consensus 
position on feminist issues.

When Australian prime minister Julia Gillard was in power, a common refrain on 
the left was that she faced appalling attacks on her appearance and marital 
status. Her famousmisogyny speech <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SOPsxpMzYw4> 
prompted headlines around the world after she accused her opponent, Tony 
Abbott, of sexism.

 There is no doubt that Gillard faced obstacles that men rarely have to 
contemplate, and that many of her ugliest critics havenever accepted 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/the-gender-agenda-gillard-and-the-politics-of-sexism-20120225-1tv7n.html>
 her legitimacy. Writer Anne Summersuncovered 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Mz47O0phbCs> a litany of “vilification and 
denigration” against Gillard that went well beyond opposing the Labor leader’s 
policies. Many women applauded Gillard because they knew the daily realities of 
men ignoring, shaming or humiliating them at home, or at work.

And yet, during this entire period I found the debate depressingly staid. The 
forums available to discuss these issues were limited, leaving (mostly female) 
feminists to defend Gillard from the trolls who mocked her ideas, clothes and 
hair. My argument here isn’t that men should have been central in the debate – 
our role as privileged players in society has lasted far too long – but that 
mainstream feminism seemed only to feel aggrieved, and little else.

But here’s the catch: Gillard ran a government that routinely enacted policies 
that harmed women, includingplacing asylum seekers 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/gillard-moves-swiftly-on-nauru-option-20120814-246ai.html>
 in privatised immigration detention,backing warlords 
<http://www.smh.com.au/world/afghan-warlords-private-army-trained-in-australia-20101028-175sg.html>
 in Afghanistan’s Oruzgan province,supporting 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-opinion/political-stance-on-palestine-is-out-of-step-with-public-opinion-20120212-1szkn.html>
 the Israeli occupation of Palestine,cutting benefits for single mothers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jan/02/labor-betrayed-itself-and-its-values-when-it-betrayed-single-parents>
 andopposing 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/pm-julia-gillard-gay-marriage-against-my-upbringing/story-e6freuy9-1226025009815>
 gay marriage.

There are countless other examples, yet they remained mostly dismissed by the 
same women (and men) who lavished support on Gillard for her “feminist ideals”. 
The love-fest continued in September last year when Summersinterviewed 
<http://annesummers.com.au/2013/10/video-of-sydney-conversation-with-julia-gillard/>
 Gillard in an Oprah-style format, with sell-out crowds lapping it up. This 
was, unquestioningly, a moment of public catharsis. Of course, there is nothing 
wrong with praising Australia’s first female prime minister for her 
achievements – but at least be honest, and admit that a few principled speeches 
on her part don’t compensate for years of abandoning the very gender you 
claimed to be helping.

In many of my books, female voices challenge a corrupt and militarised 
capitalist system, and it’s these characters that inspire me. We rarely hear 
from those women in the west, and if we do they are buried under the din of 
articles about face-lifts and marrying George Clooney (a great recipe for 
click-baiting). I believe that’s part of the reason why female anti-feminism is
growing <http://time.com/3028827/women-against-feminism-gets-it-right/>, 
especially as issues many women see as tangential gain disproportionate online 
prominence.

In Unspeakable Things 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jul/13/unspeakable-things-review-laurie-penny-modern-feminism>
, British writer Laurie Penny argues:

The feminism that sells is the sort of feminism that can appeal to almost 
everybody while challenging nobody, feminism that soothes, that speaks for and 
to the middle class, aspirational feminism that speaks of shoes and shopping 
and sugar-free snacks and does not talk about poor women, queer women, ugly 
women, transsexual women, sex workers, single parents, or anybody else who 
fails to fit the mould.

This perfectly describes many western women who have become media spokespeople 
for their gender, appearing on TV with predictable lines. These are the same 
self-described feminists now salivating over the possible US presidency of 
Hillary Clinton, despite her record as a pro-war Democrat who believes in
endless war 
<https://firstlook.org/theintercept/2014/10/07/key-democrats-led-hillary-clinton-leave-doubt-endless-war-u-s-doctrine/>
. Yes, some feminist hero.

In hindsight, there’s no solid reason why I couldn’t have written this article 
years ago, but I’ve hesitated to do so. I’ve worried that I would be slammed 
for my white, male position and dismissed as ignorant of the real problems 
faced by women today. It’s an odd concern, because I don’t worry about extreme 
Zionists challenging me when I call them out on their racism (and I do receive 
plenty of vicious attacks whenever I write about it).

The bottom line is that writing about feminism when male is like gatecrashing 
a party – and I’m concerned I’ll be slammed for daring to arrive without an 
invitation. But the responsibility to advocate for half the population falls of 
everyone’s shoulders, not just women. To do it meaningfully, however, we need 
to focus on the issues that truly need our help the most urgently: benefits 
taken away from single mums; sexual violence which affects all women, but 
especiallyalready vulnerable ones 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/features/2013/03/201334111633172507.html>; 
endemic racism which leads to parents of colour scared to have their childshot 
by police forces 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/aug/12/mike-brown-ferguson-shooting-police-black>
; lack of unionising or legislation which leaves womenwithout working rights 
worldwide 
<http://www.hrw.org/news/2014/10/22/united-arab-emirates-trapped-exploited-abused>
; the right not subject torape threats and abuse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/oct/21/gamergate-angry-men-harassing-women>
, online and offline;equal pay for equal work 
<http://www.bbc.com/news/business-29753702>. 

Ultimately, I realise I’ve been been too cautious for too long, not daring to 
add my voice to the debate. I agree with The Atlantic’s Noah Berlatsky whostates
 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/national/archive/2014/06/men-can-be-feminists-too/372234/?single_page=true>
 that although misogyny predominantly affects women, “it’s important for men to 
acknowledge that as long as women aren’t free, men won’t be either.” But to win 
this battle, we have to remember that the debates about celebrity red carpet 
dresses and celeb-feminism are designed to distract us. This is feminism lite, 
and is little more than white noise. Gender equality will only be achieved by 
hard work and uncomfortable questions.
 