
Your opponents would love you to believe that it’s hopeless, that you have no 
power, that there’s no reason to act, that you can’t win. Hope is a gift you 
don’t have to surrender, a power you don’t have to throw away. And though hope 
can be an act of defiance, defiance isn’t enough reason to hope. But there are 
good reasons.

In 2003 and early 2004, I wrote a book to make the case for hope. Hope in the 
Dark was, in many ways, of its moment – it was written against the tremendous 
despair at the height of the Bush administration’s powers and the outset of the 
war in Iraq. That moment passed long ago, but despair, defeatism, cynicism and 
the amnesia and assumptions from which they often arise have not dispersed, 
even as the most wildly, unimaginably magnificent things came to pass. There is 
a lot of evidence for the defence.

Coming back to the text more than a dozen tumultuous years later, I believe 
its premises hold up. Progressive, populist and grassroots constituencies have 
had many victories. Popular power has continued to be a profound force for 
change. And the changes we have undergone, both wonderful and terrible, are 
astonishing.

This is an extraordinary time full of vital, transformative movements that 
could not be foreseen. It is also a nightmarish time. Full engagement requires 
the ability to perceive both. The 21st century has seen the rise of hideous 
economic inequality, perhaps due to amnesia both of the working people who 
countenance declines in wages, working conditions and social services, and the 
elites who forgot that they conceded to some of these things in the hope of 
avoiding revolution. The attack on civil liberties, including the right to 
privacy, continues long after its “global war on terror” justifications have 
faded away.

Worse than these is the arrival of climate change, faster, harder and more 
devastating than scientists anticipated. Hope doesn’t mean denying these 
realities. It means facing them and addressing them by remembering what else 
the 21st century has brought, including the movements, heroes and shifts in 
consciousness that address these things now. This has been a truly remarkable 
decade for movement-building, social change and deep shifts in ideas, 
perspective and frameworks for large parts of the population (and, of course, 
backlashes against all those things).

***

It is important to say what hope is not: it is not the belief that everything 
was, is or will be fine. The evidence is all around us of tremendous suffering 
and destruction. The hope I am interested in is about broad perspectives with 
specific possibilities, ones that invite or demand that we act. It is also not 
a sunny everything-is-getting-better narrative, though it may be a counter to 
the everything-is-getting-worse one. You could call it an account of 
complexities and uncertainties, with openings. “Critical thinking without hope 
is cynicism, but hope without critical thinking is naivety,” the Bulgarian 
writer Maria Popova recently remarked. AndPatrisse Cullors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/patrisse-cullors>, one of the founders of 
Black Lives Matter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/black-lives-matter-movement>, early on 
described the movement’s mission as to “Provide hope and inspiration for 
collective action to build collective power to achieve collective 
transformation, rooted in grief and rage but pointed towards vision and 
dreams”. It is a statement that acknowledges that grief and hope can coexist.

The tremendous human rights achievements – not only in gaining rights but in 
redefining race, gender, sexuality, embodiment, spirituality and the idea of 
the good life – of the past half-century have flowered during a time of 
unprecedented ecological destruction and the rise of innovative new means of 
exploitation. And the rise of new forms of resistance, including resistance 
enabled by an elegant understanding of that ecology and new ways for people to 
communicate and organise, and new and exhilarating alliances across distance 
and difference.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Frebecca-solnit-hope-in-the-dark-new-essay-embrace-unknown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2afd15c3d0618af526c95d08013dc0655daea99%2F0_0_3264_4896%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Hope%20is%20a%E2%80%8Bn%20embrace%20of%20the%20unknown%E2%80%8B%E2%80%99%3A%20Rebecca%20Solnit%20on%20living%20in%20dark%20times&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Frebecca-solnit-hope-in-the-dark-new-essay-embrace-unknown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Hope%20is%20a%E2%80%8Bn%20embrace%20of%20the%20unknown%E2%80%8B%E2%80%99%3A%20Rebecca%20Solnit%20on%20living%20in%20dark%20times&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Frebecca-solnit-hope-in-the-dark-new-essay-embrace-unknown%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2afd15c3d0618af526c95d08013dc0655daea99%2F0_0_3264_4896%2F3264.jpg>
 Rebecca Solnit. Photograph: David Levenson/Getty Images 
Hope locates itself in the premises that we don’t know what will happen and 
that in the spaciousness of uncertainty is room to act. When you recognise 
uncertainty, you recognise that you may be able to influence the outcomes – you 
alone or you in concert with a few dozen or several million others. Hope is an 
embrace of the unknown and the unknowable, an alternative to the certainty of 
both optimists and pessimists. Optimists think it will all be fine without our 
involvement; pessimists adopt the opposite position; both excuse themselves 
from acting. It is the belief that what we do matters even though how and when 
it may matter, who and what it may impact, are not things we can know 
beforehand. We may not, in fact, know them afterwards either, but they matter 
all the same, and history is full of people whose influence was most powerful 
after they were gone.

There are major movements that failed to achieve their goals; there are also 
comparatively small gestures that mushroomed into successful revolutions. The 
self-immolation of impoverished, police-harassed produce-seller Mohamed 
Bouazizi on 17 December 2010, in Tunisia was the spark that lit a revolution in 
his country and then across northern Africa and other parts of the Arab world 
in 2011. And though the civil war in Syria and the counter-revolutions after 
Egypt’s extraordinary uprising might be what most remember, Tunisia’s “jasmine 
revolution” toppled a dictator and led to peaceful elections in that country in 
2014.

Whatever else the Arab spring was, it is an extraordinary example of how 
unpredictable change is and how potent popular power can be. And five years on, 
it is too soon to draw conclusions about what it all meant. You can tell the 
genesis story of the Arab spring other ways. The quiet organising going on in 
the shadows beforehand matters. So does the comic book about Martin Luther King 
and civil disobedience that was translated into Arabic and widely distributed 
in Egypt shortly before the uprising. You can tell of King’s civil disobedience 
tactics being inspired by Gandhi’s tactics, and Gandhi’s inspired by Tolstoy 
and the radical acts of noncooperation and sabotage of British female 
suffragists.

So the threads of ideas weave around the world and through the decades and 
centuries. There is another lineage for the Arab spring in hip-hop, the 
African-American music that’s become a global medium for dissent and outrage; 
Tunisian hip-hop artist El Général was, along with Bouazizi, an instigator of 
the uprising, and other musicians played roles in articulating the outrage and 
inspiring the crowds.

After a rain mushrooms appear on the surface of the earth as if from nowhere. 
Many come from a sometimes vast underground fungus that remains invisible and 
largely unknown. What we call mushrooms, mycologists call the fruiting body of 
the larger, less visible fungus. Uprisings and revolutions are often considered 
to be spontaneous, but it is the less visible long-term organising and 
groundwork – or underground work – that often laid the foundation. Changes in 
ideas and values also result from work done by writers, scholars, public 
intellectuals, social activists and participants in social media. To many, it 
seems insignificant or peripheral until very different outcomes emerge from 
transformed assumptions about who and what matters, who should be heard and 
believed, who has rights.

Disaster is a lot like revolution: disruption and improvisation, and an 
exhilarating sense that anything is possible

Ideas at first considered outrageous or ridiculous or extreme gradually become 
what people think they’ve always believed. How the transformation happened is 
rarely remembered, in part because it’s compromising: it recalls the mainstream 
when the mainstream was, say, rabidly homophobic or racist in a way it no 
longer is; and it recalls that power comes from the shadows and the margins, 
that our hope is in the dark around the edges, not the limelight of centre 
stage. Our hope and often our power.

***

Changing the story isn’t enough in itself, but it has often been foundational 
to real changes. Making an injury visible and public is usually the first step 
in remedying it, and political change often follows culture, as what was long 
tolerated is seen to be intolerable, or what was overlooked becomes obvious. 
Which means that every conflict is in part a battle over the story we tell, or 
who tells and who is heard.

A victory doesn’t mean that everything is now going to be nice forever and we 
can therefore all go and lounge around until the end of time. Some activists 
are afraid that if we acknowledge victory, people will give up the struggle. I 
have long been more afraid that people will give up and go home or never get 
started in the first place if they think no victory is possible or fail to 
recognise the victories already achieved. Marriage equality is not the end of 
homophobia, but it’s something to celebrate. A victory is a milestone on the 
road, evidence that sometimes we win and encouragement to keep going, not to 
stop. Or it should be.

My own inquiry into the grounds for hope has received two great reinforcements 
in recent years. One came from the recognition of how powerful are the 
altruistic, idealistic forces already at work in the world. Most of us would 
say, if asked, that we live in a capitalist society, but vast amounts of how we 
live our everyday lives – our interactions with and commitments to family 
lives, friendships, avocations, membership in social, spiritual and political 
organisations – are in essence noncapitalist or even anticapitalist, made up of 
things we do for free, out of love and on principle.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Frebecca-solnit-hope-in-the-dark-new-essay-embrace-unknown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea92cf2641ca41b163037c6931d0fb8b45c7c5bd%2F0_0_5544_3744%2F5544.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Hope%20is%20a%E2%80%8Bn%20embrace%20of%20the%20unknown%E2%80%8B%E2%80%99%3A%20Rebecca%20Solnit%20on%20living%20in%20dark%20times&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Frebecca-solnit-hope-in-the-dark-new-essay-embrace-unknown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Hope%20is%20a%E2%80%8Bn%20embrace%20of%20the%20unknown%E2%80%8B%E2%80%99%3A%20Rebecca%20Solnit%20on%20living%20in%20dark%20times&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Frebecca-solnit-hope-in-the-dark-new-essay-embrace-unknown%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea92cf2641ca41b163037c6931d0fb8b45c7c5bd%2F0_0_5544_3744%2F5544.jpg>
 The Arab spring is an extraordinary example of how potent popular power can 
be. Photograph: Mahmoud Khaled/AFP/Getty Images 
In a way, capitalism is an ongoing disaster that anticapitalism alleviates, 
like a mother cleaning up after her child’s messes. (Or, to extend the analogy, 
sometimes disciplining that child to clean up after itself, through legislation 
or protest, or preventing some of the messes in the first place.) And it might 
be worth adding that noncapitalist ways of doing things are much older than 
free-market economic arrangements. Activists often speak as though the 
solutions we need have not yet been launched or invented, as though we are 
starting from scratch, when often the real goal is to amplify the power and 
reach of existing options. What we dream of is already present in the world.

The second reinforcement came out of my investigation of how human beings 
respond to major urban disasters, from the devastating earthquakes in San 
Francisco (in 1906) and Mexico City (in 1985) to the blitz in London and 
Hurricane Katrina in New Orleans. The assumption behind much disaster response 
by the authorities – and the logic of bombing civilians – is that civilisation 
is a brittle facade, and behind it lies our true nature as monstrous, selfish, 
chaotic and violent, or as timid, fragile, and helpless. In fact, in most 
disasters the majority of people are calm, resourceful, altruistic and 
creative. And civilian bombing campaigns generally fail to break the will of 
the people

What startled me about the response to disaster was not the virtue, since 
virtue is often the result of diligence and dutifulness, but the passionate joy 
that shone out from accounts by people who had barely survived. These people 
who had lost everything, who were living in rubble or ruins, had found agency, 
meaning, community, immediacy in their work together with other survivors. This 
century of testimony suggested how much we want lives of meaningful engagement, 
of membership in civil society, and how much societal effort goes into keeping 
us away from these fullest, most powerful selves. But people return to those 
selves, those ways of self-organising, as if by instinct when the situation 
demands it. Thus a disaster is a lot like a revolution when it comes to 
disruption and improvisation, to new roles and an unnerving or exhilarating 
sense that now anything is possible.

Marriage equality is not the end of homophobia, but it is something to 
celebrate. A victory is a milestone on the road

***

“Memory produces hope in the same way that amnesia produces despair,” the 
theologianWalter Brueggemann <http://www.walterbrueggemann.com/about/> noted. 
It is an extraordinary statement, one that reminds us that though hope is about 
the future, grounds for hope lie in the records and recollections of the past. 
We can tell of a past that was nothing but defeats, cruelties and injustices, 
or of a past that was some lovely golden age now irretrievably lost, or we can 
tell a more complicated and accurate story, one that has room for the best and 
worst, for atrocities and liberations, for grief and jubilation. A memory 
commensurate to the complexity of the past and the whole cast of participants, 
a memory that includes our power, produces that forward-directed energy called 
hope.

Amnesia leads to despair in many ways. The status quo would like you to 
believe it is immutable, inevitable and invulnerable, and lack of memory of a 
dynamically changing world reinforces this view. In other words, when you don’t 
know how much things have changed, you don’t see that they are changing or that 
they can change. Those who think that way don’t remember raids on gay bars when 
being homosexual was illegal, or rivers that caught fire when unregulated 
pollution peaked in the 1960s or that there were, worldwide, 70% more seabirds 
a few decades ago. Thus, they don’t recognise the forces of change at work.

One of the essential aspects of depression is the sense that you will always 
be mired in this misery, that nothing can or will change. There’s a public 
equivalent to private depression, a sense that the nation or the society rather 
than the individual is stuck. Things don’t always change for the better, but 
they change, and we can play a role in that change if we act. Which is where 
hope comes in, and memory, the collective memory we call history.

The other affliction amnesia brings is a lack of examples of positive change, 
of popular power, evidence that we can do it and have done it. George Orwell 
wrote: “Who controls the past controls the future. Who controls the present 
controls the past.” Controlling the past begins by knowing it; the stories we 
tell about who we were and what we did shape what we can and will do. Despair 
is also often premature: it’s a form of impatience as well as of certainty.

News cycles tend to suggest that change happens in small, sudden bursts or not 
at all. The struggle to get women the vote took nearly three-quarters of a 
century. For a time people liked to announce that feminism had failed, as 
though the project of overturning millennia of social arrangements should 
achieve its final victories in a few decades, or as though it had stopped. 
Feminism is just starting, and its manifestations matter in rural Himalayan 
villages, not just major cities.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Frebecca-solnit-hope-in-the-dark-new-essay-embrace-unknown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb310793e12906c7d81bf701a1eab9bd9c7db698e%2F0_0_2048_1438%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Hope%20is%20a%E2%80%8Bn%20embrace%20of%20the%20unknown%E2%80%8B%E2%80%99%3A%20Rebecca%20Solnit%20on%20living%20in%20dark%20times&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Frebecca-solnit-hope-in-the-dark-new-essay-embrace-unknown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Hope%20is%20a%E2%80%8Bn%20embrace%20of%20the%20unknown%E2%80%8B%E2%80%99%3A%20Rebecca%20Solnit%20on%20living%20in%20dark%20times&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Frebecca-solnit-hope-in-the-dark-new-essay-embrace-unknown%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb310793e12906c7d81bf701a1eab9bd9c7db698e%2F0_0_2048_1438%2F2048.jpg>
 People in Timor-Leste display anti-Indonesia banners as they take to the 
streets in 1998. Photograph: Supri/Reuters 
Other changes result in victories and are then forgotten. For decades, 
radicals were preoccupied with Timor-Leste, brutally occupied by Indonesia from 
1975 to 2002; the liberated country is no longer news. It won its liberty 
because of valiant struggle from within, but also because of dedicated groups 
on the outside who pressured and shamed the governments supporting the 
Indonesian regime. We could learn a lot from the remarkable display of power 
and solidarity and Timor-Leste’s eventual victory, but the whole struggle seems 
forgotten.

We need litanies or recitations or monuments to these victories, so that they 
are landmarks in everyone’s mind. More broadly, shifts in, say, the status of 
women are easily overlooked by people who don’t remember that, a few decades 
ago, reproductive rights were not yet a concept, and there was no recourse for 
exclusion, discrimination, workplace sexual harassment, most forms of rape, and 
other crimes against women the legal system did not recognise or even 
countenance. None of the changes were inevitable, either – people fought for 
them and won them.

***

Social, cultural or political change does not work in predictable ways or on 
predictable schedules. The month before the Berlin Wall fell, almost no one 
anticipated that the Soviet bloc was going to disintegrate all of a sudden 
(thanks to many factors, including the tremendous power of civil society, 
nonviolent direct action and hopeful organising going back to the 1970s), any 
more than anyone, even the participants, foresaw the impact that the Arab 
spring or Occupy Wall Street or a host of other great uprisings would have. We 
don’t know what is going to happen, or how, or when, and that very uncertainty 
is the space of hope.

Those who doubt that these moments matter should note how terrified the 
authorities and elites are when they erupt. That fear signifies their 
recognition that popular power is real enough to overturn regimes and rewrite 
the social contract. And it often has. Sometimes your enemies know what your 
friends can’t believe. Those who dismiss these moments because of their 
imperfections, limitations, or incompleteness need to look harder at what joy 
and hope shine out of them and what real changes have emerged because of them, 
even if not always in the most obvious or recognisable ways.

Change is rarely straightforward. Sometimes it’s as complex as chaos theory 
and as slow as evolution. Even things that seem to happen suddenly arise from 
deep roots in the past or from long-dormant seeds. A young man’s suicide 
triggers an uprising that inspires other uprisings, but the incident was a 
spark; the bonfire it lit was laid by activist networks and ideas about civil 
disobedience, and by the deep desire for justice and freedom that exists 
everywhere.

It’s important to ask not only what those moments produced in the long run but 
what they were in their heyday. If people find themselves living in a world in 
which some hopes are realised and some joys are incandescent and some 
boundaries between individuals and groups are lowered, even for an hour or a 
day or several months, that matters. Memory of joy and liberation can become a 
navigational tool, an identity, a gift.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Frebecca-solnit-hope-in-the-dark-new-essay-embrace-unknown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe1f91f6d16fe600ff5bd72691e33342b1c5474e6%2F325_0_6768_10483%2F6768.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Hope%20is%20a%E2%80%8Bn%20embrace%20of%20the%20unknown%E2%80%8B%E2%80%99%3A%20Rebecca%20Solnit%20on%20living%20in%20dark%20times&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Frebecca-solnit-hope-in-the-dark-new-essay-embrace-unknown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Hope%20is%20a%E2%80%8Bn%20embrace%20of%20the%20unknown%E2%80%8B%E2%80%99%3A%20Rebecca%20Solnit%20on%20living%20in%20dark%20times&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Frebecca-solnit-hope-in-the-dark-new-essay-embrace-unknown%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe1f91f6d16fe600ff5bd72691e33342b1c5474e6%2F325_0_6768_10483%2F6768.jpg>
 Illustration by Celyn at BA Reps 
Paul Goodman famously wrote, “Suppose you had the revolution you are talking 
and dreaming about. Suppose your side had won, and you had the kind of society 
that you wanted. How would you live, you personally, in that society? Start 
living that way now!” It’s an argument for tiny and temporary victories, and 
for the possibility of partial victories in the absence or even the 
impossibility of total victories.

Total victory has always seemed like a secular equivalent of paradise: a place 
where all the problems are solved and there’s nothing to do, a fairly boring 
place. The absolutists of the old left imagined that victory would, when it 
came, be total and permanent, which is practically the same as saying that 
victory was and is impossible and will never come.

It is, in fact, more than possible. It is something that has arrived in 
innumerable ways, small and large and often incremental, but not in that way 
that was widely described and expected. So victories slip by unheralded. 
Failures are more readily detected.

And then every now and then, the possibilities explode. In these moments of 
rupture, people find themselves members of a “we” that did not until then 
exist, at least not as an entity with agency and identity and potency; new 
possibilities suddenly emerge, or that old dream of a just society re-emerges 
and – at least for a little while – shines. Utopia is sometimes the goal. It is 
often embedded in the moment itself, and it is a hard moment to explain, since 
it usually involves hardscrabble ways of living, squabbles and, eventually, 
disillusion and factionalism. But also more ethereal things: the discovery of 
personal and collective power, the realisation of dreams, the birth of bigger 
dreams, a sense of connection that is as emotional as it is political, and 
lives that change and do not revert to older ways even when the glory subsides.

Sometimes the earth closes over this moment and it has no obvious 
consequences; sometimes empires crumble and ideologies fall away like shackles. 
But you don’t know beforehand. People in official institutions devoutly believe 
they hold the power that matters, though the power we grant them can often be 
taken back; the violence commanded by governments and militaries often fails, 
and nonviolent direct-action campaigns often succeed.

The sleeping giant is one name for the public; when it wakes up, when we wake 
up, we are no longer only the public: we are civil society, the superpower 
whose nonviolent means are sometimes, for a shining moment, more powerful than 
violence, more powerful than regimes and armies. We write history with our feet 
and with our presence and our collective voice and vision. And yet, and of 
course, everything in the mainstream media suggests that popular resistance is 
ridiculous, pointless, or criminal, unless it is far away, was long ago, or, 
ideally, both. These are the forces that prefer the giant stays asleep.

Together we are very powerful, and we have a seldom-told, seldom-remembered 
history of victories and transformations that can give us confidence that, yes, 
we can change the world because we have many times before. You row forward 
looking back, and telling this history is part of helping people navigate 
toward the future. We need a litany, a rosary, a sutra, a mantra, a war chant 
of our victories. The past is set in daylight, and it can become a torch we can 
carry into the night that is the future.

• A new edition of Hope in the Dark 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/hope-in-the-dark.html/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 by Rebecca Solnit is published by Canongate on 28 July.
 