
Mackenzie Crook, coin collector

My dad has always been a coin collector. He tried to get me into it from a 
young age, but I thought there was nothing more boring. He’d show me his coins, 
and they didn’t interest me in the slightest. Then one day, maybe five years 
ago, it was as if something switched in my brain. Suddenly I could see the 
attraction. Maybe it was something to do with getting older. I began to 
understand the passage of time, that old coins were part of history.

I started to collect American coins – seeking out each change in design – then 
moved on to British ones as well. I want to have one coin from the reign of 
every British monarch since the Norman invasion. It’s not a case of collecting 
as many as I can. I’m looking for specific ones to fill the gaps.

I only collect coins that have been used. I’m not interested in ones that have 
been specially minted. For me, it’s all about the social history, and the idea 
that someone had used the coin to buy something in the distant past.

I now have hundreds. I don’t buy on eBay – it would be too easy. Plus you 
don’t see what you’re getting, and there are a lot of fakes out there. Part of 
the fun of it for me is going to coin dealers. The best place in London – 
possibly the country – isCoincraft <http://www.coincraft.com/> on Great Russell 
Street. It’s a great little Dickensian shop, very small and dark. They know 
absolutely everything there is to know.

I keep my coin albums in my office, and a couple of times a week I’ll flick 
through them or reorder them. I can’t describe what I’m doing, or really 
understand it – it’s the feeling of trying to create a sequence, and present 
them in the most pleasing fashion.

The reaction I get when people find out I’m a coin collector isn’t great. It’s 
definitely not much of a conversation starter. People just aren’t interested. 
But that’s not why I do it. It’s a personal, private thing. It’s something for 
myself, unless I meet a fellow numismatist, like my dad. Then we will talk 
passionately about it for hours.

Mackenzie Crook’s new TV series, Detectorists 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b04kf095>, is available on DVD from 10 November




 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fnov%2F09%2Fmackenzie-crook-allegra-mcevedy-michael-faber-pete-paphides-collections%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F5%2F1415192585187%2F56a0fafe-0762-4597-9a52-e671af966524-1513x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20am%20the%20curator%20of%20an%20exhibition%20no%20one%20visits'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fnov%2F09%2Fmackenzie-crook-allegra-mcevedy-michael-faber-pete-paphides-collections%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20am%20the%20curator%20of%20an%20exhibition%20no%20one%20visits%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fnov%2F09%2Fmackenzie-crook-allegra-mcevedy-michael-faber-pete-paphides-collections%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F5%2F1415192585187%2F56a0fafe-0762-4597-9a52-e671af966524-1513x2040.jpeg>
 Allegra McEvedy: ‘I must have 150 knives.’ Photograph: David Levene 
Allegra McEvedy, knife collector

It’s always a bit embarrassing when someone asks “Where do you keep your 
kitchen knives?” and I show them a drawer the length of the table. There must 
be 150 knives in there.


For me, cooking has always been an emotive thing, and the knives reflect that. 
My mum died when I was 17, and I still have a couple of her knives, but I came 
about the rest in all sorts of ways.

When I went to Hong Kong, I noticed all the butchers in a market had the same 
knife and managed, via mime, to find out where they’d bought them – I then 
walked miles through a monsoon to find the shop and drew a picture of what I 
wanted.

Once I was “outed” as a knifer, people started giving them to me – 
extraordinary ones from all over the world: Indonesia, Malawi, St Lucia.

It might seem negligent to have blades around when there are two 
four-year-olds in the house, but our children know not to put their fingers in 
“the sharp things drawer”. As a busy chef, though, I bear the scars.

My partner, Jack, bought a beautiful Japan-ese knife in Verona – 32 layers of 
Damascus steel, a thing of extraordinary beauty. She was admiring it and I 
said, in my patronising old chef’s way: “You know that’s not yours till it’s 
drawn your blood?” I once picked up a lovely little artisan knife in New York, 
on the way to a wedding, and managed to embed it in my thumb.

It’s a timeless collection with a practical application, too. I just hope my 
children and grandchildren will be happier to inherit my knives than I was when 
bequeathed my granny’s collection of porcelain sheep.

As told to Chris Broughton. Allegra McEvedy is the author of Bought, Borrowed 
& Stolen: Recipes and Knives from a Travelling Chef

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fnov%2F09%2Fmackenzie-crook-allegra-mcevedy-michael-faber-pete-paphides-collections%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F5%2F1415192689605%2F791a85b4-f931-4bb3-9b17-52a9fc9ce5a7-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20am%20the%20curator%20of%20an%20exhibition%20no%20one%20visits'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fnov%2F09%2Fmackenzie-crook-allegra-mcevedy-michael-faber-pete-paphides-collections%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20am%20the%20curator%20of%20an%20exhibition%20no%20one%20visits%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fnov%2F09%2Fmackenzie-crook-allegra-mcevedy-michael-faber-pete-paphides-collections%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F5%2F1415192689605%2F791a85b4-f931-4bb3-9b17-52a9fc9ce5a7-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Michel Faber: ‘Most things are meaningless to most people.’ Photograph: David 
Rose/Rex 
Michel Faber, obscure music collector

I’ve just bought a second-hand LP called This Inheritance Must Be Refused, an 
anthology of radical feminist music by such artists as Paxton Quiggly, Spitboy 
and Spork. I haven’t played it yet, but I expect it will be fairly duff. That 
won’t matter, because it contains a cool booklet of gender-political graphics 
and essays, and I collect obscure feminist LPs. In fact, I’m a collector of 
obscure music generally – the efforts of unhinged evangelists, animal rights 
activists, lesbian separatists warbling about how lovely the world will be when 
wimmin take over, and so on.

Collecting such records forces you to confront the sheer futility of the 
collecting impulse. The guy who collects Dylan or Céline Dion can fan-tasise 
that his collection will be com-plete one day, and flatter himself that he’s 
building a shrine to the greatest music ever made. I have no such illusions. I 
will collect stuff nobody else cares about, then grow old and die, having only 
scratched the surface.

I database all my treasures metic-ulously. There are several dozen items by 
the Mancunian sonic guerrilla Muslimgauze, and a few minutes ago I felt a glow 
of librarianly satisfaction when I added a new artist – DJ Female Convict 
Scorpion – to my “D” file.

When I’m gone, this immense labour will be of no use to anyone. I am the 
curator of an exhibition no one visits.

My literary work is of value (I hope) to other humans; it is an attempt to 
connect, maybe even be remembered. My collection of unpopular music reminds me 
that most things are meaningless to most people and that everything, 
eventually, is forgotten.

Michel Faber is the author of The Book of Strange New Things
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fnov%2F09%2Fmackenzie-crook-allegra-mcevedy-michael-faber-pete-paphides-collections%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F5%2F1415193027297%2Fe208f2e6-ed3a-40a9-b110-89921bc6e2d1-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20am%20the%20curator%20of%20an%20exhibition%20no%20one%20visits'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fnov%2F09%2Fmackenzie-crook-allegra-mcevedy-michael-faber-pete-paphides-collections%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20am%20the%20curator%20of%20an%20exhibition%20no%20one%20visits%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fnov%2F09%2Fmackenzie-crook-allegra-mcevedy-michael-faber-pete-paphides-collections%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F5%2F1415193027297%2Fe208f2e6-ed3a-40a9-b110-89921bc6e2d1-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Pete Paphides: ‘”It’s all on the internet now,” declutterers rationalise.’ 
Photograph: Jon Super/Guardian 
Pete Paphides, vintage magazine collector

“I used to have a stack of those,” is the most common response when visitors 
clock the huge collection of 60s and 70s NMEs, Melody Makers and Record Mirrors 
in my music room. I know how the sentence ends, because it only ever seems to 
end one way. It usually involves a house move or a new baby and, with a heavy 
heart, decades of newsprint being loaded into the car for their final journey. 
“It’s all on the internet now!” declutterers rationalise. But, of course, most 
of it isn’t. And even the odd cuttings uploaded by some Bowie or Beatles 
obsessive will never tell the whole story.

In old music papers, the throwaway asides most effectively remind you that, 
even at gigs by prog-rock innovators, provincial parochiality still somehow set 
the tone.

“The smell of bacon cooking opened the first set of the Pink Floyd concert at 
Birmingham Town Hall,” reads a review from NME in January 1971. The same month, 
without irony, Melody Maker announces: “Toe Fat have split … A spokesman says 
that singer Cliff Bennett is having a ‘good hard think’ as to why they failed 
to take off.”


Weekly gig guides propel you back to a Britain before sponsored arenas: a 
post-war circuit where Led Zeppelin or Stevie Wonder ply their wares in 
Locarnos and Winter Gardens. Records we now regard as classics were almost 
hobbled by poor reviews. Writing about T Rex’s Metal Guru in May 1972, NME 
sniffed, “Catchy, but lacks depth.” Appraising Dusty Springfield’s Son of a 
Preacher Man, Disc & Music Echo judged it “a weak song, and she sings it weakly 
too”.

Sometimes the knowledge of what happened next can confer extra pathos on an 
article. Here’s Rose Nash in the same paper a few months earlier, talking about 
what it’s like to be married to The Hollies’ Graham Nash: “I wish he’d give it 
all up – I think it’s a drag.” Unbenownst to her, Nash was already seeing Joni 
Mitchell. Over four decades on, this once bustling weekly discourse, spread 
across several music papers, has dwindled to down to just one publication, NME, 
which is barely scraping 15,000 sales.

It wasn’t just the music that excited me. It was the weekly ritual offered by 
these papers. I used to imagine how records might sound before I’d finally hear 
them. But in 2014, my kids know peculiarly little about their favourite bands. 
Instant access to their favourite music has circumvented the need to read 
around it. In 40 years’ time, when they want to remember the context in which 
that music was made, there’ll be nothing to remind them, nothing to throw out.

Pete’s music podcast returns in January: longplayerradio.com  
<http://www.mixcloud.com/longplayer/>
 