
The problem with interviewing someone you feel like you already know is how 
quickly it can go wrong. One minute you’re saying hello in the empty east 
London pub you’ve agreed to meet in, spontaneously hugging each other. The 
next, you’re trying to order a glass of wine andZawe Ashton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/zawe-ashton> is horrified, because it’s 
not even 5pm yet. She reckons we should have tea instead, so we do. And then 
she says, “Oh God, I can’t believe I wine-shamed you.”

It is then that I realise Ashton isn’t actually Vod, the student she plays in 
the Channel 4 student sitcomFresh Meat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/fresh-meat>. Vod is a literature 
student who doesn’t read books, preferring partying, shagging and paying her 
way by selling ecstasy. Ashton, 31, is a straight-A scholar, who spent all her 
childhood weekends training as an actor, and thus has been earning her own 
money, appearing on telly inThe Demon Headmaster 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J5L6Z3mePw4>, Jackanory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/dec/11/jackanory-50th-anniversary-bbc-frank-cottrell-boyce>
 andDesmond’s <http://www.channel4.com/programmes/desmonds>, since the age of 
six. Unlike Vod, Ashton has also written a play that’s being developed by the 
National Theatre; has a book deal for something that sounds like an 
autobiographical novel, “but I can’t talk about it. Well, not much. Well, I 
probably will”; and has set up her own production company,Asylum Features 
<https://mobile.twitter.com/asylumfeatures>, to release films that she writes 
and directs herself. She is, I have to concede, a bit busy for pubs.

What Ashton does have in common with Vod, however, is that they are both very 
funny, as becomes apparent when we discuss what it’s like being hailed as “one 
to watch” and getting nominated for “best newcomer” awards when you’ve already 
been working for 25 years. “The single perspective shot,Stanley Kubrick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/stanleykubrick>, down the corridor,” she 
says, her mind racing ahead. “Aww, there’s a little girl down there! And then 
you get closer and she turns round and has the face of” – she puts on a scary 
voice – “a 200-year-old woman. That is my career right now, in a nutshell. I’m 
actually at retirement age, internally.” She estimates that she might be due a 
breakdown. “Or aMacaulay Culkin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2000/aug/03/features.features11> moment where 
I just go generally off the rails. Or aWinona Ryder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/14/winona-ryder-beetlejuice-indie-girls>
 moment, shoplifting.” She thinks about Winona. “Howdid that happen?” 

It is very odd to be a very tiny person and know what you want to do

We head to a quiet room upstairs, where Ashton sprawls across an armchair, all 
long arms and legs and funny voices, her mind scattering ideas like 
wildflowers. She recently got back from LA – she bought a plane ticket and left 
the same day – and found herself getting lured into the new age scene in Venice 
Beach and Topanga Canyon. “I know it’s the worst word ever,” she says, 
grimacing, “but I really amtransitioning.” Ashton has been to LA several times 
before, though she won’t say why (you get the feeling there might be various 
projects in various Hollywood pipelines she can’t yet discuss). This time, she 
says, a conversation with a guru has left her believing she might be on the 
cusp of a whole new stage of her life.

Perhaps this transition will liberate her from the anxiety she describes as 
something of a constant in her life. She was not a carefree child, and even 
playing Vod, who can be so comically unaware, takes a great deal of awareness. 
At one point I ask her if it was a relief that the only real sex scenes she’s 
ever had to do as Vod were more comic than sensual. “Arelief?” she repeats, as 
if I have brought up something as unlikely as Antarctica or a hippopotamus. She 
is almost breathless. “There’s never any relief! Relief is not a word that ever 
enters my mind, aboutanything.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fzawe-ashton-always-play-extreme-characters-fresh-meat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F419a680926b11bc0db2b2bdb0c0e615a7652455f%2F0_94_3827_5743%2F3827.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98I%20always%20play%20extreme%20characters%E2%80%99%3A%20Zawe%20Ashton%20on%20life%20after%20Fresh%20Meat&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fzawe-ashton-always-play-extreme-characters-fresh-meat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98I%20always%20play%20extreme%20characters%E2%80%99%3A%20Zawe%20Ashton%20on%20life%20after%20Fresh%20Meat&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fzawe-ashton-always-play-extreme-characters-fresh-meat%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F419a680926b11bc0db2b2bdb0c0e615a7652455f%2F0_94_3827_5743%2F3827.jpg>
 ‘We weren’t allowed to use the words star or fame - they were banned. You had 
to say actor or success.’ Photograph: Harriet Turney for the Guardian 
Does she never give herself a break? After all, plenty of people say they want 
to write a play, a film, a book, but hardly anyone wins the London Poetry Slam 
Championship in 2000, a Verity Bargate award nomination in 2007 for her debut 
play, Harm’s Way, or a Raindance film festival nomination in 2014 for best 
British short forHappy Toys <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt3546354/>, which she 
directed. “Well, I think I am like other people. It’s just that I think I’m 
going to get to the end andthen give up. But wow, thank you for saying I finish 
things, because I really think I am such a scatty person.”

She credits Lena Dunham <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/lena-dunham> with 
showing sex on TV that is not actually sexy, and also with the inspiration for 
writing, directing and acting in her own shows. “As a woman, you do have a 
sense that if you can do other things, then you should. If you feel, mmm, the 
roles are getting a little” – she raises a sardonic eyebrow – “repetitive, and 
you know you can write, then you should write a different role. It’s a 
quadruple indemnity mission. I plan on having a long career. I don’t want to 
burn out. It’s like, I have the shield,and I have the lightsaber” – she is 
doing movie voices now – “these are my weapons of choice! Hopefully, one of 
those will come to serve me in some way.”

Does she feel she owes it to the world to redress the balance? “Well, the 
world doesn’t have to give a shit in any way. It just feels like a fulfilling 
and smart thing to do.”

Ashton grew up in Stoke Newington, north London, the eldest of three children, 
and has recently bought her own flat not far from there, living with her 
boyfriend, a film distributor, whom she prefers not to talk about. Her mother 
Victoria arrived in England in her teens from Uganda, where Ashton’s 
grandfather,Paulo Muwanga <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paulo_Muwanga>, had 
briefly served as both president and prime minister. At a Christmas party, 
Victoria met her future husband Paul, a working-class cockney who was the first 
in his family to go to university (Cambridge). The couple both worked as 
schoolteachers, Victoria teaching design and technology, and Paul teaching 
English – though he later moved to Channel 4 to commission education programmes 
for teachers, so telly was always a presence in their house, as well as 
literature. The three children went to local state schools, and young Zawe was 
taken toAnna Scher improvisation classes 
<http://www.annaschertheatre.com/#!classes/crer> merely to “burn off some 
energy”. She instantly loved it. “It is very odd to be a very tiny person and 
know what you want to do.”

Famously, the Anna Scher theatre has produced lots of big names including 
Kathy Burke <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/kathy-burke> and half the cast 
ofEastEnders <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/eastenders>. But Ashton 
says it was precisely the unstarry nature of the place that shaped the artist 
she would become. “It was a weekend drama class that cost £2.50, and we weren’t 
supposed to do commercials, we weren’t allowed to use the words star or fame – 
they were banned. You had to say actor or success. You couldn’t say, ‘I want to 
be a star’ because it was meaningless, just empty calories.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fzawe-ashton-always-play-extreme-characters-fresh-meat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F774f63a987647556a0c2237b0ad42282f9f142d0%2F17_178_3087_1853%2F3087.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98I%20always%20play%20extreme%20characters%E2%80%99%3A%20Zawe%20Ashton%20on%20life%20after%20Fresh%20Meat&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fzawe-ashton-always-play-extreme-characters-fresh-meat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98I%20always%20play%20extreme%20characters%E2%80%99%3A%20Zawe%20Ashton%20on%20life%20after%20Fresh%20Meat&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fzawe-ashton-always-play-extreme-characters-fresh-meat%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F774f63a987647556a0c2237b0ad42282f9f142d0%2F17_178_3087_1853%2F3087.jpg>
 Zawe Ashton with Alex Beckett and Alison Steadman in Here by Michael Frayn at 
the Rose Theatre, Kingston. Photograph: Alastair Muir/REX/Shutterstock 
Ashton recounts a story about a black boy being sent home from an audition, 
having been told that he could never be the Milky Bar kid. Scher, who did the 
teaching herself, dedicated an entire session to discussing with her pupils 
where the casting people had done wrong. “We were armed with all of this 
amazing… activism, I suppose. She’s an amazing woman. You were always 
encouraged to knowwhy you wanted to act. Politics is not something you think 
about as a kid, but I realise now that she was infusing us with a level of 
conscience. You had to be on time, you had to be present. The number of 
birthdays I missed. I just gave up every Friday night and Saturday afternoon 
for 14 years.”

It was a dedication that didn’t make her popular with other children at 
school. Ashton was bullied, and eventually moved secondary school when the 
threats of beatings from other teenage girls, who knew she was taking days off 
to film for TV, became too much. AtCity and Islington College, 
<http://www.candi.ac.uk> she found better friends who shared her love of 
poetry. She took A-levels and applied to do drama at Manchester Metropolitan 
University.

Then came results day. “I got hurried by my teachers into an antechamber. They 
were like, ‘Have you opened your results yet?’ I was like, ‘No? Should I? Oh my 
God, I’ve got three As.’ I was overwhelmed, because it had been a really tough 
year. My mum had been really ill with cancer. They all said, you have to take a 
year off to apply to Cambridge now. So there was this crossroads moment – you 
know, when you realise your life could go in two really different directions? 
But then the stupid, stupid girl – no, I’m joking. I’m really glad I did what I 
did.”

What she did was take a year off to look after her mum, and then went to 
Manchester Met anyway. The course was a bit of a disappointment, she says, the 
teachers intent on making Ashton less experimental, disparaging her idea to do 
things such as walk around the audience trailing a red ribbon behind her. (She 
pitched the same concept at a local experimental theatre a week later and it 
came second in a commissioning competition.) But she experienced student life, 
and the partying that she had missed while being such a focused child. She went 
to Manchester nightclubs and got into DJing, experiences that would prove 
valuable when she auditioned for Fresh Meat years later.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fzawe-ashton-always-play-extreme-characters-fresh-meat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe602dd0cbf630c41b7e5bbfc677c78caa2a34eb2%2F23_12_1125_676%2F1125.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98I%20always%20play%20extreme%20characters%E2%80%99%3A%20Zawe%20Ashton%20on%20life%20after%20Fresh%20Meat&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fzawe-ashton-always-play-extreme-characters-fresh-meat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98I%20always%20play%20extreme%20characters%E2%80%99%3A%20Zawe%20Ashton%20on%20life%20after%20Fresh%20Meat&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fzawe-ashton-always-play-extreme-characters-fresh-meat%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe602dd0cbf630c41b7e5bbfc677c78caa2a34eb2%2F23_12_1125_676%2F1125.jpg>
 As ‘tub-thumping and workshy’ literature student Vod in Fresh Meat. 
Written by Jesse Armstrong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jesse-armstrong> and Sam Bain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/sam-bain>, the duo behind Peep Show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/peep-show>, the show is set in the 
fictional Manchester Medlock University. Vod is a blunt, libidinous raver; 
tub-thumping and workshy, with a thudding estuary accent and directional hair. 
She shares a house with a mismatched group of students –Jack Whitehall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/jack-whitehall>, “who makes me laugh 
so much”, plays the posh twit whose family money has bought the house. In one 
memorable scene she is made to read Salman Rushdie’s Midnight’s Children and 
tells the class the book makes her feel “like I’ve got this pompous, fat, naked 
man sitting on my face, and he’s resting his big, overrated bollocks on my 
airways”.

Ashton auditioned for the part about eight times, and saw so many other actors 
there, of every type and look, that she realised she could make Vod her own, 
that she wasn’t being asked to play any kind of trope. I ask if there has been 
any negative response to the only black character in the group ending up as a 
drug dealer. “NEVER!! Oh my God, that’snever something that’s come up,” she 
says, clearly surprised by the question. “And I feel like, she’s not even as 
extreme as a ‘dealer’. Vod is someone who capitalises on situations, sometimes 
ones that are really misguided. It all goes really horribly wrong – I think 
Vod’s got a lot of obstacles this series. I’m quite excited about watching it.”

The night before the deadline, I said to myself, you really owe it to yourself 
to deliver – just do it

She might well be watching it alone, however, or certainly without her dad, 
who isn’t too keen on seeing her shows. She might have developed her sense of 
humour from her parents (“They are my favourite comedy double act”), as well as 
her love of language (“My dad issuch a brilliant writer”), but he can’t get 
used to seeing her on screen. He pretends her shows are radio plays, so he can 
keep his eyes closed. “Actually, I told my dad he should watch the episode with 
Vod and her mum, and he said, ‘I’d love to.’ Then he came in and I was right in 
the middle of saying the c-word. And he was like, ‘Might just go and put the 
kettle on again.’ ”

She recently played another challenging role in Not Safe For Work 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/not-safe-for-work>, a much bleaker Channel 
4 comedy by playwright DC Moore, about the jilted generation of 
thirtysomethings whose job security has disappeared. Ashton plays Katherine, 
one of a group of civil servants whose jobs are relocated from London to 
Northampton following public sector cuts, and who has to maintain a steely 
professional exterior to hide the way she is falling apart inside. Other roles 
have included a small part inDoctor Who 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who> (for a moment, she was 
the bookies’ first choice to become the first female Doctor), and the lead in 
Dreams Of A Life,Carol Morley’s documentary film about Joyce Vincent 
<http://dreamsofalife.com>, the woman whose remains were found on her sofa 
three years after her death, with the television still on.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fzawe-ashton-always-play-extreme-characters-fresh-meat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5aa181a9b01248ec9e48680824c57c0e4c578169%2F27_9_4966_2981%2F4966.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98I%20always%20play%20extreme%20characters%E2%80%99%3A%20Zawe%20Ashton%20on%20life%20after%20Fresh%20Meat&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fzawe-ashton-always-play-extreme-characters-fresh-meat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98I%20always%20play%20extreme%20characters%E2%80%99%3A%20Zawe%20Ashton%20on%20life%20after%20Fresh%20Meat&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fzawe-ashton-always-play-extreme-characters-fresh-meat%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5aa181a9b01248ec9e48680824c57c0e4c578169%2F27_9_4966_2981%2F4966.jpg>
 ‘My parents are my favourite comedy double act. But I told my dad to watch an 
episode of Fresh Meat, and he was like, “Might just go and put the kettle on 
again”.’ Photograph: Harriet Turney for the Guardian 
“I just always play these really extreme characters – they’ve all come with 
parental guidance stickers on them. I did this Abi Morgan play at the Donmar 
just now and she said, ‘You play a lot of outsiders, don’t you?’ And I was 
like, ‘Oh my God, I do!’” She looks surprised. “And she said, ‘Outsiders who 
don’t need much male intervention.’ ‘Well, yes, I do,’ I said, like I knew that 
about myself.”

Other theatre work includes Othello at the Globe and Gone Too Far! at the 
Royal Court, which is the theatre where she took the young writers’ course and 
wrote her play For All The Women Who Thought They Were Mad, at 24. It was 
inspired by research into the way that psychiatric medication affects women, 
and the way that black women in particular are often over-medicated, so that 
their health deteriorates even further. “There are stories of women in pretty 
powerful positions, in jobs, suddenly finding themselves in institutions, 
unrecognisable to themselves and their friends,” she says. “So I just had to 
sit in the research and think about it, but there was a writing competition. 
The night before the deadline, I said to myself, you really owe it to yourself 
to deliver – just do it. So I sat down and wrote it in an actual fever, staying 
up for 24 hours.”

Next up is the Genet play The Maids, a double-hander with Emmy-winning 
American actorUzo Aduba <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm2499064/> (best known as 
Crazy Eyes inOrange Is The New Black 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/orange-is-the-new-black>), opening in 
London next month. “It’s going to be really, really interesting to explore two 
characters who are essentially ready to burst from the beginning of the play.”

After that, perhaps she will have time for a quick personal collapse, though 
it seems unlikely. “I don’t really have the luxury of having a breakdown,” 
Ashton says. “I’ve just been working for a really, really long time.” And yet 
that 200-year-old woman in the corridor has got another century ahead of her, 
at least.

 * The final series of Fresh Meat <https://www.facebook.com/C4FreshMeat/> is 
on Channel 4 soon. The Maids is atTrafalgar Studios 
<http://www.trafalgar-studios.co.uk/>, London SW1, from 20 February. 
Styling: Melanie Wilkinson. Hair: Jennie Roberts at Frank Agency using Paul 
Mitchell. Makeup: Caroline Barnes at Frank Agency using Hourglass cosmetics. 
Ashton wears jumpsuit, £865, by Johanna Ortiz,from net-a-porter.com 
<http://www.net-a-porter.com/Shop/Designers/Johanna_Ortiz/?pn=1&npp=60&image_view=product&dScroll=0>
; polo neck, £119,hugoboss.com 
<http://www.hugoboss.com/uk/polo-neck-sweater-in-new-wool-%27famaurie%27/hbeu50297214.html?cgid=12400&dwvar_hbeu50297214_color=262_Beige#prefn1=style&prefv1=Polo+neck+sweaters&sz=96&start=1>
, trousers, £1,450,celine.com 
<https://www.celine.com/en/collections/spring/ready-to-wear/high-waisted-wide-leg-trousers-double-face-soft-wool/21N866746.38NO.34>
; knit, £690,victoriabeckham.com 
<http://www.victoriabeckham.com/ready-to-wear/double-vneck-jumper.html>, 
culottes, £365,by Rachel Comey, from matchesfashion.com 
<http://www.matchesfashion.com/products/Rachel-Comey-Wayward-denim-culottes--1038527>
.
 