
As a kid in Kirkcaldy, Dougray Scott liked to stow away in the back of the car 
when his dad left for work. By the time he was discovered, it was usually too 
late to turn back. Scott Sr was a door-to-door salesman, flogging 
fridge-freezers in the Scottish Highlands, and his son paid attention when he 
went into his routine.

Chloë Sevigny: I've had 'creepy situations' in auditions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/18/chloe-sevigny-ive-had-creepy-situations-in-auditions>
“My dad worked on commission, so you had to get it right, you had to convince 
people,” he recalls. “Watching him was quite extraordinary – the emotions he 
presented to the world and the ones he kept suppressed.” He learned about 
acting watching the old man sell white goods.


Flash forward four decades and Scott is 50, a mainstay of Hollywood 
blockbusters and BBC dramas. He’s in a beach bar at Cannes, a long way from 
home, although it seems that old habits die hard. His new film, London Town, is 
a coming-of-age tale with a late-70s punk backdrop – but the thing’s not quite 
finished and is being sold in the market. This puts Scott in the role of 
salesman, like his dad before him, called in to do the heavy lifting himself.

In fairness, he looks built for the task; tanned and trim, with a Celtic Cross 
tattoo on the underside of one forearm and the bushy moustache of a 70s porn 
star. He explains that the moustache isn’t permanent: he grew it for a role 
he’s been shooting in Romania. I suggest he keeps it; it makes him look like 
Tom Selleck. “No man,” he says. “It’s totally Freddie Mercury.”

Ahead of our meeting I watch seven minutes of footage from London Town, in 
which a 14-year-old boy (Daniel Huttlestone) sets out to save his dad’s record 
shop. Riding to his rescue is the late, great Joe Strummer (Jonathan Rhys 
Meyers), former frontman of the Clash, who agrees to perform at a benefit 
concert. So far as it goes, the film looks pretty good, earthy and uplifting, 
like a three-chord riff on Ken Loach’sLooking for Eric 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jun/12/film-review-looking-for-eric-cantona-ken-loach>
, although one wonders if Rhys Meyers, estimable though he is, is quite able to 
match the propulsive, impassioned charisma of a man like Strummer. Then again, 
who is?

“Joe Strummer, I loved him,” Scott says. “Amazing guy. Tender guy. Looking at 
all these documentaries about him, that’s what struck me the most, how tender 
he was as a human being. People think of punk as this aggressive, nihilistic 
thing. But he cared about everything – all kinds of music, all kinds of people. 
Maybe that’s what punk was really about.”

Personal Shopper review: Kristen Stewart's psychic spooker is a must-have
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/16/personal-shopper-review-kristen-stewarts-psychic-spooker-is-a-must-have>
He throws a glance around the beach bar, with its accompanying press junkets 
and battalion of security goons. “Film’s different,” he admits. “There’s a 
barrier that exists in the film world, but I’ve done my best to tear it down. 
Because I don’t have publicists; I don’t like dealing with that. I mean, I 
don’t have Brad Pitt levels of fame, but when I walk down the street, I’d 
rather be more accessible. And that’s what Strummer did with the Clash. He was 
like, ‘I wrote these songs for you and, more than that, I want to talk to you 
about it.’ The Clash were very much a band of the people.”

In his time, Scott has played heroes (Enigma) and villains (Mission: 
Impossible 2). He impersonated Arthur Miller inMy Week with Marilyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/nov/24/my-week-with-marilyn-review> and 
Matt Busby in United, about the Munich air disaster, and was nearly James Bond 
until Daniel Craig got the gig. But in London Town he takes the role of dad, 
toiling to support his child, and this naturally made him think of his own 
father too.

“The guy in the film, he wanted to be a rock star and ends up running a music 
shop. And it was the same deal with my dad, he tried many different things. He 
was a footballer. He was an actor with theUnity theatre 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Glasgow_Unity_Theatre> in Glasgow. He worked as 
a copyboy for the Daily Express. He did all these things, but then he ended up 
as a salesman, purely in order to earn money for the family. Those are the hard 
choices life presents you with.”

He recalls his dad coming to see one of his earliest acting jobs, when he was 
about 23. “It was at theTraverse <http://www.traverse.co.uk/]> in Edinburgh and 
I was playing a gay character who was very promiscuous. And there’s this one 
speech in the play where he talks in very graphic detail about anal sex. And 
all the way through, I’m thinking, ‘Oh Jesus Christ, my dad’s in the audience.’ 
Because he had this very old-fashioned attitude to being gay, like a lot of 
working-class men at the time. But he was fine with it, he liked it. He said I 
was good.”

Is it true that homosexuality was illegal in Scotland 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LGBT_rights_in_Scotland> until 1980? “Ha,” he 
says. “Probably still is.”

The trouble was that his father was old when he had him, already in his 50s. 
He fought in the second world war, in fact, although Scott points out that this 
not strictly true because he never saw action. Warming to his theme, he says 
Scott Sr used to boast he’d been shot in the war, when what he actually meant 
was that he’d been shot by accident, with a screw gun, by one of his fellow 
soldiers. Most war stories are tragic; this one sounds like a farce. On another 
occasion he was hospitalised after eating wild rhubarb from a French farmer’s 
field.

“My dad always said the rhubarb saved his life,” Scott remembers. “He got 
fucking food poisoning like you wouldn’t believe and so they had to ship him 
out. But right before they did, he was off in thekhazi 
<http://www.collinsdictionary.com/dictionary/english/khazi>, outside the 
barracks, when he heard the air-raid sound. When the bombs came down he was so 
far away from the explosion that he came out untouched.”

Scott erupts with laughter; his moustache twitches like a ferret. “So yes, I’m 
very thankful that happened,” he says. “If it weren’t for the rhubarb, I 
wouldn’t be here.”
 