
A dance hall on a busy street not far from Sydney’s Central Station has for 
decades done hard yards in the service of experimental theatre and standup 
comedy. One night in March, Guardian Australia rented the place for a forum on 
equal marriage. The platform was crowded with campaigners, comedians and 
politicians. Turning out for the event was every letter of the GLBTI alphabet. 
Shorten was there with his wife, Chloe, who cut a vivid figure even in that 
crowd in a leopard-skin raincoat.Shorten was entirely at ease. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/mar/31/why-knot-a-spirited-panel-discussion-on-marriage-equality-live>

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F18%2Fi-have-a-clarity-of-purpose-how-bill-shorten-bounced-back-and-made-labour-the-modern-party%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F702aa8826a1c8395e0755360c9ac41e6f3ec8b47%2F0_308_4487_2692%2F4487.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20have%20a%20clarity%20of%20purpose'%20%E2%80%93%20how%20Bill%20Shorten%20bounced%20back%20and%20made%20Labor%20modern%20%7C%20David%20Marr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F18%2Fi-have-a-clarity-of-purpose-how-bill-shorten-bounced-back-and-made-labour-the-modern-party%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20have%20a%20clarity%20of%20purpose%27%20%E2%80%93%20how%20Bill%20Shorten%20bounced%20back%20and%20made%20Labor%20modern%20%7C%20David%20Marr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F18%2Fi-have-a-clarity-of-purpose-how-bill-shorten-bounced-back-and-made-labour-the-modern-party%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F702aa8826a1c8395e0755360c9ac41e6f3ec8b47%2F0_308_4487_2692%2F4487.jpg>
 Bill Shorten, Ally Hocking Howe and former NSW premier Kristina Keneally at 
the Guardian Live Australian marriage equality event in Sydney. Photograph: 
Mike Bowers for the Guardian 
He has brought the party a long way. I remember sitting with Julia Gillard’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/julia-gillard> dour tactician John McTernan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/john-mcternan> in early 2013 as he tried 
to convince me Labor could beat Abbott by campaigning as the modern party. 
“What about equal marriage?” I asked. McTernan was silent. The issue was 
already totemic, a pointer to which century a political party was operating in, 
but the branch of the Catholic church known as the Shop, Distributive and 
Allied Employees’ Association had used its great muscle to stack parliament 
with men and women prepared to die in a ditch for traditional marriage. Shorten 
changed that. Behind the scenes at the Labor conference in Melbourne in 2014 he 
bluntly told the shoppies equal marriage was going to happen. No rebellion 
followed. Meanwhile,the Coalition was tearing itself apart on the issue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/16/marriage-equality-coalition-disunity-puts-pre-election-plebiscite-details-in-doubt>
. Turnbull might once have beenon the dance-hall platform in March with Shorten 
and the leader of the Greens, Richard Di Natale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/mar/31/why-knot-a-spirited-panel-discussion-on-marriage-equality-live>
. Not now. Backtracking on equal marriage has done the prime minister great 
damage in middle Australia. Labor’s strategic dream in 2013 has become reality 
in 2016: in this contest, Shorten is leading the modern party.

Busybodies

He had a story for the rally. That morning at an RAAF wreath-laying ceremony 
he had been accosted by a little old lady who cried, “God will damn you for 
your position on marriage equality.” Then she slipped him a note: “And your 
child’s undisciplined too.” In language you don’t expect Labor leaders to use, 
Shorten gave busybodies a spray.

People judging lesbian or gay or bisexual or transgender relationships are 
actually judging more than just those groups. They are judging the single 
parents; they are judging the people who have got divorced. I live in a blended 
family. I have stepchildren who I regard as my own children. So this is the 
point I think that we are seeing: the face of what constitutes a family is 
changing. Good luck to people who have never been divorced. But do you know 
what? If you’ve been divorced, you’re an equally worthy human being.

And children are raised not just by same-sex couples but raised in blended 
families. The good news is – and this is why there is change in theLabor party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/labor-party>, quite significant 
change in a relatively short time – that we know now that families come in all 
shapes and sizes. I bitterly resent when I hear some people judging other 
relationships. Until you are in that relationship, until you are raising those 
children, get out of my life. I don’t want your opinions … I represent a whole 
lot of Australians who in the last 10 years have started waking up and thinking 
about it and being touched by personal stories. The good news is that the 
religious right no longer owns the definition of what a family is. And they 
can’t win.”

Lucky man: has Bill Shorten got what it takes?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/09/bill-shorten-election-2016-labor-alp-essay>
The bookies aren’t betting Shorten can win either. That he might emerge this 
year as prime minister hasn’t gripped the national imagination. No one is 
asking the Labor leader what he will do in his first 100 days. But in late 
summer, as the polls swung back in Labor’s favour, even hostile commentators 
agreed: Shorten can’t be ruled out. They had been wrong so often, as blow after 
blow failed to knock him out.He survived Dyson Heydon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/07/trade-unions-inquiry-defends-late-night-release-bill-shorten-labor>
. He survived the rise of Malcolm Turnbull. He survived the last polls of 2015 
that put the Coalition’s two-party-preferred vote at 53% and Labor’s at 47%. By 
late February,Newspoll and Essential had the parties level-pegging 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/22/support-for-turnbull-slumps-as-labor-and-coalition-deadlocked-in-newspoll>
. Shorten admits he didn’t predict this. “But I didn’t predict I was going to 
be wiped out either.”

‘The government has crumpled inwards’

“I thought that when Malcolm Turnbull took over that politics would be harder 
for us, but politics might be better overall and it would be an opportunity for 
everyone to lift their game,” says Shorten. “When you play a better or a 
smarter opponent, it forces you to work harder, doesn’t it? … what has 
surprised me is that the government has crumpled inwards.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F18%2Fi-have-a-clarity-of-purpose-how-bill-shorten-bounced-back-and-made-labour-the-modern-party%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe7ddd827e0916bc5889ba30491ed0a267bf4a046%2F0_0_1510_2339%2F1510.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20have%20a%20clarity%20of%20purpose'%20%E2%80%93%20how%20Bill%20Shorten%20bounced%20back%20and%20made%20Labor%20modern%20%7C%20David%20Marr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F18%2Fi-have-a-clarity-of-purpose-how-bill-shorten-bounced-back-and-made-labour-the-modern-party%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20have%20a%20clarity%20of%20purpose%27%20%E2%80%93%20how%20Bill%20Shorten%20bounced%20back%20and%20made%20Labor%20modern%20%7C%20David%20Marr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F18%2Fi-have-a-clarity-of-purpose-how-bill-shorten-bounced-back-and-made-labour-the-modern-party%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe7ddd827e0916bc5889ba30491ed0a267bf4a046%2F0_0_1510_2339%2F1510.jpg>
 The cover of Faction Man, David Marr’s book on Bill Shorten 
Shorten found himself facing an opponent easier to grapple with. “Abbott is a 
master at turning a stick into a club. He is a puncher. Turnbull talks too 
much, doesn’t focus enough. I don’t know if he’s match-fit. I don’t get the 
impression he’s clear what he wants to do.” While the government talks 
housekeeping – shifting the tax mix, attending to the deficit – Labor is 
talking policy. It may be crazy brave. Billions are at stake backing Gonski and 
the National Disability Insurance Scheme in the years ahead. But fading fast as 
Labor’s policies come under attack from the government is the old image of 
Shorten as a shapeshifter interested only in power.

Playing strongly to his advantage is Turnbull’s shift away from the constant 
wedging of Labor on national security. The humiliations Shorten accepted to 
prevent his party being branded as soft on terrorism seem – at least for the 
moment – a thing of the past. He looks more like a leader as a result. These 
days the rule-of-law arguments he might have raised in defence of Muslim 
Australians, refugees and whistleblowers, he now deploys to defend unionists 
who might fall foul of a re-empowered Australian Building and Construction 
Commission. “The ABCC should deal with ordinary industrial laws, not criminal 
matters. But the government’s given it extraordinary coercive powers on the 
back of Dyson Heydon’s royal commission … powers more draconian to deal with 
tradies on Australian building sites than for police or courts handling ice 
trafficking or terrorism.”

My job isn’t to convince Malcolm Turnbull or News Limited that they should 
vote for me
Bill Shorten 
Shorten cuts a different figure these days. The body language is not as 
exaggerated. He has abandoned his most irritating pose: faux-thoughtful. His 
brows are no longer theatrically creased for the cameras. The serious face he 
presents now looks like his own. He’s looking for his old voice, the one he had 
before he went into parliament. “What I’m trying to do is talk to people and 
make sure our polices are speaking to their future. I’m very clear now. I feel 
I have a clarity of purpose that has been two and a half years in the making.”

Nine hundred and counting 

We’ve met on a hot Sydney autumn afternoon at roughly the 900-day mark of his 
leadership of the opposition. He’s fond of the figure, which crops up again and 
again in our conversation: “We’ve spent 900 days working on what we think we 
should do ... ”

I observe it’s a strange sort of a job being leader of the opposition: whoever 
has it wants desperately to be rid of it. Shorten cuts me off: “It’s the job 
before the one you want, but in my opinion the only way to get to the job you 
want is to do the job you’ve got.” There’s something of the flavour of Xavier 
in the way he talks up the value of the long grind of opposition. “You can’t 
know what this job is on the first day. What you learn about being an 
opposition leader is acquired over time, from scars, with lessons, with talking 
to people, with what governments do, how your party organises its ideas. To 
anyone who came to me and said, ‘One day I’d like to be prime minister,’ I 
would say to them, ‘First you must be opposition leader, because the lessons 
you’re learning now will make you a better prime minister.’ I can’t say I’ve 
enjoyed every day of opposition, but I can say that I think I’m a better leader 
for every day I’ve had.”

Australians crave change. But this election won't deliver it | David Marr
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/10/australians-crave-change-but-this-election-wont-deliver-it-david-marr>
Australian politics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-politics> are said to be 
volatile. Really, they’re repetitive. The same stories are told, the same 
scenes recur again and again with only a switch of cast. It’s as if the system 
itself is incapable of learning. We find ourselves in so many ways where we 
were in Gillard’s time. An opposition leader not much loved faces a prime 
minister under attack from within. There was at least an argument last time 
that restoring Rudd might revive the fortunes of his party. Not a skerrick of 
such hope attaches to Abbott. The government is restive. The opposition is 
disciplined. Again the country wonders if an opposition leader can rise above 
the narrow politics that brought him to the top. There’s no doubt Bill Shorten 
would have made a fine premier of Victoria. But can he scale up?

“I look forward to demonstrating that,” he says. “I know what the nation 
should look like in 10 and 15 years’ time and it’s up to me to tell that story 
to the nation. My job isn’t to convince Malcolm Turnbull or News Limited that 
they should vote for me. My job is to convince Australians I have a plan for 
the future.”

• Faction Man by David Marr is published by Black Inc on 18 May priced $22.99
 