
The Baulkham Hills African Ladies Troupe begins with a close-up of a 
soulful-looking African woman in a pink singlet. She’s in front of a blue 
projected background simulating rain, touching her face. Her eyes are closed 
and her hands are wet. Small streaks of water trickle down her arms as her 
voiceover begins: “I love my neck … ”

Whatever beauty that moment has turns devastating in a heartbeat. As a deep, 
slow, operatic song plays on the soundtrack, matched to images of other women’s 
faces and hands, the narrator completes her sentence: “because it was never 
touched.”

Director Ros Horin’s documentary is a behind-the-scenes account of the titular 
stage production 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2013/aug/19/baulkham-hills-african-ladies-troupe1>
 and the remarkable people at its core. Arriving in cinemas this week after 
making the rounds at the Sydney and Melbourne film festivals, the film’s 
champions include veteran film-makers Gillian Armstrong (“emotional and 
uplifting”) and George Miller (“remarkable and unforgettable”).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fi-was-five-when-i-was-kidnapped-powerful-new-documentary-turns-heartbreak-into-hope%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2601c859968856f57a491e8bed38bce3d34515ed%2F0_0_3744_5616%2F3744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20was%20five%20when%20I%20was%20kidnapped'%3A%20powerful%20new%20documentary%20turns%20heartbreak%20into%20hope&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fi-was-five-when-i-was-kidnapped-powerful-new-documentary-turns-heartbreak-into-hope%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20was%20five%20when%20I%20was%20kidnapped%27%3A%20powerful%20new%20documentary%20turns%20heartbreak%20into%20hope&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fi-was-five-when-i-was-kidnapped-powerful-new-documentary-turns-heartbreak-into-hope%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2601c859968856f57a491e8bed38bce3d34515ed%2F0_0_3744_5616%2F3744.jpg>
 Ros Horin, the director of The Baulkham Hills African Ladies Troupe. 
Horin, an experienced stage director, worked with four African-raised women to 
turn their harrowing lives into a cathartic experience. First as theatre and 
now as a film she hopes will have a long life.

Rosemary grew up in Kenya and was abused for several years by members of her 
own family. Aminata was 16 when she was kidnapped by a rebel leader during the 
Sierra Leone civil war in the 1990s. She became a sex slave. Yarrie, a victim 
of the same war, grew up in a refugee camp in Guinea. There’s also Yordanos, 
whose story we will illuminate in a moment.

After introducing the four key subjects – none of whom had professional acting 
experience – Horin’s documentary poses a question she has spent a lot of time 
contemplating: how do women survive something like this?

“I have arrived at the conclusion that you can survive and reconstruct your 
life but it is absolutely dependent on breaking your silence,” she tells 
Guardian Australia. “Being able tell your story and have it acknowledged and 
heard and validated.

“Just imagine having this deep dark secret inside you that you feel you can’t 
mention to anyone. It’s like having a rock inside your stomach. Like this thing 
that’s constantly pulling you down.”

Yordanos’ journey to regain her life involved combining the theatre production 
with ongoing weekly counselling. When she was a young child, she watched her 
father kill her mother. When she was five years old, she was taken and trained 
to be a child soldier by the Eritrean army. For a decade and a half she 
suffered violence and sexual abuse.

Preparing the play required extensively workshopping sessions to find ways to 
tell each person’s stories. This meant Yordanos and the rest of the group had 
to revisit the trauma of their pasts, session after session, week after week. 
All this before getting on stage and reliving it, again and again, in front of 
strangers. It became too much for her. Four weeks in, Yordanos suffered an 
emotional collapse and quit.

“I felt tired and drained and I couldn’t continue,” she says. “There’s so many 
things that happened. I was five when I was kidnapped. From that age until my 
teenage life, I was in that place. While making this I had so many flashbacks 
and I couldn’t cope with all of that.

“I felt like the best thing for me was to withdraw. Just, get away from me, I 
don’t want to be telling this again. But my counsellor thought I was strong 
enough to go back and continue it. That is what I did. I was so grateful I got 
to finish it.

“In my life I have been voiceless. But to stand there and speak in such a way, 
to say ‘this is what happened to me and I’m explaining it’, I think it has huge 
power.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fi-was-five-when-i-was-kidnapped-powerful-new-documentary-turns-heartbreak-into-hope%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52dd7531f209d528e17af52e90e4d5009f8bb4bb%2F0_0_1920_1080%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20was%20five%20when%20I%20was%20kidnapped'%3A%20powerful%20new%20documentary%20turns%20heartbreak%20into%20hope&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fi-was-five-when-i-was-kidnapped-powerful-new-documentary-turns-heartbreak-into-hope%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20was%20five%20when%20I%20was%20kidnapped%27%3A%20powerful%20new%20documentary%20turns%20heartbreak%20into%20hope&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fi-was-five-when-i-was-kidnapped-powerful-new-documentary-turns-heartbreak-into-hope%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52dd7531f209d528e17af52e90e4d5009f8bb4bb%2F0_0_1920_1080%2F1920.jpg>
 Yordanos Haile-Michael was a young child when she watched her father kill her 
mother. At the age of five, she was taken and trained to be a child soldier in 
the Eritrean army. Photograph: Goodship 
In the early days of workshopping, Horin, concerned about the women’s welfare, 
would sometimes float the idea of abandoning the play altogether when things 
became overwhelming. These conversations tended to be marked by long stretches 
of silence, she says, eventually broken by “one voice which would pipe up and 
say, ‘Yes, this pain is coming out. But I can’t tell you how much better I 
feel.’”


The director used various techniques to protect the women from revisiting the 
most painful aspects of their stories. Instead of Aminata reading out a court 
testimony detailing her rape, for example, Horin swapped roles, so Aminata 
became the lawyer character and a friend played her. This sort of approach was 
used with each of the women in various ways, including through video footage 
and songs.

“If somebody was very fragile and they were observing aspects of their story I 
could say to them, ‘Tonight you don’t have to come on stage and observe that or 
even listen to it,’” Horin says. “There wasn’t just one structure to the play. 
There was a kind of A version, then a B version, then a C version. This was all 
invented out of necessity. How to solve a practical problem and not be too hard 
on the women.”

The results are inspiring to say the least. The group bonded and grew like a 
family; they now refer to each other as sisters. There are scenes in the film 
that bring tears to your eyes, though the story is ultimately life-affirming. 
Among its messages, perhaps, is that hope comes in many forms.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fi-was-five-when-i-was-kidnapped-powerful-new-documentary-turns-heartbreak-into-hope%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40541dad39e6b76462a3b9d02e01421a6ad839b3%2F0_0_1920_1080%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20was%20five%20when%20I%20was%20kidnapped'%3A%20powerful%20new%20documentary%20turns%20heartbreak%20into%20hope&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fi-was-five-when-i-was-kidnapped-powerful-new-documentary-turns-heartbreak-into-hope%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20was%20five%20when%20I%20was%20kidnapped%27%3A%20powerful%20new%20documentary%20turns%20heartbreak%20into%20hope&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fi-was-five-when-i-was-kidnapped-powerful-new-documentary-turns-heartbreak-into-hope%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40541dad39e6b76462a3b9d02e01421a6ad839b3%2F0_0_1920_1080%2F1920.jpg>
 ‘Among its messages is that hope comes in many forms’: Yordanos Haile-Michael, 
Rosemary Kariuki-Fyfe and Yarrie Bangura. Photograph: Goodship 
The four subjects found different pathways to resilience. One has focused on 
poetry, another on participating in philanthropic projects. Yordanos says that 
because of sticking with the stage production – slogging it out when her 
instincts told her to quit – she is now in a better place than ever.

“I tried so hard to fit in with my own community, it didn’t work,” she says. 
“But this has given me faith in humans. I made friends from different 
backgrounds and I get to be seen as totally the person I am. I came to accept 
that this is what I am meant to be and I am OK with that person.

“For someone like me, I have no one to blame. I can’t go out there saying, 
‘You have done this to me.’ There is no one to say sorry, or even to 
acknowledge me as a human being. The play, for people to come to see it, to 
meet so many different people and to be able to talk about it openly – it’s 
amazing. To me, I got my life back. I got me back.”

• The Baulkham Hills African Ladies Troupe is in cinemas now
 