
Rarely have we needed the arts more. Rarely have they been so threatened. If 
we can’t imagine a better future we won’t get one. But we are living in a 
Gradgrind age. When a recent education secretary declares that it “couldn’t be 
further from the truth” that it is helpful to study the humanities. When it is 
hard for all but the rich to get through drama school. When an 
institutionalised contempt makes the minister for arts the minister for 
football.

It has always been one of the glories of the Observer that it has stood up for 
the arts by covering them critically as well as zestfully, not being suborned 
by PR machines. And it has long been received wisdom that the most famous of my 
predecessors,Kenneth Tynan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/series/kenneth-tynan-at-the-observer>, was a 
dazzling advocate and gadfly. Asked to look through the archive of arts pieces, 
I decided to put his reputation to the test. It survived.

Fervour and precision; pungency and political commitment. Above all, it is his 
range – of subjects and emotions – that knocks me out. It has long been evident 
that when Tynan talked about “high-definition performance” he was evoking 
himself. What’s more, he changed things.

Tynan was the Observer’s theatre critic from 1954 to 1963. In those years – 
fewer than I had thought – he made it seem that dramatic criticism was the 
natural prism through which to look at the whole of life. He said that a good 
critic identifies what is important on the stage; a great one “perceives what 
is not happening”. Tynan did both.

First he diagnosed the malaise. A tepid English stage tradition. A place that 
he called “Loamshire”, unpalatable to anyone under 40 – which was, of course, a 
place that could be called England. In the 1950s he found a London theatre 
scene that was dominated by “detective stories, Pineroesque melodramas, 
quarter-witted farces, debutante comedies, overweight musicals and unreviewable 
revues”.

Then he found what he considered the remedy. Tynan’s most famous word is 
“fuck”: he was the first person to say it on telly. His most celebrated piece 
is still his review ofLook Back in Anger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2003/may/21/theatre.samanthaellis>, which he 
reviewed in the spring of 1956. Loamshire citizens had reacted biliously to 
John Osborne’s play. On the wireless, the critic Ivor Brown considered it 
unthinkable that, as a colonel’s daughter, Alison Porter would have remained in 
such an “unspeakably squalid” setting. The impresario Binkie Beaumont walked 
out. The first-night audience was said to gasp at the sight of an ironing board 
on stage, though one spectator told me that the real surprise was seeing people 
reading the Sunday papers. Enter Tynan, declaring that Osborne’s Jimmy Porter, 
ribald, candid and despairing, was “the completest young pup in our literature 
since Hamlet”. And, of course, proclaiming: “I doubt if I could love anyone who 
did not wish to seeLook Back in Anger.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftheobserver%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fkenneth-tynan-intellectual-slum-clearance-stage-susannah-clapp%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c1dc6d7915e214ad60af5e1b573069b6a7b50a6%2F0_352_3712_2227%2F3712.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Kenneth%20Tynan%20brilliantly%20achieved%20an%20intellectual%20slum-clearance%20of%20the%20stage%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftheobserver%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fkenneth-tynan-intellectual-slum-clearance-stage-susannah-clapp%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Kenneth%20Tynan%20brilliantly%20achieved%20an%20intellectual%20slum-clearance%20of%20the%20stage%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftheobserver%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fkenneth-tynan-intellectual-slum-clearance-stage-susannah-clapp%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c1dc6d7915e214ad60af5e1b573069b6a7b50a6%2F0_352_3712_2227%2F3712.jpg>
 Jimmy Porter, played by Kenneth Haigh, dances with his friend Cliff (Alan 
Bates) while his wife Alison (Mary Ure) uses the offending ironing board in a 
scene from John Osborne’s 1956 production ofLook Back in Anger at the Royal 
Court Theatre in London. Photograph: Picture Post/Getty Images 
It was a gauntlet review, defiant as well as supportive. The person it was 
thought to do for was Terence Rattigan, master of the well-made play. Actually, 
Rattigan’s pain and subtlety have made his plays last better than Osborne’s. He 
is more penetrating because he is more oblique. Tynan brilliantly achieved what 
he praised Bernard Shaw, in his role as critic, for carrying out: “an 
intellectual slum-clearance” of the stage. The theatre was altered 
definitively, utterly improved for having its gentility shaken, for losing its 
gazebos. Yet though I am pleased thatLook Back in Anger exists, I don’t want to 
see it again.

Tynan’s judgment wasn’t flawless. Most critics would surely like to be 
remembered for identifying important talent before it is established. In that 
regard, Tynan’s critical adversary on theSunday Times, Harold Hobson, had at 
least as good a record, speaking up early for Beckett and Pinter. The film 
critic Penelope Gilliatt described the characteristic sound of Sunday mornings 
as that of Hobson barking up the wrong tree. Sometimes that barking was 
Tynan’s. It was, though, more melodious and more memorable than Hobson’s.

Tynan’s genius was for evocation, for trapping a performance in ink and making 
it matter, showing that the theatre could send you back to daily life with 
enhanced eyes. He did not suffer from the bane of drama critics: adjectival 
effusion – the sort of phrase that gets critics’ names up outside theatres. He 
summoned up particular presences, leaving you with the fragrance or the stink 
of an evening. He conjured up John Gielgud: “His present performance as a 
simpering valet is an act of boyish mischief, carried out with extreme elegance 
and the general aspect of a tight, smart, walking umbrella.” He excoriated 
Vivien Leigh’s “periwinkle charm”, slating her Lady Macbeth as “more 
niminy-piminy than thundery-blundery”. Leigh’s husband, Laurence Olivier, 
offered Tynan the job of literary manager at the newly formed NationalTheatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre>, exclaiming: “God – anything to get 
you off thatObserver.”

His famous dandyism – plum-coloured trousers, yellow socks, cigarette held 
between the third and fourth finger – was part of what made him right for the 
job. He was responsive to flesh and fabric and gesture, as well as word and 
theme and thought. The opposite of a deskbound inkpot, he moved around the 
world, and his pieces were unusually three-dimensional. He never fell into the 
trap of being too literary: of reviewing a play as if it were a book 
inconveniently cut up into human beings. He looked for total theatre – and 
found it in Joan Littlewood.

He was buoyant not only in reviews but in the less famous profiles. Here, free 
not only to react but to seek out subjects, he made good choices as well as 
good sentences, not merely fashionable or youth-pleasing. He admired Noël 
Coward, some of whose idiom entered his prose: “With the passage of time, the 
profundities peel away and the basic trivialities remain to enchant us.” And in 
the same year that he salutedLook Back in Anger he sought out the 84-year-old 
Edward Gordon Craig, the prophet of modern theatre, who was living near Nice, 
impoverished and forgotten.

Craig, the son of actress Ellen Terry, was a visionary designer and director, 
and a profligate lover. Tynan chronicled marvellously his mixture of the 
inspired and the haywire: new ideas aboutThe Tempest; memories of a childhood 
meeting with Lewis Carroll: “Tried to divert me with a puzzle about ferrying 
six cows across a river on a raft. Very tiresome…”; and the suggestion that 
Shakespeare’s sonnets must have been addressed to a cat. Craig told his 
interviewer he had the right face for a critic: “The look of a blooming martyr.”
 