


Dr María Gonzales cannot recall the exact moment when she realised Venezuela’s 
health crisis had enveloped her hospital, the Luis Razetti in the Caribbean 
coastal city of Barcelona.

It may have been during a surge in cases of scabies, a skin infection that 
ought to be easily prevented with soap, water and disinfectant. It could have 
been her first sight of an emaciated child, something she had only previously 
seen in medical books or documentaries about famines in Africa. Or perhaps it 
was when she found herself prescribing a 40-minute cold shower because the 
pharmacy had run out of anti-fever drugs.


But the severity of the situation was certainly clear earlier this month, when 
a patient came in with a suspected case of diphtheria – a disease thatVenezuela 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/venezuela> was supposed to have eradicated 
more than 20 years ago.


“It’s like we have returned to the last century,” she says. “Everything is 
going backwards.”


Venezuela on the brink: a journey through a country in crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/11/venezuela-on-the-brink-a-journey-through-a-country-in-crisis>
The refrain is increasingly common among medical professionals in Venezuela, 
where acute shortages of food, drugs and sanitary products threaten to reverse 
decades of health gains.


Despite its immense oil wealth, the country is in the midst of devastating 
economic, social and health crises 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/11/venezuela-on-the-brink-a-journey-through-a-country-in-crisis>
. It has the world’s steepest economic decline, the second highest murder rate 
and the sharpest-rising inflation (forecast to reach 2,200% by the end of next 
year, according to the International Monetary Fund).

These problems all converge in the nation’s hospitals, where doctors report 
rising levels of mortality thanks to a dire shortage of medical supplies, 
shutdowns of operating theatres, staff declines and violent crime, including 
gunshots during surgery and mugging in corridors.


For years, among the proudest boasts of the Bolivarian Socialist 
administration was that it eradicated hunger, reduced poverty and improved 
healthcare for the poor.

But the trend now appears to be moving in the opposite direction at an 
alarming speed. Reliable data is hard to find. The government has acknowledged 
that maternal mortality – a key healthcare indicator – has doubled in the past 
year. The opposition says the deterioration is five-fold – and that death of 
newborns increased 100-fold.


The Venezuelan Health Observatory, a research centre at the Central University 
of Venezuela in Caracas, estimates thatfewer than 10% of operating theatres, 
emergency rooms and intensive care units are fully operational 
<http://www.ovsalud.org/publicaciones/salud/encuesta-nacional-de-hospitales-2016/>
. It says76% of hospitals suffer from scarcity of medicines, 81% have a lack of 
surgical materials and 70% complain of intermittent water supply 
<http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(16)31523-9/abstract>
.


“We are seeing a collapse in the public health system.” said Maritza Landaeta, 
a senior member of theHealth <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> 
Observatory. “Venezuela is witnessing a miracle, a miracle of destruction.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fvenezuela-crisis-hospitals-shortages-barcelona-caracas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcac1ea07e7dc5ab9da0cc4a0a3bf4be8ad277fb1%2F0_234_4000_2399%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Like%20doctors%20in%20a%20war%E2%80%99%3A%20inside%20Venezuela%E2%80%99s%20healthcare%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fvenezuela-crisis-hospitals-shortages-barcelona-caracas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Like%20doctors%20in%20a%20war%E2%80%99%3A%20inside%20Venezuela%E2%80%99s%20healthcare%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fvenezuela-crisis-hospitals-shortages-barcelona-caracas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcac1ea07e7dc5ab9da0cc4a0a3bf4be8ad277fb1%2F0_234_4000_2399%2F4000.jpg>
 Patients lie on beds in the emergency room of a hospital in Barquisimeto, 
Venezuela. Photograph: Bloomberg/Bloomberg via Getty Images 
Her concerns were echoed by 10 physicians interviewed in three cities across 
the country. Without exception, they expressed alarm and anger at the 
deterioration they see.


“Sometimes I cry. It is so frustrating,” said Carlos Menezes, who recently 
qualified as a doctor after training at Luis Razetti. “People are dying because 
of this crisis.”


Menezes, and every staff member interviewed at Luis Razetti, asked to be 
identified with a pseudonym for fear of repercussions in the current tense 
climate. Earlier this year, the president of the Venezuelan Association of 
Clinics and Hospitals in the state of Carabobo, wasdetained by police and 
questioned for three hours 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2015/04/29/venezuelas-health-care-crisis> after he 
went on TV to complain about medical shortages.

Some patients have been waiting for six months to have bones reset because 
there are no rods, pins and plates

Two doctors smuggled the Guardian past security guards for a tour of their 
hospital, where the scale of deterioration was evident.


In the basement, the radiography room was permanently closed; patients were 
sleeping on dirty beds in the corridors. On the ground floor, doctors were 
staging a protest over shortages of drugs and medical equipment. In the 
second-floor trauma ward, some patients have been waiting for six months to 
have bones reset because there are no rods, pins and plates. In the paediatric 
ward, impoverished mothers of malnourished children were soliciting donations 
of food and medicine that the hospital could not provide.

The eighth-floor psychiatric ward was perhaps the most disturbing. “We have 
zero psych drugs so instead we use sedatives. The patients have been sedated 
for the past three months,” said Pablo Álvarez, another doctor at the hospital. 
“This is extremely bad because their pathologies are worsening the entire time 
and we are just masking the symptoms. The damage is irreversible.”


Luis Razetti is supposed to be the anchor hospital of the entire eastern 
region. As a level four medical institution, it should be able to deal with 
every form of treatment. The reality, however, is that it can barely cope with 
many of the basics.


In the orthopaedic department, there are no weights for traction devices, so 
nurses used Coke and Pepsi bottles filled with water. Two dangle at the foot of 
the bed of Daniel Usman, whose femur was broken in a gang shootout. He says has 
been waiting two months for surgery because the blood bank does not have his 
type. Considered a suspect, he is permanently handcuffed to the hospital bed 
and has to buy his own painkillers.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fvenezuela-crisis-hospitals-shortages-barcelona-caracas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea342bbeefbd6d92534ea3a6b479fd7e7cb5fdea%2F0_30_960_1200%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Like%20doctors%20in%20a%20war%E2%80%99%3A%20inside%20Venezuela%E2%80%99s%20healthcare%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fvenezuela-crisis-hospitals-shortages-barcelona-caracas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Like%20doctors%20in%20a%20war%E2%80%99%3A%20inside%20Venezuela%E2%80%99s%20healthcare%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fvenezuela-crisis-hospitals-shortages-barcelona-caracas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea342bbeefbd6d92534ea3a6b479fd7e7cb5fdea%2F0_30_960_1200%2F960.jpg>
 Daniel Usman, who was injured in a gang shooting. Photograph: Jonathan Watts 
for the Guardian 
Staff say they have to reuse surgical gloves unless patients bring their own. 
There used to be six working radiotherapy machines; now there are none. Of the 
10 operating theatres, only two are in use, though only sporadically because it 
is often hard to find anaesthetics. The air conditioning is out of order. Only 
one lift works. The x-ray is functioning, but there there are no printing 
materials, so doctors have to diagnose and operate based on mobile phone photos 
of the screen.


“We have to improvise like doctors in a war,” says Álvarez who has been at the 
institution for more than five years.


The battlefield analogy is made all the more appropriate by the ever-present 
fear of violence: staff and patients have been mugged in the hospital 
corridors. Five of the 10 doctors interviewed by the Guardian reported 
receiving death threats.

“The insecurity in the hospital is worse than outside,” said one. “Gangs have 
entered during surgery and started shooting. They said if the patient cannot be 
saved, then we will be killed,” said another. “Two months ago, I was threatened 
with a grenade,” says a third.


But this pales in comparison to the dangers faced by the most seriously ill 
patients: children who cannot get adequate food, or cancer patients who are 
unable to get the appropriate chemotherapy treatments.


Nationwide, the Health Observatory believes malnutrition is the biggest worry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/24/venezuela-crisis-basic-food-shortages>
, causing 29 child deaths every day and stunting of 35% of poor rural infants.

Until recently, the hospital in Barcelona only had a few cases of kwashiorkor 
(a deficiency of proteins, which leads to distended stomachs), but now for the 
first time, they are also seeing children with the more serious marasmus 
(starvation that causes emaciation and diarrhoea).

The insecurity in the hospital is worse than outside … Gangs have entered 
during surgery and started shooting
A doctor at Luís Razetti hospital 
“It has become much worse in the past year. I have seen about 20 cases of 
marasmus in the last few months. We are also seeing dozens of cases of extreme 
weight loss,” said Álvarez.

Doctors have also accused the government of downplaying the threat of the Zika 
virus <https://www.theguardian.com/world/zika-virus>. While neighbouring Brazil 
and Colombia publish weekly updates of confirmed cases, President Nicolás 
Maduro has largely kept quiet about the virus. And while other countries in 
Latin America have reported hundreds of cases of Zika-related microcephaly, 
Venezuela has not acknowledged a single one.

Diphtheria is making a comeback, although Venezuela had been the first country 
in Latin America to eradicate the disease. The first few fatalities from the 
disease were confirmed in Bolívar state earlier this month. Since then, there 
have been between 17 and 22 deaths, according to local media. Another suspected 
case is under observation in Luis Razetti.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fvenezuela-crisis-hospitals-shortages-barcelona-caracas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d2aec182c86c0b60d28ab2a5452604c2d888812%2F0_233_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Like%20doctors%20in%20a%20war%E2%80%99%3A%20inside%20Venezuela%E2%80%99s%20healthcare%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fvenezuela-crisis-hospitals-shortages-barcelona-caracas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Like%20doctors%20in%20a%20war%E2%80%99%3A%20inside%20Venezuela%E2%80%99s%20healthcare%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fvenezuela-crisis-hospitals-shortages-barcelona-caracas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d2aec182c86c0b60d28ab2a5452604c2d888812%2F0_233_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 A patient at a hospital in Mérida, Venezuela. Photograph: Marco Bello/Reuters 
The situation is only a little better in Caracas. Thanks to its charitable 
foundation, the José Manuel de los Ríos hospital is one of the best-resourced 
medical institutions in the country, but it is also chronically short of drugs, 
staff and equipment.

Since 2005, the number of paediatricians is down from 10 to three, oncologists 
down from eight to four and there are 30% fewer nurses

Augusto Pereira, the head of the oncology department, said the mortality rate 
of patients had increased 5% in the past year. Infection rates are also 
creeping up due to shortages of staff, medicine and sterilisation equipment. 
Only one elevator is working. Two cats wander the corridors.

“Technically, our hospital should be closed. In other countries, we would be 
shut down. But in Venezuela, we are the best,” Pereira says.

Due to a shortage of anaesthetists and operating theatres, there are only 15 
to 20 paediatric operations a month, down from 100 in the past. Doctors are 
forced to argue with one another whose patients deserve priority.

“People are dying every day because of the delays,” said paediatric surgeon 
Alejandro Ferrer. “We have to wait until the patients get enough money for the 
examinations, then we do the diagnosis, then we have to wait for at least three 
weeks for an chance to do surgery. If you delay the treatment of a cancer 
patient, they are going to die.”

Others suffer a collapse in quality of life. Fifteen-year old Jaidiluz 
Pastrana was born with neurological problems, severe spina bifida and a cleft 
palate and is also now suffering hypertension and urinary infection because the 
hospital has run out of diuretics and catheters. “I’ve lost count of how many 
drug stores I have been to in the past week, but there is nothing,” her mother 
Luzmery Hurtade laments. “A year ago, I could have found what I needed, but not 
now.”


In other countries, we would be shut down. But in Venezuela, we are the best
Augusto Pereira, head of oncology 
Her daughter shares a room with José García, a five-week-old baby who has 
meningitis, hypertension, asthma, allergies and convulsions. The infant’s 
mother, Ana Blanco has a thick wad of prescriptions from the doctors to treat 
these ailments, but the hospital can provide nothing but a bed.

“I’ve spent more than a month looking for medicine. The doctor says it is 
important, but I can’t get it,” she says.

The public security problem has added to her woes. The previous Saturday, she 
was robbed at gunpoint outside the hospital on her way to a pharmacy. The 
assailant stole 6,000 bolivares, equivalent to $6 – or two days’ worth of her 
husband’s salary.


Faced by this combination of crises, medical staff feel powerless to help as 
they would like.


“Nine thousands doctors have left the country and the exodus is continuing,” 
says one of those who stayed, Yamila Battaglini. “I go to work worrying about 
broken elevators, supply shortages, staffing problems, and only then can I 
think about how to treat the patients,” she says. “We arrive exhausted even 
before we start surgery.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fvenezuela-crisis-hospitals-shortages-barcelona-caracas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F87524da26123775b8aac0efd86d446491f454a77%2F0_259_4928_2955%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Like%20doctors%20in%20a%20war%E2%80%99%3A%20inside%20Venezuela%E2%80%99s%20healthcare%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fvenezuela-crisis-hospitals-shortages-barcelona-caracas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Like%20doctors%20in%20a%20war%E2%80%99%3A%20inside%20Venezuela%E2%80%99s%20healthcare%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fvenezuela-crisis-hospitals-shortages-barcelona-caracas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F87524da26123775b8aac0efd86d446491f454a77%2F0_259_4928_2955%2F4928.jpg>
 Demonstrations against medicine shortages in Caracas. ‘I’ve lost count of how 
many drug stores I have been to in the past week, but there is nothing.’ 
Photograph: Juan Barreto/AFP/Getty Images 
Those who remain do not do so for the money: a doctor with more than 20 years’ 
experience gets paid less than 10 pence (12 cents) an hour in the public 
system. Ferrer says his commute costs more than this wage, though with private 
work, he can bump his income up towards $1,000 per month. Even then, he finds 
it difficult to make ends meet, particularly when – like many doctors – he 
finds himself dipping into his own wallet to pay for medicines or exams for 
poor patients.


His hope is for political change. “We have two options: leave or be part of 
the change,” he said. “I hope this bad stimulus can make us want something 
better.”

'Everyone is catching it': Venezuelans fear the worst as Zika infections rise
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/10/venezuela-zika-virus-infections-rise-recession>
Doctors have staged hunger strikes, medical associations have taken to the 
streets. Earlier this year, a group of 78 civil society groups jointly signed 
an open letter to the UN secretary general, Ban Ki-moon,demanding the situation 
in Venezuela be recognised as a humanitarian crisis 
<http://www.ovsalud.org/publicaciones/derechos-humanos/carta-ban-ki-moon-ddhh-venezuela/>
.

The opposition is also using the health crisis to score points against the 
government. Its expatriate supporters in Miami, Bogotá and Panama have gathered 
tonnes of medical supplies, but the authorities have blocked the supplies from 
entering the country. It has alsorebuffed offers of help from international 
charities and neighbouring countries 
<http://internacional.elpais.com/internacional/2016/09/20/america/1474403382_416211.html>
 .

Maduro insists it is not needed. “I doubt there is anywhere in the world, with 
the exception of Cuba, with a better health system than this one,” the 
president said earlier this year.

Such reassurances provoke grim laughter among doctors. “We are back in the 
dark ages in this country. Every day there is a tragedy. Every day children 
die,” Battaguni says. “We are facing a humanitarian disaster, no matter what 
the government claims.”

Additional research by Mariana Reyes

 * This article was amended on 20 October 2016. A previous version incorrectly 
identified Alejandro Ferrer’s occupation as paediatrician.  