
Rob Callender is talking about cheese. “My dad loves cheese, really loves it. 
So I’ve had to persuade him to cut down. Instead of leaping on every 
two-for-one in the supermarket, buy one really nice cheese once a week. Dairy 
farming is such a horrible industry.”


Callender’s passionate advocacy of veganism has made him an object of fun and 
curiosity on film sets, but he is now turning his environmentalism into art. In 
just over a month’s time, he he will begin shooting ashort crowd-funded feature 
film on climate change <https://incentivepictures.com/>.

The British actor, whose credits <http://gb.imdb.com/name/nm6792356/> include 
Sherlock <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/sherlock>, Pride and 
Prejudice and Zombies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/11/pride-and-prejudice-and-zombies-review-sam-riley-jane-austen>
, and the Guy Burgess character in the National Theatre revival of Another 
Country, has been chiefly famous among online fans forhis appearance in Game of 
Thrones 
<https://popgoesthenews.com/2016/05/25/nsfw-game-of-thrones-fans-buzz-about-penis-scene/>
 earlier this year. A close-up of his penis - “no, it wasn’t a body double,” he 
says, blushing - as his character Clarenzo examined himself for genital warts 
caused a stir.


The Observer view on global warming
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/17/arctic-sea-ice-climate-change-britain-must-commit-to-paris-agreement>
Callender prompted the scene himself. Kidding around on set while filming a 
very different episode, he said it was about time for a male nude shot. Writers 
David Benioff and Daniel Weiss took him at his word, and the script was 
delivered soon after. “I thought it was quite amusing,” he says. “I don’t think 
we should be embarrassed about nakedness. And I had a wig, so no one would 
recognise me.”

There will be no reprise of this scene in his climate change film, however. A 
thriller that takes a series of dams as its backdrop, The Incentive revolves 
around a “sort of Steve Jobs/Elon Musk” figure of an ambitious and charismatic 
entrepreneur taking on global warming. But is he all that he seems?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Frob-callender-the-incentive-global-warming-game-of-thrones-sherlock%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc098cfa8792caa00a90d44925d02cbfdef391af5%2F0_0_4132_2720%2F4132.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='No%20time%20to%20waste'%3A%20climate%20changes%20for%20films%20on%20global%20warming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Frob-callender-the-incentive-global-warming-game-of-thrones-sherlock%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27No%20time%20to%20waste%27%3A%20climate%20changes%20for%20films%20on%20global%20warming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Frob-callender-the-incentive-global-warming-game-of-thrones-sherlock%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc098cfa8792caa00a90d44925d02cbfdef391af5%2F0_0_4132_2720%2F4132.jpg>
 Rob Callender on stage in Another Country by Julian Mitchell. Photograph: 
Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Combining elements of action and disaster movies with spy conspiracies and 
flashes of comedy - includingSimon Amstell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/simon-amstell> in a “celebrity vegan 
cameo” -the film aims to portray the perils of climate change without preaching 
or bludgeoning audiences. It will be shown initially at film festivals, with 
the hope of a general release or a bigger budget remake if successful.

Callender has been working on the script for two years, and is now in the 
final stages ofraising funds for the production 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/431020262/the-incentive> via Kickstarter. 
Shooting will be at theCruachan dam <http://www.visitcruachan.co.uk/> in 
Scotland in November.

This is a personal quest for Callender. A vegan who has converted all his 
immediate family to the cause, with the exception of his father’s cheese habit, 
he believes “in embodying the change you want to make”. Making a film about 
climate change was a natural fit because he believes the problem is now growing 
so urgent that we only have a few years, “a very short window”, to make the 
differences to the economy and our consumption patterns that are needed to cut 
greenhouse gas emissions.

Winchester-educated Callender has an unusual perspective on the issue, having 
been born in Japan and brought up largely in Hong Kong and Los Angeles. His 
father was an executive at Cathay Pacific – “I think I have a deep guilt at 
having taken so many flights,” he says – and his experience of other cultures 
encourages him to think that if people can be persuaded there are different 
ways of living without our overweening dependence on fossil fuels, we can 
switch rapidly to those other modes. “Young people see this,” he says, as their 
exposure to the internet gives them a broader viewpoint of other cultures. “My 
grandfather doesn’t believe in it.”

Deliciously Stella: the Instagram sensation serving up raw Kinder eggs on 
avo-toast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/18/deliciously-stella-clean-eating-instagram-comedian-bella-younger-interview>
His sense of urgency has deeply personal roots as well. While Callender, now 
25, was at theGuildhall <http://www.gsmd.ac.uk/> school of drama, his 
motherdeveloped cancer in her early 50s and died. “She was incredibly healthy, 
she had no vices,” he says. “It showed me that you can’t wait around. There is 
no time to waste,. All the social worries just melt away… you’re not thinking 
about how you ‘should’ behave, you just show what you are thinking, very 
directly.”

Films about climate change do not, in general, have a happy history. Al Gore’s 
2006An Inconvenient Truth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2006/sep/17/documentary.algore> won an Oscar, 
but was a documentary, beautifully paced and shot, but essentially the filming 
of an hour-long standup lecture.The Age of Stupid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/mar/20/the-age-of-stupid-review> looked 
and sounded different, but underneath was much the same format, withPete 
Postlethwaite <https://www.theguardian.com/film/pete-postlethwaite> narrating 
an impassioned polemic against rampant consumerism. Others have been less 
successful.The Day After Tomorrow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/News_Story/Critic_Review/Guardian_review/0,,1225934,00.html>
 employed conventional disaster movie tropes, while 1995’sWaterworld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/18/kevin-costner-waterworld-is-beloved-around-the-world>
, starring Kevin Costner with gills, put paid to the genre for a decade. 
Arguably the best job was done byThe Simpsons Movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/jul/24/animation.family>.

Callender believes turning climate change into watchable filmic form is vital 
if people are to be persuaded to change their behaviour. “It’s this massive 
issue, this huge part of our lives, and it is missing [on film],” he says. A 
documentary was out of the question, he says. The defining question of our 
times, that of whether we deal with climate change or fail to do so, must and 
should be a subject of art. “We are failing otherwise,” he says.

Above all, Callender says, his film must work on its own terms. “I want people 
to be awake while they watch it,” he says. “I want them to be watching to see 
what happens next, just like any other film. It’s not a lecture.”
 