
Father Alberto Franco has spent much of his life speaking out for the most 
vulnerable people in Colombia – men and women who have been kicked off their 
land and attacked by armed groups serving powerful elites. He has been 
threatened and persecuted, so perhaps it is natural that he is “moderately 
pessimistic” about hopes for an end to the world’slongest civil war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/16/colombia-brink-ending-civil-war-farc>
.

“For us, the end of the armed conflict is not peace. Peace is building a more 
just society, a more inclusive society, respectful of human rights and the 
environment,” says Franco, who is a leader with the Inter-Church Justice and 
Peace Commission. “While there are interests in the land, there will be social 
conflicts.”

Colombia's pipes to nowhere: villagers die of thirst as corruption stalls dam 
project
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jun/18/colombia-water-drought-rancheria-corruption>
Two leftist guerrilla groups, the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, or 
theFarc <https://www.theguardian.com/world/farc>, and the National Liberation 
Army, or ELN,are negotiating with the government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/30/colombia-starts-peace-talks-with-eln-countrys-second-biggest-guerrilla-group>
 to end decades of war that have claimed more than220,000 lives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/25/colombia-conflict-death-toll-commission>
 and leftabout 6.7 million people <http://www.unhcr.org/570cf4706.html> 
displaced within the country, the second highest number in the worldbehind Syria
 <http://www.unhcr.org/cgi-bin/texis/vtx/page?page=49e486a76&submit=GO>.

For activists like Franco, and Jani Silva, a community leader from the 
south-western Putumayo department, many of the injustices that underlie the 
conflict in theworld’s largest single supplier of cocaine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/apr/20/united-nations-global-drug-policy-colombia-juan-manuel-santos>
 remain unresolved. This is despite the passage in 2011 ofthe Victims and Land 
Restitution Law <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-latin-america-13736523> – 
which aims to hand back the millions of hectares of land stolen during decades 
of violence.

Even as hopes for a lasting peace rise a notch with every passing week, the 
number of attacks on human rights defendersby paramilitaries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/07/colombia-peace-talks-farc-eln-guerrilas-usuga-clan>
 – right-wing groups involved in drug trafficking and illegal mining, and often 
with links to the elites – has increased dramatically, Franco says.

In one two-week period at the end of February, seven human rights workers were 
killed <http://www.abcolombia.org.uk/subpage.asp?subid=638>, according to 
ABColombia, an umbrella group of British and Irish NGOs, includingChristian Aid 
<http://www.christianaid.org.uk/whatwedo/the-americas/colombia.aspx>, which, 
withPeace Brigades International <http://www.peacebrigades.org.uk/>, helped 
organise the activists’ trip to London to raise awareness.

ABColombia has warned that paramilitary groups are preparing to move into 
vacuums 
<http://www.christianaid.org.uk/pressoffice/pressreleases/april_2016/christian_aid_welcome_colombian_governmenteln_peace_talks.aspx>
 left as the Farc guerrillas disarm.

Franco says some political-economic forces want to derail the peace process by 
generating distrust through violence, while other factions view peace as a risk.

“In the deal on a truth commission 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/news/2015/06/colombia-farc-rebels-agree-form-truth-commission-150604235948145.html>
, they see a risk that their names will appear in public, and they think that 
they could end up in court because of thespecial jurisdiction for peace 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2016/03/28/colombia-prosecution-false-positive-cases-under-special-jurisdiction-peace>
,” he said, referring to a body set up as part of the years-long peace talks 
and meant to handle grave violations of human rights and international law.


Nonetheless, he says the people want peace even if their hope is coloured by 
fear.

“There is fear about breaches [of peace deals], about what could happen. There 
is fear about the arrival of companies who have links to criminals … And it’s 
important to know that the big media groups are drawn from economic factions 
that enriched themselves during the war. And these media are spreading the idea 
that people are tired of the lengthy peace process but … they don’t say that 
people are tired of 60 or 70 years of war, killings and violence, and 
destruction and pillage,” he says.

Stop investing in Colombian blood: land activists appeal to the UK | Sam Jones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/nov/10/colombia-land-grabs-activists-appeal-uk>
“I am moderately pessimistic in the sense that I see an opportunity to end the 
armed conflict … There are advances in the public awareness of the need for a 
better, fairer world but capital exerts such a power over people and the 
environment … I have not lost hope or the will to fight but neither do I 
believe that things will change radically yet.”

Franco, who works particularly with people of African descent and indigenous 
communities, also warned of the dangers of unethical investment by businesses 
driven only by profits.Land distribution in Colombia is among the most unequal 
in the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/nov/10/colombia-land-grabs-activists-appeal-uk>
 with nearly two-thirds of properties lacking formal titles.

“All they want to do is exploit and it is better if they do it without 
violence, but they do not have a problem resorting to violence as well,” he 
says, noting that companies had already turned on farmers, or campesinos, in 
some areas to grab land and extract gold, oil and copper or set up banana 
plantations or agro-industrial projects.

Community leader Silva says she has seen firsthand the effects of big business 
in Putumayo, where, she believes, oil companies “exploit irresponsibly” and 
contaminate the environment despite legal protection granted by courts to the 
Amazon peasant farmer reserve zone. She also criticised a recent law to set up
zones of interest for economic and social development in rural areas, or Zidres 
<http://politicsofpoverty.oxfamamerica.org/2016/02/on-the-road-to-peace-in-colombia-its-important-to-remember-the-underlying-causes-of-conflict/>
.

“This is a way to legitimise giving land to the big companies and not the 
small producer … The [peasant farmer] reserve zone allows us all to be owners 
of small tranches where we can build a way of life. The Zidres is designed so 
that big companies can earn more and increase the large land holdings, or
latifundios,” she said. 

For Silva, who has also been threatened for years, human rights and 
environmental protection are intrinsically linked.


“When I go to other places where the businesses are, and I see only oil and 
contamination, that is very painful,” she says.

“What are we leaving our children? … In meetings, I tell parents, ‘Those of 
you who don’t care about protecting and defending where we live and what we 
have, then don’t have children. Why would you give them a future you are not 
even going to defend?’”


For Franco, civil society, indigenous groups, rural communities and other 
activists must be the guarantors of peace. He also believes there are some 
smaller political and economic factions that recognise the need for a peace 
process, while the international community has a key role to play too.

Last month, Britain’s foreign secretary, Philip Hammond, visited Colombia to 
reaffirm support for the peace process. Britainhas contributed 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/foreign-secretary-visits-colombia-to-reaffirm-uk-support-for-peace-process>
 £4.2m to a UN fund, and £1.1m to an EU fund, to support peace. The US 
secretary of state, John Kerry,also met Farc leaders during the peace talks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/22/john-kerry-unprecedented-peace-talks-colombia-farc-rebels-havana>
 in Cuba.

Colombia's City of Women: a haven from violence | Sibylla Brodzinsky
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/20/colombia-city-of-women-safe-haven-from-violence-conflict>
Silva and Franco say the support, or protective accompaniment 
<http://www.peacebrigades.org.uk/country-groups/pbi-uk/what-we-do/international-protective-accompaniment/>
, provided by international groups such as Peace Brigades International, is 
critical.


“Sometimes someone would say, ‘Go back, you are going to be killed,’ and at 
those times, the accompaniment from other human rights groups was very 
important … Three years ago, I was threatened and when the people we thought 
were threatening us realised that [I] was supported, and my name was known, 
they went quiet,” Silva says.

Franco and Silva hope other activists around the world will recognise the 
universality implicit in their domestic struggle.


“It might seem a small thing because we are far away in our fields, trying to 
survive,” says Silva, “but we are also fighting a fight for people here [in 
London]. We are fighting for the right to have a healthy environment, and this 
is not just for us and our children, but for everyone in the world.”

“The global fight against injustice and global warming is very fragile, 
fragile in proportion to the risk to the planet,” says Franco. “… The way we 
relate to the environment, and the way we consume, will determine the future of 
humanity.”
 