
You always think, when you hear about people who ignore the warnings and go 
out in hurricanes, or refuse to be evacuated from fires, that you would never 
be so reckless and would get right away at the first sign of danger. Then my 
hometown, York, flooded and I thought, well, it floods every year and we 
usually walk into my favourite pub,the Lowther <http://thelowther.co.uk/>, on a 
gangplank raised over the water, so we’re all used to this. People who live 
beside the river always get their sandbags out. It’s no big deal.

 Which is why on Sunday, I still walked into the city centre from the suburb 
of Fulford, even though my route had to change three times as more and more 
roads were cut off by the rising tide. Even though every street I walked past 
had people standing in the road just to look at the floods, taking photos and 
striking up chats with complete strangers to debate whether, say, that garage 
had been so far underwater in 2000, orwas this the worst York flood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/27/flood-hit-northern-england-told-expect-further-rainfall>
 ever?

UK floods: people told to waterproof homes because of increase in 'unknown 
extremes' - live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/live/2015/dec/28/uk-floods-thousands-evacuated-after-unprecedented-crisis>
 There were rivers where there used to be side streets, and when I made it to 
the city centre, police officers on foot directing us down muddy pathways so 
you could still reach the shops. You could see the staff of an Italian 
restaurant entering their business, battling through the sandbags at their 
front door, ignoring a rather glamorous Mercedes that appeared to be floating 
in deeper water only 25ft away. And the rest of us just rubbernecking with our 
phones out – it was oddly reminiscent of the opening scenes of Virginia Woolf’s 
Orlando, where the river Thames has frozen over in 1608 and all of London has 
come out to go on the ice.

 I needed to buy a laptop charger, and the big electrical stores were still 
open. Except they had both run out of that particular stock, and did not know 
if the delivery lorries would make it through tomorrow, or if they would even 
be open, “because Coney Street’s on amber alert. We might not be here 
tomorrow”, said a cheery assistant, with three of his colleagues agreeing. 
There seemed to be more assistants than customers – the Boxing Day sales had 
never been so desolate.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F28%2Fflood-rescue-teams-york-go-house-to-house-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F28%2F1451293412647%2FKP_993326_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Flood%20rescue%20teams%20go%20house%20to%20house%20in%20York%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F28%2Fflood-rescue-teams-york-go-house-to-house-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Flood%20rescue%20teams%20go%20house%20to%20house%20in%20York%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F28%2Fflood-rescue-teams-york-go-house-to-house-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F28%2F1451293412647%2FKP_993326_crop_640x360.jpg>
Flood rescue teams go house to house in York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/video/2015/dec/28/flood-rescue-teams-york-go-house-to-house-video>
Over on the drier side of town, the shops were fine, except anyone paying by 
card had to write all their details on a piece of paper, because the phone 
lines were now down, and they were trying to swipe purchases through on manual 
card machines. The cashpoints were going down too.

 Suddenly it was getting dark outside and I wanted to head home. Except I 
couldn’t – the buses were long since cancelled, and my plan to do everything on 
foot was now foiled too, with community support officers explaining that all 
roads to Fulford were now flooded, even pathways, and my only hope was a taxi 
that could take me via the A64. But there were no taxis. Mountain rescue vans 
coming all the way from Cleveland began to drive past us as I spoke to the 
police, insisting that surely I could still get round that side bit of 
Piccadilly? Lost tourists were asking me what to do, as if I had a clue. 
Something that felt vaguely adventurous now felt horrible – I tried street name 
after street name with the police officers. No, they said, Walmgate’s down, 
Peaseholme is down, Foss Islands Road is down, like some horrible game of 
dominoes. My stomach lurched as I finally had to accept that the city around us 
was being swallowed up by water, and that I had left my small daughter on the 
other side of it with her grandmother.

Flooding in northern England – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/gallery/2015/dec/27/flooding-northern-england-pictures>
Our house was still fine, being a good five roads beyond any burst riverbank 
(andYork <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/york> is built at the confluence of 
two rivers, so there is a lot of riverbank to go round), but I couldn’t get to 
it. The army had been evacuating families from the streets in between. People 
were starting to use words like levees, that I only knew from New Orleans. 
Then, like magic, a taxi appeared. The driver disregarded the police advice and 
took me a complicated different route in the opposite direction.

 People were still queuing up to buy navy polo necks in the sales, as we made 
our getaway. Driving across a roundabout that was half flooded, with a TV crew 
set up filming. You could still drive over the other side of it – just. We 
drove past lakes that used to be playing fields, with people standing all 
around them, in the dark, back to a house where my mother had been baking 
loaves of bread for the first time in years, in case the food shops all closed. 
It felt like the quiet, unexpected beginnings of an apocalypse.

 