
In 1944, George Orwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/may/11/georgeorwell.classics> looked 
back on his political commentary and sighed. “In a peaceful age I might have 
written ornate or merely descriptive books, and remained almost unaware of my 
political loyalties. As it is I have been forced into becoming a sort of 
pamphleteer.” If Orwell could think of himself as a mere pamphleteer, where 
does that leave everyone else who produces comment pieces?

Reading through national newspaper files offers few comforts. Indeed, nothing 
brings home the futility of political writing more starkly. It’s not just that 
virtually all of the writers and many of their targets are now forgotten. The 
arguments commentators make are generally as predictable as the speaking clock. 
Pick a newspaper of the left or right from the 20th century, or click on a 
left- or right-wing website today, and you can prophesy what a writer has to 
say before he or she has said it.

At the Observer, where Orwell wrote in his last days, there is a faint flicker 
of hope. We do not face the commercial and propaganda pressures to pander to 
our readers, because we are not sure who you are. Once you have said they are 
intelligent and literate, all we can add is that they are “liberal”: a label 
that is so capacious it includes everyone from moderate Tories to socialists.

Far from being a handicap, ignorance can be a blessing. We cannot address you 
as if we are fellow members of a religious sect or private club with commonly 
agreed taboos. We must work on the assumption that many of you will start by 
disagreeing with us. As a result, theObserver has been a home for writers of 
great polemical clarity. They have assumed that they must convince those who 
are politically disposed to dislike them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftheobserver%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fobserver-225-comment-writers-nick-cohen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a1dece94876b5eb0f4707cc8ec4a89d11c1dba0%2F0_0_2008_2988%2F2008.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98The%20Observer%20frees%20its%20writers%20%E2%80%93%20you%20only%20write%20well%20when%20you%20are%20not%20intimidated%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftheobserver%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fobserver-225-comment-writers-nick-cohen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98The%20Observer%20frees%20its%20writers%20%E2%80%93%20you%20only%20write%20well%20when%20you%20are%20not%20intimidated%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftheobserver%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fobserver-225-comment-writers-nick-cohen%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a1dece94876b5eb0f4707cc8ec4a89d11c1dba0%2F0_0_2008_2988%2F2008.jpg>
 George Orwell wrote for the paper towards the end of his life. Photograph: 
Popperfoto/Getty Images 
Clear writing is not necessarily great writing. But clarity is the essential 
quality of writing that is trying to change a reader’s mind. No one will put
Louis Blom-Cooper’s arguments in theObserver against the death penalty in the 
1960s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/04/50-years-death-penalty-uk-capital-punishment>
 in an anthology of great English prose, for instance. But Blom-Cooper answered 
every objection a supporter could have raised. He wasn’t preaching to the 
choir, and ignoring the best points of the other side, but seeking to convince 
the sceptical. By the time he had finished, the case for the death penalty was 
dangling from the gallows.

Similarly, I am sure that Robert Harris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/sep/23/life-writing-robert-harris> 
will be remembered for his books, rather than his journalism. But when he was an
Observer political columnist he took conservative illusions about Margaret 
Thatcher seriously before he shredded them. She was concentrating power in her 
own hands rather than dispersing it, as she pretended. Far from reducing the 
size of the state, all her privatisations failed to dent public spending in the 
slightest. At every stage, he showed he understood how Conservatives thought 
before showing them how they were deceived.

The urge for clarity produces a reaction against obscurantism, which since 
Jonathan Swift, has been a part of the English polemical tradition. Academic 
writing, management speak, and the assembly-line cliches of the right and left 
have never found a home here. To be anti-academic is not the same as being 
anti-intellectual. Bertrand Russell was anObserver contributor, after all. But 
Russell’s school of analytic philosophy was concerned above all with conceptual 
clarity. To put it as gently as I can, intellectuals and politicians who do not 
share his passion for precision are unlikely to have the comment desk return 
their calls.

The tension between believing you are right and fearing that readers will not 
listen also produces the anger that powers the best and, indeed, the worst 
polemics in these pages. It can produce worthless rants. But you will 
understand the more focused anger you read, if you can feel the tension that 
comes with needing to make a case, and knowing that the people around you 
probably won’t listen.

Of the many stories about Terence Kilmartin that lie in the “too good to 
check” category, the best concern his ferocious drinking. TheObserver’s great 
literary editor from the 1950s to 1980s and his admirers edited the books pages 
from Soho pubs rather than anywhere as unconducive to art as the office. One 
day, a hanger-on told Kilmartin he was getting married. “The thing is,” he 
continued, “when I’m married, I will have to stop drinking.” Anxious to avoid 
the impression his fiancee had bullied him, he insisted it was his decision, 
not hers. “She hasn’t made me,” he said. “The thing is, Terry, I just don’t 
enjoy it anymore.”

Kilmartin fixed him with a ravaged face and haunted eyes, and boomed: “Do you 
think that any of us do this because we enjoy it?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftheobserver%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fobserver-225-comment-writers-nick-cohen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a6f529806b21034c2d5c32f1ebab16761510d17%2F70_802_10474_6285%2F10474.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98The%20Observer%20frees%20its%20writers%20%E2%80%93%20you%20only%20write%20well%20when%20you%20are%20not%20intimidated%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftheobserver%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fobserver-225-comment-writers-nick-cohen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98The%20Observer%20frees%20its%20writers%20%E2%80%93%20you%20only%20write%20well%20when%20you%20are%20not%20intimidated%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftheobserver%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fobserver-225-comment-writers-nick-cohen%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a6f529806b21034c2d5c32f1ebab16761510d17%2F70_802_10474_6285%2F10474.jpg>
 From left: former literary editor Terry Kilmartin at his leaving drinks in 
Soho, with AJP Taylor and Stephen Spender. Photograph: Sue Adler for the 
Observer 
The same applies to the best polemicists. Recognition, when and if it comes, 
is welcome. You will never be rich, but the pay is all right. Status and money 
are not at issue, however.

You only write well if you have something to say. You only say it well when 
you are not intimidated. Intimidation can come in many guises, from the state, 
the libel law, and the unexpressed prejudices of your time. But the most 
pervasive is the social pressure to conform with “your side” or “your type of 
people”. At theObserver, the pressure is less severe than at ideological 
newspapers, which follow a party line. The relief of working here is that the
Observer frees its writers. You can take on unpopular causes, and express 
unpopular opinions. There is no finer feeling than when an argument you have 
fought for wins through. But you must savour your victories on the rare 
occasions you achieve them, and accept that, for most of the time, you will be 
straining to make a case to a world that is not predisposed to listen.

You cannot and should not enjoy that. If you are enjoying it, you are not 
trying hard enough.
 