
The Montagu and North Fenham football club has a proud status in the game’s 
heartland of Newcastle, formed in 1948, with 70 coaches today running 31 boys’ 
and girls’ teams, playing to a high standard which has nurtured several 
outstanding alumni. Yet as the enormous scale of past sexual abuse in the sport 
has begun to emerge over the last fortnight from years of suffering and 
silence, this home of football in the west end of Newcastle has been exposed as 
one of the clubs which was targeted for decades.

The Guardian now understands that two men who were later convicted of child 
sex abuse crimes were involved at the club for years, with complete access to 
the boys. Last week the former “Monty’s” midfielder, Derek Bell, who progressed 
to sign as a professional for Newcastle United in 1979, finally waived his 
anonymity to talk about the “horrendous” abuse he was subjected to over four 
years beforethat by his former coach at the boys club, George Ormond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/29/derek-bell-abuse-coach>. 
Principally on Bell’s evidence, Ormond was convicted in 2002 and sentenced to 
six years in prison for 12 indecent assaults on seven boys committed between 
1975 and 1999.

Prominent football figures still in game named by players alleging sexual abuse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/05/football-sexual-abuse> 
Another man involved at the club, David King, who claimed a helping role in 
advancing the career locally of the former Newcastle United and England star 
Alan Shearer, was also convicted in 1997, of sexual offences against a 
10-year-old pupil at the school where he was the headteacher. Like Ormond and 
the club’s chairman of the time, Dick Almond, King was a stalwart of north-east 
junior football, well-respected and apparently respectable.

Bell was not the only player to graduate from the boys club to a professional 
career, which in his case was agonisingly cut short in 1983 after just four 
Newcastle first-team matches, by a knee injury sustained in a reserve match 
against Manchester United. Kevin Richardson, who progressed to win a Football 
League title with Everton in the 1980s and played for England, is also a 
Monty’s old boy, as is John Carver, whose own playing career was cut short but 
who rose through coaching ranks to become Newcastle’s manager last year.

Now Derek Bell has followed other footballers to speak out publicly about the 
abuse he suffered as a boy. Groomed by Ormond, he describes a “seedy”, 
sexualised culture at the boys club, pervading in a grimy, rundown landscape of 
filthy changing rooms and cold showers. Ormond would have the boys exposing and 
comparing their private parts in the changing rooms, he says, encouraging them 
to have nude play fights and joining in with them, and he recalls King working 
in the canteen, also acting inappropriately.

For a time, Ormond is said to have taken charge of the treatment room, so had 
boys in there with the doors locked, according to Bell and other sources close 
to the club. Bell feels that Almond was complicit, and remembers him watching 
boys in the showers, although he does not believe the former chairman, who is 
now dead, was an abuser himself.

“It was on a daily basis, telling the boys to expose themselves, touching you 
in the changing rooms,” Bell recalls. “We thought it was football banter and 
craic at first, but when you think about it now, it was totally inappropriate. 
The culture was seedy and the place was dirty, scruffy, there were locked 
doors; it was a dungeon.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fmontagu-and-north-fenham-boys-club%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67d0a0b2ba9d2e8d56e8d495af56a52c1bc02f82%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98The%20culture%20was%20seedy%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20boys%20club%20at%20the%20heart%20of%20north-east%20football%20abuse%20scandal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fmontagu-and-north-fenham-boys-club%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98The%20culture%20was%20seedy%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20boys%20club%20at%20the%20heart%20of%20north-east%20football%20abuse%20scandal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fmontagu-and-north-fenham-boys-club%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67d0a0b2ba9d2e8d56e8d495af56a52c1bc02f82%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 The former Newcastle United player Derek Bell says he was sexually abused 
during his time at Montagu and North Fenham boys club. Photograph: Murdo 
Macleod for the Guardian 
The alarming, sexual culture deepened for Bell into serious abuse when he was 
targeted by Ormond, who used Bell’s talent and prospects for a professional 
career to blackmail him into conforming. Bell describes it as “horrific, 
horrendous,” causing lasting “mental torture;” he has been divorced three 
times, made three attempts to kill himself and has now been diagnosed with 
post-traumatic stress disorder. After he signed as an apprentice footballer for 
Newcastle United in 1979 and left the boys club, Bell believes Ormond “weaned 
off” him, and he fears that other younger boys may then have been targeted for 
grooming and serious abuse.

Those recollections have been supported by another former player at the boys 
club, who contacted the Guardian to talk about it, wanting to remain anonymous. 
Giving his name as Phil, he said he joined the club aged 10 1973, and played 
until 1981. He described a similarly sexualised culture and “systematic abuse” 
which he witnessed, saying he too believes that Ormond moved on to other boys 
because there was always “a new batch coming through”. Phil said he had been 
traumatised, needed therapy and that his life had been “ruined”, partly because 
he always felt guilty that as the captain of the team in his age group, he 
could not protect the other boys.”

“I remember having feelings of guilt, resentment. These boys were my friends, 
good mates,” he said. “They always picked on the boys who were vulnerable, and 
there was nothing we could do.

“It was an eerie sort of place. Dick Almond was this very big, powerful person 
and I believe he orchestrated everything. He wielded all the control at the 
club and knew exactly what was going on. It was Dick who made the rules. We 
were told that we couldn’t wear underwear. At first we thought it was to make 
us tough but then we realised what was going on. They would rub this liniment 
oil on our legs, and their hands would always go where they shouldn’t. It makes 
me feel ill really, thinking about it now.

“There were always rumours flying around about Ormond and what he was doing to 
the boys. And then there was also Dave King; he was always in Dick’s office and 
was one of those who would rub the oil on our legs. I remember it being in this 
mustard bottle; they would rub it in using their thumbs and then it would lead 
to other stuff with some of the boys.”

Phil recalls that Ormond tried to groom him by giving him lifts home from the 
club, the same method by which his abuse of Bell escalated to more serious 
sexual acts in car parks. Ormond won the trust of Bell’s parents and began to 
stay overnight at his home, where more serious sexual abuse took place. Phil 
himself feels he was lucky to have escaped that fate, but believes that other 
boys suffered over the many years in which Ormond operated at the club, 
including on trips away to a military training camp in Billsmoor in 
Northumberland, and to London.

“They would pick particular boys and abuse them for a number of years before 
moving on to others,” said Phil. “They got away with it for years because it 
was a transient life and there was always a new batch of boys coming through.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fmontagu-and-north-fenham-boys-club%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e07e9b8571a4ed6be64d340bc0085e625233b72%2F0_258_3872_2323%2F3872.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98The%20culture%20was%20seedy%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20boys%20club%20at%20the%20heart%20of%20north-east%20football%20abuse%20scandal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fmontagu-and-north-fenham-boys-club%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98The%20culture%20was%20seedy%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20boys%20club%20at%20the%20heart%20of%20north-east%20football%20abuse%20scandal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fmontagu-and-north-fenham-boys-club%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e07e9b8571a4ed6be64d340bc0085e625233b72%2F0_258_3872_2323%2F3872.jpg>
 The current chairman of Montagu and North Fenham, Gary Arkley, says the club 
bears no resemblance now to that horrific past. ‘It is a family-run club now,’ 
he says. Photograph: Mark Pinder for the Guardian 
Like Bell, Phil said the boys all felt they could not tell their parents or 
anybody in authority what was happening at the club. Bell finally went to the 
police in 2000, 21 years after he left the boys club, after confronting Ormond 
at his home carrying a concealed tape recorder, and securing enough 
incriminating admissions for Northumbria police to mount an investigation. 
However he is critical of the police for not fully investigating Ormond’s 
activities and King, and the club’s culture over three decades. He also accuses 
Newcastle United of a cover up for failing to notify police or mount their own 
inquiries afterBell notified them of Ormond’s past abuse when he discovered 
Ormond was working in the club’s youth system in the 1990s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/01/newcastle-accused-cover-up-1990s-abuse?CMP=share_btn_tw>
.

The current chairman of Montagu and North Fenham boys club, Gary Arkley, told 
the Guardian that it bears no resemblance now to that horrific past. The club 
has 400 young people playing organised football regularly, with 26 boys’ teams 
and five girls’ teams, run by qualified coaches who are almost all parents with 
children in the club. The club has the FA’s charter standard, which includes 
implementing the mandatory modern child protection procedures, and has 
qualified for Football Foundation grants to improve the changing rooms.

Football League warned all its clubs about Bob Higgins in 1989
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/05/football-league-warned-all-its-clubs-about-bob-higgins-in-1989>
“There is not a single person at the club now who was there in 2002; I am one 
of the longest serving and I have been at the club 12 years,” he said. “It is a 
family run club now; almost all the coaches are parents; my son plays here, the 
coaches have full qualifications, we have all the welfare and attend the 
workshops required by the FA.

“I totally agree and understand why people have decided to come forward about 
this [child abuse ] now. We know it is crucial to prevent this ever happening 
again here, and we do everything we can to prevent it.”

The club has close links to the modern, Mike Ashley-owned Newcastle United and 
expects five players to graduate to the professional club’s academy next year. 
Its good name is restored in the boys club structure which has populated 
north-east football for decades, but light is only now beginning to be shone on 
the horrors of its recent past.

• The NSPCC’s hotline is 0800-023 2642 and ChildLine’s is 0800-1111.

• The National Association for People Abused in Childhood can be contacted on 
0808-801 0331.

• In the UK, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the National 
Suicide Prevention Hotline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support 
service Lifeline is on 13 11 14.
 