
The Gbaya Ndombia maternity clinic in Bangui epitomises the ambiguity that 
characterises life in Central African Republic: this launchpad for new life 
doubles as a trauma centre for gunshot and grenade injuries.

The midwives have learned to triage patients into black (dead), red/yellow 
(serious), and green. They have learned how to stabilise people who have been 
stabbed, or lost limbs because of explosions. And they have learned how to stay 
calm if there are angry people at the gate, sometimes firing guns in the air.

The clinic, run by Médecins Sans Frontières‎ (MSF), is in the PK5 
neighbourhood, a mainly Muslim area in this still-divided city, where UN 
peacekeepers keep watch from armoured vehicles along avenues fringed with 
palms, and where traders push handcarts piled with baguettes or balance 
pyramids of egg cartons on their hands as they weave through stalls selling 
everything from mangoes to mattresses.

“We want to help our friends here,” says Anita Louanga, an assistant midwife 
from the 4th arrondissement, who travels to PK5 to work.

When the mainly Muslim Seleka rebels pushed into Bangui in 2013 and forced the 
then president, François Bozizé, to step down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/mar/24/central-african-republic-president-flees>
, Louanga and her family fled from the city. They returned in November 2014.

Zouley Mahamat, who is Muslim and from PK5, works alongside Louanga. She too 
fled with her five children during the crisis, heading to Nigeria. When she 
came back, everything was gone.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Fcentral-african-republic-must-be-built-from-scratch-francois-hollande-country-divided%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb6e89c0a8692fdf04a2c3b7918382d14230667ba%2F20_0_3607_2665%2F3607.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='The%20Central%20African%20Republic%20must%20be%20built%20from%20scratch'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Fcentral-african-republic-must-be-built-from-scratch-francois-hollande-country-divided%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27The%20Central%20African%20Republic%20must%20be%20built%20from%20scratch%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Fcentral-african-republic-must-be-built-from-scratch-francois-hollande-country-divided%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb6e89c0a8692fdf04a2c3b7918382d14230667ba%2F20_0_3607_2665%2F3607.jpg>
 Anita Louanga, assistant midwife, Zouley Mahamat, matron, and Evangeline 
Ngogbe, midwife, at the MSF clinic in PK5, Bangui. Photograph: Clár Ní 
Chonghaile for the Guardian 
“The house had been destroyed, everything was lost. I went to stay with my 
father – there were 30 people living there. It was not easy. My children go to 
school now but it is temporary. They are used to studying hard, but their 
standard has really fallen. I don’t know how they will recover.”

Evangeline Ngogbe, a Christian, was afraid to work at the clinic, which opened 
in January.

“I nearly refused. But I told myself I was protected because I was a 
humanitarian. I took my courage in my hands.”

Her nine-year-old daughter is still traumatised. “She asks a lot of questions. 
When she hears guns, she cries and we tell her it will pass. Often she tells me 
she wants to leave. I try to calm her. I understand – she is afraid.”

Sandra Lamarque, MSF project coordinator, says the community requested a 
maternity clinic: they feared going to the nearby hospital in Castor.

“Before, there were physical barriers, like roadblocks. Now there are 
psychological barriers. The women fear they will be disrespected there, or even 
harmed,” she says.

The clinic, which is free and open 24 hours, dealt with three major traumas in 
March and April involving knife and grenade wounds. They generally get one or 
two injuries a day.

“It could be people fighting over a mobile phone, or being blown up while 
making homemade grenades, or a traffic accident,” Lamarque says.

Since 2013, PK5 has been in the firing line. Things seem calmer now – and many 
citethe pope’s visit to a mosque here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/30/pope-francis-mosque-central-african-republic>
 in November as having soothed bothMuslims – comprising about 15% of the 
population – and the Christian majority 
<https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/ct.html>.

Nonetheless, many residents are still too afraid to venture far from home, 
while some neighbourhoods – strongholds of the mainly Christian anti-balaka 
armed groups formed to oppose the Seleka – are no-go areas despite the presence 
of nearly12,000 UN peacekeepers 
<http://www.un.org/en/peacekeeping/missions/minusca/facts.shtml>, known as 
Minusca, and hundreds of French soldiers in the country.
Central African Republic factbox 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/05/archive-12-zip/giv-12515IXxpxJNPbc3w/>
After the Seleka took power their forces went on the rampage in Bangui, 
killing many Christians. This led to the formation of anti-balaka militia, who 
killed Muslims and drove thousands out of the city and country. PK5 was 
surrounded, and repeatedly attacked.

Now it has its own self-defence groups and this noxious pattern has repeated 
itself across the country in a period known asbira, or war, in the local Sango 
language.

Since the Seleka withdrew to the north, CAR has been effectively divided. A 
new president, Faustin-Archange Touadéra, waselected in February 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/12/central-african-republic-car-pray-presidential-elections-bring-peace-at-last>
 but the state is mostly just an empty word outside Bangui, where armed groups 
and bandits prey on civilians, transporters and their own communities, 
extorting taxes, kidnapping people and livestock, and launching sporadic 
killing sprees.

Martial Douagui, a lawyer by training, used to share a room with a friend, who 
then joined the Seleka.

“In 2012 I was with a Muslim friend in the same room in university. He went 
with the Seleka one day, and then he fled [abroad] afterwards. We lived 
together, we ate together. We never spoke of religion … Many people saw their 
relatives killed and their houses burned. People who lived this in their very 
skin still feel like that, so Muslims still can’t go into some quarters or they 
will be killed,” says the 26-year-old, who now works for MSF.

“When the pope came, it calmed spirits, even if it was precarious; there was a 
kind of social cohesion. People are still wary. We are not yet at 
reconciliation.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Fcentral-african-republic-must-be-built-from-scratch-francois-hollande-country-divided%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc17c9f33aa3fafeebe606fa3c1e6a75129c53cc4%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='The%20Central%20African%20Republic%20must%20be%20built%20from%20scratch'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Fcentral-african-republic-must-be-built-from-scratch-francois-hollande-country-divided%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27The%20Central%20African%20Republic%20must%20be%20built%20from%20scratch%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Fcentral-african-republic-must-be-built-from-scratch-francois-hollande-country-divided%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc17c9f33aa3fafeebe606fa3c1e6a75129c53cc4%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 A woman grieves for a relative killed by the anti-balaka in PK5, Bangui. 
Photograph: Laurence Geai/Alamy 
A recent humanitarian response plan 
<http://reliefweb.int/report/central-african-republic/r-publique-centrafricaine-plan-de-r-ponse-humanitaire-janvier-d>
 paints a bleak picture: nearly half the population – 2.3 million people – need 
aid.About 1 million people have left their homes 
<http://www.unhcr.org/pages/49e45c156.html>, with roughly half of those leaving 
the country.


Cereal production is down by 70% 
<http://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/FINAL_Humanitarian%20Bulletin%20%2310_0.pdf>
 (pdf), and cattle stock has declined by 46%, while production of coffee and 
cotton, the two main cash crops, are down by 28% and 42% respectively, compared 
with before the crisis, in a country where8 out of 10 people depend on 
agriculture <https://www.wfp.org/stories/seeds-change>.

There have been atrocities by all sides. Women have been raped, children have 
been recruited into armed groups, people have been blown up, stabbed, beheaded, 
their homes destroyed and looted, and all with impunity.


There have also been allegations of sexual abuse against UN peacekeepers and 
the French troops 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/04/un-troops-abused-least-eight-females-central-african-republic>
. The French president, François Hollande, is scheduled to visit the country 
this weekto support peace and the stabilisation of the country 
<http://www.lefigaro.fr/flash-actu/2016/05/06/97001-20160506FILWWW00158-hollande-va-se-rendre-en-centrafrique.php>
.

Extreme violence 'blighting a generation' in Central African Republic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/26/extreme-violence-blighting-a-generation-in-central-african-republic>
At the clinic, MSF’s Lamarque was surprised by how many women came forward for 
rape and sexual violence programmes, with some cases dating back to anupsurge 
of violence in Bangui last September and October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/27/central-african-republic-violent-sectarian-clashes-erupt-in-bangui>
.

“At the peak of the violence, the anti-balaka carried out a lot of sexual 
violence. The Christian women who were coming to work in PK5 or to sell goods 
here were stopped at the roadblocks and taken away, and then anything could 
happen to them; they could even be killed,” says Douagui.

Not too far from the MSF clinic is Kilometre 5. Gutted roofless houses and 
burnt-out vehicles bear mute witness to the anger that saw people destroy these 
homes with mortars, hammers or fire. But there are also signs of rebirth: 
market stalls, and homemade bricks drying in the sun.

The International Crisis Group summed up 
<http://www.crisisgroup.org/~/media/Files/africa/central-africa/central-african-republic/230-central-african-republic-the-roots-of-violence.pdf>
 (pdf) what has happened: “The crisis affecting the Central African Republic is 
the most serious that the country has known since independence. It is the final 
act in the gradual disintegration of the state and calls into question the very 
fabric of CAR society by reviving the nationality question and by portraying 
Muslims as dangerous foreigners.”

Disarmament has not started, and even early talks about it have caused more 
tensions.

“There are a lot of weapons in circulation, a lot of trafficking – of cars, 
medicines. A lot of people use drugs, mainly tramadol [an opiate],” says 
Lamarque.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Fcentral-african-republic-must-be-built-from-scratch-francois-hollande-country-divided%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffb2854ecb61a9b130d49505e5fca90438267cce8%2F0_0_3600_2405%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='The%20Central%20African%20Republic%20must%20be%20built%20from%20scratch'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Fcentral-african-republic-must-be-built-from-scratch-francois-hollande-country-divided%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27The%20Central%20African%20Republic%20must%20be%20built%20from%20scratch%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Fcentral-african-republic-must-be-built-from-scratch-francois-hollande-country-divided%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffb2854ecb61a9b130d49505e5fca90438267cce8%2F0_0_3600_2405%2F3600.jpg>
 A camp for refugees and displaced people at M’Poko airport in Bangui. 
Photograph: Marco Longari/AFP/Getty Images 
Next to the airport, up to 20,000 people live in tents or shelters cobbled 
together from corrugated iron sheets, too frightened to return home, eking out 
a living just metres from the runway.

For the midwives in PK5, the scale of the crisis is clear. “The Central 
African Republic <https://www.theguardian.com/world/central-african-republic> 
must be built from scratch,” says Mahamat, adding that she wants to see 
disarmament “immediately”.

Louanga agrees. “I think things will change but slowly. The people are 
suffering. The roads are wrecked. There are no staff at the health clinics. 
There are no teachers. We have to start again. People must relearn how to work. 
They must learn to forgive and forget.”
 