
Surrounded by heavily embroidered and sequinned dresses and shalwar kameez in 
Saiqa, an upmarket boutique in Tooting, southLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, Aisha critically eyed her reflection 
in a full-length mirror. The stunning three-layered dress she had tried on 
needed a little alteration – a pinch here and a shortening there – she and the 
designer Saiqa Majeed agreed.

Although absorbed in choosing an outfit for a special occasion, Aisha was 
quick to celebrate Sadiq Khan’s anticipated victory in the London mayoral 
election. “The United States has had Obama, and this is our moment. It’s 
amazing that London is about to get its first Muslim mayor,” she said.

“This vote is a reflection of London’s epic diversity. This is a city of 
tolerance, the best city in the world to be a Muslim. It’s terrible that forthe 
past eight years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gallery/2016/may/06/boris-johnsons-time-as-mayor-of-london-in-pictures>
 we’ve had a mayor who doesn’t reflect the great, diverse, wonderful melting 
pot of London.”


And, she added, the result was “two fingers to Zac Goldsmith’s racist campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/06/zac-goldsmith-attacked-by-senior-tory-over-tactics-in-london-mayor-election>
”.

Tooting is Khan’s home turf. The son of a bus driver and a seamstress, he was 
born in St George’s hospital, a local landmark. He grew up with his seven 
siblings in a nearby council flat and attended a local comprehensive school. 
For the past 11 years he has been the MP for the area, whosepopulation is more 
than 20% Muslim 
<http://tooting.localstats.co.uk/census-demographics/england/london/wandsworth/tooting>
, compared with 5% nationally.

His election as London mayor now makes him possibly the highest-profile and 
most powerful Muslim political figure in the western world. For the next four 
years, and perhaps longer, Khan will command the biggest and most dynamic city 
in western Europe, representing 8.5 million people and responsible for a £17bn 
annual budget.

Shuja Shafi, the secretary general of the Muslim Council of Britain, said Khan 
was “a figure of unity for all Londoners”. He added: “Sadiq has demonstrated 
remarkable dignity in the face of hatred and suspicion about his religious 
background. Smear-by-association has become all too common for Muslims and 
Muslim organisations. It is a cancer blighting sections of our political and 
media class, and has infected the solemn business of government.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fmay%2F07%2Four-moment-tooting-muslims-sadiq-khan-london-mayoral-election-victory%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f85e58c7978f37bdec6c90937a7284f282e5352%2F0_209_3350_2010%2F3350.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='This%20is%20our%20moment'%3A%20Tooting%20Muslims%20laud%20Sadiq%20Khan%20victory&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fmay%2F07%2Four-moment-tooting-muslims-sadiq-khan-london-mayoral-election-victory%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27This%20is%20our%20moment%27%3A%20Tooting%20Muslims%20laud%20Sadiq%20Khan%20victory&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fmay%2F07%2Four-moment-tooting-muslims-sadiq-khan-london-mayoral-election-victory%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f85e58c7978f37bdec6c90937a7284f282e5352%2F0_209_3350_2010%2F3350.jpg>
 Al-Muzzamil mosque in Tooting. Photograph: Mary Turner/Getty Images 
At Tooting’s al-Muzzamil mosque, where those unable to squeeze inside for 
Friday prayers unrolled prayer mats on the pavement under a hot sun, the imam 
Zahir Hussain said the election of a Muslim mayor was “fantastic in many ways, 
but he must represent everyone”. The most urgent issues that Khan needed to 
address were housing and transport, he said – a view echoed by other locals.

“Sadiq comes to pray here regularly,” said Hussain, who runs double shifts of 
Friday prayers to accommodate the faithful. “I have found him humble and 
easygoing and respectful.”


Outside the mosque, Shamsa Mohammed said Khan’s election showed that London 
was a united city. “Despite everything, by electing Sadiq people are saying we 
have confidence in a Muslim to do the job. We’re all in it together, and 
together we can rise above all the problems,” she said.


Not everyone was a Khan enthusiast. Malik Mohammed, of Air Host Travel, said 
he had not voted on Thursday as he had been too busy. But he distrusted the 
promotion of Khan by people with “a big agenda”, suggesting that a liberal 
Muslim mayor could provide cover for those intent on attacking traditionalIslam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam>.

“He’s too liberal. He even backed same-sex marriage. He doesn’t uphold 
traditional values,” he said.

Global press reaction to Sadiq Khan a mix of curiosity and ignorance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/06/london-mayor-global-press-reaction-sadiq-khan-curiosity-ignorance>
In Saiqa’s boutique, another customer, Fatema, who declined to give her full 
name, said she had voted for Goldsmith. “I just don’t agree with what Khan 
stands for. I’m a bit of a conservative. Lots of Muslims will have voted for 
him just because he’s a Muslim, not for what he believes in.”


Majeed, the dress designer and shop’s owner, disagreed. “Sadiq is the perfect 
person to take London to the next level. He is integrated with real people and 
real communities. He can reflect London back to itself. And he’s a doer. Lots 
of politicians just talk.”


Aisha, who also declined to give her full name as she did not want her 
political views known to her employers, went further. “This is a challenge to 
the accepted notion that you have to go to Eton to get anywhere,” she said 
while trying to decide how much ankle her new dress should show.


“And it’s a massive endorsement of Jeremy Corbyn. He’s providing proper 
opposition to the Conservatives, andLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> have to hold their nerve. I love 
him!”
 