
Lost in the venomous arguments that have recently been flying back and forth 
between Muslims and atheists –on HBO 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/oct/06/bill-maher-islam-ben-affleck>
 andon op-ed pages 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/09/opinion/bill-maher-isnt-the-only-one-who-misunderstands-religion.html>
, in the United States and beyond – is just how much these two marginalized, 
underrepresented groups have in common.


According to a Pew poll conducted this year 
<http://www.pewforum.org/2014/07/16/how-americans-feel-about-religious-groups/>
, Muslims and atheists are the two least favorably viewed religious or ethical 
groups in the US. Both communities are severely underrepresented in the general 
population –roughly 2% of Americans identify as atheists 
<http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2013/10/23/5-facts-about-atheists/>, 
compared to1% for Muslims 
<http://www.pewforum.org/2014/07/16/how-americans-feel-about-religious-groups/>
. Both face rising levels of animosity from the general public. And both tend 
to be defined by the loudest voices within their communities.

The media may be saturated with images of Islamic terrorists and suicide 
bombers, but a2011 Gallup survey 
<http://www.gallup.com/poll/148763/muslim-americans-no-justification-violence.aspx>
 concluded that Muslims are actually more likely than any other religious or 
ethical group in America to reject violence against civilians. At the same 
time, the vocally “anti-theist” atheists who dominate the airwaves and the 
bestseller lists may get all the press, but a2013 study from the University of 
Tennessee 
<http://www.religionnews.com/2014/06/09/academic-activist-apatheist-kind-unbeliever/>
 indicated that less than 15% of atheists fall into the “anti-theist” category.

So why hasn’t there been more dialogue and solidarity between Muslims and 
atheists? Can’t we all just get along?

The divide has to do in part with our natural inclination 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-9477.2007.00176.x/abstract> 
to retreat into our own communities or get defensive when confronted with 
difference. As a result, stereotypes about both groups not only go unchallenged 
– they become amplified as each side clings to its preconceived notions of the 
other. While it’s certainly not the only cause, the amplification of this “us 
against them” attitude has contributed to large majorities of Americans 
labeling Muslims as “violent” and atheists as “amoral”.

The irony is that when atheists and believers get to know one another, they 
often discover that many of their values are not so different after all. That 
is something that we, a Muslim and an atheist, have learned from our friendship 
– even as we acknowledge our differences and disagreements.

We’re not alone in recognizing the power of relationships to overcome 
differences.Research shows 
<http://www.pewforum.org/2014/07/16/how-americans-feel-about-religious-groups/> 
that simply knowing someone from another religious or ethical group often leads 
to more positive views of that group. That’s why personal relationships are 
indispensable when it comes to changing how we talk about religion and atheism. 
When you know and admire a Muslim or an atheist, it no longer makes much sense 
to make sweeping generalizations about either group as made up of fanatics or 
bigots. The logic of blanket statements falls apart when you’re confronted with 
the diversity of lived religious and nonreligious experience.

When 46% of Americans think 
<http://content.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,2011936-2,00.html> Islam 
is more violent than other faiths but only 37% evenknow 
<http://content.time.com/time/nation/article/0,8599,2011799,00.html> a Muslim, 
and when atheists remain one of themost distrusted 
<http://asr.sagepub.com/content/71/2/211.abstract> groups in the country, it’s 
clear that a conversation between these two communities could benefit both. But 
that won’t happen until we Muslims and atheists commit to spending less time 
speaking past one another and more time speaking with one another.

Of course, this doesn’t mean that Muslims and atheists will suddenly find 
themselves in absolute harmony. We will continue to debate and argue with each 
other, confident that our conversations may bring to light as many challenges 
and contradictions between our communities as they resolve. Pluralism isn’t 
relativism; it isn’t the erasure of differences, or even its embrace. It is the 
recognition that differences exist, and that the resolve to engage them is a 
good thing, a necessary thing.

Nor does it mean that we should only lift up the best in ourselves and others 
while whitewashing the real problems that exist in both of our communities. 
There is a great deal of work to do in the Muslim community concerning 
attitudes about and practices affectingLGBTQ people 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/news/gay-muslims/>, ex-Muslims 
<http://www.exmna.org/> and women 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2014/09/21/twin-visions-of-islamic-feminism-split-muslim-community.html>
. At the same time, the atheist community continues to struggle with fraught 
debates over anti-theism,sexism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/sep/18/richard-dawkins-sexist-atheists-bad-name>
 andracism 
<http://www.religionnews.com/2014/10/09/black-atheists-say-concerns-overlooked-long/>
 among atheists. But as we work to address these problems within our 
communities, we can also benefit from looking beyond our borders and learning 
from those outside.

Or we could just go back to shouting at each other on TV.
 