
The oppressed can take on awkward forms. The oppressed filled a room at the 
NSW rugby club near Circular Quay in Sydney on Tuesday. Mostly men, mostly 
older, almost all white.

They were Trump’s Aussie mates, a US election party organised by former 
Australian politician Ross Cameron in honour of the man who, as it turned out, 
was about to become president-elect.

'Make Australia Great Again': rightwing MPs delight ahead of Trump's victory
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/09/make-australia-great-again-rightwing-mps-delight-in-likely-trump-presidency>
“We’ve been oppressed, we’re secret believers meeting in the catacombs,” 
Cameron said.

“If you don’t exercise your freedom of opinion you lose it, the tide just 
swamps it so we had to stand up and say ‘Trump has mates’. We don’t care if 
people ridicule us, go right ahead. I’m with him.”

He said he had Trump-supporting friends too scared to attend the party because 
they didn’t want to be seen by the media.

The party started off with about 20 people and an eclectic mix of hotdogs, 
pizza and sushi. There were the satisfied smiles of privileged people who 
describe themselves as outsiders. They’d be here for a few hours and then go 
home with the buzz of having spent hours drinking for free with people who 
agreed with them.

It did not seem anyone thought Trump would actually win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/how-did-donald-trump-win-analysis>
.

US election 2016: Donald Trump declared winner in shock result – live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/nov/08/us-election-2016-polls-trump-clinton-live>
In the room were former politicians who had no long history of shared 
ideology, instead what they had in common were views formed on the fringes of 
their parties, sometimes in polar opposition to their parties, after 
spectacular exits from parliament.

That, and that they were not asked to commentate the election on Sky News.

Mark Latham, the former Labor leader who lost the Australian election to the 
man he described as “handshake mongrel” 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com.au/2016/01/12/mark-latham-calls-john-howard-little-bastard-and-a-handshake/>
 in 2004, had star billing. He was joined by Cameron who, despite being in the 
Liberal party, was voted out in the election that ended Latham’s career. The 
former Speaker and, briefly, a proposed candidate for first female prime 
minister of Australia, Bronwyn Bishop, also materialised. Commentators Miranda 
Devine, Janet Albrechtsen and Bettina Arndt were all there, too. At its largest 
the party swelled to 50.

Damien Pace, from the Young Liberal club at Macquarie University, was looking 
forward to the “PC prism” being smashed under a Trump presidency. He admired 
his foreign policy stance and said there needed to be someone to smash the 
status quo.

Of his comrades though, not many were Trump fans, especially his female 
friends.

Did that trouble him?

“The thing you have to realise is, women have been divided on Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> because they have a different 
temperament. He doesn’t go out of his way to woo women, he just says ‘bam, this 
is what I think’, and that appeals to men more than women.”

What about the allegations of sexual assault? “It seems like a concerted 
effort, there doesn’t seem too much evidence.”

Another partygoer, who did not want his name used, had been a Bernie Sanders 
supporter. Now he thought a Trump presidency was the best thing for America.

“He was actually quite similar to Trump when it came to big money and fighting 
against Wall Street. Both Trump and Sanders are trying to remind people, I 
don’t want to say elites, but people in power that there are people really 
hurting and Bernie and Trump spoke to them in a way Hillary hasn’t.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fweve-been-oppressed-australian-mates-of-trump-share-his-finest-hour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F850b0189f89eaaf79a836c4043422ef9784fb423%2F0_0_3264_2448%2Fmaster%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='We've%20been%20oppressed'%3A%20Australian%20mates%20of%20Trump%20share%20his%20finest%20hour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fweve-been-oppressed-australian-mates-of-trump-share-his-finest-hour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27We%27ve%20been%20oppressed%27%3A%20Australian%20mates%20of%20Trump%20share%20his%20finest%20hour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fweve-been-oppressed-australian-mates-of-trump-share-his-finest-hour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F850b0189f89eaaf79a836c4043422ef9784fb423%2F0_0_3264_2448%2Fmaster%2F3264.jpg>
 Donald Trump supporters celebrating his victory at the NSW Rugby Club in 
Sydney. Photograph: Bridie Jabour/Bridie Jabour for the Guardian 
Latham buoyantly declared he was going to spend the night carrying the Donald 
Trump cardboard cutout down Pitt Street “yelling un-PC things”, although when 
pressed later on what he was going to yell he would not expand. As he sat down 
after his bullet points of why he supports Trump, a woman stood up and yelled. 
“I have a message for the Guardian! Hillary sucks, but not like Monica.”

We need a rough guy to get things done
Mark Latham 
“Well,” a man behind me muttered. “I would be shot if I said that; lucky she’s 
a woman.”

“We need a rough guy to get things done,” Latham said, almost wistfully.

People expected to be home by mid-afternoon. Instead at 5pm they were having 
the kind of conversations usually reserved for 2am in the beer garden. Leaning 
into each other to repeat their salient point for the 15th time.

“This is historic,” one man said for the 15th time that hour. They began 
singing after Florida was called for Trump. At first they attempted the 
American national anthem, which they did not seem to know the words to and 
instead started humming instead. Then they moved on to another song with a 
chorus that apparently went “New York, New York, New York, New York”.

A few suburbs away at Sydney University’s Manning Bar, students who supported 
Trump were getting kicked out of the US election party after chanting “Grab the 
pussy! Grab the pussy!”


At the rugby club they confined their chants to “Lock her up! Lock her up!” 
and “Drain the swamp! Drain the swamp!”

After Pennsylvania was called, they declared victory, with a performance for 
the television cameras and consisting of blue, red and white helium balloons 
and Cameron declaring it was a day for outsiders.

It was not known if Latham made it to Pitt Street with the Trump cutout.
 