

Princess Margaret complained about a dearth of Trotskyists “to argue with” and 
Margaret Thatcher <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaretthatcher> 
boasted about addressing the “biggest luncheon ever” in an unusually revealing 
exchange of private letters.

The correspondence between the two Margarets, released on Friday to the 
National Archives in Kew after more than 30 years, shows them commiserating 
over the Russian invasion of Afghanistan and strikes in thesteel industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/30/steel-in-the-uk-a-timeline-of-decline>
.

“I suppose if one is an ordinary working man and one’s union tells one not to 
vote for new machinery or technology because otherwise you will lose your job 
or your card – you just don’t dare,” the Queen’s sister told the prime minister 
in early 1980. “The steel strike is depressing.”

The discursive, handwritten notes refer to other messages that had passed 
between them. Thatcher wrote in January following news thatPrincess Margaret 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/princessmargaret> had been admitted to the 
London Clinic for an operation to remove a benign skin lesion.

Addressing her as “Ma’am”, Thatcher said she was distressed to hear about the 
hospital visit. Her six-page letter detours through a New Year’s Eve 
performance attended in Covent Garden and a trip to the United States. “I 
cannot help feeling that Washington is much more isolated from America than 
London is from Britain,” she wrote – an opinion thatnow, perhaps, seems dated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/24/eu-vote-uk-diminished-politics-poisoned-racism>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fthey-are-so-easy-to-please-letters-between-thatcher-and-princess-margaret-released%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae47150a5dd23fc474776288ac0d38407888d436%2F0_0_2480_3413%2F2480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Your%20humble%20and%20devoted%20servant'%3A%20letters%20between%20Thatcher%20and%20Princess%20Margaret%20released&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fthey-are-so-easy-to-please-letters-between-thatcher-and-princess-margaret-released%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Your%20humble%20and%20devoted%20servant%27%3A%20letters%20between%20Thatcher%20and%20Princess%20Margaret%20released&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fthey-are-so-easy-to-please-letters-between-thatcher-and-princess-margaret-released%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae47150a5dd23fc474776288ac0d38407888d436%2F0_0_2480_3413%2F2480.jpg>
 Letter from Margaret Thatcher to Princess Margaret. Photograph: aaldridge/The 
National Archives 
“In New York, I spoke to the biggest luncheon ever, some 3,000 people and we 
took questions afterwards. I found it fascinating – they are so easy to please 
and so delighted if you say what you really think.”

Industrial relations provoked a characteristic Thatcher sermon: “Alas, the new 
year has started with a steel strike and it is difficult to see why because the 
two sides aren’t really far away from one another … People have come to expect 
an annual increase for nothing, it is difficult to get across the message that 
more money has to be earned and not just demanded.”

The prime minister signed off with: “I remain your humble and devoted servant, 
Margaret Thatcher.”

Princess Margaret’s spirited reply, dispatched from Kensington Palace nearly a 
month later on notepaper headed with a crowned ‘M’ monogram, began “My Dear 
Prime Minister”.

The “things dug out of my face”, she explained, “weren’t worrying”. As well as 
expressing sympathy over the steel strike, the sociable royal described a trip 
to Cambridge for a debate.

It was “rather dull, all about the church, lots of clerics” and full of “rabid 
conservatives – not a Trotskyist to argue with”. She continued: “They were 
passionately against the Olympic Games in Moscow. I tried the ‘but isn’t it 
hard on the athletes’ bit but they were adamant.

“I suppose individuals must choose whether to go as it’s up to the Olympic 
Committee. If that silly boxer [possibly a reference to Muhammad Ali, who had 
been sent to Tanzania, Nigeria and Senegal by the US government to campaign for 
a boycott] doesn’t make a hash of it he might get Africa to cock a snook at the 
Russians.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fthey-are-so-easy-to-please-letters-between-thatcher-and-princess-margaret-released%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85594276c73c8cd547bf583b632c928a2bb7013d%2F0_0_2480_3415%2F2480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Your%20humble%20and%20devoted%20servant'%3A%20letters%20between%20Thatcher%20and%20Princess%20Margaret%20released&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fthey-are-so-easy-to-please-letters-between-thatcher-and-princess-margaret-released%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Your%20humble%20and%20devoted%20servant%27%3A%20letters%20between%20Thatcher%20and%20Princess%20Margaret%20released&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fthey-are-so-easy-to-please-letters-between-thatcher-and-princess-margaret-released%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85594276c73c8cd547bf583b632c928a2bb7013d%2F0_0_2480_3415%2F2480.jpg>
 Letter from Princess Margaret to Margaret Thatcher. Photograph: aaldridge/The 
National Archives 
The princess added: “I found it quite impossible to find out what is happening 
in Afghanistan. Are they about to wheel into Iran and get all the oil? More 
power to your policy of nuclear power stations. I wish they weren’t called 
‘nuclear’ as people always think of the bomb. I’ve been advocating that since I 
was 20.”

With a final flourish, she thanked the prime minister for allocating £10,000 
to the NSPCC, of which she was president, and signed off with: “Yours very 
sincerely, Margaret.”

The easy, conversational tone of the exchange does not contain any 
heavy-handed lobbying on policy. Few files relating to the royal family have 
been released to theNational Archives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/nationalarchives> in Kew recently; this year 
several are included.

It is extremely rare for such a private note to surface. A Buckingham Palace 
official said it was “comfortable” with the release. The princess died in 2001 
at the age of 71. Had she still been alive, the letter would have been withheld 
far longer.

Other prime ministerial files relating to the royals released on Friday 
include one on visits made to Northern Ireland by the Duke and Duchess of Kent 
during the 1980s.

In June 1980, the Kents, on their way to a reception to mark the 10th 
anniversary of the Ulster Defence Regiment at Hillsborough Castle, were 
reminded that “as is the case of all royal visits, it might be necessary for 
security reasons to cancel the visit at any time up to the last minute”.

The duchess talked to the prime minister ahead of a 1988 trip. Thatcher added 
a handwritten note to a document instructing her civil servants: “Urgent. She 
spoke to me last evening about this visit and asked if there was anything I 
would like her to do. I suggested that she spend a short time visiting an army 
unit! Because it is important for their morale. Would you pursue this?”

Scrutinising the list of engagements arranged for the duchess on a one-day 
tour of the province the following year, the prime minister noted: “It is 
rather a lot for one day. I hope it is not too much for the duchess.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fthey-are-so-easy-to-please-letters-between-thatcher-and-princess-margaret-released%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F25400a9a64c52498a76a6732fa5d8f258dd8e39b%2F0_0_1252_751%2F1252.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Your%20humble%20and%20devoted%20servant'%3A%20letters%20between%20Thatcher%20and%20Princess%20Margaret%20released&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fthey-are-so-easy-to-please-letters-between-thatcher-and-princess-margaret-released%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Your%20humble%20and%20devoted%20servant%27%3A%20letters%20between%20Thatcher%20and%20Princess%20Margaret%20released&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fthey-are-so-easy-to-please-letters-between-thatcher-and-princess-margaret-released%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F25400a9a64c52498a76a6732fa5d8f258dd8e39b%2F0_0_1252_751%2F1252.jpg>
 Princess Margaret in 1991. Photograph: Richard Young/Rex Features 
Thatcher was also consulted by the cabinet secretary, Robert Armstrong, about 
transferring Earl Mountbatten’s private papers to Southampton University in 
1980, the year after he was assassinated by the IRA.

The documents filled 38 filing cabinets. Some had not been cleared for 
release. Thatcher minuted: “If they are available to scholars, that is open to 
the public … I should not move anything to Southampton unless it can be 
properly available to the public.”

The Queen’s proposed visit to Brussels, to tour Nato headquarters and the 
European commission, in November 1980, prompted alarm in Downing Street. In one 
advance planning document, the prime minister wrote: “Please consider this in 
relation to a settlement on fisheries policy. The proposed visit could come at 
very bad time. The deadline for a settlement is end 1980.”

The prospect of the Queen being caught up in a row over fishing rights did not 
trouble the Foreign Office. “Lord Carrington does not, however, think that this 
should prevent the visit from going ahead,” an official responded.

Thatcher, it appears, eventually backed down – and not for the first time. “On 
balance,” a memo recorded, “the arguments in favour of the visit just 
outweighed those against.”
 