
MOU’S MELODRAMA


The theme music <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-8JyTxp_TNA> ends and the 
camera pans across the glistening cobbles. Peter Barlow looks shifty and takes 
a final drag on his cigarette before tossing it to the curb. Sally Webster 
disappears into Rita’s Kabin. And José Mourinho, shoulders hunched, the collar 
of his dark peacoat turned up against the rain, trudges past the Rovers Return. 
He mutters inaudibly but we catch the words “Conte”, “humiliation” and 
“Einsteins”.

[Noises off]: José! José!

Mourinho turns to see Emily Bishop hurrying towards him, a look of concern on 
her face.

“José, I’m sorry to bother you. It’s just … you look so sad. Are you not 
enjoying life in Manchester? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/25/jose-mourinho-manchester-united-manager-disaster-hotel>
”

“For me it’s a bit of a disaster because I want sometimes to walk a little bit 
and I can’t. I just want to cross the bridge and go for a restaurant. I can’t, 
so it is really bad.”

José Mourinho: My Manchester life is a disaster
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/25/jose-mourinho-manchester-united-manager-disaster-hotel>
“Well, I wouldn’t worry too much about the restaurants – it’s pretty much a 
choice between Nick’s Bistro and Roy’s Rolls – but it can’t be much fun for you 
in living in that room above the Weatherfield Arms. Why don’t you put an offer 
in on No15?”

“Buy a house? I do not know, I do not know. But maybe, if I can get a good 
apartment … not these giant houses that the press says I’m going to buy. I will 
never buy that! But if I find a nice apartment with a good connection from the 
garage to the apartment, maybe I do it - but I can’t cook!”

“Well, Freshco does some pretty good ready meals these days. And there’s 
Primer Doner on the corner. Chesney owns the place now you know. Oh, but you 
must miss your kids …”

“The reality is that my daughter will be 20 next week, my son will be 17 in a 
couple of months. They are very stable.”

“They grow so quickly. They’re in that London aren’t they? Maria’s gone down 
to that London, so we won’t be seeing her for a bit. It’s basically the moon 
isn’t it?”

“University in London. Football in London. Friends. So they are in an age 
where they can’t chase me like they did before. So for the first time the 
family lives in a different way.”

“Ah. Well I suppose there are some things that £10m-a-year can’t …”

“We try to feel it, we try to see the evolution of our feelings and see how we 
cope with the situation.”

“Um, OK. Well, you should try some of Betty’s hotpot. That always makes me fe…”

“But I have my apps and I can ask for food to also be delivered, which I do 
sometimes.”

“Apps, yes. Good, good. Right, well, I must get round to Audrey’s salon for my 
appoi…”

“You know the history of the paparazzi, for the hotel and the brand that 
sponsors me, the clothes brand, is amazing because they are there every day.”

“Umm … brand what now?”

“Everybody knows the name of the hotel! Everybody knows the last arrivals of 
that brand! So for them, it is amazing.”

“Amazing, yes. Well, cheerio then.”

Emily pats him worriedly on the arm but before she can leave, Pep Guardiola 
staggers into them,sweating and exhausted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/25/pep-guardiola-manchester-city-frantic-pace-exhausting>
, his eyes surrounded by dark rings. He begins to speak between ragged breaths.

“I am still learning about football in this country. Even when we were winning 
10 games in a row I felt we had to make a lot of effort to win those games. You 
cannot win any game here without spending a lot of energy.”

Pep staggers off once more. A nonplussed Emily turns to see José disappearing 
up the ginnel.

END SCENE

LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE TONIGHT

Follow Manchester United 1-2 Manchester City with John Ashdown’s MBM report of 
the Milk Cup round of 16 match kicking off at 8pm BST, whilst Tim Hill is on 
hand to guide you through West Ham 2-3 Chelsea, at the slightly more sociable 
hour of 7.45pm BST. <https://www.theguardian.com/football>

QUOTE OF THE DAY


“I did not fail on the field. I am not going to fail in the bed” – Tino 
Asprilla talks the good talk at the launch of his new line of condoms.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fjose-mourinho-manchester-united-city-coronation-street%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85056377e2e0e23fce86781c040ac8706a86e870%2F0_0_644_708%2F644.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20A%20choice%20between%20Nick%E2%80%99s%20Bistro%20and%20Roy%E2%80%99s%20Rolls&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fjose-mourinho-manchester-united-city-coronation-street%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20A%20choice%20between%20Nick%E2%80%99s%20Bistro%20and%20Roy%E2%80%99s%20Rolls&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fjose-mourinho-manchester-united-city-coronation-street%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85056377e2e0e23fce86781c040ac8706a86e870%2F0_0_644_708%2F644.jpg>
 The boys. Photograph: Twitter 
SUPPORT THE GUARDIAN

Producing the Guardian’s thoughtful, in-depth journalism – the stuff not 
normally found in this email – is expensive, but supporting us isn’t. If you 
value our journalism, please support us by making aone-off 
<https://contribute.theguardian.com/?INTCMP=co_uk_Fiver_Fiver_copy> or 
recurring contribution 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/uk/supporter?INTCMP=mem_editorial_Fiver_copy>
.

FIVER LETTERS

“I am a Norwich City supporter, my mate is a Sunderland man. I’ve been trying 
to convince him that it is a far more pleasant footballing experience waking up 
on a Sunday (we both live significantly to the east of Fiver Towers, though 
he’s in the south and I’m in the north) to results that show your team to be a 
contender in the Championship rather than to be an also-ran in the Premier 
League, even if the ultimate price of success is to end up spending a season or 
two in the significantly more unpleasant role. But he’s not convinced of the 
excitement and glamour of being part of the Greatest League in the World, etc 
and so on. I’d be interested in the opinions of other Fiver readers who support 
yo-yo teams that might provide evidence either way. Of course, if I was 
equipped with a copy of Football Manager, as a time-rich ex-pat trailing spouse 
(or diplomatic handbag) I might be able to undertake extensive modelling on the 
relative merits of the two roles” – Stuart Hodge.


“In response to Angus Goldings letter [yesterday’s Fiver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/25/expressing-a-preference-for-kevin-nolan>
]: I am such a lazy letter writer that I didn’t even write a lazy letter simply 
asking for a copy of Football Manager. Therefore maybe I am more entitled to a 
copy? Or have I just ruined my chances by showing that I am proactive enough to 
write a lazy letter?” – Carl Harvey.

“Sad to hear José Mourinho <https://www.theguardian.com/football/jose-mourinho>
 speak of his trouble adapting to life in Manchester due to still staying in a 
hotel. My advice to him is to take a leaf out of Alan Partridge’s book and see 
the positives. He must already have accumulated loads of free body lotion and, 
anticipating the standard of the breakfasts in the hotel he’ll be residing in, 
he’d be a fool not to have bought a big plate by now” – David Hunter.

“May I be the first of 1,056 pedants to point out to Fiver that the voting 
rules have changed, according to thevideo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/24/ballon-dor-2016-cristiano-ronaldo-griezmann>
 accompanying the Ballon d’Or list. No longer will international managers and 
captains be voting, thus Gareth Southgate will be able to ensure England have 
done as they have always done, making a hash of itself on the international 
stage. But I see Fiver has done what it has always done - being lazy and 
sloughing off its work to others” – Nigel Assam.

• Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com 
<mailto:the.boss@theguardian.com>. And if you’ve nothing better to do you can 
alsotweet The Fiver <https://twitter.com/thefiver>. Today’s winners is David 
Hunter, who receives a copy of Football Manager 2017 from those good people at 
Football Manager Towers. It’s not out till 4 November so aren’t you the lucky 
one? We’ve got a few more copies to give away, so if you want one, keep the 
letters coming.

BITS AND BOBS

Manchester United’s Ivorian defender Eric Bailly is going to be sidelined 
until Christmaswith knee-knack and is due to return just in time for the Africa 
Cup of Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/25/manchester-united-eric-bailly-injured-christmas>
.

England’s Lionesses have beaten Spain 2-1 in Guadalajara thanks to Steph 
Houghton’s free-kick. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/25/england-spain-womens-international-friendly-match-report>

Nice guy Gareth Southgate has resisted the temptation to kick Wayne Rooney 
while he’s down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/25/gareth-southgate-england-wayne-rooney-marcus-rashford-manchester-united>
. “He’s the England captain and although he didn’t start in Slovenia, to me he 
is a hugely influential person,” cheered Southgate.

Arsène Wenger has told Alex Iwobi to take a chill pill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/26/arsenal-alex-iwobi-banish-nerves-arsene-wenger>
. “He is too nervous at the moment when he has the possibility to finish,” he 
trilled.

The majority of football fans in Britain would have no issues with an openly 
gay player at their club,although 8% have said they would stop going to support 
their club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/26/majority-fans-gay-players-no-problem>
.

And Joey Barton will hold talks with Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/26/joey-barton-rangers-talks-future>
 on Thursday in an attempt to resolve his future. *The Fiver reaches for the 
popcorn …*

STILL WANT MORE?

Remember that time when Ian St John, Jimmy Greaves and Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/26/donald-trump-rumbelows-cup-saint-and-greavsie-ian-st-john-jimmy-greaves>
 made the draw for the Fizzy Cup in 1991? No? Then read all about it here.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fdonald-trump-helps-league-cup-fifth-round-draw-1991-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Donald%20Trump%20helps%20with%20the%20League%20Cup%20fifth-round%20draw%20in%201991%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fdonald-trump-helps-league-cup-fifth-round-draw-1991-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Donald%20Trump%20helps%20with%20the%20League%20Cup%20fifth-round%20draw%20in%201991%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fdonald-trump-helps-league-cup-fifth-round-draw-1991-video&media=>
Donald Trump helps with the League Cup fifth-round draw in 1991 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/oct/26/donald-trump-helps-league-cup-fifth-round-draw-1991-video>
Rob Smyth recalls why it’s the Milk Cup that brings the best out of 
Manchesters United and City. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/26/manchester-united-manchester-city-league-cup-efl-history>


So Fresh. So Clean. Outcast from Europe, Liverpool could well be in with a 
sniff of that elusive league title,thinks Paul Wilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/26/european-absence-gives-liverpool-chance-to-end-long-wait-for-league-title>
.

“Even my 78-year-old father streams games” – readers provide their reasons and 
tales forwatching shonky internet feeds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/26/football-fans-stream-sky-bt-sport-live-viewers>
 as Big Website’s Stop Football campaign cranks up a gear.

Goals. Of. The. Week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/26/football-fans-stream-sky-bt-sport-live-viewers>
. The Prince is back!

In this week’s Knowledge, find out which football club was the first to have 
an official club website (in 1990!) inthe latest trip down Nerd-vana lane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/26/who-were-the-first-football-club-to-have-an-official-website>
.

Henrikh Mkhitaryan is heading for the Manchester United exit … so says today’s 
tish and fipsy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/26/football-transfer-rumours-manchester-united-to-sell-henrikh-mkhitaryan>
.

Just when things were going so well for the Pozzis at Watford … Paul MacInnes 
has the latest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/26/watford-gino-pozzo-premier-league>
.

Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace
 <https://www.facebook.com/guardianfootball>.AND INSTACHAT, TOO! 
<https://www.instagram.com/guardian_sport/>

‘HAVE YOU EVER STOPPED TO THINK WHY WE’RE HERE?’
 