
In the middle of the Lucerne festival <https://www.lucernefestival.ch/en/> 
this summer,A Day for Pierre Boulez  
<https://www.lucernefestival.ch/en/tickets/programme/>celebrated the music and 
legacy of one of the crucial creative partners of Lucerne’s recent history. As 
well as his 90th birthday year, the day’s stream of concerts acknowledgedBoulez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/aug/28/classicalmusicandopera2> as 
founder of theLucerne Festival Academy 
<http://www.lucernefestival.ch/en/lucerne_festival_academy/the_academy/>, the 
annual laboratory in which brilliant young musicians are immersed in the 
performance practice of 20th- and 21st-century music, and where composers and 
conductors attempt to followBoulez’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/mar/20/george-benjamin-in-praise-of-pierre-boulez-at-90>
 imposing example. Ill health meant that Boulez himself wasn’t in attendance. 
Thanks to the perfectly poised yet dazzlingly passionate performances of some 
of his largest-scale masterpieces by theEnsemble intercontemporain 
<http://www.ensembleinter.com/en/> and the Festival Academy Orchestra – the 
lamentingRituel in Memoriam Bruno Maderna 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-k7EXNZqIUg>, the resonant glitter of Sur 
Incises <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PHG3FCAM1-Y>, and the thrilling 
orchestrations of hisNotations <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uIlfuf2wUok>, 
all conducted with heroic concentration byMatthias Pintscher 
<http://www.matthiaspintscher.com/about/> – his presence shimmered throughout 
the day’s panoply of concerts, installations and events.

A guide to Pierre Boulez's music
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2012/jul/16/pierre-boulez-contemporary-music-guide>
Studded across all of the programmes were eight world premieres from a 
collection of composers of different vintages and Boulezian inspirations. There 
were imaginative and wildly diverse orchestral works by three young composers:
Samy Moussa <http://www.samymoussa.com/>, whose Crimson was a purple patch of 
intoxicated harmonies and noisy energy;Piotr Pezsat 
<https://piotrpeszatdotcom.wordpress.com/>, with the etiolated patchwork of his 
Pensées étranglées (“Strangled Thoughts”); and the crystalline concision and 
expressive precision ofChristian Mason’s  <http://www.christianmason.net/>Open 
to Infinity: A Grain of Sand (which those of you in London will be able to hear 
at theProms on Saturday afternoon <http://www.bbc.co.uk/events/e4pxj5>). 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Ftomserviceblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F26%2Fpierre-boulez-day-lucerne-festival-rihm-kurtag%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5719eae74f7df3444bca13b621fae452a623b13%2F0_530_2779_1667%2F2779.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20day%20for%20Boulez%3A%20moving%20tributes%20and%20newly%20composed%20homages%20at%20the%20Lucerne%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Ftomserviceblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F26%2Fpierre-boulez-day-lucerne-festival-rihm-kurtag%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20day%20for%20Boulez%3A%20moving%20tributes%20and%20newly%20composed%20homages%20at%20the%20Lucerne%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Ftomserviceblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F26%2Fpierre-boulez-day-lucerne-festival-rihm-kurtag%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5719eae74f7df3444bca13b621fae452a623b13%2F0_530_2779_1667%2F2779.jpg>
 Pierre Boulez. Photograph: Eamonn McCabe for the Guardian 
But it was the works written expressly in homage to Boulez that were most 
revealing of the legacy and challenge he leaves his fellow composers.Tod 
Machover’s <http://web.media.mit.edu/~tod/> Re-Structures for two pianos and 
electronics used material from Boulez’s piano music of the 1950s to re-cast the 
music in a vibrant yet reverent electro-acoustic fantasy.Heinz Holliger’s 
<http://www.schott-music.com/shop/persons/featured/9042/> miniature song-cycle, 
à plume éperdue, set his own playfully referential poem, a palimpsest of 
quotations of the titles and texts of Boulez’s works, to music of deliberately 
Boulezian angularity for solo soprano and small ensemble. At the start of the 
day,Pintscher’s  <http://www.matthiaspintscher.com/>solo piano piece Now I was 
a distilled tincture of how Boulez’s harmonic language has inspired his own 
music, a revelling in spacious resonance and soft-focused dissonance.

In praise of Pierre Boulez at 90
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/mar/20/george-benjamin-in-praise-of-pierre-boulez-at-90>
But it was two new pieces by György Kurtág 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2013/mar/12/contemporary-music-guide-gyorgy-kurtag>
 andWolfgang Rihm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2012/sep/24/tom-service-guide-wolfgang-rihm>
, both performed with unwavering conviction by the young players of theAcademy 
Orchestra <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4IuyIlMAdt0>, that were the most 
subtle, striking, and moving tributes to Boulez’s life and music.Kurtág 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g319gW5_O0o> – who will himself be 90 next 
year – contributed his Petite musique solonelle en hommage à Pierre Boulez. 
There is little in the surface of this short piece that owes anything to 
Boulez’s music, apart from the coruscating percussive clang that Kurtág creates 
from a cimbalom, harp, accordion and tubular bells, reminiscent of some of the 
textures of Sur Incises. But the music moves mostly as a slow processional, 
unfolding a melodic and harmonic world with absolute economy and clarity – a 
different world from the decorative splendour of Boulez’s more recent 
orchestral music. The “solemnness” of Kurtág’s music sounds, I think, like a 
memorial. It’s a tribute from one composer in the twilight of his years to 
another, commemorating their shared history and friendship. It sounds out a 
space of hieratic meditation and lingering sadness, symbolised by the 
disembodied echo of the pianissimo accordion notes that are left suspended at 
crucial points in the work.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Do0APfmT-mQs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Do0APfmT-mQs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Do0APfmT-mQs&media=>
 Ensemble intercontemporain playing Pierre Boulez’s explosante-fixe in March 
2015, in Paris 
Rihm’s Gruss-Moment (“Greeting-Moment”), scored for a handful of strings set 
against orchestral woodwind, brass and percussion, makes an intriguing, 
open-ended tribute. Rihm has written of his admiration for Boulez as a 
liquidator of musical borders, a composer whose output is a revelation of 
ceaseless change and dynamism. And Rihm’s piece sounded like a superimposition 
of fragments, giving glimpses of musical worlds beyond borders. A solo horn 
began the piece softly. It then ended it loudly with a musical question mark, 
an interrogative crescendo that slid suddenly to a higher pitch. In between, 
there were massive chords for the ensemble in whose sonic wake the strings were 
left stranded with soft and strange chords. With a soundworld that could only 
be his own, Rihm’s piece nevertheless paid profound homage to what he has 
learned from Boulez’s example: the inspiration to pose existential musical 
questions, to push music to its limits and beyond. As the whole Day for Pierre 
showed, it’s not just the inspiraton of his work as composer, conductor, 
writer, and teacher: Boulez, it turns out, isan attitude of mind 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2012/jul/16/pierre-boulez-contemporary-music-guide>
, a way of being in the creative world.
 