
Hollywood has finally cracked it. Last week, it was already handsomely in 
profit from its new range of toys and knick-knacks even before the massive 
two-hour commercial for them had come out. So they are now actually going to 
charge people to see the advert for their own products. I mean, wow. People say 
John Lewis has been canny by making an annual mawkish short film instead of 
having someone shouting: “It’s deals deals deals at John Lewis this 
Christmas!”, but this is really taking it up a level.

In case you’re wondering, I’m talking about Star Wars: The Force Awakens, 
which, it has been reported, took enough down payments from exclusive brand 
partners to amply cover the $200m that it cost to make. And those partners have 
since been busy manufacturing the bewildering range ofStar Wars merchandise 
that’s available to buy. Lots and lots of toys obviously – figures and ships 
and costumes and Lego and versions of Monopoly – butother crazy stuff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/dec/15/star-wars-force-awakens-merchandise-argos>
 like Darth Vader waffle makers, Millennium Falcon Bluetooth speakers, furry 
Chewbacca slippers, and endless mugs and T-shirts and pens and Christmas 
decorations.

Star Wars, it turns out, is the most ambitious, enterprising and impressive 
exercise in the marketing of crap ever conceived by man. Crap, that is, apart 
from the toys. I have to make an exception for the toys because, as a child, I 
was an enthusiastic collector ofStar Wars figures and spaceships. They were my 
equivalent of tin soldiers, Lego, fresh air or any of the other things that 
little boys are encouraged to obsess over and I would play out endless battles 
and adventures on various thickly carpeted planets, where the only cover from 
an incoming TIE fighter attack came from the giant coffee-table- and 
magazine-rack-like natural features of the weird extraterrestrial landscape. 
Looking back, there is no doubt that, scintillating though I found the films, I 
derived many times, and many hundreds of hours, more pleasure from the 
merchandise.

But, toys aside, it really is crap. Anyone who enjoys their Stormtrooper 
single duvet cover set more than watchingThe Empire Strikes Back is a very odd 
person indeed – and unlikely ever to be in the market for a Stormtrooper double 
duvet cover set. These are all things that you either don’t need at all or 
you’d be slightly better off with a non-Star Wars version. And I say that as 
someone whose wife once gave him an R2-D2 eggcup as a present. Because if you 
love eggs, and you loveStar Wars… you’ll still, in general, find yourself using 
a normal egg cup.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fdec%2F20%2Fstar-wars-stormtrooper-merchandising-margaret-thatcher-auction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff79fbb3838f804ab52381662a8f1617eea484095%2F0_0_2835_3508%2F2835.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20Darth%20Vader%20waffle%20maker%3F%20You%20really%20shouldn%E2%80%99t%20have%E2%80%A6%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fdec%2F20%2Fstar-wars-stormtrooper-merchandising-margaret-thatcher-auction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20Darth%20Vader%20waffle%20maker%3F%20You%20really%20shouldn%E2%80%99t%20have%E2%80%A6%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fdec%2F20%2Fstar-wars-stormtrooper-merchandising-margaret-thatcher-auction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff79fbb3838f804ab52381662a8f1617eea484095%2F0_0_2835_3508%2F2835.jpg>
 Illustration by David Foldvari. 
I don’t mean it as a criticism when I call this stuff crap. Our civilisation 
cannot be sustained solely from the buying and selling of sturdy items that 
people genuinely need. We all need people to purchase things they don’t need; 
to buy things that, while not necessary, are fun – like chocolate, toys, booze, 
DVDs – and then, to keep the economy growing, also to buy things that vaguely 
seem like they might be fun if you don’t think that hard about it, like Darth 
Vader showerheads and lightsaber chopsticks. The market for hilariously apt 
dust-gatherers is vast and growing – it makes up a significant proportion of 
the Christmas shopping spike and we probably can’t do without it.

Of course, not everyone’s into Star Wars and, in a global economy, there’s 
something unnecessary for every taste or lack of it. It’s been a great week for 
fans of a franchise that we currently lack the advances in medical science to 
reboot: Margaret Thatcher. There was ahuge sale at Christie’s of the former 
prime minister’s stuff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/15/margaret-thatchers-wedding-dress-auctioned-for-25000>
, some of it fetching absurd sums: £37,500 for a signed copy of a speech, 
£266,500 for a ceramic eagle given to her by Ronald Reagan and £242,500 for an 
old dispatch box. In total, the sale made millions, which must have made the 
Thatcher heirs wonder what might have been if only they’d found the right brand 
partners.

Margaret Thatcher’s father was a grocer and George Lucas’s ran a stationery 
store, so neither of them would think there’s anything grubby about retail. 
And, as my parents can attest from my requirements of Father Christmas 
throughout the 1980s, Star Wars’s primary role as a moulded-plastic merchant 
long predates Lucasfilm’s takeover by Disney. When the first film hit cinemas 
in 1977, Lucas told theLos Angeles Times: “I’m not making much for directing 
this movie. If I make money, it will be from the toys.” And he did, whatever 
the artistic failings of his later output.

Nevertheless, I very much doubt it was his primary aim. The estimated $20-32bn 
in sales ofStar Wars products notwithstanding, he mainly wanted to tell an 
exciting story set in space. It’s a noble aim. The livelihoods, fun and 
last-minute present ideas that all theStar Wars crap has given millions of us 
were just a serendipitous side-effect of an adventure story that people liked.
The Force Awakens phenomenon may seem like an elaborate advert for branded 
crockery but, if no one found the film fun, all that bric-a-brac would gather 
its dust in the shops rather than people’s homes.

You never really know what’s going to make money, however clever you are. 
Anyone successful in Hollywood would tell you that. I just wish they’d tell the
universities minister, Jo Johnson 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/government-launches-review-to-improve-university-research-funding>
. He’s asking academic bodies to justify their funding by explaining the real 
world application of their inquiries before they start making them. Johnson is 
the latest in a long line of politicians charged with the funding of academic 
research who thinks it needs to prove its worth in advance; that highly 
educated people working hard to fill the gaps in human knowledge never got us 
anywhere, and what those spendthrift boffins need to do is direct their 
research towards a readily monetisable goal.

“The government has committed to protect science and research… and we need to 
make sure we’re getting the most from this investment,” he said, as he 
commissioned Lord Stern to breathe down the necks of the whole well-meaning, 
under-resourced academic sector.

It may seem like a frivolous example but it’s worth considering (had Lord 
Stern’s review been around then) which elements of the prodigious output of 
19th-century mathematician Charles Dodgson would have found favour with the 
spending review. And whether they’re the same ones that would be most likely to 
attract major investment from Disney.
 