
MORE HYPER, HYPER THAN THIS <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7Twnmhe948A>?

Twice a season in the north-west a celebration is held in which two football 
clubs honour the region’s industrial past by creating clouds of toxic blather 
so vast that the area’s seven million residents are cast into the dark and 
given a glimpse of what it was like to have lived in its muscularly glorious 
but poisonously polluted past. The first celebration this season has gone on a 
little longer than expected, mind, with guff from the buildup to Mega Magic 
Monday’s hype-fest between Liverpool and Manchester United first being pumped 
out around the time the Premier League fixtures were drawn up in the summer. 
The other oddity is that some of the piffle being chuffed out has been far from 
toxic. In fact, when asked why José Mourinho was not everyone’s favourite 
charismatic and trendy foreign manager any more, everyone’s favourite 
charismatic and trendy foreign manager, Jürgen Klopp, leapt to his defence, 
giving the Portuguese the kind of special ego-stroke he hasn’t been treated to 
by anyone for a long while.

“Who said this? Four people in Liverpool?” barked Klopp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/16/jurgen-klopp-jose-mourinho-liverpool-manchester-united>
, sounding like he may be about to go off on a weird Beatles riff. “It’s 
bull$hit. Rubbish. He has started badly at United? They won their first games. 
So now you are giving B grades for winning? He knows how successful football 
works. To like or not like the way he plays, why should he care? He has won 
[Big Cup] more times than I have played in it. That’s how it is.”

Jordan Henderson: ‘Liverpool ready for whatever Manchester United throw at us’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/16/jordan-henderson-liverpool-manchester-united-jose-mourinho-jurgen-klopp>
As for Mourinho, he’s been too busy waffling on about Wayne Rooney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/16/jose-mourinho-i-am-not-to-blame-for-confusion-over-wayne-rooneys-role>
 to say anything spiteful about Liverpool or Klopp, although like that kid at 
school who is wilfully bad at the yes-no game, his gums couldn’t help but flap 
a wee bit on the subject of referee Anthony Taylor, who is obviously going to 
grant Liverpool 10 penalties just to show he isn’t biased. “I think Mr Taylor 
is a very good referee but because such pressure is being put on him I think it 
will be difficult for him to have a very good performance at Anfield,” parped 
Mourinho, dangling a foot tantalisingly close to his cakehole. “I don’t really 
want to say too much more on the matter. I have my view but I have learned a 
lesson, if you want to call it that, by being punished so many times for my 
words about referees.” Yes, predictably, Mourinho may well geta slap on the 
tail from FA bods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/16/manchester-united-jose-mourinho-fa-charge-referee-liverpool>
 for not being as good at learning lessons as he should be.

In the meantime, Mourinho is busy trying to rebuild his captain’s shattered 
confidence by blatantly telling porkies. “At Man Utd [Rooney] didn’t lose [his] 
place. Not at all, for me, he’s first-choice,” honked Mourinho, scratching his 
brass neck and casually brushing off suggestions that he had indeed dropped him 
for the last three games. “If somebody confused him, it was not me. He can play 
everywhere – that’s no problem.” Klopp’s biggest problem would appear to be 
whether to trust the hot-headed Emre Can to deputise for the cool-headed 
Georginio Wijnaldum, who is expected to miss out due to hip-knack. He will also 
be without groin-gah’s Adam Lallana. It perhaps makes the predictions that 
Liverpool will give their rivals a gegen-lesson misplaced. And if Mourinho has 
done his homework and watched United’s last two league wins at Anfield, he’ll 
have seen that Louis van Gaal’s more direct style, in which he instructed his 
defenders to not shy away from pumping the ball through the dark Anfield clouds 
towards Marouane Fellaini’s noggin, won out. Perhaps Mourinho will see the 
light and follow suit. As for those seven million north-west residents, they’d 
like to see the light too. Kick-off can’t come quick enough.


LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE

Join Jacob Steinberg from 8pm BST for hot MBM coverage of Liverpool 1-1 
Manchester United, the aperitif to Michael Butler’s big FA Cup first-round draw 
at 7pm <https://www.theguardian.com/football/live>.

QUOTE OF THE DAY

“He was on at me every day; he’s been fundamental for my career. The cakes, 
the bread, the Coke: it’s all good but for my profession it was $hit. I’d train 
then eat: train, eat, train, eat. I was a fish biting its own tail. Eventually, 
you realise: an elite player has to befino [slim]” – Manchester City and 
Spain’s Nolito, on the impact to his career of Luis Enrique,in conversation 
with Sid Lowe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/16/nolito-id-train-then-eat-the-cakes-and-the-coke-then-you-realise-its-no-good>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fthe-fiver-liverpool-manchester-united%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ff3a75ab6c43ffe90e5af1c27ca0c0d7007c150%2F48_494_3620_2786%2F3620.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20A%20foot%20tantalisingly%20close%20to%20his%20cakehole&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fthe-fiver-liverpool-manchester-united%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20A%20foot%20tantalisingly%20close%20to%20his%20cakehole&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fthe-fiver-liverpool-manchester-united%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ff3a75ab6c43ffe90e5af1c27ca0c0d7007c150%2F48_494_3620_2786%2F3620.jpg>
 A talented fish, earlier. Photograph: Scott Heppell/AFP/Getty Images 
FIVER LETTERS

“Just thought I’d let Fiver readers know that they can down some Tin in a bar 
called Tin at Zadar bus station, in Croatia. By the way, Arsenal are definitely 
finally going to win the Premier League this season, I think” – Seamus Keenan.


“As a proud North American, I love the idea of a joint regional bid for a 
vastly expanded World Cup final (Friday’s Fiver letters). The lip-smacking 
match-ups are endless: Tonga v Togo in Toronto, Iceland v Greenland in 
Cleveland, New Zealand v New Caledonia in Nueva Leon. And a final of Czech 
Republic v China in Chicago. Let’s give the tournament a pithy name, too: 
Americanadexico 2026. Job done, Fifa” – Mike Wilner.

• Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com 
<mailto:the.boss@theguardian.com>. And if you’ve nothing better to do you can 
alsotweet The Fiver <https://twitter.com/thefiver>. Today’s winner of our 
prizeless letter o’the day is… Seamus Keenan.

SUPPORT THE GUARDIAN

Producing the Guardian’s thoughtful, in-depth journalism – the stuff not 
normally found in this email – is expensive, but supporting us isn’t. If you 
value our journalism, please support us by making aone-off 
<https://contribute.theguardian.com/?INTCMP=co_uk_Fiver_Fiver_copy> or 
recurring contribution 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/uk/supporter?INTCMP=mem_editorial_Fiver_copy>
.

BITS AND BOBS

Soccerball chiefs in Montreal say Didier Drogba refused to play 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/17/didier-drogba-refused-play-montreal-impact-mls>
 in the Impact’s 2-2 draw against Toronto FC after not making their starting 
XI. “I spoke with him yesterday he didn’t accept the fact to come off the bench 
and, in the end, he did not want to be in the 18,” sniffed coach Mauro Biello. 
“There was tightness in his back, yes, but he was capable of playing. The 
organisation will have to handle this.”

Trillion Trophy Asia has completed its takeover of Birmingham City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/17/birmingham-city-championship-takeover-trillion-trophy-asia>
, just 16 short months after receiving a two-year exclusivity period to 
purchase the club. “A line can formally be drawn under the old regime and we 
can continue to plan ahead for a brighter Blues future,” cheered a club suit.

Mauricio Pochettino reckons Toby Alderweireld’s knee-knack may only be 
knee-ouch. And that’s not all …Harry Kane’s ankle-gah! is almost a thing of the 
past 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/16/tottenham-optimistic-toby-alderweireld-injury-harry-kane>
. “Hopefully [he’s back] as soon as possible we can recover him, and the team 
will get stronger,” parped Poch.

Pep Guardiola is playing fast and loose with The Football Gods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/16/manchester-city-manager-backs-sergio-aguero-to-continue-taking-penalties>
 by insisting Sergio Agüero will be on penalties for Manchester City’s trip to 
face Barcelona. “I love the players who have the personality to take the 
penalties. I love it, I’m sorry,” he blootered.

Marc Albrighton has cut straight to the heart of Leicester’s Premier League 
struggles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/16/marc-albrighton-leicester-city-danny-drinkwater-claudio-ranieri>
. “We need to be stronger, to be harder to play against, to be harder to beat, 
harder to score against,” he blubbed.

Mesut Özil wants a bumper wad of shiny new plastic fivers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/16/mesut-ozil-arsenal-pay-rise> 
if he’s going to extend his Arsenal contract beyond 2018. “I don’t think he 
needs convincing [to stay],” Arsène Wenger self-deluded. “He wants to stay 
here. If you have a good bank, call me.”

And a man who threatened to poison Bristol Rovers fans while working in the 
Memorial Stadium kitchen on Saturday is facing criminal charges. “On Saturday, 
prior to our match against Gillingham, someone purporting to be a Memorial 
Stadium employee posted on Facebook that he intended to harm supporters by 
tampering with their food,”explained a club spokesperson 
<http://www.bristolpost.co.uk/chef-threatens-to-poison-bristol-rovers-fans-at-the-memorial-stadium/story-29815403-detail/story.html#EZS4MAKmjbjgh8gQ.99>
. “This matter was drawn to the attention of our security staff who escorted 
that person from the premises. The person involved is not a Memorial Stadium 
employee but one of the agency staff we employ on match days. The agency has 
been informed of the matter and it’s possible that criminal proceedings will be 
taken against the person involved.”


STILL WANT MORE?

The Ched Evans case shines a light on football’s dark corners. By Gemma Clarke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/17/ched-evans-football-industry-harassment-respect-women>
.

If you’ve not watched this, watch this 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2016/oct/14/desert-fire-the-world-cup-rebels-of-kurdistan-video>
.

José Mourinho’s going to park the bus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/16/jose-mourinho-liverpool-manchester-united>
, thinks Jamie Jackson – but Liverpool will be waiting with their tow truck,
says Bebo’s Jordan Henderson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/16/jordan-henderson-liverpool-manchester-united-jose-mourinho-jurgen-klopp>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fthe-fiver-liverpool-manchester-united%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F88ad52a767cba134eca19affbf69e552ed254511%2F0_0_3685_2769%2F3685.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20A%20foot%20tantalisingly%20close%20to%20his%20cakehole&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fthe-fiver-liverpool-manchester-united%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20A%20foot%20tantalisingly%20close%20to%20his%20cakehole&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fthe-fiver-liverpool-manchester-united%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F88ad52a767cba134eca19affbf69e552ed254511%2F0_0_3685_2769%2F3685.jpg>
 Base-level lean. Photograph: LFC 
If Theo Walcott was as prolific in front of goal as he was here he’d … score 
more goals. Feast your eyes on10 things we learned from the Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/16/premier-league-10-talking-points-weekend-action>
.

Note to aspiring authors currently masquerading as professional footballers: 
do not lay in to Ultras of your current club, chapter and verse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/17/mauro-icardi-v-inters-ultras-an-unhappy-chapter-in-his-ongoing-san-siro-saga>
. The Rumour Mill thinks it knows whatMauro Icardi’s up to, mind 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/17/football-transfer-rumours-mauro-icardi-to-arsenal-memphis-depay-to-milan>
.

Tottenham’s Son Heung-min is as mild-mannered as they come 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/17/tottenham-son-heung-min-global-brand-bayer-leverkusen-champions-league>
, writes David Hytner, but he won’t be welcomed back to Leverkusen on Tuesday 
with open arms.

Derby’s Steve McClaren MkIV needs time to make his, er, mark, says Nick Miller 
inthis week’s Football League Focus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog/2016/oct/17/steve-mcclaren-task-transform-derby-county>
.

And jump In Bed with Maradona to read all about football in Hanoi, where 
Premier League clubs trump the Vietnamese champions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/in-bed-with-maradona/2016/oct/17/football-vietnam-hanoi-manchester-united>
.

Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace
 <https://www.facebook.com/guardianfootball>. AND INSTACHAT, TOO! 
<https://www.instagram.com/guardian_sport/>

PROPER LEGACY 
<http://www.pitchero.com/clubs/stamfordafc/a/club-history-39298.html>
 