
I cheated. Of course I did. Getting to my desk involves a school run, seven 
escalators and several hundred stairs – not even the podiatric sadists who 
reportedly sent home a receptionist this week for refusing to wear high heels 
on a nine-hour shift would expect that, would they?

To recap for those who missed heelgate: Nicola Thorp, a temp at PwC, was 
allegedly sent home from work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/11/receptionist-sent-home-pwc-not-wearing-high-heels-pwc-nicola-thorp>
 without pay for refusing to comply with the dress code set by Portico, the 
company that provides receptionist services at the City accountancy firm. 
Pointing out that male colleagues were not asked to do the same, Thorp called 
the dress code debilitating, sexist and outdated.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fnine-hour-shift-in-high-heels-nicola-thorp%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f0153dd5f05f5d8db2cc422c9c2d4d3d48c358d%2F803_905_1631_2039%2F1631.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20nine-hour%20shift%20in%20high%20heels%3A%20'I'm%20so%20hungry%2C%20but%20can%E2%80%99t%20face%20walking%20to%20Pret'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fnine-hour-shift-in-high-heels-nicola-thorp%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20nine-hour%20shift%20in%20high%20heels%3A%20%27I%27m%20so%20hungry%2C%20but%20can%E2%80%99t%20face%20walking%20to%20Pret%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fnine-hour-shift-in-high-heels-nicola-thorp%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f0153dd5f05f5d8db2cc422c9c2d4d3d48c358d%2F803_905_1631_2039%2F1631.jpg>
 Nicola Thorp. Photograph: BBC News/PA 
So here I am, a “fashion person who doesn’t wear heels”, ditching my furry 
Birkenstocks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2014/jun/15/birkenstock-sandals-shoes-fashion-industry>
 for 10cm stilettos. By 2pm, I’m so hungry from having had no lunch because I 
simply can’t face the seven-minute walk to Pret a Manger from my desk. I have 
to agree with Thorp’s assessment. Tripping over a colleague’s rucksack during 
an office ideas meeting was another low point (really signalling “capable and 
efficient” there, huh?).

In fact, it’s the semantics not the aesthetics of high heels that are so 
interesting. Received wisdom has it that flats aren’t considered to be very 
businesslike; they don’t have the dubious honour of being able to shout 
“corporate” loud enough. Semantics are the reason why I spent most of my day in 
heels attracting comments like “you’re much more intimidating today”. They’re 
also the reason that female actors who choose anything other than Jimmy Choo 
Minnys, the Hollywood-approved strappy sandal, are considered to be making a 
statement – see Susan Sarandonthis week at Cannes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gallery/2016/may/11/cannes-2016-woody-allen-kristen-stewart-blake-lively-in-pictures>
.

Actually, it’s not that I have a no heels policy. Some wide-leg trousers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gallery/2015/may/01/fashion-for-all-ages-wide-leg-trousers-in-pictures>
 only puddle right (technical wardrobe term, right there) with the hidden help 
of a pair of heels. They can be a useful tool. But for the past few years the 
idea of high heels as a look in their own right has been sidelined. The era of 
the vertiginous It shoe is over. The concept consigned to the fashion gutter 
while chunky skater shoes, Stan Smith trainers and, most recently, elongated 
Gucci loafers, strode confidently past.

Women share flat-shoe photos in solidarity with dismissed PwC receptionist
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/13/women-share-flat-shoe-photos-in-solidarity-with-fired-pwc-receptionist>
What high heels really signify is less about fashion and more about attitude. 
Look at Victoria Beckham. Once the patron saint of high heels, at her catwalk 
shows she’s the backstage worker-bee tomboy in Stan Smiths. Cut to the red 
carpet at Cannes and she’s busy boomeranging herself in heels and diamonds. The 
gear change from fashion designer to celebrity centres mainly on the shoes.

In truth, this week’s controversy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/2016/may/12/enforcing-high-heels-in-the-office-is-the-height-of-workplace-sexism?CMP=twt_gu>
 was as much bad press for the fashion status of high heels as it was for City 
accountancy firms. If high heels can only really semaphore a corporate business 
attitude, or even that of being in charge, then they have their work cut out to 
compete with flat shoes, which can send a much more fashionable message. 
Because fashion fetishises all sorts of clothing categories, but glass-building 
office wear is rarely one of them.
 