
One of this year’s sold-out Proms has been the late-night show by Nils Frahm 
and A Winged Victory for the Sullen, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/06/prom-27-nils-frahm-winged-victory-sullen-review-bbc-6music-late-night>
 programmed by BBC Radio 6 Music’sMary Anne Hobbs 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b01pp0xq>. Frahms is unquestionably a very 
talented pianist, but his performance – and rapturous reception – has got me 
thinking about the infinity of possible connections waiting to be made between 
the worlds of “contemporary classical” and “alternative”, whatver they might 
mean.

Here’s a playlist I made for 6 Music <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b0654lvs>
 that explores the boundaries of contemporary and classical music. And, if you 
loveNils Frahm and his many keyboards 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/events/empxj5#b06565jk>, try these masterpieces of 
pianistic possibility.

Steve Reich: Piano Phase <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7P_9hDzG1i0>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7P_9hDzG1i0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7P_9hDzG1i0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7P_9hDzG1i0&media=>
Hallucinogenic brilliance from the master of minimalism: rhythmic patterns 
that go in and out of phase, and take your mind on a musical trip.

Terry Riley: A Rainbow in Curved Air 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hy3W-3HPMWg>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dhy3W-3HPMWg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dhy3W-3HPMWg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dhy3W-3HPMWg&media=>
A psychedelic, otherworldly and beautifully constructed electric keyboard 
meditation.

John Cage: Sonatas and Interludes for Prepared Piano 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3w7GeJCLpJc>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3w7GeJCLpJc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3w7GeJCLpJc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3w7GeJCLpJc&media=>
In the late 1940s, Cage turned the piano into a multi-percussion micro-cosmos 
in ways that still sound enchanting, discombobulating and radical.

Karlheinz Stockhausen: Mantra <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3sylplEFxXo>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3sylplEFxXo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3sylplEFxXo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3sylplEFxXo&media=>
Stockhausen’s two-piano revelation of another musical world.

Jean Barraqué: Piano Sonata <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0OE7UmKmix0>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0OE7UmKmix0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0OE7UmKmix0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0OE7UmKmix0&media=>
From another stylistic universe, but if you want to know what real pianistic 
uber-virtuosity is, here’s Roger Woodward’s performance of Barraqué’s sonata, 
one of the mighty masterworks of the postwar period.
 