
Surely bombing yet another Muslim country is a mistake. But that’s exactly 
what Italian foreign minister Paolo Gentiloni hascalled for 
<http://news.nationalpost.com/news/world/christian-refugees-thrown-overboard-by-muslim-migrants-on-crossing-from-libya-to-italy-police-believe>
 – attacks on Islamic State (Isis) positions in Libya to stem the flow of 
refugees streaming into Europe.

Calls for tough action, like Gentiloni’s, are growing in response to refugees 
drowning during the treacherous journey across the Mediterranean Ocean. Last 
year nearly 5,000 men, women and children perished at sea. This year at least 
1,600 people have already died.


The desire to shut the door to Europe entirely is perhaps understandable, but 
it’s the wrong decision. It dishonestly uses the fantasy of small and ordered 
queues of asylum seekers to sell Europe as a safe haven.

If Europe listens to Tony Abbott, the future for refugees will be cruel | 
Richard Ackland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/apr/21/if-europe-listens-to-tony-abbott-the-future-for-refugees-will-be-cruel>
And yet the modern, international system of protecting asylum seekers, set up 
in the wake of the Holocaust, has never looked more incapable of dealing with 
some of the worst humanitarian crises since the Second World War.

Over 4 million Syrians have fled their country since 2011. Aside from the 
refugees pouring into Italy, around 100 Syrians arrive every day by boat on 
Greece’s Dodecanese islands.

The country is logistically incapable 
<http://greece.greekreporter.com/2015/04/14/greek-government-seeking-emergency-plan-for-refugees/>
 of managing the influx and struggles with some of the mostunaccepting attitudes
 
<http://www.pewglobal.org/2014/05/12/chapter-3-most-support-limiting-immigration/>
 to refugees in Europe (though a new, left-wing Syriza government is already
releasing 
<http://www.sbs.com.au/news/article/2015/04/17/greece-throws-open-immigration-detention-centres>
 thousands of immigrants housed in horrible detention centres, sites Iwitnessed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jun/27/an-encounter-with-greeces-migrant-prisoners-and-the-men-who-jail-them>
 in Corinth in 2014). Some in Europe are more open. A recent poll found that 
50% of Germans were infavour 
<http://www.dw.de/survey-shows-half-of-all-germans-favor-taking-in-more-refugees/a-18405458>
 of taking more refugees.

The UN is practically begging 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/04/18/world/middleeast/un-calls-on-western-nations-to-shelter-syrian-refugees.html>
 Western nations to shelter Syrian refugees but the response from America, 
Britain, Australia and Canada has been desultory. The Saudi-led campaign 
against Yemen is likely to cause more people toflee a country 
<http://www.informationclearinghouse.info/article41689.htm> that was already 
struggling before the current bombing. African leaders, from where many 
migrants are coming due to repression, arelargely mute 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/04/29/world/africa/african-leaders-are-mute-even-as-their-people-die-at-sea.html>
.

In Europe, anti-immigrant sentiment is electorally popular. It’s not a tough 
sell. Economic uncertainty,questions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/datablog/2015/jan/08/french-public-opinion-charlie-hebdo-attacks>
 around migrant integration, Al-Qaeda or Isis-inspired violence against 
civilians and questions around European identity end up expressing themselves 
in a fear of Islam and terrorism, which are doubts politicians exploit.

And the sheer scale of refugee arrivals in Italy is even causing some asylum 
seekers themselves to wonder with whom they have been travelling. There are 
often no checks or registration on arrival and some told Foreign Policy 
recently that it wasentirely possible 
<http://foreignpolicy.com/2015/04/13/italy-islamic-state-syria-refugees/> that 
members of Isis or other militant groups were travelling among them as a way to 
enter Europe.

European state identity is morphing into a less homogenous collection of 
nations. It’s undeniably becoming more socially conservative, Muslim and 
unfamiliar to traditional, Christian sensibilities.

The EU’s possible solution to these changes, mimicking Australia’s offshore 
detention network, is toestablish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/05/european-commission-third-country-immigrant-processing-centres>
 processing camps in non-EU nations such as Niger, Egypt, Lebanon and Turkey – 
as a way to keep the problem away from Europe.

To implement such a system in states that already have huge asylum burdens 
guarantees poor conditions and corruption. This has been Australia’s experience 
withawful 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/07/nauru-staff-call-for-closure-of-asylum-centre-and-royal-commission-into-abuse>
 Pacific island detention camps which have done next to nothing to alter the 
increasingly desperate nature of 21st century migration flows, except to keep 
them from settling safely in Australia.

Canberra finds itself making deals with repressive states like Cambodia and 
Vietnam, and tiny Island nations like Nauru, but is mistaken if it believes 
resettling refugees there will deter a family leaving war-torn Syria, Libya or 
Iraq trying to reach somewhere secure.

After all, the west’s participation in Middle Eastern wars is what’s 
accelerating this huge population transfer. Libya, where Gentiloni wants to 
drop his bombs, was meant to be peaceful after the 2011 overthrow of the 
Gaddafi regime. But Libya is broken, with French oil producer Total SAcutting 
and running 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-04-28/libya-oilfield-write-off-by-total-is-ominous-sign-to-other-firms>
 this month.

The result of Europe’s lack of investment in Libya after the end of the 
dictator has borne results: political chaos, violence and a wave of refugees 
fleeing. Not that this has stopped Libya’s broke, ruling government still having
money 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2015/04/29/dead-broke-libya-hires-million-dollar-american-lobbyist.html?via=newsletter&source=DDAfternoon>
 for a Washington-based lobbyist – though it’s unclear who is paying the bill.

The EU is showing every indication of wanting to push the refugee “problem” 
off its soil, a sign of its unwillingness to deal with the fruits of its 
foreign policy. Adequate search and rescue operations in the Mediterranean are 
not happening due to the spurious argument that saving people will onlyencourage
 
<http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/400-migrants-feared-drowned-appeal-rescue-search-operations-mediterranean-sea-1496519>
 more to come.

The result is many more deaths at sea; because of their brown and black skin, 
governments don’t fear a public outcry to save them. Thecompassionate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/apr/15/guardian-view-on-the-mediterranean-boat-people-europe-cannot-evade-humanitarian-responsibilities>
 and correct response is to not allow people to drown. Instead, European 
nations are pushing fordrones 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/africaandindianocean/libya/11564322/Royal-Navy-to-send-drones-to-the-Mediterranean-to-save-migrants.html>
 to monitor the Mediterranean (with Israeli government and corporateassistance 
<http://electronicintifada.net/blogs/david-cronin/israels-help-eu-seeks-new-ways-being-cruel-refugees>
, since they’re global leaders in the technology) andwarships 
<http://ca.reuters.com/article/topNews/idCAKBN0NA0SH20150419?sp=true> on the 
Libyan coast.

Europe, like Australia, views this issue as a security threat and not a 
humanitarian crisis. The response follows this logic. People smugglers are 
framed as the ultimate enemy. Rarely are Western policies acknowledged as being 
part of the problem.

An encounter with Greece's migrant prisoners, and the men who jail them | 
Antony Loewenstein
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jun/27/an-encounter-with-greeces-migrant-prisoners-and-the-men-who-jail-them>
One solution is to ease the path for migrants to enter the EU in a safe and 
responsible way. It is increasingly difficult for refugees to claim asylum in 
overseas embassies, forcing them to take alternative paths. Last year nearly 
half of migrants rescued in the Mediterranean came from Syria, Eritrea and 
Somalia – and yet the EU does little to find solutions in those states.

The EU hosts few of the world’s refugees, the UNHCR has found that 86% of the 
world’s totalreside 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/2015/04/mare-nostrum-and-high-price-guarding-our-sea>
 in developing nations, so rhetoric about a supposed migrant “invasion” is 
false. Australia argues similarly, though its intake could be far higher, too.

Europe is mimicking 
<http://news.yahoo.com/australia-says-europeans-seek-advice-stopping-migrants-024838620.html>
 an Australian immigration architecture that profits from surveillance and 
detention. Greek journalist Apostolis Fotiadis, author of the just released 
book Border Merchants,wrote 
<http://bordercriminologies.law.ox.ac.uk/eu-emerging-immigration-policy/> after 
the recent Mediterranean drownings that, “promoting reactionary policies 
dressed up with words of grief seems to have become a habit [for the EU].”

Europe is learning, as Australia surely will, that constructing a fortress 
around their privileged nations while politicising human tragedies is a road to 
further unrest.
 