
A year ago, Walmgate in York was about to become less of a road than a river, 
leaving a silver Mercedesfloating 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/28/unruffled-yorkshire-spirit-dominates-anger-too-flooded-homes>
 outside the gadget shop, soldiers rescuing inhabitants via dinghy and a few 
hardy residents deciding to stick it out in their upstairs flats with no 
electricity.

Twelve months on and the historic thoroughfare has finally dried out, but a 
tidemark of resentment remains. “The truth is, the city ofYork 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/york> council completely failed residents,” 
says the local Labour MP, Rachael Maskell.

The gadget shop never reopened. Nor did a shop selling hearing aids. Just up 
on Fossgate the Loch Fyne seafood restaurant only got back in business on 2 
December. The Blue Bicycle restaurant is still out of action. One of its walls 
bowed after being hit with a ferocious tide of water when the Foss burst its 
banks following the decision late on Boxing Day to lift the flood gates further 
up stream – a much disputed movethe Environment Agency 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/522633/Foss_Barrier_5_May_2016_FINAL.pdf>
 insists saved more properties than it ruined 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/11/york-to-replace-foss-flood-defence-pumps-boxing-day-failure-environment-agency-river>
.

Perhaps most damagingly of all for a city reliant on Viking-heritage tourism, 
the much-lovedJorvik Viking Centre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/21/york-to-reopen-vikings-of-jorvik-attraction-16-months-after-floods>
, with all its Norse sights and smells, is not going to be ready to reopen 
until April.

Some 453 residential properties and 174 businesses flooded in York between 
Boxing Day and 28 December last year, when the Ouse peaked at 5.2 metres above 
its normal summer level. Wendy Hudson remembers coming down to Walmgate to see 
stock in the furniture store where she works bobbing about. “There were people 
behind me laughing and it made me really upset. We lost all of the stock, at 
least £20,000 worth,” she said this week.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fa-year-after-the-deluge-york-is-still-counting-the-cost%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d1252ad437c16deb195742fa2dcfd774ab17c81%2F0_217_6720_4032%2F6720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20year%20after%20the%20deluge%2C%20York%20is%20still%20counting%20the%C2%A0cost&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fa-year-after-the-deluge-york-is-still-counting-the-cost%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20year%20after%20the%20deluge%2C%20York%20is%20still%20counting%20the%C2%A0cost&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fa-year-after-the-deluge-york-is-still-counting-the-cost%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d1252ad437c16deb195742fa2dcfd774ab17c81%2F0_217_6720_4032%2F6720.jpg>
 Wendy Hudson from Hambleton Furniture with her dog Tally at Walmgate in York. 
Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
It was April before Hambleton Furniture reopened. A few doors up, at York 
Catering Supplies, they were not as fortunate. Kevin Pateman, who has run it 
for 14 years, could only move back in six weeks ago, after protracted wrangling 
with his insurers and their appointed builders. He is still waiting for a final 
insurance payment to cover loss of business, and his new policy has an excess 
of £25,000. “If we get flooded again I don’t know what we will do,” he said.

Over the road, the inside of the Walmgate Ale House has been repainted, with a 
white line at about three feet showing the high-water mark last Boxing Day, as 
well as those from previous floods, in 1982, 1947 and 1978, all before the Foss 
barrier was installed.

Half a mile away from central York, a less telegenic disaster was unfolding 
for the residents of the James Street Traveller site. The council had put the 
site on a flood plain: it is in a dip opposite a Morrisons, right next door to 
the Foss Islands high-level culvert, which operates as an overflow from Tang 
Hall Beck to the River Foss. It is mostly hidden from view by a red brick wall, 
which is about 2.5 metres high on the site side. When the Foss flooded, water 
rushed right over the top of the wall, said Megan Ellis, a 22-year-old 
resident: “The site was like a plunge pool.”

The Travellers remain angry that no one warned them about the floods and claim 
they were ignored by the fire service and council workers during the rescue and 
clear-up of all 20 plots.

The water was lapping against her chalet’s top step in the middle of the night 
when Ellis bundled up her six-month-old baby and her toddler, grabbed milk and 
nappies and got out. It was eight months before she could return to the site 
after a local charity,Two Ridings <http://www.trcf.org.uk/>, raised funds to 
buy her a new mobile home. “We had to do everything ourselves,” she said. “The 
council did nothing. We kept seeing fire engines drive by through the waters 
really fast, causing waves. They were laughing at us.” The rescue and clear-up 
operation focused on the historic city centre and the well-to-do residents of 
Huntington Road, around the corner from the site, she complained.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fa-year-after-the-deluge-york-is-still-counting-the-cost%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b39acf12e8e343db72acd7753fd22234777c8dd%2F0_26_5644_3387%2F5644.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20year%20after%20the%20deluge%2C%20York%20is%20still%20counting%20the%C2%A0cost&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fa-year-after-the-deluge-york-is-still-counting-the-cost%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20year%20after%20the%20deluge%2C%20York%20is%20still%20counting%20the%C2%A0cost&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fa-year-after-the-deluge-york-is-still-counting-the-cost%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b39acf12e8e343db72acd7753fd22234777c8dd%2F0_26_5644_3387%2F5644.jpg>
 Waterside rescuers on the flooded Walmgate in York city centre a year ago. 
Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
The council insists it did not abandon the Travellers. “Once the water 
subsided, the council helped the Travellers move their own caravans. All were 
supported to make alternative accommodation … or to stay on other sites,” said 
Tom Brittain, interim director of housing and community safety.

The site reopened in April 
<http://www.yorkpress.co.uk/news/14443572.York_travellers__site_reopens__almost_4_months_after_devastating_flood/>
 after it was cleared of all debris, oil and flood detritus, he added, saying 
the council was “looking at long-term resilience for the site”.

The cleanup cost the council half a million pounds, excluding damage to 
council assets including properties and infrastructure. It persuaded the 
government to pay £17m for Foss Barrier improvements and £45m for wider flood 
risk management improvement works across the city.

But Maskell, MP for York Central, said the council totally failed in the 
immediate aftermath, claiming: “They had no plan for the flooding and they were 
totally absent in the most socially deprived areas.”

She wants to know why the independent flood inquiry 
<https://www.york.gov.uk/info/20149/emergencies/1814/flood_inquiry> 
commissioned by the council back in January has yet to report. “A year on, we 
are no further forward. What on earth are they doing?” A council spokeswoman 
insisted the report would be published in the new year.

York was not the only place devastated by record rainfall. In nearby 
Tadcaster, work continues to restore the 18th-century bridge, which partially 
collapsed due to the force of flood water last Christmas. The £4.4m 
reconstruction job will not be finished until the end of January, North 
Yorkshire council says.

In Leeds, where 2,683 residential properties and 678 commercial premises were 
affected by floods, at least 12 businesses are still not trading. Recently, 
geologists from Leeds University begana research project 
<http://www.environment.leeds.ac.uk/research/yorkshire-icasp/> to improve 
responses and long-term resilience to floods and droughts in urban and rural 
areas.

In Calderdale in West Yorkshire, where 2,000 homes and 1,000 businesses were 
flooded in towns including Hebden Bridge, Mytholmroyd and Todmorden, repair 
work continues. The council says its final bill for the Boxing Day floods could 
exceed £50m, with the cost of the damage to roads, bridges and other 
infrastructure alone estimated at £25m. And in Cumbria, which had been hit by 
Storm Desmond at the start of December, around 500 households 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/05/cumbria-residents-still-counting-cost-of-storm-desmond-a-year-on>
 are not back in their homes.

A year has passed but the anger has yet to subside – especially when it was 
reported last week 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-38343063?platform=hootsuite> that four 
times as much is being spent on protecting London from flooding than the whole 
of Yorkshire and the Humber. “It would all be different if the floods were 
happening on politicians’ doorsteps in Westminster,” said Hudson in her York 
shop. “If they had floods where they lived it would soon get sorted out.”
 