
Well, you’ve got to give Tony Abbott’s supporters their dues for loyalty, I 
suppose. Inside and outside the parliamentaryLiberal party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/liberal-party> they’re calling for 
him to be brought back into the fold as Indigenous affairs minister, echoing, 
apparently, the sentiment of the man himself.

But subjecting Indigenous Australia to more Abbott by making him minister 
overseeing outcomes for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, in order 
to sate his bruised ego, just so he’d be peeing from the inside out rather than 
directing a steady stream the other way, is ill-conceived and unjust.

Which probably means it could happen.

'Lifestyle choices' is Abbott's third and final strike on Indigenous affairs | 
Paul Daley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/11/lifestyle-choices-is-abbotts-third-and-final-strike-on-indigenous-affairs>
Poor conception and injustice have, after all, pretty well defined all but a 
few years of politicking and policy-making around Indigenous affairs, not to 
mention its reporting by mainstream media, since federation.

That the very suggestion Abbott be let anywhere near Indigenous affairs is now 
taken seriously by Australia’s political class, offends and condescends to an 
overwhelming number of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.

But then again, they have rightly become accustomed to precious little else.

While the beltway debate might focus largely on the parlour-game politics 
(Would Abbott just use it to undo Turnbull from within cabinet? If the PM gives 
into Abbott by promoting his disloyalty, what next?), little serious 
consideration has been given to whether the member for Warringah is actually 
credentialed to do the job.

Well, he ain’t.

Abbott, despite his soft press in this space, is no renaissance politician 
when it comes to Indigenous matters, despite having assiduously cultivated a 
media reputation as one with a deep understanding of Aboriginal and Torres 
Strait Islander culture, society and history.

In fact he has demonstrated little more than a particularly narrow, somewhat 
Anglophile and imperial approach to Indigenous Australia – one more akin, 
really, to the views of the early-to-mid-20th century assimilationist 
anthropologists and mission vicars who raced to “preserve” material culture and 
“save souls” while they charted what they felt certain was the vanishment of 
the race.

As the so-called, self-appointed “prime minister for Indigenous affairs”, 
Abbott was hopeless and offensive.

He surrounded himself with a predictable coterie of Indigenous men and women, 
to the exclusion of others with challenging views that did not prioritise 
economic development and punitive, racially based welfare “reform” above the 
preservation of living culture and genuine self-determination.

As PM for Indigenous affairs, Abbott began with a vow to sweat blood to 
achieve constitutional recognition for Indigenous people. Never mind that 
“Recognise” is largely the tame, mostly whitefella politicians’ response, the 
“look over here” distraction, to the far more pressing need for treaties and 
meaningful truth and conciliation processes.

(That’s the imperial, Anglophile, Abbott I mentioned earlier.)

Then came his ridiculous assertion in mid-2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jul/04/australia-unsettled-before-the-british-came-tony-abbott-knows-better>
, that: “I guess our country owes its existence to a form of foreign investment 
by the British government in the then unsettled or, um, scarcely settled, great 
southern land.”

I guess that’d be why colonial “settlers”, soldiers, militias and others saw 
fit to kill, by some accounts, up to60,000 Indigenous people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jul/15/why-the-number-of-indigenous-deaths-in-the-frontier-wars-matters>
 on the um, “unsettled”, Queensland colonial and immediate post-federation 
frontier, alone. Never mind the rest of the continent.

Abbott would soon compound his habitation fallacy with this insult to 
Indigenous Australians: “The arrival of the first fleet was the defining moment 
in the history of this continent. Let me repeat that: it was the defining 
moment in the history of this continent.”

Did you get that the second time?

Where oh where in the 50 –to-60,000 year human habitation (the oldest 
continuous civilisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/21/indigenous-australians-most-ancient-civilisation-on-earth-dna-study-confirms>
) of the continent, to begin? Should he rise to become Indigenous affairs 
minister, I can recommend Abbott some fine books, not leastNick Brodie’s 
recently published 1787 
<http://hardiegrant.com.au/publishing/bookfinder/book/1787-by-nick-brodie/9781743791608>
, that illustrate the many, many important moments of continental history that 
preceded invasion in 1788.

Indigenous Australians know we're the oldest living culture – it's in our 
Dreamtime | Larissa Behrendt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/22/indigenous-australians-know-were-the-oldest-living-culture-its-in-our-dreamtime>
Oh yeah, then there was “lifestyle choices” rant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/mar/10/remote-communities-are-lifestyle-choices-says-tony-abbott>
 – an explanation of his impatience with public subsidy of remote communities 
(never mind the addiction of successive governments to middle-class welfare and 
rural subsidies).I wrote at the time about Abbott’s three strikes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/11/lifestyle-choices-is-abbotts-third-and-final-strike-on-indigenous-affairs>
 on Indigenous issues; he’s done nothing since to make amends.

Was that it for Abbott, the Indigenous affairs PM?

No, unfortunately – there’s more. Far more. Let’s not forget that Abbott made 
his first mark in the Indigenous space bycutting $500m plus from Indigenous 
programs 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-05-13/budget-2014:-$534-cut-to-indigenous-programs-and-health/5451144>
 in the 2014 federal budget (while pledging more millions to Recognise). Then 
he set off on a staged-managed visit to Arnhem Land to demonstrate his 
purported Aboriginal bonafides to a bemused Yolngu who, like the rest of 
Indigenous Australians, are still waiting for anything substantive to 
materialise.

Nigel Scullion, the incumbent Indigenous affairs minister, is a journeyman, 
devoid of lateral ideas and cultural insight, with a tin ear for creative 
advice.

Indigenous Australia deserves far, far better.

And far, far better, still, than the restless, bruised former prime minister 
for Indigenous affairs.
 