
Sausage Party <https://www.theguardian.com/film/sausage-party>, Seth Rogen and 
Evan Goldberg’s very adult animation about a frankfurter called Frank’s efforts 
to stuff himself into Brenda the bun, has been given an 11 rating in Sweden, 
meaning viewers as young as seven can see it when accompanied by a grownup.

Sausage Party review – Seth Rogen's surprisingly tasty supermarket sweep
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/10/sausage-party-review-seth-rogen> 
The film centres on foodstuffs having a crisis of faith after realising that 
human beings are not gods waiting to whisk them away to the great beyond, but 
are simply hungry. Featuring the voices of Rogen, Kristen Wiig, Jonah Hill and 
Edward Norton, it was given a 15 certificate in the UK, as it features scenes 
of drug-taking, oral sex, anal sex, racial slurs andeven potential rape 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/why-the-rape-scene-in-sausage-party-wasnt-funny_us_57b33b68e4b04147250fba45>
. “Sausage Party isnot a family film,” notes one Swedish cinema website 
<http://www.sf.se/filmer/Sausage-Party/#>. 

It’s not the first time the film has been seen by children. In June, a cinema 
in California accidentally screened the Sausage Party trailer to families 
waiting to watch the Disney-Pixar adventureFinding Dory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/14/finding-dory-review-nemo-sequel-disability-ellen-de-generes>
. The trailer, which heavily features the word “fuck”, also includes a scene in 
which a pair of baby carrots are eaten. “They’re eating fucking children!” one 
character screams.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fsausage-party-trailer-seth-rogan-and-kristen-wiig-in-adult-cartoon-comedy-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sausage%20Party%20trailer%3A%20Seth%20Rogen%20and%20Kristen%20Wiig%20in%20adult%20cartoon%20comedy%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fsausage-party-trailer-seth-rogan-and-kristen-wiig-in-adult-cartoon-comedy-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sausage%20Party%20trailer%3A%20Seth%20Rogen%20and%20Kristen%20Wiig%20in%20adult%20cartoon%20comedy%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fsausage-party-trailer-seth-rogan-and-kristen-wiig-in-adult-cartoon-comedy-video&media=>
Sausage Party trailer: Seth Rogen and Kristen Wiig in adult cartoon comedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/aug/10/sausage-party-trailer-seth-rogan-and-kristen-wiig-in-adult-cartoon-comedy-video>
The film’s more risque elements have been highlighted by a number of media 
monitoring sites, including one that hasoutlined the adult content in explicit 
detail 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/films/news/sausage-party-list-of-graphic-scenes-in-seth-rogans-r-rated-animation-reminds-parents-it-definitely-a7193191.html>
. One note reads: “A line of dancing olives bends over away from the camera to 
expose their pit holes.”

Sweden’s film certification programme is not designed to recommend 
suitability, but to judge the relative risk of filmed material to a child’s 
wellbeing. Its rating system divides films into “All ages”, 7 (for children 
under the age of seven, accompanied by an adult), 11 (for ages 7-11, 
accompanied by an adult) and Not Approved/15 (for those over the age of 15).
 