
Cycling advocates are split over NSW roads minister Duncan Gay’s changes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/21/nsw-cyclists-must-carry-id-and-will-face-same-fines-as-drivers-under-new-laws>
, with disappointment in some quarters at the government’s punitive approach 
“sweetened” by minor improvements to safety.

The new laws will require cyclists to carry ID and fines for infringements, 
such as failing to stop at red lights or pedestrian crossings, will rise to up 
to $425. The laws come into effect in March.

A minimum one-metre clearance zone for motorists overtaking riders on the road 
will also be introduced.


The metre matters rule will save cyclists' lives, but of course it will be met 
with bile | Steven Herrick
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/22/of-course-sensible-legislation-to-save-cyclists-lives-will-be-met-with-bile>
The Amy Gillett Foundation (AGF), which has called for all states and 
territories to adopt clearance zones through its “metre matters” campaign, has 
applauded the NSW government’s decision.

“One of the reason why a metre matters is we know we’re not going to get 
infrastructure [like dedicated cycle lanes] on every street, it’s just not 
possible,” Phoebe Dunn, AGF’s CEO said.

“It gives them a virtual space, a virtual safety zone,” she said. “This is a 
very easy change to make for governments ... it costs very little compared to 
other measures.”

“That’s for every cyclist, not just the ‘lycra brigade’.” 

Dunn said that one-metre clearance zones in other states, Queensland in 
particular, had produced good outcomes for safety and a change in attitude 
among riders, motorists and the police.

However, Omar Khalifa, a former head of Bicycle NSW and a founder of the 
Cyclists’ party, says the minister’s approach was “cynical”. The government had 
offered the one-metre clearance zone as a “sweetener”, he said, while giving 
rein to “the Australian tendency to regulate people into submission instead of 
actually addressing some of the root cause problems”.


Any reforms should aim at getting more cyclists on the road, Khalifa said, and 
he disagreed that the metre rule was itself significant.

“If we’ve just gotten this one thing ... then no it’s not nearly enough,” he 
said.

Low rates of children cycling, safety for casual riders and commuters, and the 
potential for steeper fines to be “devastating” for low-income riders 
overshadowed the safety improvement, Khalifa said.

“[The NSW Government] would have calculated that people like the AGF would 
come in positively [on the one-metre clearance zone], and would split the 
cycling community: ‘That’s good, forget the rest’.”

NSW cyclists must carry ID and will face same fines as drivers under new laws
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/21/nsw-cyclists-must-carry-id-and-will-face-same-fines-as-drivers-under-new-laws>
While Khalifa says he respects the work the AGF has done in safety, he says 
the cycling community doesn’t speak with one voice, the changes “may be helping 
to accommodate those people who are already cycling but it’s not changing the 
fundamentals for people who are not already cycling”.

The AGF’s chairman, conservative pollster Mark Textor, said in a statement he 
was “delighted with the minister’s decision to introduce the trial and it caps 
off a breakthrough year” for his organisation.

Chris Rissel, a professor of public health at the University of Sydney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney> said the AGF had been quite 
effective in pushing a single-focus message, but he warned the real problem was 
the minister’s own intransigence on cycling.

Rissel said the environment for cyclists in NSW was “in a downward cycle”.

Earlier this year, Gay called himself “the biggest bike-lane sceptic 
<http://www.cyclingweekly.co.uk/news/latest-news/australian-anti-cycling-minister-has-busy-sydney-cycle-path-removed-175547>
 in the government” and described inner-city Sydneysiders as “anti-roads 
zealots”.

The minister’s term was like a “nuclear winter” for cyclists, Rissel said.

The NSW government’s changes follow a campaign by News Corp and talkback radio 
against the City of Sydney’s building of bike lanes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/sep/19/anti-bike-sydney-clover-moore>
, which culminated in a review and the removal of the lane on College Street.

The Bicycle Network’s CEO, Craig Richard, also had a low opinion of the 
reforms, saying they could be “the tip of the iceberg”.


“The great risk is that having started, it could go further. They’ve been 
talking about also introducing compulsory third-party insurance for bike riders 
... who knows what’s coming next, it’s scary.”

But the AGF’s Dunn called the new laws a “positive step” and commented on her 
organisation’s “very positive working relationship with the NSW government”.
 