
Afghanistan faces an existential crisis over its untapped natural resources. 
After decades of war and insecurity, the Afghan government and foreign 
investors are pushing to exploit minerals under the ground but real dangers 
exist with little enforced regulation. LikePapua New Guinea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/dec/19/bougainville-mine-locals-who-oppose-its-re-opening-must-have-a-voice>
 andHaiti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/feb/05/haiti-the-neoliberal-model-imposed-on-the-country-is-failing-its-citizens>
, two other nations with natural wealth that are blighted by the “resource 
curse”, Afghanistan could be seriously considering leaving resources untouched 
to ensure peace, stability and a clean environment but the economic imperative 
is too strong.

Taliban territory is less than one hour from Afghanistan’s capital, Kabul. 
Logar Province has traditionally been aninsurgent stronghold 
<http://www.tolonews.com/en/afghanistan/16036-taliban-attack-ansf-outposts-in-logar-province>
 and regularly sees violent clashes between Afghan security forces and 
militants. I went there recently to visit the Chinese-owned Aynak mine, one of 
the largest copper deposits in the world and set to commence operations in the 
coming years (though an exact date hasn’t been specified).

The Guardian view on war in Afghanistan: not mission accomplished, only 
mission over | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/13/guardian-view-war-afghanistan-not-mission-accomplished-mission-over>
Its site is an archaeological treasure trove for Buddhist artefacts, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/may/31/mes-aynak-afghanistan-buddhist-treasure>
 but Afghan president Ashraf Ghani announced this year after a visit to Beijing 
that his government wanted tomove ahead 
<http://thekabultimes.gov.af/index.php/newsnational/5867-president-ghani-pays-visit-to-ainak-copper-mine.html>
 with the mine to earn much-needed revenue for his aid-dependent state. The 
Buddhist treasures are nearly 2,000 years old and reveal an ancient 
civilisation that stretched across China, India and Japan. Archaeologists have 
discovered gold jewellery, silver platters and a human skeleton amidst the 
ancient town.

A secret contract was signed between Kabul and Beijing in 2007 and only this 
year the Afghan governmentfinally agreed 
<http://www.iwaweb.org/_news/news0033_publication_of_largest_ever_afghan_mining_contract.html>
 to release its contents. But insecurity, falling global copper prices and a 
lack of transport for the minerals hasstalled the enterprise 
<http://news.yahoo.com/chinese-demands-rebels-buddhist-ruins-stall-afghan-copper-031819726.html>
. It still remains Afghanistan’s largest project in a nation with trillions of 
dollars worth of resources under the ground.

Locals in Logar’s Davo village told me that their lives had become hellish 
since the mine’s arrival including being kicked off their lands, pressured by 
insurgents and the government to leave the area entirely and little economic 
development. On a bright, sunny day with Afghan and American helicopters 
roaring overhead, I sat in a compound with 10 men to hear about the impact of 
the mine. Nazir Khan, a young man who lives in the house in which the meeting 
took place, escorted me into the area because it was too unsafe in the 
afternoon with Taliban and Isis-affiliated groups for outsiders to travel alone.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fafghanistan-should-leave-its-copper-in-the-ground-to-avoid-further-strife%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc78e4458285b4afd77e0d204a8be4e71f896c67e%2F0_0_2174_3264%2F2174.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=To%20avoid%20further%20strife%2C%20Afghanistan%20should%20leave%20its%20copper%20in%20the%20ground%20%7C%20Antony%20Loewenstein&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fafghanistan-should-leave-its-copper-in-the-ground-to-avoid-further-strife%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=To%20avoid%20further%20strife%2C%20Afghanistan%20should%20leave%20its%20copper%20in%20the%20ground%20%7C%20Antony%20Loewenstein&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fafghanistan-should-leave-its-copper-in-the-ground-to-avoid-further-strife%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc78e4458285b4afd77e0d204a8be4e71f896c67e%2F0_0_2174_3264%2F2174.jpg>
 ‘Chief elder Malik Mullah Mirjan explained that his community was promised 
many benefits after the establishment of Aynak.’ Photograph: Antony 
Loewenstein/Supplied 
Chief elder Malik Mullah Mirjan explained that his community was promised many 
benefits after the establishment of Aynak. “The Chinese company confiscated our 
property and we have never been compensated or paid by anybody,” he said. “We 
felt like they invaded and stole our land.”

Mirjan said that there was no “consultation” about the process and very few 
employment opportunities despite assurances of jobs for the community. He said 
he would still back the mine but nobody from the government had ever come and 
explained how they would benefit. Consultation is undeniably difficult in a war 
zone but all 10 men were offended that it had been assumed by Kabul authorities 
that they were expendable to the project and could be pushed aside. 
Environmental destruction was rife, he continued, from the building of dirty 
roads and polluting of waterways by early mining excavations.

“There’s no good intention on the part of the Chinese or Afghan government. 
The army protects the mining project and not us,” he said. The police regularly 
beat and insulted his family and friends for raising questions about the mine; 
they were told to shut up. Insurgents threatened violence. Some Taliban wanted 
no mining at all and opposed anybody who tried to secure a deal with the 
government to benefit from it. Other Taliban were more pragmatic and insisted 
on a financial cut when the mine commenced operations.

Aynak is symbolic of Afghanistan’s declining fortunes since the 2001 fall of 
the Taliban and the American-led war. The state was shocked with weapons, 
money, foreign troops and aid but withlittle oversight or accountability 
<https://news.vice.com/article/the-us-just-cant-stop-blowing-billions-in-afghanistan>
 the results from a long occupation and massive amounts of foreign aid have 
been desultory. Attacks against foreigners and Afghan civilians aresoaring 
<http://www.dw.de/un-high-number-of-civilians-continue-to-die-in-afghan-conflict/a-18380184>
.

With western aid drying up and few foreign troops remaining in the country, 
the Afghan government is desperately looking for ways to sustain itself. Mining 
is offered as a compelling answer. Australiafunds initiatives 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2013-05-18/australia-backs-afghan27s-struggling-miners/4698082>
 to assist Afghan mining but I was told in Kabul that this was little more than 
helping Australian businesses benefit from the potential gold rush.

In May this year, the Western Australian government supported 
<http://www.miningweekly.com/article/wa-committed-to-help-in-afghan-resource-development-2015-05-05>
 a summit of the Australian Afghanistan Business Council to discuss development 
of the Afghan mining sector. West Australian mines and petroleum minister Bill 
Marmion said at the meeting: “Western Australia is our nation’s resources 
powerhouse, and I am confident our regulatory and industry experience will help 
guide positive mining development in Afghanistan.” Afghanistan and Western 
Australia signed a deal in 2012 to back Kabul’s “sustainable” mining industry.

Canberra assists many resource-rich states, including Papua New Guinea 
<http://antonyloewenstein.com/2015/05/20/papua-new-guinea-must-be-more-than-mines-to-australia/>
, but the results of this support have been poor for the people themselves. In 
theory, mining has the possibility of making a country rich but all too often 
mineral exploitation guarantees poor governance. Rampant corruption, illegal 
smuggling, warlordism and a lack of regulation are key factors against a 
sustainable mining sector in Afghanistan.

In Hairatan, a town in northern Afghanistan on the border with Uzbekistan, a 
railway 
<http://www.andrewgrantham.co.uk/afghanistan/railways/hairatan-to-mazar-i-sharif/>
 runs to the nearest major town, Mazar-i-Sharif, to transport oil and gas. The 
government in Kabul says this relatively safe area of the country is a strong 
example of resources being managed responsibly to benefit the nation. But local 
oil traders I met in the area told the opposite story: how they’re forced to 
pay exorbitant taxes for little return while the insurgency grows around them.

Masoom Qasemyar, a former interpreter for Swedish forces, told me outside the 
Hairatan oil and gas trading office that earning revenues from indigenous 
resources was the only way for the state to grow. That said, he had no faith 
that the authorities would manage them intelligently.

Afghanistan mining sector lacks safeguards, warn campaigners
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2013/nov/28/afghanistan-mining-safeguards-campaigners-global-witness>
A report 
<http://iissonline.net/488-million-investment-in-afghanistans-oil-mining-gas-industry-at-risk/>
 in April found that the nearly US$500m granted by the US government to back 
the Afghan mining industry had failed because both the Afghan ministry of mines 
was incapable of managing new contracts, while US evaluation of any progress 
was close to non-existent.

I asked many Afghans about the prospect of leaving resources in the ground to 
avoid worsening corruption and environmental destruction, and whether 
alternative ways to raise money could be found.Javeed Noorani 
<http://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/PB182-Exploitation-of-Mineral-Resources-in-Afghanistan-Without-Government-Revenues-or-Development-Benefits.pdf>
 is an independent researcher on mining and co-founder of theNatural Resources 
Monitoring Network 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Natural-Resources-Monitoring-Network/1466759940223898>
, a gathering of communities from across the country to bring national 
attention to mining issues. He said leaving resources in the ground was the 
ideal situation if Afghanistan couldn’t provide social and environmental 
safeguards.

“Communities are so poor living around mines and when powerful people come to 
extract they’re exposed to violence,” he said. “If the government doesn’t 
intervene when minerals are being exploited, and they already are across the 
state, we transition from one conflict to another.”
 