
Reporter and presenter:

CNC Clár Ní Chonghaile

Interviewees:


VL Viola Llewellyn

TD Tomi Davies

SH Stephen Haggard

CNC It’s London technology week and today I’m at the Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> technology business forum; a one-day 
conference showcasing technology opportunities that are unfolding across the 
African continent.


 Technology is radically reshaping business and society in Africa, mainly 
thanks to an explosion in the ownership of mobile phones. So much so that when 
people talk about the subject you can guarantee that superlatives will flow: 
phrases such as “Tech is thriving in Africa”, “Africa is the tech continent”, 
and “Nairobi’s got the Silicon Savannah”.

 But, although nearly 386 million Africans will hold mobile technology in 
their hands by the end of 2016, getting the most out of this potentially 
transformative tech is another matter. And that’s largely because some of the 
basic building blocks that are needed to activate those opportunities are still 
lacking.

Can democracy spread at the push of a button? | Stephen Abbott Pugh
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/datablog/2016/feb/24/can-democracy-spread-data-monitor-governments-africa>
 SH This is an enormous pool of talent and appetite for learning and when 
you’re delivering over these slightly creaky devices and networks you are 
necessarily giving people basic foundations, a lot of the time, rather than the 
higher levels of learning that people deserve and need and want – which is a 
challenge.

 VL Even though there’s internet but the power supply is going to be huge, 
because when people start building from small to big there’s going to be a 
drain.

CNC I’m Clár Ní Chonghaile and in this Global development podcast I speak to 
investors and business people who have come together for London technology week 
in order to investigate some of the barriers to opportunities offered in 
Africa, which is sometimes called the “mobile-first continent”.

 Nelson Mandela said that education is the most powerful weapon which you can 
use to change the world. And to support the potential massive changes in Africa 
that could result from mobile technology the continent does need expertise.

 VL You can’t get a degree in computer science in the majority of west Africa 
– you have to go somewhere else. You’ll probably have to go to Sierra Leone or 
you’ll have to go to Nigeria. You cannot get a degree in animation even though 
we have companies like, I think it’s Kiriku [Kiro’o], in Cameroon, who raised 
venture capital because they’re doing gaming. You can’t get a degree in 
logistics even though Cameroon has Douala, the biggest seaport, and entry way 
to the Cemac.

CNC Viola Llewellyn is co-founder of Ovamba which offers financing to small- 
and medium-sized businesses through a web-based platform with a mobile app. She 
feels education is one area where movement is needed, especially in mainly 
francophone west Africa.

 VL So there needs to be a shift from traditional learning to what’s going to 
make these countries functional in 20, 30 years’ time. And it’s all sitting on 
technology but the shift has not happened yet.

CNC For Tomi Davies, a Nigerian angel investor with a special focus on Lagos, 
education – or rather lack of it – is also keeping the lid on the potential for 
investment in tech.

 TD I do not believe our current educational systems are fit for purpose and I 
think there’s a general agreement and a consensus on that. For the last four 
years, five years, I’ve spoken about this topic at the education world forum 
and it looks like some are listening, others aren’t. But if we don’t change 
education we’re not going to change Africa. It’s just that simple.

CNC There is also the topic of technology IN education. 

Kenya's smart greenhouse texts when your tomatoes need watering | Murithi 
Mutiga
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/05/kenya-smart-greenhouse-tomatoes-watering-farming>
 SH I’m Stephen Haggard and I am the chair and I also do a little bit of the 
running of Eneza Education. Now, Edeza Education is a Nairobi-based education 
technology company. We serve the core basic education curriculum through mobile 
phones to learners in, mostly, Kenya, but we’ve now also begun operations in 
Ghana and Tanzania.

CNC The company is about to break the one million mark in terms of the numbers 
of users, but there’s still a long way to go to reach more children. For 
Stephen Haggard, the biggest problem is the cost of airtime for the learners.

 SH To get a week’s unlimited access is 10 Kenyan shillings – about 10 US 
cents – and that is a challenge for many learners to afford, particularly if 
they’re younger or in that teenage transition where they don’t quite have their 
own money or their parent’s money yet – there’s ground rules.

CNC Cost is just one barrier. Just over 70% of Africans use 2G but in the rest 
of the world around 70% of people use 3G or 4G. Apps of course run on the 
faster networks and are what make phones so powerful. So without this capacity, 
Africans could be missing out on many of the benefits in terms of development.

SH Most of our learners are coming in on pretty old-fashioned SMS phones, 
technology, though we are seeing adoption of smartphones, particularly in urban 
areas among our students. Access to network, obviously, is an issue in many of 
the more remote communities, but we can still reach very, very large 
proportions of the population just using the network.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fafrica-and-the-tech-revolution-whats-holding-back-the-mobile-continent-podcast-transcript%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4acff82fd526c874e327915fc8540e2467bec83f%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Africa%20and%20the%20tech%20revolution%3A%20what's%20holding%20back%20the%20mobile%20continent%3F%20%E2%80%93%20podcast%20transcript&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fafrica-and-the-tech-revolution-whats-holding-back-the-mobile-continent-podcast-transcript%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Africa%20and%20the%20tech%20revolution%3A%20what%27s%20holding%20back%20the%20mobile%20continent%3F%20%E2%80%93%20podcast%20transcript&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fafrica-and-the-tech-revolution-whats-holding-back-the-mobile-continent-podcast-transcript%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4acff82fd526c874e327915fc8540e2467bec83f%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
 An employee works on a mobile phone on the assembly line at a factory in 
Brazzaville, Congo-Brazzaville. Photograph: Federico Scoppa/AFP/Getty Images 
 The difficulty there though is that often the computing power of the devices 
is sufficiently low, or the frustrations of working with SMS are sufficient 
barriers, that you can’t really give the highest quality interactive 
educational experiences to the learners. You’re talking about quite basic and 
frugal pedagogies, is the word we use – you know, methods of giving people 
knowledge and skill – which is a pity, I think.

CNC Access to expertise, capacity, network, are all of course major barriers. 
But for even the most basic device to work, it needs power. According to the 
World Bank, only 24% of people in sub-Saharan Africa have access to electricity.

 VL It’s a combination of the electricity supply not always being as constant, 
and the inability of some legislative groups to allow things like Cleantech, 
and alternative electrical sources or solar, to give people constant access to 
being able to power these things. That, for me, is a really big problem.

App helps health workers save lives of mothers and newborns | Carla 
Kweifio-Okai
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/25/safe-delivery-app-maternal-deaths-newborns-baby-pregnancy>
CNC The antidote to all these barriers is investment, but the path for 
investors who want to support new initiatives is not a clear one. Tomi Davies 
explains why angel investors, like him, who want to invest in tech start-ups, 
are sometimes frustrated.

 TD Africa is not very, very structured in terms of how investments are made. 
So, for example, in our particular sector, in our particular segment, there 
aren’t clear policies, either around taxation or investment. But when you look 
at local investing, which is where I’m coming from, there’s still a fair bit of 
work to be done in that space.

CNC And, Viola Llewellyn adds, in many west African countries banking systems 
have failed to move with the times.

 VL Because of the regulatory environment and the risk appetite and lack of 
innovation, getting to that money in a timely fashion and circulating it with 
transparency is very hard to achieve. The systems have been in place now for 
50, 60 years and are a holdover from previous colonial or legislative 
environments, and not a lot has changed. We’re in a modern day now – the use of 
technology will be possibly the way in which we can alleviate some of those 
issues.

CNC However Tomi Davies still believes international investor interest in 
Africa’s tech scene is not going anywhere, any time soon.

Tanzania: the smartphone apps putting Africa's fastest-growing city on the map 
| Mark Anderson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/sep/22/tanzania-smartphone-apps-africa-fastest-growing-city-dar-es-salaam-map>
 TD Well, we can rely on it as long as the growth continues. And the growth 
factors inherent are the fact that you’ve got a youthful population, that will 
continue … The trend is still south – they’re not ageing yet. So when you’ve 
got an ageing population elsewhere in the world and a youthful population – so 
you have the counterbalance. That’s the first thing. The second is you have the 
growing middle class. Regardless of what is happening, you know, on the ground, 
the middle class in Africa is growing, which means you have an increasing 
consumer base.

CNC So can this interest in tech significantly boost development in Africa? 
And how does it compare to other progress in terms of development? Stephen 
Haggard.

 SH I think you can say that the mobile-driven processes, and the 
technology-driven processes, are working harder and faster and further in this 
area than anybody else I can see. You won’t find many governments, perhaps one 
or two on the African continent, who are driving participation in innovative 
problem-solving in the way that the mobile platforms and the mobile device and 
networks are – you just won’t. They are – in terms of scale, power, 
affordability, reach, replicability – doing something that no-one else is 
doing. Yes, you’re certainly right that there are risks about it being divisive 
or serving only the already-enabled strata of society, but I think that is true 
of any kind of social process. Whether you’re talking about education, banking, 
health or whatever it is, we see that operating everywhere.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fafrica-and-the-tech-revolution-whats-holding-back-the-mobile-continent-podcast-transcript%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd956b9bac00a2f92d6850e4575bb4b49bf816d5%2F0_0_4000_2667%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Africa%20and%20the%20tech%20revolution%3A%20what's%20holding%20back%20the%20mobile%20continent%3F%20%E2%80%93%20podcast%20transcript&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fafrica-and-the-tech-revolution-whats-holding-back-the-mobile-continent-podcast-transcript%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Africa%20and%20the%20tech%20revolution%3A%20what%27s%20holding%20back%20the%20mobile%20continent%3F%20%E2%80%93%20podcast%20transcript&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fafrica-and-the-tech-revolution-whats-holding-back-the-mobile-continent-podcast-transcript%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd956b9bac00a2f92d6850e4575bb4b49bf816d5%2F0_0_4000_2667%2F4000.jpg>
 Mobile phone users in Abidjan, Ivory Coast. Photograph: Jose 
Cendon/Bloomberg/Getty Images 
CNC So while an excess of euphoria about Africa’s tech revolution may be 
misplaced, new technology is certainly already offering new opportunities, from 
money transfers to learning apps.

 The next step is to resolve some of the hardware glitches holding back the 
software; so expanding electricity networks, boosting connectivity and training 
young people to be able to use and, ultimately, design apps made for Africa, in 
Africa.

VOICEMAIL: At the end of your message, press “one”.

 That’s all for this edition of the Global Development podcast. You can 
download all our podcasts onguardian.com/global-development 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/series/global-development-podcast>
 or via iTunes, SoundCloud and all podcasting apps.

 Thank you for listening. My name is Clár Ní Chonghaile and the producer is 
Kary Stewart.
 