
Although African countries need to tap new streams of funding if they hope to 
implement an ambitious blueprint to end inequality and poverty, they must 
beware borrowing too much and potentially triggering debt crises such as those 
experienced in the 1980s and 1990s, says the UN’s trade body.

In a report <http://unctad.org/en/PublicationsLibrary/aldcafrica2016_en.pdf> 
assessing debt levels against the backdrop of fragile global financial markets, 
theUN Conference on Trade and Development <http://unctad.org/en/Pages/Home.aspx>
 (Unctad) recognised that traditional aid is not going to cover the estimated 
$600bn-$1.2tn (£455-£910bn) cost of implementing thesustainable development 
goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive>
 in Africa, but warned that plugging the gap with debt was risky.

“While Africa’s … external debt ratios currently appear manageable, their 
rapid growth in several countries is a concern and requires action if a 
recurrence of the African debt crisis of the late 1980s and the 1990s is to be 
avoided,” said the report, which was published on Thursday during akey Unctad 
meeting <http://unctad14.org/en/Pages/Home.aspx> in Nairobi.

The study examines the delicate balance between financing development and 
making sure the burden of debt – both external and domestic – does not become 
dangerous for African economies already battered by aslowdown in commodity 
prices and Chinese growth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/13/africa-oil-giants-anxious-times-commodities-boom-oil-metals>
.

“Debt, both domestic and external, as well as other complementary sources, 
cannot be excluded from Africa’s list of development finance policy options … 
However, Africa’s vulnerability to rapidly changing external conditions, 
including volatile commodity markets and unstable international financial 
markets, make debt a more problematic financing instrument than necessary,” it 
said.

Africa’s external debt stock grew by on average 10.2% a year in 2011–13, 
compared with 7.8% growth a year in 2006–09.

The report looked at the range of financing options available to African 
governments. Some borrow from private lenders, some take syndicated loans, and 
somehave issued Eurobonds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics-blog/2013/jun/26/subsaharan-africa-eurobond-borrowing-debt>
 on international markets. Private firms are also borrowing more externally, 
with large corporate bonds being issued in Nigeria and South Africa, for 
example.

Mukhisa Kituyi, Unctad’s secretary general, said borrowing could play an 
important part in improving the lives of African citizens. “But we must find a 
balance between the present and the future, because debt is dangerous when 
unsustainable,” he said.

The report paints a somewhat sombre picture of African economic prospects, 
with multiple risks and fresh funds needed to tackle climate change and other 
challenges.

“The global economic outlook remains gloomy, as fiscal austerity underpins the 
deceleration in growth in the eurozone, and China is shifting to a growth 
strategy that implies lower but more sustainable growth rates and a rebalancing 
of economic activity away from investment and manufacturing towards consumption 
and services,” it said.

“Africa must critically assess its capacity to tackle its significant 
development challenges in light of its development finance requirements. This 
entails a redoubling of efforts to harness potential and innovative sources of 
finance, including those that may come from the private sector, such as through 
public–private partnerships, while also tackling rising levels of debt.”

Opening the Nairobi meeting on Sunday, Ban Ki-moon, the UN secretary general, 
said <http://www.un.org/sg/statements/index.asp?nid=9888> slower world trade 
and investment were exacerbating divisions and fuelling protectionism and even 
xenophobia.

“There are worrying signs that people around the world are increasingly 
unhappy with the state of the global economy,” said Ban, who referenced 
inequality, stagnant incomes, and lack of jobs, especially for youth.

“The global trade slowdown and a lack of productive investment have sharpened 
the deep divides between those who have benefited from globalisation, and those 
who continue to feel left behind,” he said. “And rather than working to change 
the economic model for the better, many actual and would-be leaders are instead 
embracing protectionism and even xenophobia.”

To achieve the 17 sustainable development goals, said Unctad, African 
governments should use new revenue sources, such as remittances and 
public-private partnerships. They should also clamp down onillicit financial 
flows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/feb/02/africa-tax-avoidance-money-laundering-illicit-financial-flows>
, which cost up to $50bn a year, and totalled an estimated $854bn between 1970 
and 2008.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fafrica-risks-fresh-debt-crisis-as-levels-of-borrowing-rise-sharply-warns-un%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F404a26036b49f50589e50c67a1763f8abd90e659%2F0_0_3784_2518%2F3784.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Africa%20risks%20fresh%20debt%20crisis%20as%20levels%20of%20borrowing%20rise%20sharply%2C%20warns%20UN&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fafrica-risks-fresh-debt-crisis-as-levels-of-borrowing-rise-sharply-warns-un%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Africa%20risks%20fresh%20debt%20crisis%20as%20levels%20of%20borrowing%20rise%20sharply%2C%20warns%20UN&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fafrica-risks-fresh-debt-crisis-as-levels-of-borrowing-rise-sharply-warns-un%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F404a26036b49f50589e50c67a1763f8abd90e659%2F0_0_3784_2518%2F3784.jpg>
 UN secretary general Ban Ki-moon, centre, prepares to address the 14th session 
of the UN Conference on Trade and Development in Nairobi. Photograph: Rick 
Bajornas/UN Photo 
To coincide with the Nairobi meeting, more than 400 civil society groups 
called on Unctad 
<https://gallery.mailchimp.com/3592d5dcafd1b9278dd78095f/files/TD_506_EDITED_final.pdf?utm_source=UNCTAD+Civil+Society+Newsletter&utm_campaign=67a405e81e-Civil+Society+Declaration+to+UNCTAD+14&utm_medium=email&utm_term=0_2e2035bdbc-67a405e81e-41814565>
 (pdf) to express support for curbing tax evasion and avoidance, and to work to 
eliminate illicit financial flows. The groups, including Tax Justice Network 
Africa (TJN-A), ActionAid International, and Fair Trade Africa, said Unctad 
should also push mechanisms to help countries achieve debt sustainability.

Last year, remittances to Africa increased by 1.2% to to $64bn. Unctad said 
these flows could be used as collateral for loans, although the flows would 
have to become more formal.

“The use of remittances for financial deepening and as collateral for loans or 
securitisation is subject to remittances being officially recorded … However, 
migrants generally utilise a whole range of formal and informal channels for 
remitting, chosen on the basis of cost, reliability, accessibility and trust. 
As a result, a large share of remittances is transmitted through informal 
channels and thus remains unrecorded,” the report said.


Some economists have warned that, after years of strong growth, remittance 
flows could start to slow as global economies wobble over a slew of crises, 
including Britain’s decision to leave the European Union. This week, the 
International Monetary Fundcut its forecasts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/19/imf-cuts-uk-growth-forecasts-following-brexit-vote>
 for the global economy due to thelikely knock-on effect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/24/bank-of-england-markets-pound-shares-plummet-brexit-vote-carney>
 of the Brexit vote on other countries, particularly in Europe.

The Unctad report urged African governments to lower current account deficits, 
diversify exports, combat corruption and ensure greater efficiency in spending 
and revenue collection. The study also stressed the importance of treading the 
fine line between sustainable borrowing and debt distress.

“The difficult question is how African countries may achieve the dual goal of 
covering their development finance needs and maintaining debt sustainability.”

 