
As protests continue 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/politics/2014/08/ferguson_protests_over_michael_brown_won_t_end_soon_the_black_community.html>
 in Ferguson, Missouri,however calmly now 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/22/us/ferguson-missouri-protests.html>, I have 
found myself increasingly disappointed in the silence of my fellow African 
immigrant communities. There has not been the coordinated outrage I saw for
Ethiopian domestic workers experiencing abuse in Saudi Arabia 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/miriamberger/ethiopians-shame-saudi-arabia-on-twitter-for-inhumane-treatm#488zdow>
 orEritrean migrants in Israel 
<http://www.latimes.com/world/middleeast/la-fg-c1-israel-immigrant-leader-20140326-m-story.html#page=1>
. Instead, there have been too many dismissals of African-American pain, veiled 
attempts at insinuatingthese kinds of things only happen to those kinds of 
blacks.

Too many black immigrants believe ourselves removed from the threat of police 
violence, saved somehow by the allure of our accents or the false safety of our 
refusal to openly question American racism.

My father, a dark-skinned man with hair so tightly curled my aunt once joked 
he didn’t need an umbrella in the rain, immigrated from Ethiopia in the early 
1980s to escape political turmoil, and acquired US citizenship in time to vote 
in the 2000 election. He does not see the police as an enemy; he often waves to 
them. He does not see my fear of paramilitary civic servants as legitimate.

And he is not alone in his sentiments. Buoyed by racist perceptions of 
Africans and West Indians as more hard-working than our African-American 
counterparts 
<http://www.npr.org/blogs/codeswitch/2014/08/09/338974310/are-you-like-african-american-or-african-american>
, black immigrants often actively distance ourselves from issues like police 
brutality, which we too often believe to be relevant only for native-born black 
people.The divide is neither new nor altogether surprising 
<http://www.theroot.com/articles/culture/2014/04/regular_black_vs_ethnic_black_why_the_divide.html>
. Black immigrantsoften cling to ethnic ties 
<http://www.xojane.com/issues/i-was-raised-to-honor-my-african-ness-and-avoid-becoming-black-with-a-capital-b>
, resisting the American categories of race that lump us into a monolithic 
designation that we too often feel is inauthentic.

But in a nation with such an entrenched history of white supremacy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/aug/20/white-supremacy-ferguson-black-excuses>
, we are black, and we are targets. Guinean immigrant Amadou Diallo was not 
asked about his native language beforeofficers emptied 41 bullets into his body 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1999/02/05/nyregion/officers-in-bronx-fire-41-shots-and-an-unarmed-man-is-killed.html>
. WhenHaitian immigrant Abner Louima was brutalized by NYPD officers 
<http://cityroom.blogs.nytimes.com/2007/08/09/the-abner-louima-case-10-years-later/>
, none of them paused to inquire if he was the “right” kind of black to be 
torturing. Our international flavor ofrespectability politics 
<http://www.theroot.com/articles/culture/2014/08/michael_brown_and_our_obsession_with_respectable_black_victims.html?wpisrc=topstories>
 will not save us from the sin of our skin.

The unwillingness of my fellow Africans to stand in solidarity with African 
Americans is about more than just a desire to remain in touch with our heritage 
– or even afailure to believe in global blackness as an authentic marker of 
identity 
<http://wheretruthechoes.tumblr.com/post/54511190677/dear-non-american-black-when-you-make-the-choice>
. I have overheard relatives lament the “sensitivity” of “lazy” African 
Americans who “look for racism everywhere”, blissfully unaware of the ways in 
which the violent legacy ofAmerican slavery informs every facet of black life 
in America 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/features/archive/2014/05/the-case-for-reparations/361631/>
. And while having been socialized in the United States as a black woman will 
never allow me tocondone this form of intra-racial violence, I do understand 
the internalized racism and heartbreak that fuel it.

(Open contributions: Help the world hear your police racial profiling story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/aug/13/michael-brown-shooting-police-racial-profiling-ferguson>
)

There is pain in accepting that the country you thought would save you from 
your homeland doesn’t want you. There is trauma in realizing that you are not 
wanted here, that your accent doesn’t make you special, that you are subject to 
violence based on the color of your skin in a nation that was supposed to be 
your promised land. We don’t want to believe that our blackness turns the 
American dream into a nightmare – that our bodies are the monsters.

But we cannot continue to be dishonest with ourselves. We are here, and we are 
black 
<http://www.ourafricablog.com/post/94358770648/i-felt-as-if-that-this-is-a-topic-that-needed-to>
. That is bothblessing 
<http://ethiopienne.com/post/94561126213/i-am-black-i-am-in-total-fusion-with-the-world>
 andcurse 
<http://ethiopienne.com/post/80402766812/the-black-psyche-emerges-within-a-context-of>
, question and answer. To pretend that we exist outside the consequences of 
blackness in this country is to do both ourselves and African Americans a 
profound injustice. It makes us complicit in perpetuating dangerous stereotypes 
about African Americans – and by extension, all black people.

Dishonesty in identity politics endangers black immigrant youth by failing to 
prepare them for the extendedmental assault 
<http://colorlines.com/archives/2013/03/yes_racism_is_a_public_health_risk.html>
 that this country’s racism will have on their bodies – and for the physical 
assaults that could claim their lives more quickly.

Every 28 hours in this country, a black person is killed extrajudicially by 
police or vigilantes 
<http://www.alternet.org/news-amp-politics/1-black-man-killed-every-28-hours-police-or-vigilantes-america-perpetually-war-its>
. Black immigrants aredeported at numbers that far eclipse other immigrant 
groups because we are perceived as criminal 
<http://www.blackcommentator.com/54/54_guest_immigrants_pf.html>. These facts 
do not exist independently of one another. By entering this country, we have 
woven ourselves into the racial patchwork of a nation that would rather soak 
its colored threads in blood.

We are here, working jobs and living our lives, only because of the profound 
sacrifices that black folks in this country have been making since its inhumane 
inception. We cannot pretend to only have inherited its riches; we cannot turn 
our backs on the kinfolk who made our existence here possible just because we 
falsely believe their concerns to not include us. We bear the beauty of 
blackness – now we must bear its responsibilities.
 