
Africa faces a crippling deficit of engineering skills, which will stunt its 
future economic growth and lead to hardship for the continent’s growing 
population, aconference on engineering heard on Tuesday 
<http://www.raeng.org.uk/policy/international-policy-and-development/engineering-a-better-world-caets-2016>
.

The president of Mauritius, Ameenah Gurib-Fakim, a biodiversity scientist, 
told the meeting in London: “Only through science, technology, engineering and 
mathematics can we as a global community increase the prosperity of our people. 
ButAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, despite its impressive 
recent economic growth, remains burdened by a deeply rooted scientific deficit.”

She said that encouraging young female students into science and engineering 
disciplines was key to increasing the number of skilled people available to 
build much-needed infrastructure and prepare the way for a new society.

“We need to make science more attractive to women,” she said, laying out three 
strategies to make this happen: raising the profile of female role models; 
challenging the “false distinction” that only “soft” subjects were suitable for 
girls; and making schools facilities in Africa better suited to girls by 
putting the necessary infrastructure in place.

This would include adequate toilet facilities, she noted. Many girls and young 
women are put off or taken out of school because of inadequate toilets, which 
force them to share with young men or give insufficient privacy and hygiene.

Menstruation misery for schoolgirls as sanitation woes hit hopes for the future
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/may/28/period-misery-schoolgirls-menstruation-sanitation-shame-stigma>
The president was addressing the Royal Academy of Engineering’s conference 
Engineering a Better World. Engineers and international development 
professionals discussed how to meet thesustainable development goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive>
 adopted by the UN general assembly in September last year.

A report commissioned by the academy from the Centre for Economics and 
Business Research (CEBR) found there was a “strong positive correlation” 
between a country’s skills base in engineering and its economic development.

Sweden, Denmark and the Netherlands topped the list of nations ranked by their 
engineering strength, measured by a high number of people employed in 
engineering jobs, high average wages for engineers, and good quality 
engineering infrastructure.

The study confirms other research showing that a lack of engineering expertise 
was a brake on developing economies. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jan/15/lack-of-engineers-delaying-vital-water-projects-in-developing-countries>

The report also revealed that some small emerging economies were ahead of 
larger players,including the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/feb/18/uk-skills-shortage-universities-employers-industry>
, when it came to the proportion of women studying engineering. Two-thirds of 
such graduates in Myanmar were women, along with 42% in Tunisia and 41% in 
Honduras.

By contrast, little more than a fifth of engineering graduates were female in 
the UK, Australia and the Netherlands. The European average was 28%.

According to the report, India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/apr/14/a-league-of-their-own-india-ranks-its-universities-for-the-first-time>
 and Vietnam are set to be the next engineering “hotspots”, owing to their 
forecast economic growth, burgeoning population and need for new infrastructure.

David Whitaker, managing economist at CEBR, said the study found that a one 
percentage point increase in a country’s score on its engineering index 
correlated to a 0.85% increase in GDP per capita.
 