
Political success for society’s invisible souls is rare. So when US investor 
Westbrook Partners announced last week that it had withdrawn from evicting 
families at the New Era estate in East London, it was cause for celebration. 
Instead of building expensive properties, the companysold its development 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/dec/19/charitable-foundation-dolphin-square-new-era-estate-london>
 to Dolphin Square Charitable Foundation, an affordable housing organisation. 
People who faced skyrocketing rents now have security and hope before Christmas.


British writer and comedian Russell Brand was key to this victory. His support 
of the campaigners on the ground and on social media led The Independent to
describe 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/proof-that-russell-brands-revolution-may-actually-be-working-9935076.html>
 New Era as “Proof that [his] revolution may actually be working”.

After New Era, it’s harder than ever to mock him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/oct/27/revolution-review-russell-brand-beverly-hills-buddhist>
 as “the voice of the discontented wealthy”, as the Observer’s Nick Cohen did 
in his review of Brand’s book, Revolution. On the contrary: protest organiser 
Lindsey Garrett said Brand’s involvement “gave us a bigger voice. And rather 
than taking over, he gave us a much bigger audience to speak to”.

Accusations of hypocrisy 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2859473/PIERS-MORGAN-TV-tantrum-shows-revolutionary-Russell-Brand-really-just-revolting-hypocrite.html>
 and shallowness are also getting harder to make. When it comes to inequality, 
housing, income – all the things the left is supposed to be interested in – 
Brand seems to understand that the personal really is the political. As he 
wrote on New Era:

Drawn in initially by the importance and ubiquity of the cause, housing is the 
issue of our time, I was compelled to stay, as if held by the heart, by a 
deeper issue, both social and personal. By something I didn’t even know I was 
grieving; the loss of community, our connection to each other.

More broadly, his thinking on issues like climate change – he says agreements 
like Kyoto are “not worth a wank in a windsock” – accords with the thesis of 
(among others) Canadian writerNaomi Klein 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QoM8BgmUy8A>, in her bestselling book This 
Changes Everything 
<http://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/books/naomi-kleins-this-changes-everything-castigates-western-power-elite-over-climate-change-20141110-11i2dw.html>
. Admittedly, Klein’s language is rather less fruity.

Now it seems to be Brand’s turn to do the mocking: of the insular world of 
star fucking that permeates our culture; of the ennui and flatness of modern 
life; and of the insularity of the media elite.

He is convincing a legion of followers that there’s more to life than, “do a 
gram, drop a pill, download an app, eat some crap, get a slap, mind the gap, do 
a line, Instagram, little grope in the cab”. He acknowledges his luck and 
wealth while constantly taking the piss out of himself. He likes having money 
but fears losing it.

Squarely in the 1%, even as he reminds us “the richest 1% of British people 
have as much as the poorest 55%”, Brand enrages his critics because his 
celebrity and wealth give him easy access to media and money.

Case in point: he is making a documentary about inequality that’s reportedly 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/celebritynews/11304792/Russell-Brand-film-on-RBS-bankers-funded-by-City-investors-including-former-RBS-banker.html>
 funded by some of the big bankers he’s going after. Does this neuter his 
anti-capitalist message? Surely it could instead be seen as a savvy way of 
culture jamming an establishment that thrives on extravagance.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0dAFbpk9_GM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0dAFbpk9_GM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0dAFbpk9_GM&media=>
 ‘He acknowledges his luck and wealth while constantly taking the piss out of 
himself.’ 
The filmmaker Michael Moore, director of hugely popular documentaries 
challenging US hegemony and capitalism, wasplagued 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2705149/Michael-Moores-lavish-property-empire-revealed-court-documents-wife-22-years-divorce.html>
 by similar accusations of hypocrisy. One New York Times bestseller,Michael 
Moore is a Big Fat Stupid White Man 
<http://www.amazon.com/Michael-Moore-Big-Stupid-White/dp/0060779608>, is 
devoted to these kinds of attacks.

So what if people like Brand and Moore are sometimes pompous, or narcissistic, 
or populist, or inconsistent? Or if they don’t correspond with the cliche of 
the ascetic Marxist revolutionary? What matters is what these 
multi-millionaires do with their money.

Moore has produced any number of films that both 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/09/michael-moore-documentary-makers-entertaining-toronto-film-festival>
 entertain and challenge orthodox views of state violence, health care and 
capitalism itself. Earlier this year, he joked wryly that, “Entertainment is 
the big dirty word of documentary. ‘Oh no! I’ve entertained someone. I’ve 
cheapened my movie!’.”

Or as Brand puts it: “The revolution cannot be boring.”

A public feeling economic anxiety 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/jun/16/insecure-britain-poll-economic-recovery-immigration>
, at turns enraged and defeated, might agree. People flock to hear the stories 
Moore and Brand have to tell, no matter how much scorn is poured on them by 
critics.

“Aren’t we all, in one way or another, trying to find a solution to the 
problem of reality?” Brand writes in Revolution. What his solution looks like 
might depend on how you see him: media darling, irritant, inspiration, guru, 
reformed drug addict, former husband to singer Katy Perry, author, founder of 
daily news hackThe Trews <https://www.youtube.com/user/russellbrand>, opponent 
of voting or man of the people. Take your pick.

Plenty have picked “hate object”, which, like the accusations of hypocrisy and 
selfishness, will be harder to justify after the New Era win. Surely it’s time 
to acknowledge that Brand – like Michael Moore – is actually a working class 
voice who belongs in the mix?

As he told Democracy Now 
<http://www.democracynow.org/2014/11/14/russell_brand_on_revolution_fighting_inequality>
, “If you sort of go, ‘Hey, I’m actually from a background where people are 
affected by stuff like this. This is what we think. Can we talk about this in a 
different way?’ people are so fiercely territorial and protective, it’s 
interesting”.


Brand isn’t the messiah (or just a naughty boy, for that matter) and his 
messagepisses off <http://www.russellbrand.com/2014/12/8164/> plenty of people. 
So does hismethod 
<http://blog.squandertwo.net/2014/12/an-open-letter-to-russell-brand.html?m=1>, 
sometimes. But his apology to an RBS worker whose lunch inadvertently became a 
casualty of a film shoot is heartfelt:

Jo, get in touch, I owe you an apology and I’d like to take you for a hot 
paella to make up for the one that went cold ... When I make a mistake I like 
to apolgise and put it right. Hopefully your bosses will do the same to the 
people of Britain.

He’ll apologise for the small things; many of the established columnists who 
dump on Brand won’t apologise for getting it wrong on the big-picture issues, 
like the wars in Iraq, Afghanistan, Libya and Syria, national security and the 
like.

On these stories, Brand speaks for the mainstream far more than many 
self-described national security experts. A 2013 Pew poll in the USfound 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/jul/29/poll-nsa-surveillance-privacy-pew>
 that a majority of citizens were more worried about civil liberties than 
terrorism. His recentcomments <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aZ8ZYAvWTxo> on 
the Sydney siege nailed the way governments implement excessive state 
surveillance after a terror attack – increasingly a mainstream concern.

Nevertheless, anybody famous who proclaims themselves dissatisfied with 
society’s options is bound to be accused of wankery and ungratefulness by some. 
So be it. But Brand is a fascinating man, who dares to ask a huge audience to 
question the causes of housing shortages, corporate power and state terrorism. 
He is also ready to swing his star power behind the cause of a few dozen 
families facing eviction before Christmas. And he makes these issues relevant 
to millions.
 