
With dreary predictability, there have been calls for Olympian Jessica 
Ennis-Hill to apologise to footballer Ched Evans for saying (after his initial 
conviction for rape, which has now been overturned) thatshe wanted her name 
removed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/nov/13/jessica-ennis-hill-name-stand-ched-evans-contract-sheffield-united>
 from a stand in Sheffield United’s ground if the club offered him another 
contract. Why should Ennis-Hill apologise? At the time of her statement, Evans
had been found guilty. Even now, isn’t Ennis-Hill entitled to subscribe to the 
widely held view that Evans’s behaviour was disgusting?

As far as the actual case goes, there’s been a definitive legal decision, 
however much some people disagree with it. (Those interested in issues raised 
by the case might care to take a look at theSecret Barrister 
<https://thesecretbarrister.com/> website, which, among other interesting 
observations, contends that the case did not set a precedent for women being 
grilled on their sexual history.) Legality aside, what Evans might find himself 
dealing with from now on is the wider public response to the sickening, 
self-justifying culture he’s come to represent and the importance of personal 
responsibility.

To my mind, this has long gone beyond the world of overpaid, sexually messy 
footballers. Despite all the money sloshing around, football has miraculously 
remained one of the few areas of public life where those at the top tend to 
come from working-class backgrounds, which is something to be proud of. But how 
is it possible to be “proud” of a grubby, self-gratifying world where, in too 
many cases, the personal nightlife “perks” have revolved around budget hotel 
rooms, crude phone footage and impressionable, outnumbered women?

For me, it’s also gone beyond legality, important though that is. This has 
become about everyone, but mainly a certain breed of calculating men, taking 
absolute responsibility for their sexual conduct. This isn’t kneejerk 
moralising (wanting sex to only happen between sober married people, with the 
lights out); personally, I couldn’t care less what people get up to behind 
closed Travelodge doors. This is about sexually active adults acknowledging 
that there has to be a baseline of mutual human respect, instead of what so 
often happens (disrespecting certain women, targeting certain women, using 
certain women), with the men all the while cynically reassuring themselves that 
what they’re doing is legal (“consented”), ending all thoughts of 
accountability.

In America, following the Colorado college rape uproar, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/10/university-of-colorado-sexual-assault-austin-wilkerson>
 it was reported that (sometimes drunken) prospective sexual partners were 
being filmed on mobile phones “consenting” to sex, as if being able to speak 
semi-coherently for a few seconds is all the proof that’s needed. Instead of 
this arse-covering farce (if someone’s so drunk that you have to film them 
giving consent, then postpone the sex), there’s this other brilliant solution, 
which is being a decent human being.

This means recognising, as decent human beings tend to do, that not only are 
equivalent levels of inebriation crucial, but also that in every single sexual 
situation, both parties have (or should have) an unwritten, but necessary and 
complex, “duty of care” to each other. That, as well as what’s happening 
physically, there are the all-important grey areas on the emotional peripheries 
of sex where mutual trust and respect are key and non-negotiable.

When this baseline is achieved, and only then, it becomes irrelevant how 
casual the sex is, how little the participants know each other, or whether 
someone likes their sex “rough”. How depressing that sexually active adults 
can’t lead with this attitude of basic respect, instead of being cynical, 
manipulative and disingenuous. Even S&M practitioners tend to have a “safe 
word”, which, when said, stops everything. Perhaps that’s it – it’s come to the 
point that so-called normal, casual sex culture needs to have its own safe 
word? Let me help with a few of them: if a woman is good enough to have sex 
with, then she’s good enough, full stop.

Now, perhaps, they’ll rebrand obesity
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fched-evans-jessica-ennis-apology-pooh-90-obesity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb19d8e31d91efcaf484d023e31e8957d9b04947c%2F0_83_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Let%20me%20lay%20down%20the%20law%20on%20casual%20sex%3A%20care%20and%20respect%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fched-evans-jessica-ennis-apology-pooh-90-obesity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Let%20me%20lay%20down%20the%20law%20on%20casual%20sex%3A%20care%20and%20respect%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fched-evans-jessica-ennis-apology-pooh-90-obesity%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb19d8e31d91efcaf484d023e31e8957d9b04947c%2F0_83_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Will overweight middle-class children get called ‘lazy’ too? Photograph: Chris 
Radburn/PA 
A study in Leeds reports that middle-class children are the most likely to be 
obese. The study, a collaboration between the education authority, city 
council, and Leeds Metropolitan University, scrutinised 13,333 children over 
three years, finding that those in “middle-affluent” neighbourhoods were more 
likely to be obese than children in the richest or poorest neighbourhoods.

This rather contradicts the perceived wisdom on obesity – which is that the 
poorest children are likely to be the heaviest, because they have less access 
to nutritious food, and more likelihood of eating cheap unhealthy diets.

With this in mind, these results do seem surprising, raising questions about 
the impact that living in particular areas has on weight – whether, for 
instance, a proliferation of high-profile fast-food joints (which poorer people 
might not be able to afford on a regular basis) would affect weight more than 
poverty? Social mores could also be factored in – are children in more 
middle-class areas more likely to be over-indulged, or to over-eat because they 
feel under pressure from parent, school or peer groups?

Then there’s the public perception of obesity and the judgments that are made 
– is that all going to change, too? When it was mainly about obese poor people 
(of any age), it was all about them being lazy, disgusting losers who 
“deserved” to be fat. Now that the finger is pointing at the middle classes, 
are they going to get the “lazy, disgusting loser” treatment, too?

Or might there be a “rebranding” of obesity, as another kind of food disorder 
– where the overeating is out of an individual’s control?

I wouldn’t complain – I think it’s vile how overweight people are attacked. 
Still, should it happen, a class rebranding of obesity could get very 
interesting.

Pooh’s 90th will be a picnic, but ours won’t be
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fched-evans-jessica-ennis-apology-pooh-90-obesity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F02ab98b67b7d7d35f2e955accdb84b1f2cb446cf%2F0_129_1890_1134%2F1890.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Let%20me%20lay%20down%20the%20law%20on%20casual%20sex%3A%20care%20and%20respect%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fched-evans-jessica-ennis-apology-pooh-90-obesity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Let%20me%20lay%20down%20the%20law%20on%20casual%20sex%3A%20care%20and%20respect%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fched-evans-jessica-ennis-apology-pooh-90-obesity%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F02ab98b67b7d7d35f2e955accdb84b1f2cb446cf%2F0_129_1890_1134%2F1890.jpg>
 The ageless Pooh with his new chum. Photograph: Trustees of the Pooh 
Properties//PA 
Winnie-the-Pooh is 90 years old. To mark the occasion, there’s a book, The 
Best Bear In All The World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/19/winnie-the-pooh-penguin-anniversary-aa-milne>
, featuring a new character, called Penguin. Other than that, let’s hope that 
the honey-loving “bear of very little brain” has a nice time with Eeyore, 
Tigger and Piglet, perhaps even a splendid picnic where he doesn’t get a honey 
jar stuck on his head.

It’s probable that Pooh has a better birthday than the majority of human 
nonagenarians.

If I make it to 90, I can imagine spending my “special day” incarcerated in 
the cheapest possible nursing home, a grudging 15-minute visit from the 
children (“Does she really need the heating on? It’s so expensive.”) and the 
rest of the day parked in front ofBargain Hunt with a rug over my knees, 
sucking a Nuttall’s Mintoe.

And that’s the optimistic version – I could go a lot bleaker. The point is, 
where’s my 100-acre wood? Where’s my new chum called Penguin?

So, a sour, embittered “happy birthday” to Winnie-the-Pooh.

Even if he does get a honey jar stuck on his head, he’ll be still doing 
significantly better than most of nonagenarian humanity.
 