
British farmers growing wheat typically treat each crop 
<https://secure.fera.defra.gov.uk/pusstats/surveys/documents/arable2014v2.pdf> 
over its growing cycle with four fungicides, three herbicides, one insecticide 
and one chemical to control molluscs. They buy seed that has been precoated 
with chemicals against insects. They spray the land with weedkiller before 
planting, and again after.

They apply chemical growth regulators that change the balance of plant 
hormones to control the height and strength of the grain’s stem. They spray 
against aphids and mildew. And then they often spray again just before 
harvesting with the herbicide glyphosate to desiccate the crop, which saves 
them the energy costs of mechanical drying.

Most farmers around the world, whatever the crop, will turn to one of just six 
companies that dominate the market to buy all these agrochemicals and their 
seeds. The concentration of power over primary agriculture in such a small 
number of corporations, and their ability both to set prices and determine the 
varieties available, has already been a cause of concern among farmers. Yet by 
next year the competition is likely to shrink even further.

Bayer's $66bn takeover bid of Monsanto called a 'marriage made in hell'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/14/bayer-takeover-monsanto-66-billion-deal>
The six global chemical and seed giants will become three behemoths with even 
greater market control. Just when climate change demands a more diverse and 
adaptable food system, resilient to changing conditions, agriculture is being 
dragged further down an ever-narrowing agroindustrial route.

Bayer, Monsanto, Dupont, Dow, Syngenta and BASF currently account for 
three-quarters of the global agrochemical market and nearly two-thirds of the 
commercial seed market. As commodity prices have fallen, their profits have 
been flagging. Farmers who are getting less for their crops have struggled to 
make money. In the US they have begun turning away from expensive GM seed, and 
in Europe more than 3m farms have been lost in eight years. So for two years 
the agrochemical companies have been engaged in a flurry ofmerger and 
acquisition activity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/may/05/monsanto-dow-syngenta-rush-for-mega-mergers-puts-food-security-at-risk>
 to become even bigger and more powerful. The bids have settled, for the 
moment, on a trio of megadeals.

The most recently agreed merger, worth $66bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/14/bayer-takeover-monsanto-66-billion-deal>
, is between Monsanto, the controversial US-headquartered giant that is the 
world’s largest seed and seventh-largest pesticide company, and German-based 
Bayer, the world’s second-largest agrochemical and seventh-largest seed company.

To give a sense of the scale of this deal and its impact, Monsanto, as well as 
being the leading global supplier of genetically modified seed, controls nearly 
a quarter of the vegetable seed market in Europe and is a big player in 
conventional maize seed. The herbicide glyphosate, its big earner, is now so 
commonly used across Europe thatit has been detected 
<http://www.foeeurope.org//glyphosate-reasons-for-concern-briefing-130613> in 
the urine of 44% of people surveyed for Friends of the Earth. Bayer is a leader 
in most pesticides, including neonicotinoids used to treat about 90% of UK 
cereal, sugar beet and oil seed rape.

The proposed Bayer-Monsanto merger follows a $130bn deal between the US 
corporates DuPont (No 2 in seeds, 6 in pesticides) and theDow Chemical company 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/11/dow-chemical-dupont-merger-dowdupont>
 (5 in seeds, 4 in pesticides). China, focused on its own food security, wants 
a bit of the action too, and its state-backed agrochemical companyChemChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/03/chemchina-makes-43bn-dollar-offer-for-swiss-pesticide-firm-syngenta>
 (seventh in global pesticide sales via subsidiaries) has successfully bid 
$43bn for Swiss Syngenta. A parallel process of concentration is taking place 
in the fertiliser sector.

The narrative offered to justify this dominance of a supposedly free market is 
that only bigger, braver new entities can rise to the great challenge of our 
time: how to feedan additional 3 billion people 
<https://www.advancingtogether.com/en/about-the-combination/compelling-strategic-rationale/>
 by 2050 without destroying the planet. We are asked to accept the intensive 
model of agriculture as the heroic march of science, against primitive, 
low-yielding, traditional methods of production. There is no alternative. But 
in fact it is this model of food production that is stuck in a rut.

Postwar, there were indeed huge strides in increasing the amount of food 
produced globally thanks to plant breeding and the use of chemicals in the form 
of artificial fertilisers and pesticides. But alongside the triumphs of that 
green revolution, its longer-term shortcomings are increasingly apparent.

Overuse of agrochemicals has contributed to steep losses in biodiversity, and 
crucially of pollinators vital to food. Increases in pest resistance threaten 
to reverse previous gains in yields.Research <http://www.ipes-food.org/reports> 
has found that over a short period yields per hectare for individual crops are 
greater in intense agricultural systems. But over a longer period, and when you 
look at total farm output, more mixed and diverse farming produces more.

Pakistan fights devastating malnutrition with mass food-fortifying programme
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/16/pakistan-fights-devastating-malnutrition-with-mass-food-fortifying-programme>
If the prime purpose of a food system is to nourish people and keep them 
healthy, this one is failing. Despite a doubling of available food in some 
regions, more than 750 million people still routinely go hungry. At the same 
time nearly 2 billion are overweight or obese.

The agroindustrial system these companies underpin is primarily focused on a 
small number of commodity crops for export. TheETC 
<http://www.etcgroup.org/recent-reports> research group points out that GM seed 
companies have concentrated their development efforts on maize, soya and 
rapeseed (canola) rather than a wide range of the 7,000-odd food crops grown by 
farmers around the world. Breaking these commodity crops down into their 
constituent parts and reselling them as sugars, starches, and fats adds 
shareholder value in the chain but depletes nutritional value.Diet-related 
diseases <http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs355/en/> have now 
overtaken infectious diseases as the largest cause of premature death globally.

Although the companies talk of tackling the threat that climate change poses 
to food security, the agroindustrial food system is one of the most significant 
causes of it, contributing a third of all manmadegreenhouse gas emissions 
<http://www.nature.com/news/one-third-of-our-greenhouse-gas-emissions-come-from-agriculture-1.11708>
.

Corporate concentration in the food system has sucked the money to be made in 
the chain up to a handful of companies at the top. It works for the few but not 
for the many. As if to underline the point, the chief executive of Monsanto 
stands to collect over $135m from the Bayer merger in share options and 
severance pay. But paradoxically, these three mergers to increase power reveal 
a sector that is also vulnerable. The pesticide business is under pressure – 
Bayer and Syngenta are both big producers of the three types of neonicotinoids 
recently banned in the EU because of theirimpact on bees 
<http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2013:139:0012:0026:EN:PDF>
. The EU has been under pressure too to restrict the use ofglyphosate 
<http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_MEMO-16-2012_en.htm>, since it was ruled 
a “probable carcinogen 
<http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanonc/article/PIIS1470-2045%2815%2970134-8/abstract>
” by the WHO last year.

This way of producing our food is broken and most people, including those 
still promoting it, know it. So why does it not change? The former UN 
rapporteur on the right to food,Olivier de Schutter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/olivier-de-schutter>, has described a 
series of “lock-ins” that prevent change. Because value accrues to a limited 
number of actors, their political and economic power and ability to influence 
government policy is reinforced.

The latest frontier is Africa, where there is a new scramble to spread the 
agroindustrial model of farming. It may well be in Africa, however, that a 
different, more ecological vision of the food future emerges. I had a glimmer 
of it on a trip to a large-scale horticultural export company based on Kenya’s 
Lake Naivasha.

The company, Flamingo Homegrown, has abandoned its long and heavy use of 
chemical pesticides, partly in response to a campaign highlighting their effect 
on workers’ health, but partly too in recognition that they were on a losing 
treadmill of spraying and pest resistance.

They have reinvented their agriculture in a way that makes the science of 
agrochemical use look as primitive as a blunderbuss. Instead they employ groups 
of highly trained African scientists to study and reproduce in labs the fungi 
and microrrhizae in healthy soil that form intricate links with plant roots. 
Rather than waging chemical war on the land, they are working to harness its 
immensely complex ecosystems. They have built vast greenhouses dedicated to 
breeding and harvesting ladybirds to control pests biologically rather than 
chemically.

There is an another route to food security – and it is the polar opposite of 
three agrochemical giants bestriding the world.

• This article was amended on 3 October 2016. An earlier version referred to 
glyphosphate; that has been corrected to glyphosate.
 