
Everybody has fear,” says Albert Woodfox. “Fear is the soul telling the body 
that it’s in danger. Some people overcome that fear. I overcame it by having a 
cause. That’s what the party told me: always be honourable, always serve the 
people.” Woodfox, now a grizzled 69-year-old, has had more reasons to be afraid 
than most, and when he says that he has known “more pain and suffering than any 
human being should be asked to suffer”, he is not exaggerating. At the hands of 
the American penal and judicial system he has endured wrongful imprisonment and 
deprivation of basic needs to a degree that seems outlandish in an advanced 
democracy. Yet his experience is not unique. It is an extreme version of 
something inflicted on thousands of others, and it is on behalf of these others 
that, he says, he continues to fight.

This February, as he puts it, “I walked through the gates of hell into 
freedom.” He was released from 45 years incarceration, almost 44 of them in 
solitary confinement, for most of the time in the Louisiana State Penitentiary, 
also known as Angola prison. Originally imprisoned for armed robbery, he was 
later sentenced for the fatal stabbing in 1972 of a prison guard called Brent 
Miller, a conviction ruled unsafe three times by a federal judge. Together with 
two other prisoners subjected to decades of solitary, Robert King and Herman 
Wallace, Woodfox was one of the “Angola Three”, whose treatment provoked
sustained campaigns for their release <http://angola3.org/> . Wallace was 
convicted along with Woodfox for Miller’s murder, King for a separate murder of 
another prisoner, of which he was eventually cleared.

Even had he been guilty of Miller’s murder, decades of solitary confinement 
would be an exceptionally sadistic punishment, onedefined as “torture” by the 
United Nations <http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=40097#.WAiWPdfd79I>
. Woodfox believes it was inflicted on him because he joined the Black Panthers 
in prison, the “party” to which he refers. “I know how many times they offered 
that if I gave up my party they’d let me out of solitary. Each time I told 
them, get out of my face.”

From my mom I inherited values and principles that I was able to use: loyalty 
and devotion, education and discipline

The phrase “solitary confinement” might suggest total isolation, a 
blank-walled cell with a lightbulb, food pushed through a slot in the wall, a 
condition which over any length of time would destroy anyone. Woodfox is at 
pains to say that in Angola his was not this “Hollywood” version but rather 23 
hours a day locked into an 9ft by 6ft (2.7 metres by 1.8 metres) cell, barred 
at one end, in a tier of “14, 15, 16” similar cells. Some communication was 
possible with neighbours, even if he could not see them, or with other inmates 
on their way to the showers. The Angola Three made themselves chess sets out of 
twisted toilet paper and played games by shouting moves to each other. Woodfox 
would also walk repeatedly up and down his three-yard-long universe in an 
effort to keep fit.

The former attorney general of Louisiana James “Buddy” Caldwell has tried to 
argue that this wasn’t really solitary at all, on the basis of the limited 
human contact allowed – that, rather than being absolutely unsurvivable, it was 
merely almost so. The United Nations disagrees with his definition and says 
that no form of solitary confinement should be imposed for more than 15 days – 
that is, about a thousandth of Woodfox’s punishment – after which some of the 
harmful psychological effects of isolation can become irreversible. CCR, or 
closed cell restricted, to give the term preferred by the prison system, is 
incomprehensibly harsh. Some inmates, none of whom suffered it as long as 
Woodfox did, curled themselves up in foetal positions, others screamed. “That 
may seem good,” says Woodfox of the fact he could talk to other prisoners, “but 
given the nature of some of these guys driven insane, sometimes it wasn’t.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Falbert-woodfox-interview-released-angola-three-louisiana-state-penitentiary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd4192956eb15158f36a9d315fc02bb5e4230caf7%2F0_0_3200_4000%2F3200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Albert%20Woodfox%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20choose%20to%20use%20my%20anger%20as%20a%20means%20for%20changing%20things%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Falbert-woodfox-interview-released-angola-three-louisiana-state-penitentiary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Albert%20Woodfox%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20choose%20to%20use%20my%20anger%20as%20a%20means%20for%20changing%20things%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Falbert-woodfox-interview-released-angola-three-louisiana-state-penitentiary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd4192956eb15158f36a9d315fc02bb5e4230caf7%2F0_0_3200_4000%2F3200.jpg>
 Albert Woodfox, less than 24 hours after his release from the Louisiana State 
Penitentiary. Photograph: Bryan Tarnowski/New York Times/Redux/Eyevine 
He himself suffered panic attacks – sweating, a feeling of being smothered 
that obliged him to sleep sitting up. So he was not unscathed, but with the two 
other members of the Angola Three “came to the conclusion that we were going to 
survive”. They taught themselves criminal law and civil law and committed 
themselves to fighting for their own and others’ causes. “From my mom,” Woodfox 
also says, “I inherited values and principles that I was able to use: loyalty 
and devotion, education and discipline. I was able to self-educate, to define 
who I was.” How did he get the books? “In prison there’s always a black market 
system.”

The Angola Three would fight for better conditions in the prison – for 
example, for access to TV, newspapers and occasional exercise that was 
initially denied them, and against the degrading way in which their food was 
pushed into their cell along the ground, under the wall of bars. They used 
hunger strikes if necessary, “the most effective but the most brutal way”. They 
would campaign for their own release and against wider injustices in American 
society. “We argued, but we never broke faith,” Woodfox says inCruel and Unusual
 <http:>, a feature documentary about the Angola Three that will be shown on 
Channel 4 later this year. “We could die in prison if that’s what it took. Once 
you break that spirit, you can’t get it back.”

Now he sits in the Washington flat (contemporary in style, greyish-white, 
subdued) of one of his loyal band of supporters, where he is staying in the 
brief pause between one public event in the nation’s capital and another in 
Chicago. He combines an astonishing level of outward calm and peace with a 
sense of something held in. He is both polite and frank but also seems removed, 
as his way of dealing with his drastic experiences. Above all, he seems to be 
maintaining the ferocious self-discipline that kept him sane inside. “I still 
have claustrophobic attacks, panic attacks,” he says, “I still get angry. I 
just choose to use my anger as a means for changing things”.

He has had the Rip Van Winkle experience of leaving society in one era and 
re-entering it in another, except that he didn’t find that racial politics in 
the United States had made as much progress as you might think. It was as if 
the hair, fashion and music of 1971 were still the same, only in the field of 
social relations. “So far,” he says of the state of America before and after 
his imprisonment, “my observation is that while there appear to be changes in 
the country, the changes that did occur are really superficial.” He sees the 
successes of Donald Trump as evidence: “He has made racism and bigotry 
legitimate. He is not going to go away if he loses. It will take another 
generation to get rid of this kind of garbage.”

As far as Woodfox is concerned, he has been grappling with racism all his 
life, ever since he grew up in New Orleans. He also admits faults of his own. 
“A lot of people have no idea how African Americans lived in the 60s,” he says. 
“The vast majority lived in ghettoes, the majority couldn’t get jobs or else 
they got worse paid for the same jobs than white people did. I was a petty 
criminal at one time. It was a way to survive at times of desperation. I wasn’t 
stealing just to steal, I would steal to bring food into the house. Other than 
that, it was bullshit things like stealing a car. But I was still a predator on 
my own people.”

Then he was sent to Angola, 140 miles inland from New Orleans, the largest 
maximum security prison in the US and a place whose notorious horrors have long 
exercised a special fascination on writers, film-makers and reformers. It 
occupies a former plantation – its name refers to the place of origin of its 
slaves – and following the civil war was owned by a former Confederate major 
who ran it along lines very like its former existence. African Americans sent 
there on often slender pretexts were forced to work its fields for the profit 
of its owners, in a way barely distinguishable from slavery.

When society looks the other way, the judicial system becomes judge, jury and 
executioner

Despite periodic attempts at reform, a recitative of outrage about Angola 
sounds through the decades, in magazines, books and newspapers. Its regime was 
“probably as close to slavery as any person could come in 1930”. In 1952 it was 
“the worst prison in America”. In the 1960s it was “the bloodiest prison in the 
south”. In 1971 the American Bar Association said that its conditions were 
“medieval, squalid and horrifying”. “Every week,” says Woodfox, “someone there 
was killed or seriously injured.” “I know guys in Angola”, he also says, “who 
have been there 40 years for having a bag of dope.” In this telling, given that 
prisoners still work in its farms and factories for minimal pay, 200-year-old 
habits are dying hard.

Woodfox states his innocence of the armed robbery charge that had him sent to 
Angola: “I lent my car to my friend and he was involved in a shoot-out with the 
police.” Inside the prison, he started protesting for better conditions. He 
joined the Black Panthers, the revolutionary black nationalist movement that 
had reached the peak of its fame and influence in the late 1960s. Woodfox had 
encountered them in New York while on the run from imprisonment, and been 
inspired by the confidence and empowerment, until then unfamiliar to him, with 
which he saw the party’s young black men speak. In Angola he followed the 
Panthers’ model of self-defence: “We were organising against racism and against 
corruption.” They fought, for example, the appropriation by security staff of 
food and clothing meant for prisoners.

He helped start “anti-rape squads”. “Every Thursday – you call it Fresh Fish 
Day – when new arrivals come by bus and get assigned to various camps. Guys 
would gang up on them, trick them into accepting gifts and then demand payment, 
which they can’t pay. So they’d say ‘you’ve got to be my gal-boy’. They’d make 
them into prostitutes, rent them out.” Sometimes “it would be two or three guys 
on one man”. Sometimes victims would die as a result of their assaults. Woodfox 
says that the guards knew about it, but they were paid off.

He and his allies would “look for first-timers when they got off the bus and 
try and educate them.” He says they were “loved and respected” by other 
inmates, but “the predators hated our guts”. The anti-rape squads were 
threatened with weapons. “They said ‘it’s not your business’. We said ‘we’re 
making it our business’.”

Then Brent Miller, 23 years old and married for two months to 17-year-old 
Teenie, was killed, stabbed 38 times with a knife and a sharpened lawnmower 
blade. “I never met him, I never talked with him,” says Woodfox. “I was in the 
dining hall eating breakfast.” He had witnesses to back him up. The 
prosecution’s chief witness was Hezekiah Brown, a serial rapist serving life 
without parole, who was described as a “professional snitch” by a fellow inmate 
and of whom a deputy warden of the prison would say “Hezekiah was one you could 
put words into his mouth”. Having first said that he did not witness the crime, 
he was offered privileges, luxuries such as cigarettes and ultimately freedomto 
testify against Woodfox and Wallace 
<http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=96255685>. He was 
threatened with solitary if he did not 
<http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=96199165>.

Bloody fingerprints at the scene of the crime matched neither of the accused’s 
and no effort was made to find out whose they were, out of the limited pool of 
prisoners. Later, during the protracted appeals against their convictions, DNA 
evidence that might have exonerated Woodfox and Wallace went missing. Among 
those unconvinced by the evidence would be Miller’s widow, Teenie. “Brent was 
my whole life,” she later said, “he was witty, handsome and talented. He sang 
and played the drums. He was an all-round good soul.” But she became “very, 
very angry” that,in her view, the wrong men were convicted 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/news/2014/03/wife-murdered- prison- 
guard-urges- justice-man- placed-solitary- years-ago/>.

Woodfox and Wallace were tried separately in the court house in St 
Francisville, which, as the place where many of the penitentiary’s large staff 
live, is almost a company town. All-white juries, who had not been told of 
Brown’s incentives, found them guilty. Woodfox and Wallace were put in 
solitary, in principle a short-term disciplinary measure. It has to be renewed 
after 90 days, which it was, again and again, until the days turned into years 
and decades. “They were saying we were physically dangerous to ourselves or 
others,” says Woodfox, “they didn’t let us out because of our reputation, that 
the young would copy us… bullsh-i-i-i-i-t.” During this time, to fast-forward 
more than half a lifetime of legal agonies, dragged out by the authorities to a 
barely credible degree, the following landmark dates stand out.

Chelsea Manning emerges from solitary confinement after suicide attempt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/12/chelsea-manning-solitary-confinement-suicide-attempt-military>
In 1992 Woodfox’s conviction was overturned. In 1993 he was indicted again and 
for some reason he had to wait until 1998 before a retrial, at which point he 
was convicted again. The jury’s forewoman at the time of the reindictment was 
Anne Butler, formerly married to a former Angola warden, Murray Henderson, and 
author of a book in which she stated her belief in the guilt of the accused. 
Even she, it was reported,wondered why she was allowed on the jury 
<http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=96199165>.

Woodfox’s second conviction was overturned in 2008 by James J Brady, senior 
federal judge for the Middle District of Louisiana, and then reinstated in 2010 
by a higher court, the Fifth Circuit. It was overturned again in 2013, a 
decision upheld in 2014 by the Fifth Circuit. In 2015 the state indicted 
Woodfox for the third time after which Judge Brady issued a rare writ banning a 
retrial, on the basis that the state were unlikely to give him a fair trial, 
that key witnesses were all dead and that Woodfox’s age and health meant that 
he too might die before the process was concluded. The state appealed and in 
November 2015 the Fifthfound Brady’s writ excessive 
<http://www.theadvocate.com/baton_rouge/news/article_05fbfe11-86e8-5aab-8d7e-f15fad6f8e23.html>
, a judgment then appealed by Woodfox.

Early this year, on the advice of his lawyers and in order to end the 
interminable legal struggle, he reached an agreement with the state whereby he 
pleaded no contest to its charges and was released on his birthday, 19 
February. This wasn’t easy. “The internal struggle for me was,” he recently 
said, “I had spent 43 years of my life never backing down, never compromising 
what I believe in.” But “somehow my daughter and my grandkids and great 
grandkids coming to visit gave me the strength to say, ‘Yeah, you’re not 
compromising on anything. It’s not a plea of guilt. This is a plea for 
freedom.’”

Meanwhile, in 2001, Robert King’s conviction was overturned and he was 
released. Herman Wallace had his conviction overturned in 2013 but, even though 
he was in the final stages of liver cancer, the prison still prevaricated about 
his release. Only under the threat of being charged with contempt of court did 
they let him out. He was reindicted by the state two days later. The day after 
that he died.

During this time the Angola Three became famous for the injustice of their 
cases and the cruelty to which they were subjected. Their story became the 
centre of the ongoing campaign to end solitary confinement and the 
International Coalition to Free the Angola Three was created. The founder of 
The Body Shop, Anita Roddick, championed their cause and her husband Gordon 
continued to do so after her death.

The Angola Three endured, day after day, the extreme deprivations and 
arbitrary humiliations of CCR. Woodfox’s mother and sister died while he was 
inside, and he was banned from attending their funerals. His brother Michael 
survives, and visited every month even when displaced by Hurricane Katrina – 
even when it required a five- or six-hour drive for the two hours’ visiting 
time permitted by the prison.

The Angola Three were subjected to routine strip and anal cavity searches, 
sometimes six times a day, until in 1978, their lawsuit to have them restricted 
was successful. In 2013 the searches started on Woodfox again, requiring 
another court order that was then appealed by the state. I ask if there were 
exceptions to what appears to be a story of unmitigated official brutality. 
“There are exceptions, people who are able to hold on to their humanity, who 
are able to avoid theRobocop syndrome. But absolute power corrupts. Prison 
guards have absolute power because they realise they can do pretty much what 
they want.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Falbert-woodfox-interview-released-angola-three-louisiana-state-penitentiary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F020bbddd84310f078b437d4d12c76f93aac09d5b%2F0_251_2396_1437%2F2396.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Albert%20Woodfox%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20choose%20to%20use%20my%20anger%20as%20a%20means%20for%20changing%20things%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Falbert-woodfox-interview-released-angola-three-louisiana-state-penitentiary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Albert%20Woodfox%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20choose%20to%20use%20my%20anger%20as%20a%20means%20for%20changing%20things%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Falbert-woodfox-interview-released-angola-three-louisiana-state-penitentiary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F020bbddd84310f078b437d4d12c76f93aac09d5b%2F0_251_2396_1437%2F2396.jpg>
 Albert Woodfox leaves prison with his brother Michel Mable, who visited him 
every month. Photograph: Billy Sothern/EPA 
In Angola, he also says, “you have families that go back generations. They 
graduate from high school and a week later, they work in Angola. It keeps a 
tradition going. They become part of the system. Who knows how long it’s been 
going on?”

Of course, those responsible for the Angola Three’s confinement see things 
differently. One is the devout Southern Baptist Burl Cain, who was warden of 
Angola from 1992 until he stood down on 1 January this year, under allegations 
thathe inappropriately entered into business deals with relatives of inmates 
<http://www.theadvocate.com/baton_rouge/news/politics/article_d6826c2e-136d-5a19-a62d-fcf3383887e6.html>
. Described byThe Economist as “a rockstar of the correctional world” 
<http://www.economist.com/blogs/democracyinamerica/2016/01/story-cain>, he won 
fame and praise for reducing Angola’s rates of violence. In his words, he 
“transformed this place from a facility of violence and despair to one of peace 
and morality”, a task he set about with what one prisoner called “a Bible in 
one hand and a sword in the other” or what the Baptist Press called“a firm hand 
and a strong love for Jesus.” 
<http://www.bpnews.net/46003/angola-warden-burl-cain-slates-jan-1-retirement>

Membership Event: Life in solitary confinement: the story of the Angola 3 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/event/life-in-solitary-confinement-the-story-of-the-angola-3-28047089600>

Interviewed in 2008 by Woodfox’s attorney Nick Trenticosta 
<http://louisianajusticeinstitute.blogspot.co.uk/2012/01/angola-warden-burl-cain-on-black.html>
, Cain cited a 1973 letter in which the prisoner called violent revolution “a 
highly necessary occurrence in life”. Trenticosta asked if the passage of time, 
years of good behaviour and the overturning of his second conviction counted 
for anything. “He’s just good because he is locked in CCR,” said Cain, “not 
because he’s good at heart… Because the lion in a cage can’t cause much 
trouble, you see.” Trenticosta asked Cain to assume “if you can” that Woodfox 
was innocent of Miller’s killing. “I would still keep him in CCR. I still know 
that he is still trying to practise Black Pantherism, and I still would not 
want him walking around my prison, because he would organise the young new 
inmates.”

The most persistent adversary of the Angola Three is Buddy Caldwell 
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2009/03/36-years-solitude>, attorney 
general of Louisiana until he was voted out last year amid accusations of what 
his opponent called“cronyism, nepotism and corruption” 
<http://www.nola.com/politics/index.ssf/2015/10/incumbent_caldwell_under_ 
attac.html>. It was under his direction that the state fought so hard to keep 
Woodfox in prison, where he would probably still be today if Caldwell were 
still in office. “This is the most dangerous person on the planet,” Caldwell 
has said, and “I oppose letting him out with every fibre of my being.” He has 
stated his complete faith in the process that led to Woodfox and Wallace’s 
convictions and has praised Hezekiah Brown’s courage for testifying in the face 
of possible intimidation.

Miller’s siblings, unlike his widow, believe in Woodfox and Wallace’s guilt 
and opposed his release. There is also a website, theOfficer Down Memorial Page 
<http://www.odmp.org/officer/9311-corrections- sergeant-brent- miller angola>, 
which remembers “all of law enforcement’s heroes”: it simply states, without 
reference to the vacated convictions, that he was killed by members of the 
Black Panthers, “a racist, radical group that professed the murders of law 
enforcement officers”. But Woodfox and Wallace’s accusers have failed, over 
decades of legal scrutiny, to make their case without glaring flaws.

Central to the case of the Angola Three are the fears and emotions that the 
Black Panthers still arouse, 50 years after their founding and more than 30 
years after they faded away in the early 80s. J Edgar Hoover called them “the 
greatest threat to the internal security of the country” and, as is now known, 
set about destabilising them, getting its leaders locked up and, if desired, 
killed. In this context, where someone like Woodfox is deemed a threat to the 
future of the US, the attitudes and practices of someone like Cain become, 
though not justifiable, explicable.

It is also is a matter of record that Black Panthers advocated violence and 
expressed sympathy for the likes of Stalin, Mao Zedong andthe regime of North 
Korea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/19/black-panthers-north-korea-us-imperialism>
. As well as fighting flagrant injustice and founding free food and health 
programmes for the poor, some of its factions resorted to criminal gangsterism 
andincluded murder, torture and rape among their methods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/18/black-powers-coolest-radicals-black-panthers-vanguard-of-the-revolution-stanley-nelson-interview>
. Now that Woodfox is free and dedicated to campaigning, I ask him if he means 
to do this by legal and democratic means. “That’s the culture and tradition of 
America,” he answers. Of the letter cited by Cain, he says that he wasn’t 
“advocating revolution, just explaining what it would entail”.

But he is not going to disavow the party, and the day before our interview he 
shared a platform in a Washington convention centre with Bobby Seale, who with 
Huey Newton founded the Panthers. Rather, he sees campaigns like Black Lives 
Matter, with which he is involved, as “an extension of what the Black Panther 
Party was”. They want “what our ancestors have always been asking for, just to 
be equal”. To achieve this “we have to do something different, because we are 
too predictable. We’re not even allowed the right to resist. If we do, we’re 
criminals.”

6×9: A virtual experience of solitary confinement
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2016/apr/27/6x9-a-virtual-experience-of-solitary-confinement>
It was, he says, “so disappointing when I got out to find that conditions when 
I left 45 years ago are still here. With the first black president, everyone 
thought we had reached a milestone, but it just looked different.” If, he 
continues “America has nothing else to thank Donald Trump for, it is to show 
that racism is very much alive. He didn’t come out of nowhere. I thought the 
battle would be economic, not sick-assed philosophy about racism 45 years 
later.”

And so he is travelling and speaking, jetting from one American city to 
another to speak of his experiences and to fight, along with Robert King, for 
“the abolishment of solitary confinement and freedom for political prisoners” – 
and political prisoners is what he believes many of those incarcerated in 
America to be – “who remain victims of the criminal injustice system in the 
USA.” Apart from his fugitive trip to New York, he had never been out of 
Louisiana until this year, but now he travels from coast to coast and north to 
south, and is coming to Britain next month for a multi-city tour. All this from 
a man who came out of jail with hepatitis C, diabetes, renal failure and 
hypertension. His health has improved dramatically in the months of his 
freedom, partly due to receiving treatments denied him inside.

“We’re trying to get some kind of civil oversight,” he says, “to hold the 
administration accountable. When society looks the other way then the judicial 
system, from police to the courts to the prisons, becomes judge, jury and 
executioner.” The treatment of people like himself “is more than a legal issue, 
it’s a moral issue. It’s no different to what they do in other countries that 
we call dictatorships. We just have a more sophisticated way of doing it.”

He gets support from the people who campaigned for his release, from fellow 
activists, and especially from his brother – “my rock” – who is all that is 
left of the family he grew up with. But in general he likes to downplay the 
drama of his transition and to stress that, through continuing the activism 
that he started inside prison, his move to life outside was made easier. 
“There’s some residue, but it doesn’t dominate my life. I was not connected to 
the prison system. I did not have to break a lot of ties to the prison culture. 
I was already free in my mind. There was more like a physical adjustment. I had 
to learn to live beyond a 9ft cell.” Has he even had a holiday since his 
release in February? “I went to Yosemite. I read a lot ofNational Geographic in 
prison and I had a lifetime desire to go there. It was overwhelming.”




The European Freedom Tour: see Albert Woodfox talk

Albert Woodfox and his fellow surviving member of the Angola Three, Robert 
King, will visit the UK and France next month, kicking off on 1 November with 
the launch of Amnesty UK’sWrite for Rights 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/get-involved/write-for-rights/> campaign.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Falbert-woodfox-interview-released-angola-three-louisiana-state-penitentiary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0083fc499a5886ae8fe817c3d309bf9afe7bceb7%2F1973_287_4171_2502%2F4171.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Albert%20Woodfox%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20choose%20to%20use%20my%20anger%20as%20a%20means%20for%20changing%20things%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Falbert-woodfox-interview-released-angola-three-louisiana-state-penitentiary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Albert%20Woodfox%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20choose%20to%20use%20my%20anger%20as%20a%20means%20for%20changing%20things%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Falbert-woodfox-interview-released-angola-three-louisiana-state-penitentiary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0083fc499a5886ae8fe817c3d309bf9afe7bceb7%2F1973_287_4171_2502%2F4171.jpg>
 Albert Woodfox is greeted by Robert King during Woodfox’s first post-release 
appearance in New Orleans, February 2016. Photograph: Max Becherer/AP 
Thursday 3 November, Liverpool
John Foster Building, John Moores University, 80-98 Mount Pleasant, L3 5UZ, 
5.30pm.Click here to reserve your free place. 
<https://www.ljmu.ac.uk/about-us/events/ccse-angola-3> 

Friday 4 November, Manchester
Brooks Building, Faculty of Education, Metropolitan University, 53 Bonsall St, 
M15 6GX, 5.30pm.Click here to reserve your free place. 
<http://www.eventbrite.com/e/black-power-and-the-struggle-for-freedom-the-story-of-the-angola-3-tickets-28650793294>

Monday 7 November, London (Guardian event)
Simon Hattenstone talks to Albert Woodfox and Robert King on the eve of the US 
election. The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, N1 9GU, 7pm. Click here to 
book your ticket. 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/event/life-in-solitary-confinement-the-story-of-the-angola-3-28047089600>

Tuesday 8 November, Cambridge
Lab 026, Lord Ashcroft Building, Anglia Ruskin University, East Road, CB1 1PT, 
6pm.Click here to reserve your free place. 
<https://www.eventbrite.co.uk/e/black-panthers-to-obamas-america-albert-woodfox-robert-king-at-aru-tickets-28362449851>

After touring the UK, Woodfox and King will travel to France and speak at 
events and attend meetings hosted by Amnesty France. More information about the 
Angola 3 and event details can be found atangola3.org <https://www.angola3.org>

Cruel and Unusual <http://mobfilm.com/film-video-in-production/>, a 
documentary directed by Vadim Jean and telling the story of the Angola Three, 
will be screened on Channel 4 later in the year.
 