
Sweden’s Alex Noren held his nerve to claim a remarkable third European Tour 
title in his past eight events at the British Masters on Sunday.

Noren recorded a final round of 69 at The Grove to finish 18 under par and two 
ahead of Austria’s Bernd Wiesberger, withLee Westwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lee-westwood> a shot further back in third.

A more comfortable victory had looked on the cards when Noren led by four 
shots early on only for the world No26 to bogey the 7th as his playing partner 
Richard Bland holed from 50 feet for birdie.

Lee Westwood is still aiming to be Europe’s Ryder Cup captain in 2020
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/12/lee-westwood-ryder-cup-captain-2020-whistling-straits>
Noren’s lead was down to a single shot when he made bogey at the 11th and he 
did superbly to save par on the next thanks to a brilliant recovery shot from 
the trees.

Wiesberger briefly joined Noren at the top of the leaderboard with a birdie on 
the par-five 15th, only for Noren to do likewise from a near-identical position 
in the group behind.

With Wiesberger unable to birdie the 18th, Noren knew all he needed was a par 
to win, but a superb pitch to two feet set up a birdie to cap off a brilliant 
run of form after victoriesin the Scottish Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/10/alex-noren-scottish-open-tyrrell-hatton-matteo-manassero>
 andEuropean Masters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/04/alex-noren-scott-hend-second-european-masters-leed-westwood>
.

Westwood feels he let down his good friend and Ryder Cup captain Darren Clarke 
after failing to win any of his three matches asEurope suffered their heaviest 
defeat for 35 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/02/usa-win-ryder-cup-rory-mcilroy-europe>
 at Hazeltine.

The 43-year-old then missed the cut in last week’s Links Championship, thanks 
largely to a second round of 82 at Kingsbarns, but a closing 67 was enough to 
secure his best result since finishing in a tie for second behind Danny Willett 
at the Masters.

Bland, who was seeking a first European Tour title at the 395th attempt, 
dropped shots at the 16th and 17th and had to settle for a five-way tie for 
third alongside Graeme McDowell, Alexander Levy, Peter Hanson and Tommy 
Fleetwood.
 