
‘We’ve got a freaker!’

It was around 3.15pm on Monday 4 August 1975, 41 years ago this Thursday, and 
England and Australia were meandering their way towards a draw on the fourth 
day of the second Ashes Test at Lord’s. The home side were steadily building a 
declaration total, a heatwave had thermometers hovering around 33C and, sat in 
front of the Tavern, Michael Angelow was pondering his immediate future.

The immediate past had featured several pints of ale and some good-natured 
back-and-forth with a group of Australia fans who has also been enjoying the 
sun and the refreshments. The question of livening up the soporific proceedings 
had been raised. A member of the antipodean party came up with an idea and 
offered £20 to the man bold enough to carry it out. Angelow, 24, and a cook in 
the merchant navy, stepped up to the challenge. “I didn’t have any plan, just 
to keep running.”

Those around the country tuned into Test Match Special were treated to John 
Arlott’s description of what happened next 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=FVro7oZP-vI>, made all 
the more memorable by his failure to remember the word “streaker”: “We’ve got a 
freaker! We’ve got a freaker down the wicket now. Not very shapely and it’s 
masculine. And I would think it’s seen the last of its cricket for the day. The 
police are mustered, so are the cameramen, and Greg Chappell. And now he’s 
being embraced by a blond policeman. And this may be his last public appearance 
but what a splendid one.

A brief history of streaking in sport
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2013/jul/18/a-history-of-streaking-in-sport>
“He’s now being marched down in the final exhibition past at least 8,000 
people in the Mound Stand, some of whom perhaps have never seen anything quite 
like this before. And he’s getting a very good reception.”

(That may be one of the most famous pieces of cricket commentary in existence 
but years later Arlott felt he had missed an opportunity. “No, I blew it,” he 
told David Rayvern Allen. “What I should have said was that perhaps his 
greatest disappointment was not being deprived of further cricket for the day, 
but that he actually managed to straddle the stumps without even dislodging a 
bail.”)

Angelow had shed his clothing and, wearing nothing but a pair of black socks 
and his white Adidas trainers, leaped over both sets of stumps, in doing so 
creating one of the great cricket photographs. There he is, buttocks shining 
proudly in the sunshine, a hand (rather than a more personal appendage) poking 
out jauntily between his legs, fingers spread as if to say: “Ta da!” Such is 
the picture’s pop-culture cache thatit adorns the cover 
<http://www.dlmethod.co.uk/audio/releases/sticky-wickets/> of the Duckworth 
Lewis Method’ssecond album 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/jun/27/duckworth-lewis-method-sticky-review>
, Sticky Wickets.

The police, taking a fairly laissez-faire approach to the spectacle (it’s fair 
to say any Edgbaston interlopers this week will not experience quite the same 
relaxed attitude – an Australia fan wasjailed for a week in Sri Lanka after 
streaking during a rain delay in the first Test 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/cricket/36905978>), eventually caught up with 
Angelow after he had wandered over to the Mound Stand and escorted him from the 
ground. Perhaps their hesitation was borne out of inexperience. Angelow’s amble 
across the Lord’s pitch had created a little bit of history: he was the first 
streaker at a Test match in England (the equally-coveted First Streaker at a 
Major Sporting Event title having gone to Michael O’Brien at Twickenham in 
1974).

“No one at Lord’s had seen a streaker before, but I’d seen quite a few back in 
Australia prior to that,” noted the Australia batsman Doug Walters, who had 
been on the field at the time. “They were really quite commonplace back home, 
but you certainly didn’t expect that kind of behaviour in England, certainly 
not in those days, and at Lord’s of all places. It’s probably fair to say that 
cricket in England was a bit formal. Times have changed since then, whether for 
the good or the worse I don’t know.

“The players managed to forget about the interruption pretty quickly. I think 
it was handled pretty well at the time – there was quite a laugh from everyone 
on the field, but then it was back to business.”

Such was the attitude at the time that Angelow returned to Lord’s the 
following day to watch the conclusion of the match (Australia comfortably 
batting out for a draw to maintain their 1-0 lead in the series). Angelow, 
though, did not get to hold on to his winnings. “I remember the magistrate 
asking me how much the bet had been for and I said £20,” he told the 
Independent. “He said: ‘Right, we’ll have that then’ and that was it.”

He was offered cash to repeat his streak at the Grand National and at 
Wimbledon but turned all offers down, returning to the comparatively quiet life 
in ships’ kitchens. “It wasn’t something I was going to make a career out of. 
Streaker isn’t something you put on your CV.”

Which is very true, although as a antisocial ways of relieving the boredom 
during a Test-match lull go, give me a streak overa beer snake any time 
<http://www.news.com.au/sport/cricket/cricket-fans-set-beer-snake-record-at-australia-sri-lanka-scg-washout/story-fndpt0dy-1226558071040>
.

• This is an extract taken from the Spin, the Guardian’s weekly cricket email. 
To subscribe just visit this page, find ‘The Spin’ and follow the instructions 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/email-prefs>.
 