
bellwether: The leading sheep of a flock, with a bell on its neck. 
<http://www.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/english/bellwether>

– Oxford dictionaries

It’s the first day of winter. But recent unseasonal mild, dry weather renders 
the bucolic village of Bungendore, just outside Canberra, in soft autumnal 
glow. Late falling leaves of russet and straw, usually raked away by mid-May, 
gather in drifts on footpaths and in gutters.

Smoking chimneys periscope through rust-stained corrugated iron roofs.

In one village cafe sits a middle-aged bloke in a business suit, white shirt, 
and smart tie.

It’s Peter Hendy, federal member for the newly redistributed seat of 
Eden-Monaro, a vast federal electorate of 41, 617 sq km stretching from Yass 
and Bungendore in the north, south to the Victorian border and along the east 
coast from Eden to Narooma.

“The electorate is 41,000 sq kms – the size of Switzerland or Holland or 
something like that,” Hendy says.

“So you get spread pretty thinly. In a marginal seat you never cease 
campaigning. You start campaigning the week after the last federal election ... 
over the course of a couple of weeks I try to touch every region of the 
electorate and it’s usually a six or a six-and-a-half day week.”

Since March he has driven some 15,000km. From his home in Queanbeyan, just 
over the border from the Australian Capital Territory, it’s three-and- a-half 
hours to Eden, the old whaling town so named for its beauty and bounty (the 
Monaro of the electorate’s name is the vast expanse of mesmerising high plain 
leading to the mountains). Tumbarumba, the biggest town to the west, is also 
three and a half hours.

It is as centrist, conservative and volatile a federal seat as Australia can 
produce. Eden-Monaro is a conservative sea encircling the decidedly leftist 
ACT, with its progressive, socially explorative local government and two 
traditionally Labor-held federal electorates.

Bigger, or so Hendy reckons, than about 60 of the world’s countries, 
Eden-Monaro is home to extreme wealth and pockets of intense rural poverty, and 
disparate industries including logging, dairy and cattle farming, fishing and 
tourism. It’s a place of tree-changers and tree-huggers, primary producers and 
their employees, self-funded aged city escapees and pensioners.

Topograpically, geographically, climatically, it’s a continental microcosm: 
open plains, thick forest, stunning sun-kissed coast, undulating, brown high 
country leading to snow-covered mountain peaks.

It’s metaphoric, perhaps, for the competing political pressures within 
Eden-Monaro and its tendency to swing to the major party federal election 
winner. A federal seat since federation in 1901, the ever marginal Eden-Monaro 
has gone to the candidate from the party that won government every time since 
1972. The Greens,represented this time by Tamara Ryan 
<http://www.begadistrictnews.com.au/story/3516868/the-greens- eden-monaro- 
candidate- announced-tamara- ryan/>, polled 7.5% at the last election.

The seat, as evidenced by Bungendore itself, is demographically diverse.

Utes laden with hay bales or metal tradies’ toolboxes compete with urban 
all-wheel drives on streets lined with heritage stone cottages and newer 
buildings unsympathetic to colonial history. It’s an intersection of Ye Olde, 
urban drift and rural utility; leather and wood craft shops, antique dealers 
and inner-city style cafes are there with feed merchants and none-of-your-fancy 
$8.50-artisanal-loaves-here-style bakeries.

It’s morning coffee time – a bit of a thing. Grey-haired regulars with 
sensible coats and footwear, and soft hats, clutch copies of the Sydney Morning 
Herald and leashes linked to dogs; working kelpies, indulged labradors. They 
sit and banter: dogs, kids, grandchildren – this interminable election campaign.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Ffor-whom-the-bellwether-tolls-eden-monaro-rematch-draws-political-heavyweights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d609dfd21b7479742eab1ae5c97bc4ad769d34d%2F0_471_3932_2359%2F3932.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=All%20eyes%20on%20Eden-Monaro%2C%20the%20bellwether%20seat%20that%20always%20picks%20the%20winning%20side&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Ffor-whom-the-bellwether-tolls-eden-monaro-rematch-draws-political-heavyweights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=All%20eyes%20on%20Eden-Monaro%2C%20the%20bellwether%20seat%20that%20always%20picks%20the%20winning%20side&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Ffor-whom-the-bellwether-tolls-eden-monaro-rematch-draws-political-heavyweights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d609dfd21b7479742eab1ae5c97bc4ad769d34d%2F0_471_3932_2359%2F3932.jpg>
 Peter Hendy in the Parliament House press gallery in November last year. 
Photograph: Mike Bowers for the Guardian 
Hendy, an economist, former company director, political staffer and industry 
group lobbyist, has been the MP for Eden-Monaro since 2013. It’s a litmus test 
seat that’s often referred to, analogously within the political beltway and 
perhaps confusingly for average – which is to say, disengaged – voters, as the 
leading, belled, tell-tale sheep of the electoral flock (about which, more 
shortly).

The newly expanded (by one third and 25,000 voters) electorate now takes in 
the former Yass shire 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/federal-election-2016/guide/emon/>. While the 
expansion brings more wealth into the demographic and increases Hendy’s margin 
to about 3%, there is no safety. So he is working the new area assiduously.

“You knock on doors, drop into businesses, set up street stalls – if there’s 
opportunities for a public meeting you always go,” he says.

In Canberra they reckon you can always tell how worried a government is about 
Eden-Monaro by the number of campaign ministerial visits. In recent weeks a 
conga line of ministers has passed through.

Recently Malcolm Turnbull (Hendy strongly backed his 2015 challenge against 
Tony Abbott) and the NSW premier, Mike Baird, visited the Bega Valley with the 
local member to make $50m in election pledges – the first time a PM and premier 
have campaigned there together since federation.

Despite suggestions of lingering Liberal anger over his support for Turnbull (
and reports some vengeful conservatives actually want him to lose the seat 
<http://www.canberratimes.com.au/federal-politics/federal-election-2016/leaked-email-suggests-some-liberals-want-peter-hendy-to-lose-his-bellwether-seat-20160509-goqanx.html>
), Hendy says: “The way I’d put it is that it [ministerial and prime 
ministerial visits] indicates that I’m getting a lot of support. That’s what it 
actually indicates.”

I’m very relaxed about the decision I made and how it might affect this 
electorate
Peter Hendy, Eden-Monaro MP 
Of his support for Turnbull, Hendy says: “I would get multiple favourable 
comments about supporting Malcolm Turnbull and there would be a single voice 
here and there for people who liked Tony ... So, I’m very relaxed about the 
decision I made and how it might affect this electorate.”

Baird’s highly unpopular forced council mergers (six councils in Eden-Monaro 
have been combined), telecommunications – especially internet access and mobile 
black-spots – the state of roads and the urgent need for new ones and health 
service provision are among the electorate’s hot-button issues.

While Hendy believes constituents regard council mergers (which he opposed) as 
a state issue, novelist Sulari Gentill, resident of Batlow in former Tumbarumba 
shire, insists there is simmering anger that could be federally directed.

“I’ve also spoken to people ... who are very distressed about the government’s 
treatment of refugees,” she says. “I’m not sure that will influence the way 
they vote but they felt very strongly that the country was succumbing to fear 
and hysteria.”

Julie Giddings, a former independent Tumbarumba councillor, real estate agent 
and local farmer, says a number of parochial issues – including council 
mergers, the loss of jobs at a local prison – will strongly influence the 
federal vote.

“Also, Peter Hendy was one of the ones caught up in ousting Abbott,” she says. 
“People talk about that. I think that could play a part [in the result].”

Mike Kelly, a former army intelligence officer and counter-insurgency expert, 
held Eden-Monaro from the “Rudd-slide” of 2007 until 2013, when Labor, riven by 
two terms of leadership bastardry, lost to Abbott’sCoalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition>. Kelly lost by the 
narrowest of margins – against the tide, perhaps, of emphatic, anti-Labor 
sentiment after Rudd’s re-emergence as prime minister.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Ffor-whom-the-bellwether-tolls-eden-monaro-rematch-draws-political-heavyweights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05ddf08ac366107bd4cb0044c85cf687e6e4ee26%2F0_0_4256_2832%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=All%20eyes%20on%20Eden-Monaro%2C%20the%20bellwether%20seat%20that%20always%20picks%20the%20winning%20side&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Ffor-whom-the-bellwether-tolls-eden-monaro-rematch-draws-political-heavyweights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=All%20eyes%20on%20Eden-Monaro%2C%20the%20bellwether%20seat%20that%20always%20picks%20the%20winning%20side&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Ffor-whom-the-bellwether-tolls-eden-monaro-rematch-draws-political-heavyweights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05ddf08ac366107bd4cb0044c85cf687e6e4ee26%2F0_0_4256_2832%2F4256.jpg>
 Mike Kelly, right, during his swearing in as defence materiel minister at 
Government House in Canberra in February 2013. Photograph: Alan Porritt/AAP 
He is running for the seat again, something he describes as “an endurance 
test”. He believes Labor’s Rudd-Gillard-Rudd leadership moves cost him the seat 
and he speaks of the “trauma” he felt during those times of internal ALP 
treachery and subterfuge – equally traumatic, he says, as some of that which he 
experienced in combat.

“I said, after I eventually lost [Eden-Monaro in 2013], I felt like a jilted 
lover,” he says.

But, over a coffee in a modest café behind the main street of Queanbeyan, 
Kelly, dressed semi-casually in open shirt and jacket, says he has unfinished 
business – not least on climate change mitigation and the development of sound, 
bipartisan national security and defence policy.

“My family goes back [in the region] 169 years and were among the pioneers 
that built the place,” he says. “My great-great grandfather built the Tathra 
wharf (on the Saphire Coast] ... my great-great grandfather founded the Bega 
cheese co-op ... my great grandfather ran for Eden-Monaro in the 1940.

I said, after I eventually lost, I felt like a jilted lover
Mike Kelly, Labor candidate 
“I’ve got a deep and profound love of this region and its people and I just 
felt that Peter Hendy was not showing that same passion and commitment. And 
everywhere I went people were complaining to me about that. It’s the difference 
between sleeping here and living here.”

Kelly describes Hendy as having the attitude of a “bit of a feudal landlord 
... not having that passion and commitment and not really being a voice for us”.

It seems there’s little love lost between these two.

Hendy says: “My answer to that is I’ve lived in the seat for 16 years. Mike 
Kelly never lived in the seat before he got elected. So my personal connection 
with the seat is much stronger than his.

“And, you know, just because my great-grandfather lived in London doesn’t mean 
I’m a Londoner.”

Now back to the sheep-with-the-bell- around-its-neck analogy, with Eden- 
Monaro as national litmus test.

I consulted a toponymist – Jan Tent who lives in Khancoban, a former Snowy 
Hydro town at the bottom of the former Tumbarumba shire, which he describes as 
a “ghost town” – to see if the bloke in the street would have any idea what a 
bellwether might be.

“Most people have had just a high school education and are politically 
conservative, either voting National party or Liberal,” says Tent, who moved 
after retiring from academia in Sydney. “One family (an ex-motorcycle 
gang-member) declared he moved here to escape the Muslim invasion of Melbourne. 
Most people here are just concerned with their own necks and comfort. They are 
terrified of ‘illegal immigrants and Muslims’.

“Khancoban now lies within Eden-Monaro ... I overheard some locals at the post 
office a week or two ago discussing this redistribution. One said: ‘They say 
Eden-Monaro is a ‘bellwether’ seat. Well, with the wonderful weather we’ve been 
having of late, we deserve to be in such a seat. The weather here is always 
good.’”
 