
Hundreds of Morrisons <https://www.theguardian.com/business/morrisons> fresh 
and frozen food products will be available to order from Amazon, after the US 
online retailer struck its first supply deal with one of the UK’s “big four” 
supermarkets.

Amazon and Morrisons tie-up: a customer's guide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/29/amazon-morrisons-customers-guide-grocery-food-online>
Morrisons, Britain’s fourth biggest supermarket, said on Monday the deal would 
allow Amazon Prime Now andAmazon <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon>
 Pantry customers access to Morrisons ambient, fresh and frozen products in the 
coming months.

The British supermarket sector has been convulsed by fierce competition in 
recent years and analysts have warned that a step up from Amazon could hurt the 
traditional players even more.

In November Amazon launched a packaged groceries offer for Amazon Prime members
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/29/amazon-uk-boss-christoper-north-hails-pantry-grocery-expansion-supermarkets>
, who pay an annual fee of £79.

That was its most ambitious foray into Britain’s growing online grocery market 
but it stopped short of replicating its broader US Amazon Fresh service, which 
offers about 20,000 chilled, frozen and perishable products and items from 
local shops. Retail analysts have speculated the US company was gearing up for 
a launch of Amazon Fresh in Britain this year.

“The combination of our fresh food expertise with Amazon’s online and 
logistics capabilities is compelling,” said Morrisons chief executive David 
Potts. “This is a low risk and capital light wholesale supply arrangement that 
demonstrates the opportunity we have to become a broader business. We look 
forward to working with Amazon to develop and grow this partnership over the 
coming months.”

The British grocer already has a supply deal with Ocado and on Monday it said 
it had reached agreement in principle with the online retailer to grow 
Morrisons.com.

The deal will result in Morrisons taking space in Ocado’s new distribution 
centre, or customer fulfilment centre (CFC), in Erith, south east London, and 
Ocado deliver a store pick solution for Morrisons that leverages its technology 
and the supermarket chain’s shops.

Amazon UK to expand grocery range as supermarkets look on warily
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/29/amazon-uk-boss-christoper-north-hails-pantry-grocery-expansion-supermarkets>
When implemented the deal would expand Morrisons’ online reach to the whole of 
the UK. The amended agreement is subject to detailed terms being agreed and 
will only proceed if it enables Morrisons to achieve profitable growth online.

Morrisons’ share price was up nearly 5% in early trading to 197p, the biggest 
riser on the stock market on Monday morning, following the announcement of the 
two online retail deals. Ocado was the biggest faller, however, shedding 6.5% 
to 263p.




 