
When I interviewed Sam Wills – AKA The Boy With Tape on His Face 
<http://www.theboywithtapeonhisface.com/> – a few years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/sep/26/sam-wills-boy-with-tape-comedy>, 
I presented him as an act in opposition to the TV mainstream and one reconciled 
to never appearing on panel shows. I thought the same of John van der Put –AKA 
magic act Piff the Magic Dragon 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/theatre-dance/features/edinburgh-festival-piff-the-magic-dragon-and-the-lunatic-fringe-8734784.html>
 – who seemed to me to distil the spirit of the Edinburgh fringe, which he 
gratefully credited with launching his career. In neither case was I blind to 
the act’s commercial potential – but I certainly didn’t expect what happened 
next, which is that they both entered America’s Got Talent (though neither is 
American) and rode the crest of newfound primetime celebrity all the way to the 
final.

A career in the US is now theirs for the taking: Van der Put currently lives 
in Las Vegas, where he has his own solo show. Wills, a New Zealander, is 
currently back in his adopted UK home, touring asTape Face 
<http://www.theboywithtapeonhisface.com/> – but one assumes he’ll be back 
Stateside soon to capitalise on his recent AGT near-success. That’s what 
ventriloquist Paul Zerdin did. Theonly UK act to actually win America’s Got 
Talent <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WN9yyAaV36I>, in 2015, the Wimbledon 
man duly cancelled a scheduled UK tour to take up a three-year contract with 
Planet Hollywood in Las Vegas. It’s been quite the phenomenon in recent years: 
well-established UK comedy and variety acts submitting themselves to America’s 
national talent show and proving that, if America does have talent, it isn’t 
necessarily amateur, or native, or even resident in the US.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Famericas-got-talent-britain-fringe-boy-tape-face-piff-magic-dragon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f48486d70073e991dc79d9a3916b4370974fee9%2F0_0_3000_1978%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=America's%20Got%20Talent%3A%20the%20new%20route%20to%20stardom%20for%20Britain's%20fringe%20favourites&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Famericas-got-talent-britain-fringe-boy-tape-face-piff-magic-dragon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=America%27s%20Got%20Talent%3A%20the%20new%20route%20to%20stardom%20for%20Britain%27s%20fringe%20favourites&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Famericas-got-talent-britain-fringe-boy-tape-face-piff-magic-dragon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f48486d70073e991dc79d9a3916b4370974fee9%2F0_0_3000_1978%2F3000.jpg>
 Ventriloquist Paul Zerdin on America’s Got Talent. Photograph: NBC/Getty Images
So what does all this prove? That we sometimes exaggerate the distinctions 
between mainstream and alternative? Or simply that there are different 
mainstreams? Wills’ Tape Face act still wouldn’t work on a panel show – which 
is, for better or (let’s face it) worse, how most young comics in Britain stake 
their place in the public’s favour. Wills, Van der Put and Zerdin are all 
old-school variety acts, proponents of artforms (mime, magic, ventriloquism) 
that they’re having to drag out of varying degrees of uncoolness. You can see 
what drove them to give AGT a go: certainly in the UK, those artforms can get 
overlooked – I never reviewed Zerdin’s work until he won AGT – and there are 
precious few mass-audience opportunities for their practitioners.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Famericas-got-talent-britain-fringe-boy-tape-face-piff-magic-dragon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa14393e34971b3eed6f5a31b8bd97162dbfe70f%2F0_0_2595_4128%2F2595.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=America's%20Got%20Talent%3A%20the%20new%20route%20to%20stardom%20for%20Britain's%20fringe%20favourites&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Famericas-got-talent-britain-fringe-boy-tape-face-piff-magic-dragon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=America%27s%20Got%20Talent%3A%20the%20new%20route%20to%20stardom%20for%20Britain%27s%20fringe%20favourites&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Famericas-got-talent-britain-fringe-boy-tape-face-piff-magic-dragon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa14393e34971b3eed6f5a31b8bd97162dbfe70f%2F0_0_2595_4128%2F2595.jpg>
 BGT finalist Jack Carroll. Photograph: Ken McKay/Rex Features 
With the exception, of course, of the interchangeable talent shows that clog 
the schedules. Those shows feature plenty of novelty acts, and have – very 
occasionally – brought a comic talent to the nation’s attention (Jack Carroll 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/jun/07/britains-got-talent-final>
 is the salient example). And yet, there are very few, if any, professional 
acts from the UK comedy/variety circuit (by which I mean the Soho 
theatre/Edinburgh fringe/UK touring nexus) to have appeared, far less 
prospered, on Britain’s Got Talent. Why is that?

You can find some of the answers in this blog by the British comic Jody Kamali 
<https://thejohnfleming.wordpress.com/2016/01/28/jodi-kamali-on-what-happened-at-the-britains-got-talent-audition/>
, who was (according to his account) persuaded by producers to enter BGT, and 
ritually humiliated for doing so. For a start, contestants on those TV talent 
shows are assumed to be, and promoted as, “wannabes” and plucky amateurs, not 
experienced pros. Then there’s the likelihood that the show is setting you up 
for a fall – one that could be terminal for a budding comedy career.

I suspect that’s partly why established UK comedy talents are now queueing up 
to show what they can do on AGT. It’s a bit like Hollywood starsadvertising 
whisky and Rolex watches 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foreign_celebrity_advertising> in the far east: 
if it turns out tacky, no one at home need ever know. And of course, there can 
be oodles of money in it. Britain’s Got Talent probably hasn’t set anyone up 
for life but, as Van der Put and Zerdin may be discovering, riches lie in store 
for those who parlay AGT success into big gigs in the entertainment capital of 
the world.

And that’s fair enough. OK, so TV talent shows are as likely to elevate 
mediocrity as blazing talent: when I did catch up with Zerdin, Ifound his 
material a lot weaker than his voice-throwing skill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/apr/15/paul-zerdin-review-udderbelly-americas-got-talent>
. But Wills’ newfound fame is well deserved. Tape Face became an instant 
Edinburgh fringe superstar at the turn of this decade, and he’s got askilful, 
strange and lovable act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/dec/21/boy-with-tape-on-his-face-review>
 that’s capable of entertaining nearly everyone. If TV talent shows are being 
used, not only to bring unknowns into the limelight, but already-knowns into 
brighter lights than they’ve yet occupied, that is – at least occasionally – a 
good thing. And if Simon Cowell happened to credit the Edinburgh fringe and the 
British live comedy scene, where all these acts cut their teeth, well, that 
would be welcome too.

Three to see
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fkerry-godliman-friendship-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kerry%20Godliman%3A%20'Isn't%20friendship%20a%20wonderful%20thing%20%E2%80%A6%20in%20theory%3F'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fkerry-godliman-friendship-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kerry%20Godliman%3A%20%27Isn%27t%20friendship%20a%20wonderful%20thing%20%E2%80%A6%20in%20theory%3F%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fkerry-godliman-friendship-video&media=>
Kerry Godliman: ‘Isn’t friendship a wonderful thing … in theory?’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/video/2016/sep/15/kerry-godliman-friendship-video>
Kerry Godliman

Very likable straight-down-the-line standup from the Derek star and News Quiz 
regular, embarking on her second national tour with a new show “looking at all 
the big issues of the day” (it says here, tongue slightly in cheek).

 * At G-Live, Guildford, on 6 October; Pavilion Arts Centre, Buxton, 7 October;
then touring <http://www.kerrygodliman.com/>.

Professor Brian Cox Live

A year after publicly quitting live comedy 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/comedy/news/robin-ince-to-quit-stand-up-comedy-over-family-commitments-and-imposter-syndrome-10193574.html>
, Robin Ince is prospering. This week he won the Crick Science Journalism award 
for his work on Radio 4’sThe Infinite Monkey Cage 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b00snr0w>. And this autumn, he’s touring in 
“Professor Brian Cox Live” with his co-host on that show. Part-comedy, 
part-popular science, probably worth seeing.


 * At Sheffield City Hall on 6 October; at Reading Hexagon on 7 and 8 October; 
then touring <http://www.apolloschildren.com/blog-item.php?id=28>.

Dane Baptiste

A second tour of the second show by the man who wants to be Britain’s Chris 
Rock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/mar/20/dane-baptiste-standup-comedy-interview-sunny-d-bbc3>
. On the basis ofReasonable Doubts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/10/dane-baptiste-edinburgh-festival-review>
, which made a splash at Edinburgh 2015, you wouldn’t bet against Baptiste, a 
wry and thoughtful commentator on race and culture.

 * At Arlington Arts Centre, Newbury on 7 October; at Theatre Severn, 
Shrewsbury, on 8 October;then touring <http://danebaptiste.co.uk/gigs/>.
 