
Everybody is wrong in Philip Roth’s American Pastoral. They start out wrong. 
They misjudge those around them and become hopelessly confused. The characters’ 
lives are a mess; they must make a home in the ruins. But then, “getting people 
right is not what living is about anyway,” Roth (in the guise of his fictional 
alter-ego Nathan Zuckerman) reminds us. “It’s getting them wrong that is 
living, getting them wrong and wrong and wrong and then, on careful 
consideration, getting them wrong again. That’s how we know we’re alive: we’re 
wrong.”

American Pastoral review: Ewan McGregor no match for Philip Roth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/11/american-pastoral-review-ewan-mcgregor-no-match-for-philip-roth>
All of which should make Ewan McGregor’s film version of American Pastoral 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/11/american-pastoral-review-ewan-mcgregor-no-match-for-philip-roth>
 the most pulsatingly alive piece of cinema we’ll witness all year. The casting 
is wrong. The handling is bungled. The tone is off-key. It should at least 
possess a certain breakneck panache; a car-crash fascination. But no – American 
Pastoral’s succession of wrong turns only serves to steer it into a creative 
cul-de-sac. The result, asVariety 
<http://variety.com/2016/film/reviews/american-pastoral-ewan-mcgregor-dakota-fanning-1201856649/>
 put it, is a film “as flat and strangled as Philip Roth’s novel is furious and 
expansive”.

Few authors have been quite so ill-served by the film industry as Roth, whose 
ruminative, proselytizing, deeply felt writing style appears to set all manner 
of traps for the Hollywood scriptwriter. The 1969 adaptation of Goodbye 
Columbus remains a decent, dogged pass at the material. Since then, the films 
have verged from the calamitous (Portnoy’s Complaint, The Human Stain) to the 
leadenly deferential (The Humbling, Indignation). So it’s no surprise that 
American Pastoral (arguably the finest American novel of the past 20 years) 
should become a timid, mithering non-drama, in which McGregor directs himself 
as the tragic Swede Levov, picking his way through the rubble oflate 60s Newark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/nov/18/american-cities-newark-new-york>
. Next, presumably, we’ll get an adaptation of I Married a Communist, Roth’s 
tale of a fiery Jewish radical who finds himself undone by his celebrity wife. 
I’m tipping Tyler Perry to direct.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Famerican-pastoral-film-ewan-mcgregor-philip-roth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F454da0f556c3f3f0b00053ff9714b2e9dc282a49%2F0_116_1782_1069%2F1782.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=American%20Pastoral%20and%20the%20curse%20of%20adapting%20a%20literary%20classic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Famerican-pastoral-film-ewan-mcgregor-philip-roth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=American%20Pastoral%20and%20the%20curse%20of%20adapting%20a%20literary%20classic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Famerican-pastoral-film-ewan-mcgregor-philip-roth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F454da0f556c3f3f0b00053ff9714b2e9dc282a49%2F0_116_1782_1069%2F1782.jpg>
 Demi Moore in The Scarlet Letter. Photograph: Allstar/Cinetext/Buena Vista 
Until then, McGregor’s film must take its place alongside a long list of 
cherished books which have been wantonly manhandled by philistine film-makers. 
Truman Capote’s bittersweetBreakfast at Tiffany’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jan/20/breakfast-at-tiffanys-film-review>
 was quickly made over as a simpering romcom. The Scarlet Letter became a 
convenient excuse to show Demi Moore in a bath.Gulliver’s Travels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/dec/23/gullivers-travels-review> was 
customized to make room for Jack Black.Actually, I have a certain grudging 
affection for all of these follies. In their lumbering, roundabout fashion, 
they serve to reaffirm my love for the books they have tried and failed to pin 
down.

Also, some bad adaptations are more diverting than others. Back in 2013, Baz 
Luhrmann was accused of confusing F Scott Fitzgerald’sThe Great Gatsby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/may/14/great-gatsby-review-cannes> for a 
crass, rowdy party. And yes, fair enough, but is that really so terrible? Given 
the choice, I’d prefer my literary classics tackled by an eager vandal like 
Luhrmann than the Hollywood equivalent of a fawning, white-gloved footman, or 
all those solemn pallbearers who carried Harry Potter to the screen. Films are 
not literature and needn’t be treated as such. Stories need room to run and 
experiment and find their own route through a different medium. One of my 
all-time favorite adaptations, for instance, is Adaptation, in which Charlie 
Kaufman sets out to make a movie out of Susan Orlean’s The Orchid Thief and 
winds up casting himself as the hero and the author herself as a libidinous 
drug-user who contributes to an internet porn site. Orlean’s initial reaction, 
apparently, was not entirely positive.

Match the movie still to the book adaptation - quiz
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/19/match-the-movie-still-to-the-book-adaptation-quiz>
Which brings us to another question. If you comprehensively screw up an 
adaptation, what actual harm does it do? It might be annoying for those who 
have to sit through it. It may even be irksome for some of those who have made 
it. But by and large these are small and self-contained disasters. The book 
itself isn’t hurt and the author is most likely sobbing all the way to the bank.

“People ask me, ‘Don’t you care what they’ve done to your book?’” said James M 
Cain <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/James_M._Cain>, the author of Double 
Indemnity and The Postman Always Rings Twice. “I tell them, ‘They haven’t done 
anything to my book. It’s right there on the shelf.’” Or to put it another way, 
no film has the power to retroactively ruin a book. If the film gets it right, 
it confirms the book’s greatness. If the film gets it wrong, it proves that the 
book is unique. Either way, the book endures. Either way, its reputation 
improves. American Pastoral: the Movie looks likely to die a swift and quiet 
death at the box office. But American Pastoral’s fine. I can see it right now 
on my shelf.
 