
Donald Trump didn't save the ethics committee. You did | Richard Wolffe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/04/donald-trump-ethics-committee-you-did>
When my father was a young man in Queens, New York, he was friendly with an 
older man – a neighborhood fixture who sat in a chair in front of my family’s 
laundromat so he could chat with passersby. One day, this man’s adult children 
pressured him into putting his apartment under their names; they kicked him out 
soon after.

Although they in effect swindled their father out of his home, his children 
weren’t able to stay there long: people spat at them as they walked down the 
street, neighbors cursed them, local grocers refused to sell them food.


This public shaming didn’t undo the damage they wrought on their father, of 
course, but it did send a clear message about what the community found 
unacceptable.

As Americans continue to grapple with Donald Trump’s presidential win, it’s a 
lesson we need to remember more than ever:there’s nothing wrong with shaming 
people who have done shameful things. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/19/hamilton-mike-pence-trump-voters-safe-space>
 And there are few things more shameful than supporting a fascistic bigot.

Yet since the election, we’ve heard again and again that calling Trump 
enablers out for their bigotry is fruitless andwrong-headed 
<https://twitter.com/jwpetersNYT/status/813811340087357441>. This line of 
argument, which comesmostly 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/projects/cp/opinion/election-night-2016/stop-shaming-trump-supporters>
from 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/26/opinion/sorry-liberals-bigotry-didnt-elect-donald-trump.html?smid=tw-share>
white men 
<http://townhall.com/tipsheet/katiepavlich/2016/11/18/stop-calling-trump-voters-racistsays-jon-stewart-n2247610>
 who have the privilege of seeing racism and sexism as a thought experiment 
rather than a destructive reality, says that “identity politics” hurt Democrats 
and that the election is proof thatfeminism “lost”. 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/30/opinion/sunday/feminism-lost-now-what.html>

Trumpites and misguided liberals are eager to “move on,” insisting against all 
<https://twitter.com/samswey/status/813999203018047489> evidence 
<http://www.vox.com/identities/2016/11/15/13571478/trump-president-sexual-assault-sexism-misogyny-won>
 that Trump’s campaign had nothing to do with sexism or racism. By doing so, 
they are encouraging Americansto be polite 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/arts-and-entertainment/wp/2016/12/23/civilities-wrong-place-wrong-time-for-protest-against-ivanka-trump-but-in-the-future-shes-fair-game/?utm_term=.f8ee43e13964>
 in the face of demagoguery.

But we cannot retreat from this clear line in the sand. Not only because 
shaming is deserved, but because it is effective, too.

We’re seeing pushback against calling people racist or sexist precisely 
because everyone understands these things to be shameful. There’s a reason your 
Trump-voting aunt makes a point, apropos of nothing, to say that the gay couple 
down the street make such good parents. Or that my conservative cousin posts 
pictures on Facebook of every person of color she sees at a Republican rally. 
They are desperate to prove their good-person bonafides, even as they support 
policies that are horrific.

Calls for American unity are misplaced. We must fight on for justice | Jessica 
Valenti
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/09/american-unity-calls-trump-presidency-fight-on-equality-rights>
They know what they are doing is wrong. And it’s our job to remind them of it.

Because when we don’t continually remind them, people devolve into 
self-delusion. It’s why people who are against same-sex marriage say they’re 
simply “traditional”, or how a Republican party official can make a racist 
remark about the first lady and then claimhe’s just not “politically correct.” 
<http://thehill.com/homenews/campaign/311686-trump-ny-co-chair-wishes-death-on-obama>
 Even the KKK now saysthat they’re not white supremacists 
<http://bigstory.ap.org/article/b0256e138327481ebcba6e23e2d03957/white-supremacists-not-exactly-kkk-and-other-groups-claim>
!

These people think if they can distance themselves from labels, their behavior 
ceases to be awful. But words like “misogynist”, “racist”, and “homophobe” are 
not just accurate – they also have power. That’s why we can’t stop using them, 
whether in the media, in politics or around the dinner table.

It’s true that telling these uncomfortable truths may not result in people 
changing their politics. But there’s no sense in appealing to the “better 
natures” of those who have shown themselves willing to stand with hate.

They’ve made their decision already, now it’s time for us to make ours.

Instead of bending over backwards to bolster the self-esteem of bigots, we can 
make clear that the country we want is unapologetically progressive. We can 
refuse to normalize bigotry, shaming those who stand with Trump. That is how we 
build a more just society – not with kowtowing or equivocations, but with 
strength and truth.
 