
It took 45 hours over the course of four days for an all-white jury in 
Oklahoma City to decide whether or not they should convict former police 
officer Daniel Holtzclaw of sexual assault on the word of 13 black women. On 
Thursday night, the jury opted to believe (most of) them.

There is perhaps no bigger test of how blind justice could possibly be than 
asking any American jury – especially one that is all white and includes eight 
men – to believe 13 black women over a former police officer and supposed hero 
football player. It’s easy enough to point tocases where the police were 
acquitted <http://bigthink.com/focal-point/new-york-city-cops-acquitted-of-rape>
. And yet, against all expectations this time, justice was blind.

Holtzclaw was found guilty for five counts of rape, 13 other counts of sexual 
assault – including six of sexual battery – against eight of the women who 
testified against him. In what felt like a unique moment, justice was not 
fooled by the aggressive defense mounted by Holtzclaw’s attorney, Scott Adams, 
which exploited racist stereotypes, class bias and fears about the 
majority-black east side community from which Holtzclaw culled his victims.

As in many sexual assault cases, Adams wanted Holtzclaw to cease being on 
trial and instead to put13 black women on trial 
<http://bigstory.ap.org/article/91f2a29a1ddf46318ca8c35bac0b308d/witness-credibility-focus-ex-officers-sex-abuse-trial>
 in the minds of the jury members, presumed guilty of some sin great enough to 
negate their victimization.

For seven months before that jury was chosen – from December 2013 through June 
2014 – Holtzclaw targeted women with suspected or documented substance abuse 
problems during his patrols, stopping them in their cars, in parking lots or 
walking alone at night in their neighborhoods. His near-rote routine, as 
described in court by multiple victims, aligned neatly with what those without 
much interaction with the police would assume is proper procedure; in reality, 
it was a menacing cover for a serial sexual predator seeking victims who would 
not be believed or missed.

Some women testified that he would escort them home and assault them there, 
intimidating them into performing sex acts, or drive them to secluded locations 
to rape them.

Holtzclaw seemingly escalated his assaults, grew bolder with each encounter 
for which he faced no consequences. One woman from early in his spree, 
identified as “J”,testified 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/jtes/daniel-holtzclaw-women-in-their-ow#.rv7N7ZVyE> 
that she feared that Holtzclaw was going to kill her; she detailed a sickening 
encounter where she was forced to expose her breasts and genitals while 
Holtzclaw fondled himself during a traffic stop then forced her to perform oral 
sex on him with his gun in plain view.

The 13th accuser 
<http://newsok.com/updates-daniel-holtzclaw-trial-day-16/article/5463940>, who 
was 17 years old at the time that she was raped on her mother’s front porch, 
was asked why she didn’t report it immediately to the police. “What kind of 
police do you call on the police?” she said.

Hannah Giorigis wrote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/25/women-of-color-police-sexual-assault-racist-criminal-justice>
 in March:

To be a “good rape victim 
<http://jezebel.com/5251148/who-you-calling-a-bad-feminist>” is to immediately 
report your assault to the police (even knowing you will likelynever see 
“justice” 
<http://www.thenation.com/article/180441/how-did-fbi-miss-over-1-million-rapes>
), but to be a goodblack person is to avoid the police entirely because your 
life quite literally depends on it 
<http://gawker.com/unarmed-people-of-color-killed-by-police-1999-2014-1666672349>
. The tightrope walk is impossible.

Yet the women assaulted by Holtzclaw courageously walked the tightrope and 
took the risk, facing their accuser and trusting a system that has failed so 
many brown women before it.

Many women of color don't go to the police after sexual assault for a reason | 
Hannah Giorgis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/25/women-of-color-police-sexual-assault-racist-criminal-justice>
With his conviction, the justice system has done something it historically 
hasn’t done very well: this time, the justice system has protected black women 
victims of sexual assault. And it’s about time.Police misconduct, sexual 
assault and abuse of authority targeting women 
<http://bigstory.ap.org/article/fd1d4d05e561462a85abe50e7eaed4ec/ap-hundreds-officers-lose-licenses-over-sex-misconduct>
 is not new, but punishment and accountability have been all too rare.

Defense strategies like Adams’s are a key reason that accountability continues 
to be so rare. Adams’s arguments fed into disgusting stereotypes about women 
and, more specifically, black female sexuality – so much so that even women 
jurors in many cases are swayed to accept the mythology that victims of sexual 
assault are responsible for their own rapes.

The jury didn’t accept five of the 13 women’s stories, and delivered not 
guilty verdicts for 18 of the 36 counts Holtzclaw was originally facing. For 
those women – and for many of the rest of us –every count mattered 
<http://www.apple.com/>. For now, we have some measure of justice; Holtzclaw is 
going to jail. But the split decision shows that, as a society and for victims 
of sexual assault, we still have much further to go.
 