
Jamie Briggs, who resigned from his ministry on Tuesday after “an error of 
professional judgment” in a Hong Kong bar, is not the first Australian 
politician to run into grief while drinking.


Jamie Briggs resigns as minister over incident in Hong Kong bar with female 
public servant
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/29/jamie-briggs-resigns-federal-minister-cities>
Malcolm Fraser

The former prime minister, who died earlier this year, was famously discovered 
sans trousers in the foyer of a seedy Memphis, Tennessee hotel during a 
conference in 1986. Fraser appeared at 7am wearing only a towel, after losing 
his $10,000 Rolex watch, passport, wallet and $600 cash.

He maintained he was drugged and not drunk, a story backed by his wife, Tamie.

“They were having him on. Poor old boy,” she said 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/climate/mals-trousers-and-me-tamie/story-e6frg6xf-1111114264770>
 in 2007. “Someone must have slipped him a mickey finn as soon as he walked in. 
He rang me up and told me about it when he got back to his own hotel. There was 
this awful voice.”


John Gorton

According to veteran journalist Laurie Oakes, former prime minister John 
Gorton once boarded a VIP jet in Melbourne after a boozy official dinner, and:


He fell asleep, was woken a while later by the noise of the engines, and 
vomited. As a flight attendant cleaned up, the apologetic PM asked if she was 
surprised an old fighter pilot like him would still get airsick.

Yes, she said – particularly since the plane had not yet taken off.

Kevin Rudd

In 2007, news broke that Kevin Rudd had visited Scores 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2007-08-21/rudd-in-strip-joint-oh-no-this-wont-do/645778>
, a Manhattan strip club. He claimed to have been too drunk to remember the 
details of the night, spent with Labor MP Warren Snowdon and the editor of the 
New York Post, the Australian Col Allan.

“I have never tried to present myself as Captain Perfect,” Rudd said at the 
time. The night out, which occurred in 2003, was quickly parodied by other 
politicians who made even more ancient confessions.
“The last time I attended a strip place would have probably been in the 1970s, 
when I was a student,” then-Victorian premier John Brumby said. “I think if my 
memory’s correct it was probably in Sydney.”


John Brogden

In 2005, then-NSW opposition leader John Brogden “had a few drinks and let off 
some steam” following the resignation of longstanding NSW premier Bob Carr. 
After reportedly “propositioning” a journalist and pinching another, he made a
“mail-order bride” joke 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2005-08-29/brogden-offers-to-resign-over-mail-order-bride/2092032>
 about Carr’s Malaysian-born wife, Helena.

After initially dismissing the story as “a grubby Labor Party attack”, Brogden 
resigned the Liberal leadership and a day later was hospitalised after a 
self-harm attempt. He is now a chairman of Lifeline Australia.

Dave Tollner

Northern Territory MP Dave Tollner was accused of being drunk and “boorish” on 
a flight from Adelaide to Canberra in 2004 by South Australian Labor MP Rod 
Sawford. Tollner was reportedly“ruffling” 
<http://www.smh.com.au/articles/2004/05/25/1085442118098.html?from=moreStories> 
Christopher Pyne’s hair, and did the same to Sawford.

“I think that’s one of the things a nancy boy in Adelaide would say,” Tollner 
said. “But I think this is a terrible beat-up.”

Sawford replied that Tollner was a goose, saying: “He ruffled my hair and I 
told him: ‘The last bloke who did that to me had his jaw broken.’”

Tollner was later appointed the NT’s minister for alcohol rehabilitation and 
policy, and loosened alcohol laws, saying Territorians were “made to feel like 
criminal suspects every time they went into a bottle shop”.

Edmund Barton

Australia’s first prime minister, Edmund Barton, was accused of drunkenness by 
Labor journalist and politician John Norton in 1902:

I myself have seen you [Barton] drunk in the legislative assembly of New South 
Wales ... I have seen you snoring drunk on several occasions ... you have 
addressed audiences while under the influence of drink ... when in Brisbane 
about a year ago you got so disgracefully drunk and incapable that medical aid 
had to be called in so that you could be ‘toned up’ in time to address a big 
public meeting. On that occasion your condition and demeanour, the result of 
your drinking, so shocked some of the audience nearest the platform that they 
left in shame and disgust ...

Tony Abbott

Tony Abbott’s 2015 antics included shirtless post-coup partying, and chugging 
schooners with students in Sydney pubs. But in 2009 he reportedly missed the 
vote on the Rudd government’s $42bn stimulus package because he fell asleep in 
his office after a night of drinking with Peter Costello, Kevin Andrews and 
Peter Dutton.

“That is an impertinent question,” Abbott said 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/news/national/abbott-snoozed-through-key-vote/story-e6freuzr-1111119064644>
 when asked by a journalist whether he had been drunk. He “wasn’t keeping 
count” of the bottles of wine that were consumed, but thought it was “maybe 
two”.

Andrew Bartlett

In 2003, Andrew Bartlett, then-leader of the Democrats, gate-crashed the 
Liberals’ Christmas party, making off with five bottles of wine.

According to reports in the Age 
<http://www.theage.com.au/articles/2003/12/06/1070625576359.html?from=storyrhs>
, Bartlett returned four bottles at the request of Liberal senator Jeannie 
Ferris but kept the last.

Later that night, Bartlett abused Ferris during a Senate debate, followed her 
into the courtyard and allegedly grabbed her with “considerable strength”.

Bartlett took leave from his position as leader, and did not recontest it 
after the 2004 election. He left parliament in 2007. Ferris commented on his 
decision to abstain from alcohol that it’s “a difficult decision to take in the 
building in which we work”.
 