
Dear Mexico <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico>,

I apologize. There are so many things I could apologize for, from the way the 
US biotech corporationMonsanto <http://www.cipamericas.org/archives/4244> has 
contaminated <http://archive.truthout.org/121208D> your corn to the way Arizona 
<http://www.stanford.edu/group/progressive/cgi-bin/?p=983> and Alabama 
<http://www.aclu.org/blog/immigrants-rights-racial-justice/aclu-tells-appeals-court-georgia-alabama-anti-immigrant-laws>
 are persecuting your citizens, but right now I'd like to apologize for the 
drug war, the 10,000 waking nightmares that make the news and the rest that 
don't.

You've heard the stories about the five severed heads 
<http://www.newyorker.com/reporting/2010/05/31/100531fa_fact_finnegan> rolled 
onto the floor of a Michoacan nightclub in 2006, the300 bodies 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/centralamericaandthecaribbean/mexico/4329841/Henchman-of-Mexican-drugs-lord-dissolved-300-bodies-in-acid.html>
 dissolved in acid by a servant of one drug lord, the49 mutilated bodies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/may/13/mexican-authorities-find-mutilated-bodies>
 found in plastic bags by the side of the road in Monterrey in May, thenine 
bodies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/may/05/bodies-bridge-23-mexico-drug> 
found hanging from an overpass in Nuevo Laredo just last month, the Zeta 
Cartel'svideotaped beheadings 
<http://abcnews.go.com/Blotter/drug-cartel-rivals-behead-zetas-camera/story?id=16670584#.T_xAyXFnG01>
 just two weeks ago, the carnage that has taken tens of thousands of Mexican 
lives in the last decade and has terrorized a whole nation. I've read them and 
so many more. I am sorry50,000 times 
<http://articles.nydailynews.com/2012-01-13/news/30621243_1_drug-cartels-fight-drug-war-alejandro-poire>
 over.

The drug war is fueled by many things, and maybe the worst drug of all is 
money, to which so many are so addicted that they can never get enough. It's a 
drug for which they will kill, destroying communities and ecologies, even 
societies, whether for the sake of makingdrones 
<http://www.republicreport.org/2012/gop-sen-rand-paul-warns-forprofit-drone-lobby-seducing-congress/>
, Wall Street profits, ormassive heroin sales 
<http://www.americanprogress.org/issues/2012/06/afghan_opium.html>. Then, there 
are the actual drugs, to which so many others turn for numbness.

There is variety in the range of drugs. I know that marijuana mostly just 
makes you like patio furniture, while heroin renders you ethereally indifferent 
and a little reptilian, and cocaine pumps you up with your own imaginary 
fabulousness before throwing you down into your own trashiness. And then, 
there's meth, which seems to have the same general effect as rabies, except 
that the victims crave it desperately.

Whatever their differences, these drugs, when used consistently, constantly, 
destructively, are all anesthesia from pain. The Mexican drug cartels crave 
money, but they make that money from the way Yankees across the bordercrave 
numbness (pdf) <>. They sell unfeeling. We buy it. We spend tens of billions of 
dollars 
<http://www.boston.com/news/world/europe/articles/2005/06/30/un_report_puts_worlds_illicit_drug_trade_at_estimated_321b/>
 a year doing so, and bysome estimates 
<http://www.laht.com/article.asp?ArticleId=342471&CategoryId=14091>, about a 
third to a half of that moneygoes back (pdf) <> to Mexico.

The price of numbness

We want not to feel what's happening to us, and then we do stuff that makes 
worse things happen – to us and others. We pay for it, too, in a million ways, 
from outright drug-overdose deaths (which nowexceed 
<http://articles.latimes.com/2011/sep/17/local/la-me-drugs-epidemic-20110918> 
traffic fatalities, and of which the United States has thehighest rate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/interactive/2012/jul/02/drug-use-map-world>
 of any nation except tiny Iceland, amounting to more than 37,000 deaths here 
in 2009 alone) to the violence of drug-dealing on the street, the violence of 
people on some of those drugs, and the violence inflicted on children who are 
neglected, abandoned, and abused because of them – and that's just for 
starters. The stuff people do for money when they'redesperate for drugs 
<http://articles.latimes.com/2010/aug/07/local/la-me-banks-20100807> generates 
more violence and more crazy greed for the money to buy the next round. And 
drug use is connected to the spread of HIV and various strains of hepatitis.

Then there's our futile "war on drugs" 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2011/06/17/opinion/17carter.html?_r=1> that has created 
so much pain of its own. It's done so by locking up mothers and fathers and 
brothers and sisters and children for insanely long prison sentences and 
offering no treatment. It does so by costing so much it's warping the economies 
of US states that have huge numbers of nonviolent offenders in prison and not 
enough money for education or healthcare. It does so bybranding as felons and 
pariahs 
<http://www.tomdispatch.com/post/175520/best_of_tomdispatch%3A_michelle_alexander,_the_age_of_obama_as_a_racial_nightmare/>
 those who have done time in the drug-war prison complex. It was always aimed 
most directly at African Americans, and the toll it's taken would require a 
week of telling.

No border divides the pain caused by drugs from the pain brought about in 
Latin America by the drug business and the narcotraficantes. It's one big 
continent of pain – and in the last several years, the narcos have begun 
selling drugs in earnest in their own countries, creatingnew cultures 
<http://mexidata.info/id2541.html> of addiction and misery. (And yes, Mexico, 
your extravagantly corrupt government, military, and police have everything to 
do with the drug war now, but file that under greed, as usual, about which your 
pretty new president is unlikely to do anything much.)

Imagine that the demand ceased tomorrow; the profitable business of supply 
would have to wither away, as well. Many talk about legalizing drugs, and 
there's something to be said for changing the economic arrangements. But what 
about reducing their use by developing and promoting more interesting and 
productive ways of dealing with suffering? Or even getting directly at the 
causes of that suffering?

Some drug use is, of course, purely recreational, but even recreational drug 
use stimulates these economies of carnage. And then, there are the overdoses of 
the famous and the unsung on prescription and illicit drugs. Tragic, but those 
dismembered and mutilated bodies the drug gangs deposit around Mexico are not 
just tragic, they're terrifying.

GNP: gross national pain and the pain export economy

Mexico, my near neighbor, I have been trying to imagine the export economy of 
pain. What does it look like? I think it might look like air-conditioning. This 
is how an air-conditioner works: it sucks the heat out of the room and pumps it 
into the air outside. You could say that air-conditioners don't really cool 
things down so much as they relocate the heat. The way the transnational drug 
economy works is a little like that: people in the US are not reducing the 
amount of pain in the world; they're exporting it to Mexico and the rest of 
Latin America as surely as those places are exporting drugs to us.

In economics, we talk about "externalized costs": this means the way that you 
and I pick up the real cost ofoil production 
<http://www.energyandcapital.com/articles/oil-gas-crude/461> with local and 
global ecological degradation or wars fought on behalf of the oil corporations. 
Or the wayWalmart turns its employees 
<http://www.greenamerica.org/about/newsroom/editorials/costofwalmart.cfm> into 
paupers, and we pick up the tab for their food stamps and medical care.

With the drug economy, there are externalized traumas. I imagine them moving 
in a huge circulatory system, like the Gulf stream, or old trade routes. We 
give you money and guns, lots and lots of money. You give us drugs. The guns 
destroy. The money destroys. The drugs destroy. The pain migrates, a phantom 
presence crossing the border the other way from the crossings we hear so much 
about.

The drugs are supposed to numb people out, but that momentary numbing effect 
causes so much pain elsewhere. There's a pain economy, a suffering economy, a 
fear economy, and drugs fuel all of them rather than making them go away. Think 
of it as another kind of GNP – gross national pain – though I don't know how 
you'd quantify it.

A friend of mine who's lived in Latin America for large parts of the last 
decade says that she's appalled to see people doing cocaine at parties she goes 
to in this country. I mentioned that to an anthropologist who was even bleaker 
in describing thecocaine migration routes 
<http://www.culturalsurvival.org/news/coca-and-cocaine-bolivia-death-lies-between>
 out of the Andes and all the dead babies and exploited women she'd seen along 
the way.

We've had movements to get people to stop buying clothes and shoes made in 
sweatshops, grapes picked by exploited farmworkers, fish species that are 
endangered, but no one's thought to start a similar movement to get people to 
stop consuming the drugs that cause so much destruction abroad.

Picture middle-class people here stuffing the blood of campesinos up their 
noses. Picture poor people injecting the tears of other poor people into their 
veins. Picture them all smoking children's anguish. And imagine if we called it 
by name.

America, No 1 in pain

I don't know why my country seems to produce so much misery and so much desire 
to cover it up under a haze of drugs, but I can imagine a million reasons. A 
lot of us just never put down roots or adapted to a society that's changing 
fast under us, or we got downsized or evicted or foreclosed or rejected, or we 
just move around a lot. This country is a place where so many people don't have 
a place, literally or psychologically. When you don't have anywhere to go with 
your troubles, you can conveniently go nowhere – into, that is, the limbo of 
drugs and the dead-end that represents.

But there's something else front and center to our particular brand of misery. 
We are a nation of miserable optimists. We believe everything is possible and 
if you don't have it all, from the perfect body to profound wealth, the fault 
is yours. When people suffer in this country – from, say, foreclosures and 
bankruptcies due to the destruction of our economy by the forces of greed – the 
shame is overwhelming. It's seen as a personal failure, not the failure of our 
institutions. Taking drugs to numb your shame also keeps you from connecting 
the dots and opposing what's taken you down.

So, when you're miserable here, you're miserable twice: once because you 
actually lost your home/job/savings/spouse/girlish figure, and all over again 
because it's not supposed to be like that (and maybe thrice because our 
mainstream society doesn't suggest any possibility of changing the 
circumstances that produced your misery or even how arbitrary those 
circumstances are). I suspect that all those drugs are particularly about 
numbing a deep American sense of failure or of smashed expectations.

Really, when you think of the rise of crack cocaine during the Reagan era, 
wasn't it an exact corollary to the fall of African-American opportunity and 
the disintegration of the social safety net? The government produced failure 
and insecurity, and crack buffered the results (and proved a boon to a 
burgeoning prison-industrial complex). Likewise, the drug-taking that exploded 
in the 1960s helped undermine the radical movements of that era. Drugs aren't a 
goad to action, but a deadening alternative to it. Maybe all those zombies 
everywhere in popular culture nowadays are trying to say something about that.

Here in the United States, there's no room for sadness, but there are plenty 
of drugs for it, and now when people feel sad, even many doctors think they 
should take drugs. We undergo losses and ordeals and live in circumstances that 
would make any sane person sad, and then we say: the fault was yours and if you 
feel sad, you're crazy or sick and should be medicated. Of course, now ever 
more Americans are addicted to prescription drugs, and there's always the old 
anesthetic of choice, alcohol, but there is one difference: the economics of 
those substances are not causing mass decapitations in Mexico.

Roads to destruction and the palace of the dead

When I think about the drug wars and the drug culture here, I think about a 
young man I knew long ago. He was gay, from Texas, disconnected from his 
family, talented but not so good at finding a place in the world for that 
talent or for himself. He was also a fan of the beat novelist and intermittent 
junkie William Burroughs, and he believed that line about how "the road of 
excess leads to the palace of wisdom." Maybe it was fine when William Blake 
said it in the 1790s, since Blake wasn't a crackhead. But my friend got from 
Burroughs – a man with family money and, apparently, an iron constitution – the 
idea that derangement of the senses was a great creative strategy.

This was all part of our youth in a culture that constantly reinforced how 
cool drugs were, though back then another beat writer, the poet David Meltzer, 
told me methamphetamine was a form of demonic possession. The young man became 
possessed in this way and lost his mind. He became homeless and deranged, gone 
to someplace he couldn't find his way back from, and I would see him walking 
our boulevards barefoot and filthy, ranting to himself.

Then, I heard he had jumped off the Golden Gate Bridge. He wasn't yet 30; he 
was just a sweet boy. I could tell four or five more stories like his about 
people I knew who died young of drugs. The meth that helped him down his road 
of no return was probably a domestic product then, but now vast quantities of 
it are made in Mexico for us –15 tons 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/02/10/world/americas/mexico-seizes-15-tons-of-methamphetamine.html>
 of it were found earlier this year in Guadalajara, enough for 13m doses, worth 
about $4bn retail.

When I think about the drug wars, I also think about my visit to Santa Muerte 
<http://observers.france24.com/content/20100210-mexico-newest-saint-not-calendar-santa-muerte-death-skull-religion>
 (Saint Death) in Mexico City in 2007. A young friend with me there insisted on 
going. It was perilous for outsiders like us even to travel through Tepito, the 
black-marketeers' barrio, let alone go to the shrine where imposing, somber men 
were praying and lighting candles to the skeleton goddess who is the 
narcotraficantes' patron saint. They worship death; they're intimate with her; 
they tattoo her on their flesh, and there she was in person – in bones without 
flesh, surrounded by candles, by gifts, by cigarettes and gold, an Aztec 
goddess gone commercial.

My companion wanted to take pictures. I wanted to live and managed to convince 
him that thugs' devotional moments were not for our cameras. When it came time 
to leave, the warm patroness of the shrine locked up the stand in which she 
sold votive candles and medallions, took each of us by an arm – as if nothing 
less than bodily contact with death's caretaker would keep us safe – and walked 
us to the subway. We survived that little moment of direct contact with the 
drug war. So many others have not.

Mexico, I am sorry. I want to see it all change, for your sake and ours. I 
want to call pain by name and numbness by name and fear by name. I want people 
to connect the dots from the junk in their brain to the bullet holes in others' 
heads. I want people to find better strategies for responding to pain and 
sadness. I want them to rebel against those parts of their unhappiness that are 
political, not metaphysical, and not run in fear from the metaphysical parts 
either.

I want the narcotraficantes to repent and give their billions to the poor. I 
want the fear to end. A hundred years ago, your dictatorial President Porfiro 
Díaz supposedly remarked, "Poor Mexico, so far from God and so close to the 
United States", which nowadays could be revised to, "Painful Mexico, so far 
from peace and so close to the numbness of the United States."

Yours sincerely,

Rebecca
 