
The South Australian Museum <http://www.samuseum.sa.gov.au>’s Indigenous 
Australian collection of 28,000 artefacts stands as one of the world’s most 
significant accumulations of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander cultural and 
historical material.

Despite the depth and extraordinary value of this collection – much of it 
drawn from the vast portion of north and central Australia that became the 
Northern Territory in 1911 – the museum is renowned for its conservatism.

In a significant first challenge to the institution’s orthodoxy, its new head 
anthropologist, John Carty,has made a special appointment 
<https://blogs.adelaide.edu.au/researchtuesdays/2016/05/25/unreconciled-museums/>
 of the acclaimed Aboriginal curator Glenn Iseger-Pilkington, to reconnect the 
Indigenous collection with country and peoples.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fpostcolonial-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fan-indigenous-curator-for-indigenous-artefacts-south-australia-breaks-new-ground%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6546856b82194794fb1a3b31808537fb6f6dd4a8%2F0_0_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20Indigenous%20curator%20for%20Indigenous%20artefacts%3A%20South%20Australia%20breaks%20new%20ground&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fpostcolonial-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fan-indigenous-curator-for-indigenous-artefacts-south-australia-breaks-new-ground%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20Indigenous%20curator%20for%20Indigenous%20artefacts%3A%20South%20Australia%20breaks%20new%20ground&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fpostcolonial-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fan-indigenous-curator-for-indigenous-artefacts-south-australia-breaks-new-ground%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6546856b82194794fb1a3b31808537fb6f6dd4a8%2F0_0_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
 Glenn Iseger-Pilkington, the first person to fill a curatorial role designated 
specifically for an Indigenous person at the South Australian Museum. 
Photograph: Mark Gambino/British Council 
On Monday the museum will formally announce the appointment of 
Iseger-Pilkington 
<http://www.britishcouncil.org.au/about/press/2016-accelerate-participants-announced>
 as curator of Aboriginal art and material culture. Six other Indigenous 
Australians work there. But it is the first time in the history of the museum, 
founded in 1856, that a lead curatorial role has been designated specifically 
for an Indigenous person.

Carty, a leading proponent of Australian museological reform in relation to 
Indigenous collections, turned to philanthropy to fund the position for 
Iseger-Pilkington – a 35-year-old visual artist and curator from the Kimberley 
who is of Wadjarri, Nhanda and Nyoongar, as well as Dutch and Scottish, 
ancestry.

Carty approached Margaret Davy, a retired doctor who works as a volunteer 
archivist for the museum, to fund the position, which will be known as the 
“William and Margaret Geary curator of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander 
art and material culture”.


Nothing we do amounts to much unless we are doing it hand in hand with 
Aboriginal people
SA Museum head anthropologist John Carty 
Carty, 39, explains: “I went to a friend of the museum, Margaret Davy AM ... 
and explained my vision: that nothing we do amounts to much unless we are doing 
it hand in hand with Aboriginal people, and the best way for us to set that 
standard is to make a major role for an Aboriginal curator at the museum. She 
came back to me a few days later and said she would fund the entire position. 
She only asked that we name it in honour of her late husband William Geary.”


Indigenous artists and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people who are 
eager to reconnect with the museum’s collection (only a minuscule portion of 
which is, or has been, displayed) are likely to applaud the appointment of 
Iseger-Pilkington.

Like Carty, he arrives with a reputation of being at the vanguard of 
revolutionary museological practice and philosophy, having worked for many 
years at the Art Gallery of Western Australia and as a content developer for 
the $420m “new museum” project at the Western Australian Museum.

Preservation or plunder? The battle over the British Museum’s Indigenous 
Australian show
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/apr/09/indigenous-australians-enduring-civilisation-british-museum-repatriation>
Iseger-Pilkington’s heritage stands as a reminder of South Australia’s rich 
precolonial, colonial and postcolonial history. He is deeply connected to his 
people’s country and has a broad array of contacts throughout Australian museum 
networks, and within Indigenous arts communities.

Carty – who began at the museum six months ago after time as an anthropology 
research fellow at the National Museum of Australia and the Australian National 
University – has committed to equalising the power dynamic between Aboriginal 
and Torres Strait Islander communities and this country’s major collecting 
institutions, especially museums. At the South Australian Museum, whose patrons 
are renowned for their comparative conservatism, he has his work cut out.

He said of Iseger-Pilkington’s appointment: “This role is the key to moving 
the museum forward. It’s not enough for me to be telling these stories – we 
need to divest power and authority to the next generation of Aboriginal 
scholars and curators. Glenn’s appointment is a flag in the ground about the 
trajectory of our museum. It’s a really confident statement that we want to 
entrust our collection into the hands of that next generation.

“Changing the power balance in museums is ultimately about ... changing the 
culture of museums. It means that it isn’t only Aboriginal staff who are asked 
to address reconciliation or supporting Aboriginal culture and Indigenous 
history – it’s everyone’s priority.”

Carty says he is determined to “open the museum’s custodianship” of the 
Indigenous collection and to start new discussions about best-practice models 
of curating Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander artefacts.

“There are many questions, many discussions, to be had about how and why 
museums must really only hold these things in trust for their owners – there 
are big discussions about how some materials should be reconnected with their 
people and country of provenance, loaned to them or, indeed, even returned. 
That involves building new trust and that is what Glenn’s appointment is 
critical to insofar as the South Australian Museum goes.”

There is a growing wave of Indigenous cultural workers who are acting as 
agents of change
Glenn Iseger-Pilkington 
Iseger-Pilkington says there is an increasing number of “highly professional 
and culturally competent Indigenous voices working with community and 
advocating for change” in the museum sector.

 “Even with all of this development and with increased numbers of Indigenous 
cultural workers, many organisations remain largely unchanged, and continue to 
be informed through non-Indigenous disciplines, value sets and guiding 
principles. Changing this, and shaping museum practices so that they too are 
informed by Indigenous worldview is our greatest collective challenge, and if 
we can, it will be our greatest achievement,” he said.

 “I am committed to finding ways that museums can be more relevant and 
accessible to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities. Around the 
world, there’s a growing wave of Indigenous cultural workers who are acting as 
agents of change, reinventing the ways that museums, working with Indigenous 
people in open collaboration, care for collections, develop educational 
programs and publications, make exhibitions and share stories with the public.

 “The South Australian Museum’s vision for transforming the ways it works with 
our communities, across Australia, ways which respond to our ways of knowing 
and being, is incredibly exciting, and on a personal level, align with where I 
want to be heading as a curator and cultural worker.”

The views of Carty and Iseger-Pilkington about the role of the 21st century 
museum, especially in relation to Indigenous collections, will doubtless rankle 
with some more conservative anthropologists and curators.

In a landmark speech in May, Carty, perhaps refining the ground for the debate 
to which he will be central, said: “What was going on in Australia when our 
collections were being amassed? And if our collections don’t tell that story – 
why not?Museums <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/museums> have a role to 
play not only in conserving collections but in conserving the truth of our 
history from the proclivity for forgetting that sits at the heart of the 
Australian psyche. We must continue to promote the power and beauty of 
Aboriginal culture, but if our galleries don’t also tell the story of frontier 
conflict, of the stolen generations, of the fight for land rights and human 
rights, then I believe we are in neglect of our responsibilities.”

It’s a long overdue national discussion. Or argument.
 