
Andros Townsend is determined to ​make the most of his place in England’s 
​provisional ​squad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/16/england-euro-2016-squad-marcus-rashford-jack-wilshere-andros-townsend-jordan-henderson>
 for the European Championship after enduring one of the most difficult periods 
of his career with Tottenham.

The 24-year-old was not in England’s thinking earlier in the season and was 
some way from Mauricio Pochettino’s first-team plans at Spurs, playing with the 
club’s under-21s and resigning himself to a summer watchingEuro 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2016> rather than playing in it.

A move to Newcastle United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/newcastleunited> gave him a late 
opportunity to impress Roy Hodgson and, under Rafael Benítez, Townsend 
flourished towards the end of the season. Of his difficulties at Spurs, he 
said: “When you’re going to Chester on a Monday night to play against Liverpool 
under-21s you don’t see yourself making the England squad for the Euros six 
months later. I didn’t foresee it but had enough faith in my ability to know 
that if I got the chance to play regularly I’d get my form back.

Newcastle move pays off for Andros Townsend as he earns Euro 2016 chance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/16/newcastle-andros-townsend-england-euro-2016-squad-roy-hodgson>
“It was no secret that I wasn’t playing enough football and my confidence was 
low. I needed to get back playing week-in week-out. I knew if I got back to my 
best I could get in the England squad. On a personal level it’s worked out but 
it’s a shame I couldn’t helpNewcastle stay in the Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/12/newcastle-relegation-championship-mike-ashley-board-rafael-benitez>
.

“The lowest point was probably when I was playing for the under-21s and the 
boys were doing so well, winning games at the top of the Premier League. I 
wondered what would happen with my career so ​I ​was grateful that Newcastle 
paid a lot of money for me and helped me get things back on track.

“Even when I wasn’t playing much at Spurs Roy Hodgson always had faith in me 
and put me in the squad, and nine times out of 10 I’ve done well for him. 
Hopefully I can repay that faith in the friendlies and make sure I get in the 
[final, 23-man] squad.”

England <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> begin their 
preparations for the Euros with a friendly against Turkey at the Etihad Stadium 
on Sunday, although the squad who have trained at St George’s Park this week 
has been without players from Manchester United and Liverpool because of their 
FA Cup and Europa League commitments.

Benítez’s future at Newcastle has yet to be resolved 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/16/rafel-benitez-newcastle-close-to-stay>
 and Townsend, who hopes the Spaniard stays at St James’ Park beyond the 
summer, said: “He’s been great with me. When he walked through the door I was 
struggling with an injury but he said: ‘I know you’ve got an injury, I’m not 
going to rush you, I’m going to help you get back to your best.’ In the last 
few weeks I’ve been close to my best.”
 