
As leaders of some African countries brace themselves for a rocky financial 
year, they might reflect ruefully on the words of Polish author Ryszard 
Kapuściński: “Oil is a resource that anaesthetises thought, blurs vision, 
corrupts.”

As the wheels come off a decade-long commodities supercycle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/04/end-of-chinas-commodity-boom-spells-pain-for-producers-with-no-end-in-sight>
, Africa’s oil-producing and metal-rich giants find themselves facing a 
dangerous mix of lower export revenues, depreciating currencies, declining 
financial flows from China, falling domestic demand and higher debt costs 
followinglast month’s US interest rate rise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2015/dec/16/federal-reserve-us-interest-rates-janet-yellen-live>
.

For the continent’s oil importers, there is a different story: lower prices 
mean more money for governments, and possibly cheaper goods.

For those on both sides of the oil coin, the first year of the new global 
development agenda <http://www.globalgoals.org/> – introduced with much fanfare 
in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/sep/25/global-goals-summit-2015-new-york-un-pope-shakira-malala-yousafzai>
 – is a challenging start to a 15-year project to enshrine sustainable 
development in national policies across the globe.

The question is: have some African countries squandered their chance to invest 
in the building blocks of sustainable development, and is it now too late?

Uganda determined not to let expected oil cash trickle away | Alon Mwesigwa
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/13/uganda-oil-production-yoweri-museveni-agriculture>
Since September 2014 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/markets-oil-idUKL3N0RA1L220140909>, the price of 
Brent crude oil, the global benchmark, has plummeted from around $100 (£70) a 
barrel tobelow $30 this week 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-global-oil-idUSKCN0UQ02220160112>. Prices 
for other commodities, such as copper and zinc, have also fallen, mainly 
because of slowing demand in China, once hailed as the no-stringseconomic 
saviour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/interactive/2013/apr/29/china-commits-billions-aid-africa-interactive>
 for African countries tired of dealing with former colonial powers.

More than 80% of African exports 
<http://www.uneca.org/es-blog/commodities-super-cycle-slowdown-shock-africa> 
are still linked to commodities, and particularly extractive industries.

“The commodities supercycle is dead in the water … It’s already sent some big 
African sub-Saharan economies into a tailspin,” said Aly Khan Satchu, an
independent trader <http://www.rich.co.ke/> in Nairobi. “In Zambia, the 
currency has pretty much collapsed 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/zambia-ratings-idUSL5N11Y0I220150928>. If you 
put $100 in the Zambian market at the beginning of last year, at the end of the 
year, you would be taking out 14.” But Satchu remained bullish on east Africa.

“The sharply reduced oil prices have really improved the dynamics of the east 
African economies because we are still net oil importers … you are already 
seeing it improve the current account deficit in Tanzania and Kenya, and I 
think it’s going to provide some momentum to our economies,” he said.

In early January, the World Bank warned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/06/world-bank-perfect-storm-warning-2016-slowdown-brics-economies>
 that a synchronised slowdown in the biggest emerging markets, the so-called 
Brics, could be intensified by a fresh bout of economic turmoil.

In its annual Global Economic Prospects 
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/publication/global-economic-prospects>, the bank 
said growth in developing countries reached a post-crisis low of 4.2% in 2015, 
down from 4.9% in 2014, and warned that 2016 could be another difficult year. 
In sub-Saharan Africa,growth slowed to 3.4% last year 
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/publication/global-economic-prospects/Regional-Outlooks/GEP-Jan-2016-Sub-Saharan-Africa-analysis>
, and was expected to rise to 4.2% this year.
2014 sub-Saharan Africa oil production. 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/01/africa_oil/giv-27167md0NMowZug4Z>
 2014 sub-Saharan Africa oil production. 
According to the International Monetary Fund, Africa’s real gross domestic 
product fell from 5% in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/06/world-bank-perfect-storm-warning-2016-slowdown-brics-economies>
 to 3.7% in 2015 and is expected to climb to 4.3% this year.

Debt will be a problem. Some oil-producing African countries have accepted 
loans from China, and some of these are collateralised by oil priced at a level 
that is now just a fond memory. To add to their woes, the cost oftheir 
dollar-denominated debt 
<http://www.worldbank.org/content/dam/Worldbank/document/Africa/Report/Africas-Pulse-brochure_Vol11.pdf>
 is rising; the US Federal Reserve said December’s rate hike is just the start 
of a“gradual” tightening cycle 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/us-usa-stocks-idUKKBN0TZ1JF20151216>.

Ibrahim Mayaki, the head of the New Partnership for Africa’s Development 
<http://www.nepad.org/>, said the sustainability of African debt is in question 
as repayment services – already a major portion of state budgets – look set to 
increase significantly.


“This will lead states to make tough choices, from the amputation of certain 
infrastructure investments to the postponement of social services,” Mayaki 
said, adding that he hoped these cuts would not affect investments vital for 
development, such as infrastructure and education.

“African governments will therefore have to steel themselves to diversify 
their financial resources and to reclaim industrial development policies,” 
Mayaki said.

This gloomy economic outlook will weigh on efforts to implement the 
sustainable development goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive>
. At afinancing meeting in Ethiopia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jul/16/financing-for-development-summit-outcome-addis-ababa-milestone-millstone-poverty>
 last year, there was consensus that domestic resource mobilisation, as well as 
traditional aid and private finance, would be needed to turn the paper goals 
into real policies – at a cost of “trillions not billions”.


But as growth slows, tax revenues are likely to fall, particularly in 
oil-producing countries. For some governments, the problems have already 
started.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjan%2F13%2Fafrica-oil-giants-anxious-times-commodities-boom-oil-metals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62c32cf321344c095090f0bf8e99ad0c7f101f8e%2F0_0_4000_2670%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anxious%20times%20for%20Africa's%20oil%20giants%20as%20commodities%20boom%20starts%20to%20bust&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjan%2F13%2Fafrica-oil-giants-anxious-times-commodities-boom-oil-metals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anxious%20times%20for%20Africa%27s%20oil%20giants%20as%20commodities%20boom%20starts%20to%20bust&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjan%2F13%2Fafrica-oil-giants-anxious-times-commodities-boom-oil-metals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62c32cf321344c095090f0bf8e99ad0c7f101f8e%2F0_0_4000_2670%2F4000.jpg>
 Cash on the forecourt: motorcycles are filled up in Kamsar, Guinea. 
Photograph: Waldo Swiegers/Getty Images 
“Those countries that were just making it now have tipped over the edge 
because they are going to find it very expensive to borrow international money. 
They are being squeezed, they don’t have enough of a productive economy and 
also taxes will slow down very, very dramatically,” said Satchu.

Africa’s top oil producer, Nigeria, is facing pressure to devalue the naira 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/07/nigeria-naira-devaluation-central-bank-currency-crisis>
, which has come under extreme pressure despite unorthodox monetary policies 
aimed at restricting the supply of dollars. Satchu says a devaluation is 
inevitable, and that the tough market conditions may force necessary policy 
changes.

“It’s an irony that Nigeria is sending any of its oil out to be refined only 
to import it back,” he said. “It’s definitely been a wake-up call. You find 
policymakers tend to make changes when their feet are held to the fire; this is 
the equivalent of having their feet held to the fire.”

Amadou Sy, director and senior fellow at the Brookings Institute’s Africa 
Growth Initiative <http://www.brookings.edu/about/projects/africa-growth>, said 
African countries needed a two-pronged approach to accelerate growth: they need 
to implement macroeconomic policies to cope with external shocks, and stay the 
course in bringing in medium- to long-term structural policies.

It’s an irony that Nigeria is sending any of its oil out to be refined only to 
import it back
Aly Khan Satchu 
“As the continent takes its first steps in meeting the sustainable development 
goals, it is crucial that it achieves faster and better quality economic growth 
… and relies on more engines of growth, such as agriculture and manufacturing, 
than exports of oil and other commodities,” he wrote in arecent report 
<http://www.brookings.edu/~/media/Research/Files/Reports/2016/01/foresight-africa/foresightafrica2016_ch1.pdf?la=en>
.

For Satchu, the hardest-hit African countries will be forced to call on the 
IMF for help in raising money on international markets, as oil-producerGhana 
has already been forced to do 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/aug/08/ghana-imf-oil-inflation-currency>
.

“It’s really unprecedented the kind of pressure that policymakers are under 
and quite a lot of these guys are making a lot of idiotic and schoolboy 
errors,” he said, citing as an example the Zambian president’s call forprayer 
rallies for the country’s embattled 
<http://mgafrica.com/article/2015-10-16-divine-intervention-lungu-calls-for-a-day-of-prayer-and-fasting-to-save-the-kwacha>
currency.


“The room for error is no longer there, and mistakes will be badly punished.”
 