
The European commission’s decision that Apple owes Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> €13bn (£11bn) in unpaid taxes has 
been branded “fundamentally unfair” by its former competition commissioner, 
Neelie Kroes.

Writing for the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/01/eu-state-aid-tax-avoidance-apple>
, Kroes attacked Tuesday’sruling by Margrethe Vestager 
<http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-16-2923_en.htm>, her successor as 
Europe’s top competition watchdog.

The commission found that Ireland had breached state-aid rules by allowing the 
California technology group to pay substantially less tax than other businesses 
since 1991. It made a similar ruling againstStarbucks and Fiat in the 
Netherlands <http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-15-5880_en.htm> last year, 
and has used state-aid laws to launch ongoing investigations intoAmazon 
<http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-14-1105_en.htm> and McDonald’s 
<http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-15-6221_en.htm> in Luxembourg.


Why EU state aid is not the right tool to fight tax avoidance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/01/eu-state-aid-tax-avoidance-apple>
Kroes said state-aid rules should not apply to tax matters. “EU member states 
have a sovereign right to determine their own tax laws,” she said. “State aid 
cannot be used to rewrite those rules. However, the current state-aid 
investigations into tax rulings appear to do exactly that.”

Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> routes the majority of 
its European and other foreign revenues through Ireland. The commission found 
Apple’s effective rate of corporation tax at one subsidiary in Ireland was just 
0.005% of its profits in 2014 – equal to a tax bill of just €50 on each €1m of 
profit.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fwhy-apple-is-facing-13bn-tax-bill-in-ireland-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Apple%20is%20facing%20a%20%E2%82%AC13bn%20tax%20bill%20in%20Ireland%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fwhy-apple-is-facing-13bn-tax-bill-in-ireland-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Apple%20is%20facing%20a%20%E2%82%AC13bn%20tax%20bill%20in%20Ireland%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fwhy-apple-is-facing-13bn-tax-bill-in-ireland-video-explainer&media=>
Why Apple is facing a €13bn tax bill in Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/video/2016/aug/30/why-apple-is-facing-13bn-tax-bill-in-ireland-video-explainer>
Kroes is also critical of the retrospective nature of the ruling, which 
determined that Apple had underpaid its Irish taxes from 2003 until 2014, 
saying a fundamental principle of tax law is that changes do not apply to past 
years.

She writes: “You cannot change the rules of the game through ad hoc state-aid 
enforcement, and then seek retroactive recovery for unpaid taxes. Doing so 
would be fundamentally unfair and would harm competition, growth and tax income 
in Europe. And it raises serious questions about legal certainty and the rule 
of law.”

The Dutch former politician, who headed the commission’s competition 
directorate from 2004 to 2010, now sits on the public policy board of the 
taxi-hailing business Uber, a technology group headquartered in California.Uber 
uses subsidiaries in the Netherlands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/29/londons-black-cab-drivers-consider-court-action-against-uber>
 to shield its overseas income from United States taxes.

“We all agree on the need to tackle tax avoidance, but such reform should come 
from a transparent legislative process within the EU and through consensus 
building in international fora,” says Kroes.


She argues that the commission’s use of state-aid laws to force companies to 
pay more tax risks undermining the work of theOrganisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development (OECD) 
<http://www.oecd.org/tax/beps/beps-actions.htm>, which has been pushing for 
more transparency around the tax paid by multinationals and ways to block the 
use of artificial structures designed to cut tax bills.
 