
Practice makes perfect

It says something about the crowded nature of the international fixture list 
and the reduced expectations for preparation that the Australia coach Darren 
Lehmann was pleased to announce at the start of his side’s tour of Sri Lanka 
that his side had “come over here a little bit earlier than we normally would” 
in order to better acclimatise to conditions.

England showed against Pakistan that they have all the tools to win | Mike 
Selvey
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/aug/08/england-pakistan-all-the-tools-jimmy-anderson>
Australia played only two and a half days of cricket in the country before the 
first Test. Yes, they scored 474 against a Sri Lankan XI at the P Sara Oval in 
their sole tour match, and won by an innings and 162 runs, though in retrospect 
it seems notable that the off-spinner Shehan Jayasuriya took five for 110 in 
their solitary batting innings. It meant Australia went into the Test series 
with only one of their top-order batsmen – Joe Burns –having faced more than 
100 deliveries in a competitive game in the country 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/sri-lanka-v-australia-2016/engine/match/1035927.html>
. This with a touring squad of whom only two players – Usman Khawaja and Nathan 
Lyon – had ever previously played Test cricket in Sri Lanka.

You’ll be familiar with what followed. Kusal Mendis’s extraordinary 176 in the 
second innings at Pallekele (aided and abetted by nine wickets for Rangana 
Herath and seven from slow-left-armer Lakshan Sandakan) setting up a 106-run 
victory in the first Test and, in the second Test in Galle, the off-spinner 
Dilruwan Perera taking six for 70 in the second innings (and match figures of 
10 for 99) to propel the hosts to a 229-run win and an unassailable 2-0 lead in 
the series.

Such was the Australian’s batting lineup’s haplessness and the Sri Lankan 
spinners’ collective excellence extra game-time before the first Test may have 
been a sticking plaster on a gaping wound, but events in Galle provided an 
interesting contrast to the third Test between England and Pakistan.

Pakistan did not send a full-strength team for their tour match at Worcester 
after the second Test but those who did turn out felt the benefit. Azhar Ali 
was perhaps the most obvious beneficiary. Having begun the tour in good nick – 
he scored 101 against Somerset in Taunton and 145 at Hove against Sussex prior 
to the first Test – he had flopped in the Tests, with seven and 23 at Lord’s, 
and one and eight at Old Trafford. But he rediscovered his mojo with 81 against 
Worcestershire and returned to the Test arena with 177 runs at Edgbaston.

Sami Aslam, having missed out on the first two games, got his first taste 
(albeit a brief one) of first-class cricket in England and went on to score 82 
and 70 at Edgbaston. Sohail Khan did enough to persuade the selectors he was a 
better bet than Wahab Riaz and took five for 96 on day one. Kinks were ironed 
out, decisions were made. The Test results may have been the same but given the 
contrast between Pakistan’s performances at Old Trafford and Edgbaston, though 
both losing efforts, it seems fair to suggest that that trio, and therefore the 
team as a whole, found some benefit from their jaunt to New Road.

Of course, this absence of acclimatisation is a fairly new issue in the game. 
Australia’s tour in 1989, for example, began with a one-day game against the 
LeagueCricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Conference on 5 May 
and they went on to face a Duchess of Norfolk’s XI, Sussex, MCC, 
Worcestershire, Somerset, Middlesex, Yorkshire, Warwickshire, Derbyshire, 
Lancashire, Northamptonshire, Oxford and Cambridge Universities, Glamorgan, 
Scotland, Minor Counties, Hampshire, Gloucestershire, Nottinghamshire, 
Leicestershire, Kent, Essex, the Netherlands (twice) and Denmark (twice), the 
final game, in Copenhagen, taking place on 6 September. In between those 
commitments they managed to squeeze in six Ashes Tests (winning four and 
drawing two) and three ODIs.

But it is not only preparation time that has been lost with the demise of tour 
matches. Also absent now is that sense of a team genuinely touring the country, 
becoming part of the sporting fabric of another nation for a few months or for 
an entire summer, not just popping in for their ICC-approved minimum. And many 
a tall cricketing tale has hinged on a sparsely attended match in some far 
flung destination against a local XI.

Perhaps the most remarkable tour match story was West Indies’ fateful trip to 
Ireland in 1969 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lKN4vVm7Ffs>. It was not a 
full-strength Windies side that took the field at Sion Mills in County Tyrone 
that summer but the team for the two-innings one-day game still featured five 
of the XI who had drawn the second Test at Lord’s two days prior. On a damp, 
green wicketthey were reduced to 12 for nine 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/ci/engine/current/match/301112.html> before a 
last-wicket stand more than doubled the score to 25 all out. Ireland then 
sportingly declared their innings on 125 for eight to allow the tourists 
another go, Basil Butcher scoring a half-century as some sense of normality was 
restored and West Indies ended the match at 78 for four.

It is a bit of a stretch but a tour match can also lay claim to having 
affected the course of Ashes history. On that 1989 tour, county sides had been 
offered a share of £25,000 for wins over the Australians in a well-meaning but 
slightly ill-conceived attempt to ensure more competitive games. It meant the 
counties unveiled some rather fiery pitches in order to produce results. Allan 
Border, already showing a more hard-edged demeanour, took his side to 
Derbyshire for the final warm-up game before the Test series. The bombardment 
he and his team received from Devon Malcolm and Ian Bishop (added, it seems, to 
some disappointing pizza served up at lunch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2013/may/23/20-great-ashes-moments-1989>
) was the straw that broke the camel’s back. Border finally resolved “show the 
bastards” in the first Test.

Given the calendar pressures now on the modern game there is, of course, no 
going back. But if Test cricket is to survive, there is a need for competitive 
matches. For competitive matches, touring teams need to have some semblance of 
an idea of how to play in otherwise alien conditions. That, surely, is reason 
enough for tour games not be the afterthought they so often seem to be.

• This is an extract taken from the Spin, the Guardian’s weekly cricket email. 
To subscribe just visit this page, find ‘The Spin’ and follow the instructions. 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/email-prefs>
 