
It’s a good time to be in the weapons business. Three of the leading US 
defence contractors, General Dynamics, Northrop Grumman and Lockheed Martin, 
are all makingunprecedented profits 
<http://www.standard.net/Business/2014/10/23/Defense-contractors-earnings-exceed-expectations>
.

In December, Northrop will host an event at the Australian War Memorial to 
mark the company’s expansion into the Asia-Pacific region. It will be launched 
by Federal defence minister David Johnson. It’s a curious location because, as 
Crikey’s tipster drilynoted 
<http://www.crikey.com.au/2014/11/11/tips-and-rumours-1249/>, “without the 
endeavours of arms companies stretching back centuries, there’d be 
significantly fewer Australians for the War Memorial to commemorate”.


Northrop’s US-based corporate HQ decided in the last 18 months to open a major 
office in Australia. In March the companypurchased 
<http://www.qantasnewsroom.com.au/media-releases/sale-of-qantas-defence-services>
 Qantas Defence Services, a firm that provides engine and aircraft maintenance 
to the Australian Defence Force and global militaries. It was an $80m deal. In 
September 2013, Northropbought 
<http://globenewswire.com/news-release/2012/09/25/495069/10006090/en/Northrop-Grumman-Completes-Acquisition-of-M5-Network-Security.html>
 M5 Network Security, a Canberra-based cyber-security outfit.


Northrop appointed 
<http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/northrop-grumman-appoints-ian-irving-as-chief-executive-for-australia-211075531.html>
 Ian Irving as CEO of the Australian outfit in June, as part of a plan to 
capitalise on the “strategically important market” of the Asia Pacific. The 
centrepiece of that plan is to give smaller enterprises in the defence space
access to Northrop’s global supply chain 
<http://www.australiandefence.com.au/news/northrop-grumman-hosts-sme-supplier-conference1>
. That’s nothing to be sneezed at: they’re a vital defence contractor for the 
US military and the company’s weapons have been used in Iraq, Afghanistan and 
beyond.

Irving explained to Australian Defence Business Review in July that he was 
pleased to sell the Australian government the firm’s MQ-4C Triton surveillance 
drones. The machines will be used tomonitor 
<http://www.stripes.com/news/pacific/australia-wants-mq-4c-triton-drone-to-patrol-its-waters-1.272526>
 the nation’s borders and protect “energy resources” off northern Australia. 
Northrop Grumman Australia is set tomake up to $3bn 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-03-13/drone-fleet-to-be-based-in-adelaide-triton-edinburgh/5317262>
 from selling the drones. Countless European nations are equally desperate to
use drones 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/opinion/2013/12/why-europe-obsessed-with-drones-201312189025172357.html>
 to beat back asylum seekers.

Despite all this, a Northrop spokesman assured me that the company’s growing 
presence in Australia has no connection to the Abbott government’sincrease in 
defence spending 
<https://newmatilda.com/2014/06/10/ballooning-military-spending-comes-cost>. 

As Northrop’s Australian expansion makes clear, arms manufacturing thrives in 
an integrated global defence space. Australia is an important market for that 
other military powerhouse, Israel. In 2010 leading Israeli arms company Elbit 
Systemssold 
<http://www.jpost.com/Israel/Elbit-lands-300m-contract-to-supply-Australian-military>
 a $300m command control system to the Australian military. In August 2013 Elbit
announced 
<https://www.tenders.gov.au/?event=public.cn.view&CNUUID=4D62E4F4-E014-7E31-0F900E41649FD8EC>
 the $5.5m sale of “an investigation system” to the Australian federal police 
that was tested in the occupied Palestinian territories of the West Bank and 
Gaza.

That’s a trend that has become commonplace since the 9/11 attacks. As the 
Israeli newspaper Haaretzreported 
<http://www.haaretz.com/business/.premium-1.610032> in August, “[Weapons 
companies] need to sell in the large international defence markets – where the 
products are scrutinized partly on the uses the IDF makes of them on the 
battlefield.”

In August pro-Palestinian activists climbed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/15/pro-palestine-activists-arrested-over-israeli-arms-protest-in-melbourne>
 on the roof of Elbit’s Melbourne offices to protest its involvement in the 
recent Israeli military incursions in Gaza, after which the company’sshare 
price soared 
<http://electronicintifada.net/blogs/rania-khalek/stocks-rise-israeli-drone-maker-gaza-slaughter-continues>
. Amnesty International recently accused Israel and Hamas of committingwar 
crimes <http://www.haaretz.com/news/diplomacy-defense/1.624769> during the war.

Defence contractors rarely stop with the profits from war and colonisation. In 
Britain, Lockheed Martin is now reportedlybidding 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/business/news/international-arms-firm-lockheed-martin-in-the-frame-for-1bn-nhs-contract-9871247.html>
 for a massive National Health Service contract worth $2bn. In the US, Northrop 
was a presentingsponsor 
<http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/northrop-grumman-announced-as-presenting-sponsor-of-the-american-veterans-center-honors-broadcast-280767812.html>
 at a recent Washington DC event for honouring war veterans.


It’s rare to read about arms trading in the Australian press; even the 
country’s largest privately owned small arms supplier,Nioa 
<http://www.nioa.com.au/>, rarely registers beyond the business pages. Our 
politicians are also loathe to speak out, and are happy to have factories and 
bases in their electorates, and donations for their parties.

The Greens do oppose military trading with Israel. Leader Christine Milne 
tells me that, “given the continuing disregard by Israel of international calls 
to halt settlement expansion in the occupied Palestinian territories and the 
disproportionate response used against the people of Gaza, the Australian 
Greens have repeatedly called on the Australian government to halt all military 
cooperation and military trade with Israel”.

Greens senator Lee Rhiannon 
<http://greens.org.au/news/adjournment-speech-ceasing-australian-military-co-operation-israel>
 spoke in parliament last year, saying “if any of the military equipment that 
Australia has sold to Israel has been used in Israel’s deplorable wars in the 
Gaza strip which has killed thousands of civilians, the Australian government 
should be held accountable for this”.

Australia, the 13th largest spender on arms globally, has a choice. We can 
keep embracing these merchants of death, and the botched deals and waste that 
they bring. Or we can reject the the rise of Northrop and its associates, and 
refuse to participate in an investment culture that continues a cycle of 
violence both at home and abroad.
 