
As Missouri goes, so goes the nation.

My history teacher taught us that when I was 16 years old. It was in Missouri, 
after all, where Dred Scott sued for his freedom, where the US supreme court 
would take up his case and declare that black men“had no rights which the white 
man was bound to respect” 
<http://www.msnbc.com/melissa-harris-perry/no-rights-which-the-white-man-was-bound-respect>
.

As Ferguson goes, so goes the nation.

The year 2014 taught us that. It was in Ferguson, after all, where fast-food 
workers at McDonald’s protested for higher wages 
<http://thinkprogress.org/economy/2014/05/15/3438218/map-fast-food-strikes-may/>
, where the St Louis-area fry cooks get told“that’s all you deserve, that’s all 
you need” 
<https://medium.com/@sarahkendzior/the-minimum-wage-worker-strikes-back-fa4c36eb306b>
.

Missouri.

It was Missouri that joined the union as a slave state on 10 August 1821, then 
voted against secession and remained with the union, thenwitnessed a bloody 
massacre between secessionist and union loyalists 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Camp_Jackson_Affair>.

Ferguson.

It was Ferguson that fired the black superintendent of its schools 
<http://news.stlpublicradio.org/post/mccoy-resigns-ferguson-florissant-superintendent>
 in March, as a town with a 70% black population and a 97% white police force 
remained a town with an 85% white city council and a white mayor who ran 
unopposed, thenwitnessed 6%  
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/monkey-cage/wp/2014/08/15/how-ferguson-exposes-the-racial-bias-in-local-elections/>
of its eligible black voters participate in the last election 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/monkey-cage/wp/2014/08/15/how-ferguson-exposes-the-racial-bias-in-local-elections/>
.

Why is Ferguson, Missouri, of all places, still the bellwether for our 
national conversation around race and representation? Why is Ferguson, 
Missouri, a suburb of 21,000, just now the place to bear witness to assembly, 
to free speech, to free press, to democracy in action?

Why Ferguson? Why not Ferguson?

The protests of the killing of Michael Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/michael-brown-shooting> began while his body 
lay out on the street for four hours. In the nearly two weeks since, a nation 
has watched a gathering of outrage as civil action. For every act of civil 
disobedience, Ferguson and the St Louis County law enforcement community have 
met the protesters with force. They broughtdogs and guns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/aug/12/mike-brown-ferguson-shooting-police-black>
,tanks and teargas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/aug/13/ferguson-war-zone-mike-brown-missouri>
. They immediatelyfeared the black and brown citizens of their small 
municipality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/aug/20/white-people-black-people-michael-brown-death-ferguson>
 – of just 21,000 – simply becauseblack anger and outrage frightened them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/aug/20/white-supremacy-ferguson-black-excuses>
. For every scared cop, there was a little war. Their reaction to the black 
body became a microcosm for American malice.

So Ferguson is where the shit goes down. Where goes the nation now?

The social contract of every police officer – to serve the communities they 
are sworn to protect – is on the line.

And in Missouri, they have a questionable track record. Last year, in 86% of 
traffic stops and searches,92% of those searches were of black citizens 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2014/08/how-much-racial-profiling-happens-in-ferguson/378606/>
, while police officers were less likely to discover contraband on black 
drivers (22% black versus 34% white). In 2009, Ferguson policeallegedly beat an 
innocent man and charged him with destruction of property for bleeding on their 
uniforms 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2014/08/15/the-day-ferguson-cops-were-caught-in-a-bloody-lie.html>
.

Nearly two weeks of excessive policing and harassment in Ferguson proves that 
the black body in public space is still criminal before innocent.Police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> must replace an ex officio policy of 
intimidation with a show of respect for the lives of people in the communities 
they protect equal to that of their own.

The faith in local government – to act as an intermediary between town and 
city and state and country – that, too, is on the line.

The St Louis County prosecutor appears sympathetic to law enforcement, 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/21/us/st-louis-county-prosecutor-defends-objectivity.html?_r=0>
 the Ferguson mayoris in denial about any racial divisions in his town 
<http://www.msnbc.com/newsnation/watch/ferguson-mayor--theres-no-racial-divide-here-319506499946>
, and the governoris reticent to exert his powers to appoint a special 
prosecutor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/21/ferguson-eric-holder-says-justice-will-be-upheld-in-michael-brown-case>
 in responding to calls from Ferguson residents and a state senator.

St Louis County, with over 90 towns and suburbs sprung from decades of housing 
desegregation struggles, is a balkanized republic, and law enforcement has 
acted as an arm to reinforce these divisions by targeting blacks citizens for 
crossing town lines.

The foundation of American democracy – of our civil liberties and our 
constitution – are challenged, so long as our black bodies are mistreated, so 
long as we don’t do anything.

If a resident of Ferguson can be arrested for standing on her front lawn, what 
is freedom then? If a working man in Missouri can’t make it to the protest 
before the curfew, what good is his right to assemble? If a citizen of America 
is confined to a kind of house arrest where teargas seeps through the 
window-cracks, what does it mean to be an American anymore?

And if we are a nation of laws, shouldn’t they also apply to law enforcement 
when they act in error? The brazen lack of transparency by authorities in 
Ferguson is what set tempers aflame. An unarmed 18-year-old with his hands up 
in surrender was shot to death by a police officer; the public simply wanted to 
know why, the people wanted simple accountability. In the absence of trust, we 
turn to federal oversight. Attorney general Eric Holderis a temporary balm to a 
fractured community 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/aug/20/ferguson-tragedy-eric-holder-must-lead>
, promising to “work with the police, civil rights leaders, and members of the 
public” in“bridging persistent gaps between law enforcement officials and the 
communities we serve” 
<http://www.stltoday.com/news/opinion/from-eric-holder-a-message-to-the-people-of-ferguson/article_ea8b7358-67a3-5187-af8c-169567f27a0d.html>
. But his justice department must do better: we don’t need a bridge – we need 
tectonics.

The mayor of Ferguson wants to the diversify the police force, to invest in 
programs for schools and businesses. Community leaders and residents of 
Missouri engaged in civil disobedience want to use the momentum – the relative 
calm of the last couple nights – to nurture reflective new leaders. America 
wants to look in the rearview mirror and look forward at the same time.

Brown will finally be laid to rest on Monday. His family will be waiting months
 
<http://abcnews.go.com/US/ferguson-shooting-grand-jury-decide-october-charge-cop/story?id=25047905>
 for answers or even a charge for Darren Wilson, the man who killed their son. 
His American family will be doing the good and grimy work of correcting the 
fault lines of race and class – filling the unbridged space that was always 
there in all our Fergusons, all our Missouris. We will bear witness all over 
again, with our eyes open.
 