
Most daughters would be proud of a mother on the verge of a historic election 
victory, but the prospect brings pain and dread to Zoilamérica Narváez Murillo, 
who says she fears the politics of her nation are becoming as destructively 
incestuous as that of her family.

Narváez is the outcast child of Nicaragua’s first lady, Rosario Murillo, who 
is standing for the first time in this Sunday’s election on the same ticket as 
her husband, the veteran Sandinista leader and national presidentDaniel Ortega 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/daniel-ortega>.

Polls suggest the first couple will win by a landslide, prompting comparisons 
with the Underwoods in the TV dramaHouse of Cards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/house-of-cards>, outrage among an 
opposition who claim a rigged poll is cementing the power of an authoritarian 
dynasty, and despondency in their daughter.

Narváez claims Ortega, her stepfather, sexually abused her from the age of 
nine years old. When she went public with these accusations in 1998, her mother 
turned against her and led a campaign of denials that propelled the president’s 
wife into a more powerful position both in her marital relationship and 
national government.

In the years since, Murillo has moved from the fringes to the centre of 
Nicaraguan politics. She is already de facto chief of staff, the main spokesman 
of the administration and a micromanager whose approval is needed for every 
ministerial interview or policy draft. The vice-presidency will formalise her 
power. According to Narváez, it will also complete a cynical trade-off.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fnicaraguas-first-couple-daniel-ortega-tighten-grip-power-election-win%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a4d14bf10e1c3e7f21be5792479ba3c4a9af0ea%2F0_41_3597_2158%2F3597.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=As%20Nicaragua's%20first%20couple%20consolidates%20power%2C%20a%20daughter%20fears%20for%20her%20country&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fnicaraguas-first-couple-daniel-ortega-tighten-grip-power-election-win%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=As%20Nicaragua%27s%20first%20couple%20consolidates%20power%2C%20a%20daughter%20fears%20for%20her%20country&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fnicaraguas-first-couple-daniel-ortega-tighten-grip-power-election-win%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a4d14bf10e1c3e7f21be5792479ba3c4a9af0ea%2F0_41_3597_2158%2F3597.jpg>
 Rosario Murillo and Daniel Ortega at an event commemorating the 36th 
anniversary of the Sandinista National Liberation Front withdrawal to Masaya, 
in Managua, Nicaragua. Photograph: Esteban Felix/AP 
“I feel like I was sold, that I was part of a transaction. Since I came out 
and revealed what happened, she has tried to eliminate the truth. It’s part of 
an agreement she has with Daniel. She told him, ‘Don’t worry, I’ll deal with 
it’,” Narváez told the Guardian. “She denied the sexual abuse of her daughter 
to prove her loyalty and maintain power. It was politics that motivated her.”

Ortega and Murillo did not respond to requests for an interview, but they have 
previously denied Narváez’s accusations and argued that political opponents are 
trying to use them to undermine a popular government.

They are by no means the only allegations against the first couple, who have 
also alienated many former associates with their increasingly authoritarian 
leadership.

Nicaraguan president accused of nepotism over wife's VP ticket
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/03/daniel-ortega-nicaraguan-sandinista-president-rosario-murillo>
Ortega is accused of using his influence over the courts and the electoral 
council toovercome constitutional term limits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/10/nicaragua-presidential-term-limits-contitutional-reforms>
 for himself and toblock the opposition alliance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/26/nicaragua-opposition-daniel-ortega-presidential-election>
 that came second in the last election – headed by the Independent Liberal 
party – from fielding their chosen candidates. Despite concerns about previous 
elections in 2008 and 2011, the president has ignored reform recommendations by 
monitors from the European Union and Organisation of American States (OAS).

“This is the moment of total collapse for the Nicaraguan democratic system. In 
the past 40 years, we have not seen an election that is less credible or more 
fraudulent,” said Dora María Téllez, founder of the breakaway Sandinista 
Renovation Movement, which was earlier stripped of its legal status. “Ortega 
controls the entire process – who can contest, who monitors the vote and how 
the count is organised.”

Like Ortega, Téllez risked her life for the Sandinista revolution. In 1978, 
she was among the leaders of a daring mission that seized the national assembly 
and took 1,500 people hostage, including most of the congressmen. This was a 
turning point in the struggle against the dictatorship ofAnastasio Somoza 
Debayle <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anastasio_Somoza_Debayle> and she hoped 
it would usher in a period of greater freedoms and social justice. But under 
Ortega, she says the country appears to be going backwards to an old system of 
a family dictatorship.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fnicaraguas-first-couple-daniel-ortega-tighten-grip-power-election-win%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23b19196eb69a6e091d1bea2a99a314935db5790%2F0_53_5832_3500%2F5832.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=As%20Nicaragua's%20first%20couple%20consolidates%20power%2C%20a%20daughter%20fears%20for%20her%20country&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fnicaraguas-first-couple-daniel-ortega-tighten-grip-power-election-win%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=As%20Nicaragua%27s%20first%20couple%20consolidates%20power%2C%20a%20daughter%20fears%20for%20her%20country&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fnicaraguas-first-couple-daniel-ortega-tighten-grip-power-election-win%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23b19196eb69a6e091d1bea2a99a314935db5790%2F0_53_5832_3500%2F5832.jpg>
 A man cycles past a Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN) local 
headquarters in Masaya, Nicaragua. Photograph: Rodrigo Arangua/AFP/Getty Images 
Téllez said that as well as nominating his wife as vice-president, Ortega has 
ensured the first couple’s children have dominant positions in the tourist 
industry, the media, and business with China (including over the currently 
stalledplans for a canal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/20/-sp-nicaragua-canal-land-opportunity-fear-route>
), while their in-laws run the police and oil distribution networks.

“The family of Ortega and Murillo have taken over the Sandinista National 
Liberation Front (FSLN) like a parasite, using their control to benefit their 
family. It is basically the same as what the Somozas did,” she told the 
Guardian, as a tropical rainstorm lashed the streets of Managua, the country’s 
capital. “He’s a representative of big capital. He and his family are now among 
the richest inNicaragua <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nicaragua>. This is 
a profoundly corrupt system that completely betrays the principles of the 
Sandinista movement.”

But many voters remain loyal to the FSLN, which introduced free healthcare and 
education and more recent benefits – such as free Wi-Fi in city parks – that 
other governments failed to deliver to one of the poorest countries in Latin 
America.

With decades of experience, the first couple have also proved among the 
wiliest political operators in the region, building alliances with key sectors 
of society, pursuing business-friendly policies, and ruthlessly applying a 
strategy of divide and rule for their enemies, all the while ensuring an ever 
tighter grip on all branches of government and the election process.

Nicaragua is drifting towards dictatorship once again | Gioconda Belli
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/24/nicaragua-dictatorship-sandinista-ortega-murillo>
The powerful Catholic and evangelical lobbies are happy the government has 
committed itself tostrict anti-abortion laws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2007/oct/08/health.lifeandhealth>, devoted 
public funds to church renovation, and that the first couple are running under 
a slogan of “Christian, socialist, solidarity” – which can be seen on pink and 
purple roadside banners across the capital. Corporations like the government’s 
orthodox macroeconomic policy, relatively low crime rates compared with most 
other central American neighbours, and a GDP growth rate that has been ticking 
along at about 4.5% for the past two years, despite the sharp decline in 
financial support from Venezuela and a fall in commodity prices.

The result is some way from socialism or democracy, but it has proved 
resilient. While other leftist governments in Latin America have been pushed 
from power, lost key elections or come under pressure in the past year, Ortega 
and Murillo remain far ahead in the polls.

With the opposition denied or divided, there is no real contest so the 
strongest vote against the government is likely to come from the campaign for 
abstentions and deliberately spoiled ballots. It will be hard to know how 
effective this proves, however, because the result will be easy to manipulate 
without independent monitors.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fnicaraguas-first-couple-daniel-ortega-tighten-grip-power-election-win%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe6e09f00e66f2c774d12421bcde0e5a6f7c35ef7%2F0_109_5058_3035%2F5058.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=As%20Nicaragua's%20first%20couple%20consolidates%20power%2C%20a%20daughter%20fears%20for%20her%20country&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fnicaraguas-first-couple-daniel-ortega-tighten-grip-power-election-win%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=As%20Nicaragua%27s%20first%20couple%20consolidates%20power%2C%20a%20daughter%20fears%20for%20her%20country&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fnicaraguas-first-couple-daniel-ortega-tighten-grip-power-election-win%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe6e09f00e66f2c774d12421bcde0e5a6f7c35ef7%2F0_109_5058_3035%2F5058.jpg>
 Voters have remained loyal to Daniel Ortega and the Sandinista National 
Liberation Front. Photograph: Esteban Felix/AP 
Concerns about the vote may lead to repercussions. The OAS has said it will 
issue a report on the electoral system six months from now. The United States 
Senate is also debating a bill – the Nicaragua Investment Conditionality Act 
(more widely known simply as NICA) – that would impose financial controls on 
the country if it restricts multi-party democracy.

She’s the only one who talks. You don’t hear other ministers. You almost never 
hear Daniel.
Maria Fernanda Flores 
But any punishment would come too late to affect the outcome, which means 
Ortega is almost certain to secure his third consecutive term, with Murillo 
becoming his vice-president. How much further she can go is now the subject of 
speculation, fired by unsubstantiated rumours her husband is unwell.

Some gossip that the old guard of the Sandinistas are manoeuvring to block her 
from taking over if Ortega died. Others believe Murillo –a poet 
<http://bombmagazine.org/article/504/five-poems> – is already in the driving 
seat, due to her increasingly prominent role. It is her voice that updates the 
nation with a radio broadcast each lunchtime. It is her artistic tastes that 
have resulted in Managua’s roadsides being adorned with numerous luridly 
coloured steel “trees of life”.

 “I think she is more powerful than him,” said Maria Fernanda Flores, a 
Liberal opposition congressional candidate and wife of the former president 
Arnoldo Alemán. “She’s the only one who talks. You don’t hear other ministers. 
You almost never hear Daniel. You forget what his voice is like.”

Narváez, however, remembers. She said she was driven to exile in Costa Rica by 
the harassment she faced after her accusations, and that she cannot forget the 
violence in her family and the lies that followed so they could maintain power. 
She warned the country could be in for something similar.

“The abuser of a child captures, isolates and brainwashes their victim. That 
is what is happening to Nicaragua, which has a political system controlled by 
one family that denies opposition,” she said.

 * This article was corrected on 5 November 2016. The Sandinista National 
Liberation Front is referred to as the FSLN, not the FLSN.  