
David Bowie’s final album cover 
<https://www.creativereview.co.uk/bowie-barnbrook-and-blackstar/>, a 
build-your-ownrobotic surgeon <http://www.opensurgery.net/> and a coffee cup 
<https://www.wired.com/2015/01/coffee-cup-designed-let-astronauts-sip-espresso-space/>
 that allows astronauts to drink in space are among the Designs of the Year, a 
70-strong lineup of ingenious innovations that will be exhibited at theDesign 
Museum <https://designmuseum.org/>’s new home in Kensington from 24 November.

Design Museum aims for Tate Modern effect in new home, says director
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/mar/18/design-museum-london-open-new-premises-november>
Launching the museum’s west London incarnation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/mar/18/design-museum-london-open-new-premises-november>
, housed in the concrete tent of the former Commonwealth Institute on the edge 
of Holland Park, the exhibition will join a new permanent collection, on show 
for the first time in the institution’s 27-year history – some of this year’s 
highlights might one day join the anglepoise lamp and the Eames plywood chair 
in the design canon.

But the exhibition does more than scout out the next design icons. Holding up 
a mirror to the creative industries, Designs of the Year is an annual barometer 
of the design world’s preoccupations, anxieties and dreams – as well as a 
reminder of its conscience, with a welcome emphasis on useful problem-solving, 
rather than luxury sofas.


Following a period of unprecedented global migration, responses to the refugee 
crisis loom large on the list this year. A simpleicon-based communication system
 <http://buerobauer.com/projekte/first-aid-kit/> designed to illustrate first 
aid kits and provide clear way-finding in refugee camps features alongside 
Ikea’s contribution to the crisis in the form of aflat-pack shelter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2013/jul/02/ikea-flatpack-refugee-shelter>
, made from lightweight insulated panels that clip on to a simple frame. It’s a 
step up from the usual tents, though the design has yet to be perfected: the 
city of Zurichhad to return 62 of the cabins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/19/swiss-city-buys-ikea-shelters-to-house-refugees-then-ditches-them-over-fire-risk>
 it had ordered to house asylum seekers after tests showed the enclosures were 
“easily combustible”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Fbeazley-designs-of-the-year-design-museum-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa918e2e285f29dfafdef1c190d6bb6d4d10e316c%2F0_0_3508_2480%2F3508.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Astronaut%20coffee%20and%20DIY%20heart%20surgery%20%E2%80%93%20Designs%20of%20the%20Year%20unveiled&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Fbeazley-designs-of-the-year-design-museum-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Astronaut%20coffee%20and%20DIY%20heart%20surgery%20%E2%80%93%20Designs%20of%20the%20Year%20unveiled&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Fbeazley-designs-of-the-year-design-museum-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa918e2e285f29dfafdef1c190d6bb6d4d10e316c%2F0_0_3508_2480%2F3508.jpg>
 Pictograms from Buero Bauer’s first aid kit for use in refugee camps 
Photograph: Design Museum 
They could have done with the expertise of Design that Saves Lives, a 
structural assessment methodology created by Arup engineers that will also 
feature in the exhibition, developed in response tothe collapse of the Rana 
Plaza textile factory <https://www.theguardian.com/world/rana-plaza> in 
Bangladesh in 2013, which killed 1,100 workers. Now adopted across the country, 
the assessment process has seen around 4,000 similar factories surveyed and 
upgraded to prevent such disasters in the future. Like many other projects on 
show, it is design as strategic process, rather than the creation of a final 
photogenic product.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Fbeazley-designs-of-the-year-design-museum-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F693d7733cefadbe95ddf2875a5ee34d941a38e4a%2F304_0_1706_1500%2F1706.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Astronaut%20coffee%20and%20DIY%20heart%20surgery%20%E2%80%93%20Designs%20of%20the%20Year%20unveiled&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Fbeazley-designs-of-the-year-design-museum-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Astronaut%20coffee%20and%20DIY%20heart%20surgery%20%E2%80%93%20Designs%20of%20the%20Year%20unveiled&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Fbeazley-designs-of-the-year-design-museum-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F693d7733cefadbe95ddf2875a5ee34d941a38e4a%2F304_0_1706_1500%2F1706.jpg>
 The sleeve design for David Bowie’s Blackstar. Photograph: Design Museum 
Alongside humanitarian interventions, the shortlist also reflects the ongoing 
interest in open-source, DIY “maker” culture and crowdsourced design, as 
designers continue to bypass conventional routes to manufacture and consumers 
demand an increasing say in how their products are made.

Inspired by the publishing trends, three Royal College of Art graduates have 
developed an on-demand clothing company,Unmade <https://www.unmade.com/>, 
allowing people to order customised garments at the click of a button. Using
digitally coded knitting machines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/nov/01/cutting-edge-knitting-the-future-of-textiles>
 and a simple online interface of adjustable graphic patterns, every item is 
made to order, yet sold at a similar price to mass-produced high street 
clothing.

Fellow RCA graduate Frank Kolkman <http://www.frankkolkman.nl/> has taken the 
DIY approach a few alarming steps further with a speculative project that 
imagines a future of robotic keyhole surgery in the home. Kolkman was inspired 
by the gruesome discovery that some Americans without health insurance are 
using YouTube to share videos in which they perform medical hacks on themselves 
as an alternative to professional care.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Fbeazley-designs-of-the-year-design-museum-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b7c1d556efc43ad1f8f2ddf5b6700f3d3767e93%2F0_32_5582_3349%2F5582.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Astronaut%20coffee%20and%20DIY%20heart%20surgery%20%E2%80%93%20Designs%20of%20the%20Year%20unveiled&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Fbeazley-designs-of-the-year-design-museum-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Astronaut%20coffee%20and%20DIY%20heart%20surgery%20%E2%80%93%20Designs%20of%20the%20Year%20unveiled&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Fbeazley-designs-of-the-year-design-museum-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b7c1d556efc43ad1f8f2ddf5b6700f3d3767e93%2F0_32_5582_3349%2F5582.jpg>
 The OpenSurgery domestic surgery theatre. Photograph: Juuke Schoorl 
His project, Open Surgery <http://www.opensurgery.net/>, follows self-care 
culture to its ultimate conclusion, with a series of open-source robots made 
from 3D-printed and laser-cut parts, combined with hacked surgical components 
bought online. Although still requiring a surgeon to operate it remotely, the 
machines could theoretically be replicated almost anywhere at a fraction of the 
cost of commercial surgical instruments. A heart bypass from the comfort of 
your armchair?

Meanwhile, a pair of south London councils, working together with the NHS, 
have a slightly more down to earth application for self-care in the home, in 
the form ofSH:24 <https://www.sh24.org.uk/>, an online sexual-health testing 
service. Freeing up clinical capacity to deal with more complex cases, the 
service allows people to order free home sampling kits for chlamydia, syphilis, 
gonorrhoea and HIV, send them back to the lab and receive results by 
confidential text message.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Fbeazley-designs-of-the-year-design-museum-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71f814dd518538a303a37003cb2d762e481967b2%2F33_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Astronaut%20coffee%20and%20DIY%20heart%20surgery%20%E2%80%93%20Designs%20of%20the%20Year%20unveiled&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Fbeazley-designs-of-the-year-design-museum-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Astronaut%20coffee%20and%20DIY%20heart%20surgery%20%E2%80%93%20Designs%20of%20the%20Year%20unveiled&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Fbeazley-designs-of-the-year-design-museum-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71f814dd518538a303a37003cb2d762e481967b2%2F33_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
 The Lumos bike helmet, displaying a left-turn signal. Photograph: Max 
Wagenblass 
The transport category is also brimming with clever inventions, including a 
crowdfundedlight-equipped bicycle helmet <https://lumoshelmet.co/> with a 
built-in accelerometer, providing automatic brake lights and turning signals,a 
super-light e-bike <https://biomega.com/product/oko-2-speed-automatic/>, and 
Gogoro,an electric scooter sharing scheme <http://www.gogoro.com/> in Taipei. 
Structured around quick battery-swapping stations, avoiding lengthy recharging 
times, Gogoro has been hailed as a gamechanger, with the potential to do for 
scooters what Tesla did for cars.

A winner will be selected in each category – architecture, digital, fashion, 
graphics, product and transport – and the overalldesign of the year will be 
announced on 26 January 2017.

• Beazley Designs of the Year will be at Design Museum, London 
<https://designmuseum.org/exhibitions/future-exhibitions/beazley-designs-of-the-year>
 from 24 November to 19 February.
 