
The scientific research Tim Peake will carry out in space
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/dec/15/scientific-research-tim-peake-space-iss>
For Tim Peake, the view is about to get a whole lot better. After a month 
confined to the tubular compartments of theInternational Space Station 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/international-space-station>, the British 
astronaut is to step outside for the first time on Friday for a spectacular, 
gruelling spacewalk far above the world.

Scheduled for 12.55 GMT and due to last more than six hours, the spacewalk 
calls for Peake and his Nasa partner Tim Kopra to traverse nearly the entire 
length of the space station to replace a broken power unit, fit a new valve, 
and lay tens of metres of cable.


The pair must move swiftly to ensure that the new power unit is in place 
before the station emerges from the shadow of a solar eclipse and its 16 
massive solar panels start to produce electricity again.


The spacewalk is the first for a British astronaut with the European Space 
Agency <https://www.theguardian.com/science/european-space-agency>. Other 
astronauts from the UK have performed so-called “extravehicular activities” or 
EVAs, but only after taking US citizenship and being selected for Nasa’s 
astronaut corps.


EVAs are one of the toughest parts of an astronaut’s job, but they are also 
among the most exhilarating. One veteran likened the experience to mending a 
watch while wearing oven gloves and falling off an infinitely tall building.


Before opening the hatch, Peake and Kopra will spend up to two hours 
“prebreathing” pure oxygen to rid their bodies of nitrogen. The pressure inside 
their space suits will be lower than that on the station, so the astronauts are 
at risk of the bends if they do not clear all the nitrogen from their blood 
before they embark.


Six amazing sights that look even better from the ISS
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/blog/2015/aug/29/six-amazing-sights-that-look-even-better-from-the-international-space-station>
The two Tims will leave the space station through an airlock and do a “buddy 
check” to make sure their equipment is working. They will have a few moments to 
orientate themselves, then the hard work begins. Kopra, wearing red stripes, 
will lead the way to the broken power unit by traversing the giant structure as 
it soars more than 200 miles above the Earth at 17,500mph. When Kopra gives the 
OK, Peake, wearing white stripes, will follow with the replacement unit.


The astronauts must be tethered to the station at all times, and need to be 
careful not to grab or stand on any delicate equipment as they move around. The 
power unit, a suitcase-sized box of electronics that regulates electricity from 
a pair of the station’s solar panels, is removed by undoing a single bolt, but 
with stiff gloves on, that is no simple task. The new unit must be an exact fit 
because of the high voltage electricity it handles.


Once the new unit is in place and tested, Peake and Kopra will take the broken 
one back to the space station for storage and then get on with the rest of 
their tasks. While Kopra sets to work on replacing a valve, Peake will lay 
nearly 30m of cable on the outside of the station.


The entire spacewalk is expected to take six hours and 20 minutes. By the time 
Peake and Kopra are finished, the space station will have circled the planet 
four times. There is no food or toilet break during the spacewalk, though water 
is provided through a drinking straw connected to a pouch.


Lincolnshire-born Michael Foale became the first person from Britain to 
spacewalk in 1995 when he clambered out of the shuttle Discovery to test a 
modified space suit. Piers Sellers, from East Sussex, also joined Nasa and 
racked up nearly two days of spacewalking. Peake was born in Chichester, making 
him the second spacewalker from Sussex.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F22%2Fastronaut-tim-peake-calls-parents-from-space-gets-the-answerphone-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F22%2F1450779699846%2FKP_875063_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Astronaut%20Tim%20Peake%20calls%20parents%20from%20space%20...%20but%20gets%20the%20answerphone%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F22%2Fastronaut-tim-peake-calls-parents-from-space-gets-the-answerphone-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Astronaut%20Tim%20Peake%20calls%20parents%20from%20space%20...%20but%20gets%20the%20answerphone%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F22%2Fastronaut-tim-peake-calls-parents-from-space-gets-the-answerphone-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F22%2F1450779699846%2FKP_875063_crop_640x360.jpg>
Astronaut Tim Peake calls parents from space ... but gets the answerphone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/video/2015/dec/22/astronaut-tim-peake-calls-parents-from-space-gets-the-answerphone-video>
“For most astronauts, EVA is the holy grail, the thing you most want to do at 
some point in your career. It was certainly that way for me. I was incredibly 
fortunate in getting to do six spacewalks, 41 hours altogether, and I can 
remember almost every minute of them,” Sellers told the Guardian.


“Looking at Earth through the viewports of a shuttle or the ISS is a bit like 
looking into an aquarium through a window. During an EVA, you are in the 
aquarium. If you look straight ahead through your visor, you can’t see the 
edges of your helmet, and it’s like you are hanging there 220 miles above the 
Earth, moving at five miles per second (60 seconds from Lands End to Dover), 
seeing over a thousand miles in every direction. People have referred to it as 
the God’s eye view.


“EVA is hard work too. The suit and particularly the gloves, resist your 
movements. One of my friends described it as trying to do watch repair, while 
wearing oven mitts and falling off an infinitely high building. But excellent 
training and the right tools make it work. I’m sure thatTim Peake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/tim-peake> is fully prepared for the task 
and will enjoy it immensely.”
 