
What do you ask Santa for Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> when you are a child as 
young as two and you are facing your second holiday season locked up by the US 
government? What present could ease the pain of having spent almost half your 
life incarcerated?


Today the Guardian publishes the Santa wishlists of children aged two to nine 
years old. They are some of 19 children spending their second consecutive 
Christmas essentially behind bars in an immigration detention center in 
Pennsylvania.

In their cards, the children ask for toys and trinkets in keeping with their 
young age. A six-year-old girl asks for an iPad, some candy and Frozen-themed 
headphones. The youngest of the pack, a boy just two, struggles to come up with 
any specific request – all he can ask for is “things”.

But there is more to the wishes of the children. Each card bears the same core 
plea, repeated over and over. The girl with the doll wants “to get out of here, 
to be with my daddy”. The little two-year-old boy does rustle up one specific 
desire: he asks for “a present of my liberty”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fus-immigration-detention-center-christmas-santa-wish-list%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdea0f8a3c305a82da558857f1da79c2dcdf03f18%2F0_0_796_504%2F796.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=At%20immigration%20detention%20center%2C%20every%20child%20has%20same%20Christmas%20wish%3A%20freedom&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fus-immigration-detention-center-christmas-santa-wish-list%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=At%20immigration%20detention%20center%2C%20every%20child%20has%20same%20Christmas%20wish%3A%20freedom&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fus-immigration-detention-center-christmas-santa-wish-list%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdea0f8a3c305a82da558857f1da79c2dcdf03f18%2F0_0_796_504%2F796.jpg>
 ‘Dear Santa, this Christmas I would like: Frozen-themed headphones, shoes, an 
iPad, candy, a skateboard, to leave here with my mommy. I am 6 years old.’ 
Composite: The Guardian  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fus-immigration-detention-center-christmas-santa-wish-list%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7dddd9e1581c49fb1b867a0d084d75d20f061502%2F0_0_796_800%2F796.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=At%20immigration%20detention%20center%2C%20every%20child%20has%20same%20Christmas%20wish%3A%20freedom&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fus-immigration-detention-center-christmas-santa-wish-list%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=At%20immigration%20detention%20center%2C%20every%20child%20has%20same%20Christmas%20wish%3A%20freedom&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fus-immigration-detention-center-christmas-santa-wish-list%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7dddd9e1581c49fb1b867a0d084d75d20f061502%2F0_0_796_800%2F796.jpg>
 ‘Dear Santa, I am seven years old. I want freedom so I can be with my aunts 
and uncles. I don’t want to go back to my country. And I also want a remote 
control airplane.’ Composite: The Guardian  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fus-immigration-detention-center-christmas-santa-wish-list%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4261952089df257e2af831b75a947341667d1e60%2F0_0_796_794%2F796.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=At%20immigration%20detention%20center%2C%20every%20child%20has%20same%20Christmas%20wish%3A%20freedom&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fus-immigration-detention-center-christmas-santa-wish-list%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=At%20immigration%20detention%20center%2C%20every%20child%20has%20same%20Christmas%20wish%3A%20freedom&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fus-immigration-detention-center-christmas-santa-wish-list%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4261952089df257e2af831b75a947341667d1e60%2F0_0_796_794%2F796.jpg>
 ‘Dear Santa Clos? I am a girl who has her whole life ahead of her and I want 
the same freedom as any other girl and on this day, the only thing I ask is to 
be with the person who is waiting for me on the outside and that person has a 
very tiny heart [she is referring to her little sister].’ Composite: The 
Guardian 
For more than a year, the children of Berks have been held along with their 
mothers under the custody of the US Immigration and Customs Enforcement (Ice). 
The facility is officially classed a “county residential center”, but with its 
austere brown brick facade and chain-metal perimeter fence, it better resembles 
a prison.

Another two-year-old boy called Said has also spent almost half his young life 
detained in a room which he shares with his mother Amparo, 27, and two other 
mother-and-child pairs. They were picked up on the border of Texas as they 
tried to enter the US to seek asylum. Amparo counts the days they have been 
held byUS immigration <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/usimmigration> 
authorities: 422.

The mother and son fled Honduras in October 2015 when Said was just 22 months, 
having been issued death threats from local drug gangs. All the 17 mothers at 
Berks who are facing their second Christmas in the detention facility similarly 
came to the US from the northern Central American triangle of Honduras, El 
Salvador and Guatemala, where drug crime and murder rates have escalated to
exorbitant levels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/22/el-salvador-worlds-most-homicidal-place>
 in recent years.

As a single mother, Amparo was targeted by “pandilla” gangsters for protection 
money, until she feared for her own safety and her son’s life. She left their 
home and community and set off on the perilous journey to the north. Such is 
the fear that was engendered in her when she left Honduras that Amparo still 
prefers to endure the hardships of incarceration in the US rather than be 
deported, despite the evident harm it is doing to her child.

“This is a very sad, very painful time [for] my son,” she told the Guardian. 
“I knew I couldn’t trust my own government in Honduras, that they wouldn’t 
protect us. But we came here to the United States of America thinking that this 
was the home of human rights, that we would find protection here. I never 
dreamed we would be treated this way,” Amparo said.

Every day my son watches the visitors arrive and he shouts through the window: 
​‘Take me away! Take me with you!’
Amparo 
Last Christmas, officials at Berks brought in a Santa to entertain Said and 
his fellow detained children and allowed presents donated by local charities to 
be handed out to them. The same will be laid on this year, but Amparo is 
scathing of what she sees as cosmetic rejoicing.

“We are not criminals or delinquents to spend so much time in a prison. My son 
doesn’t want to be here, the only present he wants is to get out. Every day he 
watches the visitors arrive in their cars and he shouts at them through the 
window: ‘Take me away! Take me with you!’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fus-immigration-detention-center-christmas-santa-wish-list%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0fc942207fd9d3ad676373f0c8fd1496d913bc38%2F0_0_796_800%2F796.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=At%20immigration%20detention%20center%2C%20every%20child%20has%20same%20Christmas%20wish%3A%20freedom&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fus-immigration-detention-center-christmas-santa-wish-list%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=At%20immigration%20detention%20center%2C%20every%20child%20has%20same%20Christmas%20wish%3A%20freedom&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fus-immigration-detention-center-christmas-santa-wish-list%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0fc942207fd9d3ad676373f0c8fd1496d913bc38%2F0_0_796_800%2F796.jpg>
 ‘Dear Santa, I love computers, PlayStation, go to the beach, video games, but 
in here it’s not allowed. That’s why I want my liberty. I also love roast beef 
pupusas. I’m six years old.’ Composite: The Guardian  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fus-immigration-detention-center-christmas-santa-wish-list%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde73b5bbc8323b7e42f7ae3b2a80c52fff8ea6c3%2F0_0_796_790%2F796.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=At%20immigration%20detention%20center%2C%20every%20child%20has%20same%20Christmas%20wish%3A%20freedom&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fus-immigration-detention-center-christmas-santa-wish-list%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=At%20immigration%20detention%20center%2C%20every%20child%20has%20same%20Christmas%20wish%3A%20freedom&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fus-immigration-detention-center-christmas-santa-wish-list%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde73b5bbc8323b7e42f7ae3b2a80c52fff8ea6c3%2F0_0_796_790%2F796.jpg>
 ‘Dear Santa Claus, I want a present and that present should be my liberty and 
more things. I’m two years old.’ Composite: The Guardian 
Studies have revealed the damage caused by prolonged incarceration to children.
A report 
<http://www.humanrightsfirst.org/sites/default/files/HRF-family-detention-still-happening.pdf>
 by Human Rights First in October 2015 pointed out that harm can set in within 
the first two weeks of lockup, let alone years. Among the well-documented 
symptoms are PTSD, depression and suicidal thoughts – all of which have been 
recorded by psychologists examining the Berks children.


The families held at the center have all been issued expedited deportation 
orders, but those are on hold pending a legal challenge brought by the ACLU 
against the terms of their removal. ACLU lawyers are expected to appeal to the 
US supreme court within the month.

The Obama administration says it cannot release the families because of the 
stay on deportations in the case. But immigration rights groups argue there is 
nothing preventing Ice from releasing the mothers and children, as they are 
legally obliged to do, pending resolution of the challenge.

They point out that the government is in breach of a federal court ruling, 
Flores v Lynch 
<http://www.humanrightsfirst.org/resource/flores-settlement-brief-history-and-next-steps>
, which gives immigrant children detained with their mothers equal rights to 
those detained alone. That puts Ice under an obligation to release the children 
into the care of outside relatives or groups without any delay.

Ice declined to answer Guardian questions about why so many mothers and 
children were facing a second Christmas in detention despite the Flores ruling, 
citing ongoing litigation. But a spokesman insisted that the Berks center 
“operates in an open environment and includes play rooms, social workers, 
resident field trips, educational services, and access to legal counsel. 
Comprehensive medical care is provided from the moment the families arrive and 
throughout their entire stay at the facility.”

That is not how lawyers acting for the families see it. “What it boils down to 
is that the government is saying that two-year-old Said is subject to 
indefinite mandatory detention,” said CarolAnne Donohoe, an immigration 
attorney who has represented many Berks families.

“To see these kids grow up in detention is heartbreaking. One little girl 
bites her nails to the quick. A lot of the kids sense their mothers are upset 
so they start acting like the parent, the strong one. We have several kids 
evaluated by a child trauma specialist that have been found to have PTSD, and 
several of them have had suicidal ideation, as young as six years old.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fus-immigration-detention-center-christmas-santa-wish-list%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa8a46832eeb86446a78d4b3e077f30185bfe0586%2F0_0_796_800%2F796.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=At%20immigration%20detention%20center%2C%20every%20child%20has%20same%20Christmas%20wish%3A%20freedom&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fus-immigration-detention-center-christmas-santa-wish-list%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=At%20immigration%20detention%20center%2C%20every%20child%20has%20same%20Christmas%20wish%3A%20freedom&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fus-immigration-detention-center-christmas-santa-wish-list%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa8a46832eeb86446a78d4b3e077f30185bfe0586%2F0_0_796_800%2F796.jpg>
 ‘Dear Santa, 1 – To get out of here, out of the Berks center. 2 – To be with 
my daddy. 3 – A doll Sofia to sing. 4 – Play Dough. 5 – Live with security in 
this country. 6 – A phone and computer.’ Composite: The Guardian 
At a time when much of the national focus is on the incoming Trump 
administration and the president-elect’sthreat 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2016/11/13/donald-trump-plans-to-immediately-deport-2-to-3-million-undocumented-immigrants/?utm_term=.b72bccee4352>
 to deport millions of undocumented immigrants, Donohoe puts the responsibility 
for Berks squarely on the shoulders of Barack Obama. “We’ve been asking for two 
and a half years why Obama and his administration are so recalcitrant in 
detaining children. It is 100% his administration that put family detention on 
steroids and it is 100% within his power to end it.”

Why is the Obama administration opposing rights for immigrant detainees? | 
Daniel Denvir
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/02/obama-administration-opposing-rights-for-immigrant-detainees>
The palpable anger and frustration felt towards the Obama administration is 
intensified now with the victory of Donald Trump and his threats to round up and
deport millions 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2016/11/13/donald-trump-plans-to-immediately-deport-2-to-3-million-undocumented-immigrants/?utm_term=.3bdd20a86e42>
 of undocumented immigrants such as Amparo and her son. “Obama has paved the 
way for everything Trump is now threatening,” Donohoe said. “Everything is in 
place for President Trump.”

It is into this uncertain world that the children of Berks detention center 
and their mothers now go. One of the cards drawn up by the children and 
published by the Guardian is written in sketchy English by a nine-year-old 
girl. “I want free and stay whith my father I not want anything else,” she 
writes. Then she changes her mind. “I want a iPad and doll sing Frozen.”


Even in detention, a child can hope.
 