
Remember the Atkins diet? Under its low-carb regime, the pounds fell from the 
hips and the celebrity endorsements flowed in. But, like a yo-yo dieter, the 
company's fortunes have fluctuated in recent years, particularly sincethe death 
in 2003 of its controversial founder 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/2003/apr/19/guardianobituaries.williamleith>
Robert C. Atkins.

Now Atkins Nutritional Holdings, which was set up in 1989, is changing hands 
for the fourth time in seven years. The buyer,according to the Wall Street 
Journal 
<http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052748703766704576010172800323498.html>
 (subscription required), is Atlanta-based private equity firm Roark Capital 
Group.

No price has been given for the sale but details of the deal are expected 
later on Friday.

Roark is buying Atkins from another private equity firm, North Capital 
Partners. Previous owners have included Parthenon Capital and Goldman Sachs's 
buyout arm.

In 2005 the Atkins company filed for bankruptcy after its controversial 
high-protein diet drewincreasing criticism from health experts 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2003/sep/21/society.politics> and other fad diets 
gained popularity.

Atkins' new owners believe the diet is much misunderstood. The WSJ's Shira 
Ovide quotes Roark Capital's managing director Ezra Field: "This is not the 
bacon double cheeseburger and T-bone diet. Atkins offers a well-known, 
research-based and clearly differentiated approach to weight loss and weight 
management."

Sales of the business reached $700m in 2004 but had fallen to $200m by 2006. 
In an attempt to revive its fortunes, the company has hired Ally McBeal and 
Melrose Place actress Courtney Thorne-Smith to front a new advertising campaign.

By the time of his death in 2003, the controversial diet pioneer had sold more 
than 10m copies of his book, Dr Atkins' New Diet Revolution. In the 1990s, he 
was cited as one of the 10 most influential people in the world.
 