
Remember the Atkins diet? Under its low-carb, meat-eating regime, the pounds 
fell from the hips and the celebrity endorsements, from Hollywood stars such as 
Jennifer Aniston and Renée Zellweger, flowed in. But, like a yo-yo dieter, the 
company's fortunes have fluctuated in recent years, particularly since the 
death in 2003 of its controversial founder Robert C. Atkins.

Now Atkins Nutritionals, which was set up in 1989 and includes online diet 
programmes and a range of Atkins branded foods available in 20 countries, is 
changing hands for the fourth time in seven years. The buyer, is Atlanta-based 
private equity firm Roark Capital Group. No price has been given for the sale.

Roark is buying Atkins – which describes itself as a "scientifically-supported 
carbohydrate-optimization weight-management programme" – from another private 
equity firm, North Capital Partners. Previous owners have included Parthenon 
Capital and the buyout arm of Goldman Sachs.

In 2005 the Atkins company filed for bankruptcy after its controversial 
high-protein diet drew increasing criticism from health experts and other fad 
diets gained popularity.

Atkins's new owners believe the diet is much misunderstood. Roark Capital's 
managing director Ezra Field told the Wall Street Journal: "This is not the 
bacon double cheeseburger and T-bone diet. Atkins offers a well known, 
research-based and clearly differentiated approach to weight loss and weight 
management."

Sales of the business reached $700m (£440m) in 2004 but had fallen to $200m by 
2006. In an attempt to revive its fortunes, the company has hired Ally McBeal 
and Melrose Place actor Courtney Thorne-Smith to front a new advertising 
campaign.

By the time of his death in 2003, the controversial diet pioneer had sold more 
than 10m copies of his book, Dr Atkins New Diet Revolution. In the 1990s, he 
was cited as one of the 10 most influential people in the world.
 