
The terms of the current battle 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-11-24/mark-scott-announces-abc-job-cuts/5913082>
 in Australia over the ABC, its budget and place in public life have been set 
by its most vociferous critics, mostly in the Murdoch press. If only the lines 
weren’t so predictable. Their campaign fits neatly into a global trend: to 
reduce the public’s faith in public broadcasting, and to prepare for its 
selloff to corporate competitors.

Neutering the BBC and ABC, and the US public broadcasters NPR and PBS, is part 
of the Murdoch empire’s core business. As many of its papers continue tolose 
money <http://neilchenoweth.com/2014/03/25/how-much-is-the-australian-losing/> 
every day, it’s no surprise that their fixation on halting so-called digital 
“mission creep” is a worldwide obsession.

The BBC

In 2013, Rupert Murdoch tweeted 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/media/tv-radio/bbcs-tony-hall-takes-on-critics-after-attack-by-rupert-murdoch-8880069.html>
 about his favourite enemy, the BBC: “huge lack of balance in UK media with 
8,000 BBC left wing journalists far outnumbering all national print 
journalists.” He added that the BBC was a “massive taxpayer-funded mouthpiece 
for tiny circulation leftist Guardian”.

And in 2006, James MacManus, executive director of News International, said 
<http://www.forbes.com/2006/04/27/bbc-news-corp-cx_po_0427autofacescan03.html> 
it was “outrageous” that the BBC was able to run on public money because the 
broadcaster had “blatantly commercial ambitions” and was trying to “create a 
digital empire”.

The same criticisms 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/opinion/editorials/mark-scott-fades-as-abc-faces-its-moment-of-truth/story-e6frg71x-1227134868523>
 were made of ABC managing director Mark Scott in the papers last week: that he 
is creating a “superfluous digital empire” that impinges on the commercial 
realities of privately-owned media.

The message from Murdoch and other commercial enterprises is that their 
investment in journalism and innovation keeps a vibrant press alive – and that 
any limit to their commercial operations is an intrusion on free speech.

What that means in practice is quite different. To the Murdoch empire, a 
“free” press means the right to, for instance, sponsor the tricks of prominent 
British Murdoch reporter Mazher Mahmood – the “fake sheikh 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8iK7IPY64_I>”. 

For a well-resourced and independent BBC, the Guardian’s Peter Preston argued 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/nov/16/fake-sheikh-report-case-bbc-investigation>
 in his commentary on the BBC’s Mahmood expose, freedom is the “in-house means 
to dig, expose, take risks, and clear its decks for action” – vital 
journalistic functions that serve democracy.

Although many in the UK still like and admire 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/broadcast/2012/11/bbc-still-most-trusted-media-organisation>
 the BBC, the institution has fallen greatly in the last ten years.Scandals 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/2012/10/23/bbc-scandal-david-kelly-blue-peter_n_2005186.html>
, mismanagement and the perception that the broadcaster remains too close to 
the political establishment have harmed the BBC’s reputation. Thecover-up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jan/19/call-to-end-bbc-culture-of-secrecy>
 of the crimes of serial paedophile Jimmy Savile was a watershed moment for the 
BBC – nearly half the British publiclost trust in the Beeb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/dec/18/public-trust-bbc-jimmy-savile> 
after the scandal broke.

The difference is, every scandal at the public broadcaster is ammunition for 
the critics and privatisers. As British journalist Charlotte Higginswrote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/may/14/bbc-crisis-jimmy-savile-david-kelly-smith-review>
 earlier this year in the wake of ongoing crises in the BBC:

“It is in the nature of BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> rows to 
escalate quickly to question the very basis on which it is run. Some of the 
corporation’s enemies clearly hold the view that if one undermines the 
foundations, the edifice might be more swiftly destroyed: like digging a mine 
in a medieval siege.”

Murdoch would be pleased to recently read that the foundations are indeed 
getting shaky: BBC management isconsidering 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/nov/12/panorama-could-split-from-bbc-shakeup>
 placing leading current affairs shows into a commercial subsidiary, yet 
another arm of the organisation that could suffer hits to their credibility 
were it exposed to commercial realities. David Cameron’s government has always 
been amenable to Murdoch’s grander ambitions – in opposition heargued 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/1884401/Bloated-BBC-out-of-tough-with-the-viewers-says-Tory-chief-David-Cameron.html>
 the BBC “was squeezing and crushing ... commercial competition” in Murdoch’s 
Sun newspaper. Labour leader Ed Miliband has also had acosy relationship 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-2670137/I-repeat-Daves-fool-But-way-Blair-Miliband-schmoozed-Murdoch-makes-rank-amateur.html>
 with the media mogul, despite a recent critical turn.

PBS and NPR

The American public are fighting an even more important battle. A mere six 
corporations control 90% of the press, and consumer confidence in the media is 
at anall-time low 
<http://www.gallup.com/poll/171740/americans-confidence-news-media-remains-low.aspx>
. Publicly funded outlets PBS and NPR have been marginalised and starved of 
funds for so long that they now sometimes takecorporate largesse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/may/21/why-the-rich-and-powerful-cant-stand-public-broadcasters>
, diluting their integrity.

Republican critics of US public broadcasting argue 
<http://online.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424052748703559604576176663789314074> 
that the high salaries of top management, and the success of its childrens’ 
programmes like Sesame Street, are arguments for cutting it loose from taxpayer 
funding. Again, parallels can be drawn with the Australian example: just look 
at the intense interest in Quentin Dempster’s salary and the children’s show, 
Peppa Pig.

Were PBS or NPR to be diminished, a handful of multinational media outlets 
would completely dominate the US media market. Murdoch’s burning desire to 
still consumeTime Warner 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2014/08/05/us-time-warner-fox-idUSKBN0G529X20140805>
 would guarantee an even larger voice for the multinational.

During the 2012 US presidential election, Republican candidate Mitt Romney 
said Washington should “stop the subsidy” to PBS, due to his ideological set 
against state funding for media. In reality, like with the ABC and BBC, 
government support istiny and decreasing 
<http://www.propublica.org/article/big-bird-debate-how-much-does-federal-funding-matter-to-public-broadcasting>
. NPR and PBS received $445m from 2012 to 2014, .012 percent of the federal 
budget.

Stations in rural areas are closing and shrinking and public radio states are 
decreasing, leaving only corporate alternatives. A 2012 pollfound 
<http://articles.latimes.com/2012/oct/09/entertainment/la-et-st-poll-support-pbs-funding-big-bird-obama-20121009>
 55% of voters opposed cuts in public television spending. Murdoch, through Fox 
News, New York Post and Wall Street Journal, tirelessly campaigns and backs 
candidates who argue that the digital revolution makes public media obsolete.

We hear exactly the same rhetoric in Australia. The Lewis review urged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jun/24/abc-should-dump-digital-radio-charge-for-iview-sell-studios-says-review>
 the ABC to dump digital radio and charge for online content, opening the way 
for Murdoch to capitalise on a reduced ABC footprint.

The ABC

The aim isn’t to kill public broadcasting outright but to force a long war of 
attrition that slowly chips away at public’s respect and broadcasters’ desire 
to fight. It’s a messy strategy, but it’s working: trust in state-owned media 
like the ABC is in slowdecline 
<http://www.crikey.com.au/2014/08/06/essential-post-election-rebound-lifts-trust-in-media-from-the-deep/>
, even though it still leaves its critics for dead.

It’s a sign of how far this debate has skewed that the vast majority of heated 
conversations on public broadcasting are framed in purely economic terms. Can 
we afford it? Should we pay for it? How much does it cost? Can we sell off 
divisions?

We’re never discussing that terms of the debate disallow or discourage 
dissenting points of view. It’s far easier to obsess over the dry economics of 
an industry that doesn’t make anything tangible, like manufacturing or 
agriculture. The ABC is forced to explain its relevance in the face of ongoing 
attacks, when its charter prioritises the very things its commercial critics 
would see diminished: multiculturalism, education, diversity – and independence.
 