
We don’t know whether the Australian military has killed or injured civilians 
in Iraq, and if so, how many. Since Canberra joined the US-led mission against 
theIslamic State <https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> (Isis) on 8 October 
2014, the Australian Defence Force (ADF) has provided barely any information 
about its operations.

So the new report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/03/us-led-air-strikes-on-isis-targets-killed-more-than-450-civilians-report>
 by Airwars, a British organisation comprised of journalists and researchers, 
is welcome. It aims to demystify the war against Isis and document how many 
civilians are dying in Iraq and Syria.

Hundreds of civilians killed in US-led air strikes on Isis targets – report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/03/us-led-air-strikes-on-isis-targets-killed-more-than-450-civilians-report>
Airwars has found at least 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/03/us-led-air-strikes-on-isis-targets-killed-more-than-450-civilians-report>
 459 non-combatant deaths, including 100 children, from 52 airstrikes. Over 
5,700 airstrikes have been launched since 2014.

Yet the US military central command cites the deaths of only two civilians. 
The discrepancy between these figures – two deaths, or 459 – should be 
startling. The US State Department pledged to “review its findings 
<http://www.state.gov/r/pa/prs/dpb/2015/08/245625.htm>” after Airwars issued 
its report, with a spokesman saying “That’s why we’re looking into them and 
trying to see where the – what the right number is, to be frank.”

Recall how it wasn’t until Wikileaks released the Afghan War Logs 
<https://wikileaks.org/afg/> and Iraq War Logs <https://wikileaks.org/irq/> in 
2010 that the world discovered the extent of death, abuse and cover-up caused 
by the US in both states.

Australia’s role in the anti-Isis coalition is shrouded in secrecy 
<http://www.abc.net.au/pm/content/2015/s4287018.htm>. Operation Okra is 
described <http://www.defence.gov.au/Operations/Okra/ATG.asp> as “conducting 
air combat and support operations in Iraq and is operating within a US-led 
international coalition assembled to disrupt and degrade ISIL.”

The ADF issues very sparse monthly reports on how it is going about this 
mission. Australian jets are spending thousands of hours in the air, and have 
completed over 100 airstrikes, dropping more than 400 bombs and missiles, yet 
we are told only about the jets’ capabilities, and given pretty pictures of 
them in action.


I asked the ADF a number of questions, including why the public wasn’t being 
told more, whether Australia was aware of its actions causing harm or death to 
civilians, and whether its “rules of engagement” aimed to minimise civilian 
casualties and damage to infrastructure. My questions were largely ignored. I 
was told:


For operational security reasons, the ADF will not provide mission-specific 
details on individual engagements against Daesh. The ADF will not release 
information that could be distorted and used against Australia in Daesh 
propaganda. Australia’s Rules of Engagement are designed to avoid civilian 
casualties and damage to civilian infrastructure.

A spokesperson for the Minister for Defence, Kevin Andrews, added that, “the 
Abbott government has every confidence in the professionalism of the Australian 
Defence Force to act in accordance with Australia’s Rules of Engagement, which 
are designed to avoid civilian casualties and damage to civilian 
infrastructure”.


When Airwars questioned Australia’s lack of information sharing – unlike, say, 
Canada, which releases information on a timely basis – it received the same, 
pro-forma response from the ADF.


Airwars project leader Chris Woods, a British journalist and author of “Sudden 
Justice: America’s Secret Drone Wars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/24/drone-warfare-life-on-the-new-frontline>
”, told me that Australia’s lack of transparency was worrying.

“Of the 12 nations in the Coalition which have bombed Daesh in Iraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> and Syria over the past year, 
Australia is pretty much near the bottom in terms of transparency and 
accountability”, he said.

“The Saudis and the Belgians are worse, though not by much. Once a month we 
get a chart saying how many bombs have been dropped – and that’s it. No details 
of locations struck. No word of the dates on which strikes occurred.”

Woods condemns Canberra’s reason for secrecy as inappropriate for a democracy.

“The excuse for this paucity of information is that Daesh might use any 
improved reporting ‘for propaganda purposes’. That’s absurd, of course. Canada, 
the UK, France and others all report happily on where and when they strike,” he 
says.

“And transparency really does matter. The Coalition tells us that each member 
nation is individually liable for the civilians it kills. If Australia refuses 
to say anything about its strikes, how can there be any justice for those 
affected on the ground if something goes wrong?”

This ADF obsession with secrecy and obsessively trying to control the message 
is nothing new. Remember that in 2013, the ADFtried and failed 
<http://www.theage.com.au/national/how-the-adf-tried-to-control-the-real-story-of-oruzgan-20130315-2g5yt>
 to isolate Fairfax reporters Paul McGeough and Kate Geraghty during their time 
in Afghanistan. As McGeough put it, they were “effectively denying our right as 
journalists to cover any of the story”.

Successive Australian governments have long demanded secrecy in matters of war,
immigration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/03/australian-detention-centre-secrecy-laws-condemned-by-world-medical-body>
 andtrade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jun/02/australian-mps-allowed-to-see-top-secret-trade-deal-text-on-condition-of-confidentiality>
. It’s an attitude that presumes the public either doesn’t really care about 
what governments do; or that enough journalists are willing to swallow spin in 
exchange for access, embeds with Australian troops or spurious “exclusives” 
with the military and strategists.

Australia’s current war against Isis has continued this tradition of secrecy. 
As former army intelligence officerJames Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/mar/05/australia-at-war-how-should-we-as-a-nation-remember-the-fallen-and-living>
 wroterecently 
<https://www.thesaturdaypaper.com.au/opinion/topic/2015/08/01/boots-the-ground-head-the-clouds/14383512002193>
 in The Saturday Paper, “how much progress is Australia making against Daesh? 
It’s painfully hard to tell.” Yet there isno demand 
<https://www.thesaturdaypaper.com.au/opinion/topic/2015/08/01/boots-the-ground-head-the-clouds/14383512002193>
 for the ADF to open up.

Paul Barratt, former secretary of the Department of Defence and president of 
thecampaign for an Iraq War inquiry <http://iraqwarinquiry.org.au/>, says that 
the Abbott government’s attitude “reflects both its habits of secretiveness and 
the lack of a coherent strategy – more policy on the run.

Isis, Hamas, Haiti and the Catholic church: on the use of 'death cults' | 
Jason Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/sep/22/isis-hamas-haiti-and-the-catholic-church-on-the-use-of-death-cults>
“What started out as humanitarian relief using existing assets in the Middle 
East was rapidly transformed into boots on the ground in a training role, and 
aircraft both flying combat missions and refuelling other coalition aircraft 
for combat missions in Syria. There is little sign that this has been thought 
through or that it is heading in the direction of an achievable goal.”

I’ve long argued that reporters and media organisations should collectively 
push back against restrictive ADF methods by refusing to be embedded without 
greater freedom in the field. Apart from visiting the troops for state-managed 
photo ops, independent reporting of the wars inIraq 
<https://overland.org.au/previous-issues/issue-204/feature-john-martinkus/> or 
Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/15/afghanistan-should-leave-its-copper-in-the-ground-to-avoid-further-strife>
 is preferable because it’s civilians who bear the brunt of the conflict.

Journalists should also ignore “exclusives” from the ADF until it recognises 
it’s creating an unacceptable mystery around actions undertaken with taxpayer 
dollars. Would the ADF loosen its rules? I’m confident it would, not least of 
all because it craves publicity.

If it doesn’t, we would at least have the spectacle of the ADF defending its 
tenuous position on disclosure.
 