
Here’s an end-of-year suggestion for Australian television: reflect on its own 
ratings while streaming tears down its ancient and massive LCD face, with 
occasional pauses for blubbering ad breaks.

Viewing figures for 2014 suggest many people are now treating their television 
set as a framed minimalist photograph, in this case a depressing close-up of 
some soil at night. What were once guaranteed hits are now proving about as 
popular as a wasp at an orgy.

Reassuringly, however, reality TV was 2014’s biggest loser (not so fun when 
the finger’s pointing at you, hey). And there’d be no need to construct that 
escape pod you’re working on if it weren’t for the fact that most channels have
more of the same 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/oct/30/reality-television-to-dominate-screens-in-2015>
 planned for 2015.

Big Brother 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/dec/01/big-brother-to-dancing-with-the-stars-reality-tv-has-its-final-flush>
, The Big Adventure andBeauty and the Geek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/nov/17/g20-beauty-and-the-geek-battle-tv-review>
 all rated poorly, suggesting reality can no longer rely on being a fad to win 
viewers. Apparently we do actually care about content, and for some reason, 
tanned strangers locked in a house arguing about groceries for three months 
just doesn’t cut it.

My suggestion for Big Brother 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/big-brother> 2015 would be to explore 
the horror movie potential the show has never capitalised on. There are so many 
cameras everywhere – just pop a vengeful spirit in that sealed Gold Coast 
castle and you’ve got yourself all the footage you need for a live-to-air 
Paranormal Activity.


Australian X Factor also lost about 25% of its viewers 
<http://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/tv-and-radio/the-x-factor-australia-finally-takes-number-one-spot-in-ratings-20141020-118l36.html>
, while The Voice finale wasdown 17% 
<http://www.news.com.au/entertainment/tv/the-voice-and-the-x-factors-shock-ratings-drop-where-have-all-the-tv-viewers-gone/story-fnk8579h-1227002381161>
. Just 1.66 million metropolitan viewers tuned in to see Blue Mountains blonde 
Anja Nissen win the singing contest compared to two million in 2013 — and the 
year before that, 2.6 million.

None of us should be alarmed by this, of course, any more than if I typed the 
sentence: “Usage of the new and highly addictive substance methy-crackabis has 
dropped by 20%”. I hear methy-crackabis is extremely bad for you.

On the flipside, thought-provoking content saw SBS rewarded with a ratings 
boost.First Contact was a particular talking point 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/nov/19/im-31-and-had-my-first-contact-with-indigenous-australia-six-months-ago>
. Educational and confronting, its success hints at a viewing public that is 
tiring of televisual “reality” (whacky personalities trapped in places, doing 
tasks) and would ratherlearn something 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/nov/10/blackfish-documentary-lingering-obsession-animals-entertainment>
 from actual reality.

Not that TV seems to be able to save itself: 2014 saw repeated evenings where 
not a single channel rated over one million viewers 
<http://www.tvtonight.com.au/2014/11/ratings-slip-under-900000-mark.html> – 
it’s not just reality TV that’s suffering, butthe whole apparatus 
<http://www.news.com.au/entertainment/tv/tv-ratings-2014-finales-of-big-brother-the-big-adventure-beauty-and-the-geek-crash-in-final-week/story-e6frfmyi-1227138538474>
 of scheduled television. Are we surprised?

Streaming services and smart devices mean you can control when you watch your 
favourite shows and where: on public transport, at the gym, in the middle of a 
freeway you’ve accidentally stumbled on to because you weren’t looking. This 
distracted style of ambulating that treats the pavement like some sort of 
stretched sofa really needs its own name: iWalking, perhaps?

And the zombie-like shuffle of people smashing an entire season of The Walking 
Dead <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-walking-dead> in the middle 
of a pedestrian crossing is something we’ll have to get used to. Television 
when we want it is too hard to resist. Future generations will consider 
scheduled TV as ridiculous as ovens that only switch on at a specified, 
national eating time. “Oh no! I missed my toast. I’ll have to wait until 11pm 
when it next pops up!”


The most compelling viewing will be watching what TV networks do in reaction 
to 2014’s writing on the wall. As Netflix prepares forits March 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/media-blog-australia/2014/nov/19/netflixs-australian-launch-subscribers-may-look-in-vain-for-the-big-titles>
 Australian launch, Channel Nine has teamed up with Fairfax to releaseits 
streaming service Stan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/nov/05/australias-new-streaming-tv-service-stan-netflix-competitor>
, and Seven is also launching Presto.

What am I going to do? Find lots of ways to describe a switched-off television 
I guess. Bugger. And I already used up that one about soil at night.

More from the year in review:

• Australian music in 2014: the year its pop stars conquered the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/dec/16/australian-music-2014-the-year-its-pop-stars-conquered-the-world>
• A year of culture in lists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/best-of-2014-in-lists>
 