
England could get an early insight into the workings of Australia’s 
experimental back row 10 days before the sides meet in what could be their pool 
decider.

With the No8 Wycliff Palu picking up a hamstring problem and likely to miss 
Australia’s opening game against Fiji next Wednesday, their coach, Michael 
Cheika, has the opportunity to pick his two openside flankers, Michael Hooper 
andDavid Pocock <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/david-pocock>.

The two have started together only once, against New Zealand last month, when 
they proved more than a handful for an All Black back row who included Richie 
McCaw and Kieran Read. Added to a solid scrum, this partnership paved the way 
for a 27-19 Australia victoryand their first Rugby Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/08/nic-white-the-hero-as-wallabies-finally-overcome-all-blacks>
.

Cheika did not repeat his experiment a week later when, on the back of six 
Wallaby changes,the All Blacks took revenge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/15/new-zealand-crush-australia-bledisloe-cup-decider>
.

Australia, who are based in Bath, are being cautious with Palu, giving the No8 
as much time as possible to be 100%. Cheika is already thought to be ready to 
give all 31 of his squad gametime either against Fiji or Uruguay only four days 
later. Next up come England, a side who do not have a conventional “fetcher” in 
the mould of either Hooper or Pocock.

“Cliffy has had a bit of a hamstring,” said Cheika. The coach added that Palu 
had trained and “he probably won’t be right for the first game, but he will 
probably be right for the second game”.

Hooper and Pocock, playing in the No8 shirt, “are still a possibility”, said 
Cheika. “We’ve got a good idea.” Australia rested their first-choice starting 
XV for the one-off Test against USA two weeks ago to ensure Cheika had a fully 
fit team available to face Fiji.
 