
The Australian habit of year-in-advance theatre programming may make it 
difficult for local playhouses to be politically responsive, but it sure is 
good for publicity schedules.

When it comes to the major Australian stages, the launch season is half done – 
meaning those already planning what they’ll see at a theatre next December have 
half their menu of options to choose from.

This far out from actual performance dates, it’s near-impossible to predict 
just what will turn out to be the unexpected masterpiece local audiences throng 
to see. This is, after all, a country that’s managed to make living-memory hits 
from a cabaret musical about a defeated prime minister (Keating), a localised 
take on Norwegian realism staged almost entirely behind a wall (The Wild Duck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/oct/27/the-wild-duck-review-ibsen-simon-stone>
) and a love story that concludes when everyone dies from Aids (Holding the 
Man).

Nevertheless, here are seven stabs in the dark:

Queensland Theatre – An Octoroon 
<http://www.queenslandtheatre.com.au/Shows/An-Octoroon>, by Branden 
Jacobs-Jenkins, director Nakkiah Lui

Up north, the pick of the Queensland Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> season is the Australian premiere 
of the Branden Jacobs-Jenkins American smash, An Octoroon. The play riffs on 
Irish playwright Dion Boucicault’s 19th-century melodrama set in the antebellum 
Deep South, and follows the illicit love of a white man for a girl whose 
one-eighth African-American heritage is enough to ostracise her.

Enormously popular in its day, Boucicault’s text has been rewritten by 
Jacobs-Jenkins both as a comedy and a radical reappraisal of race 
representation in America. Black performers take to white roles with the 
assistance of “whiteface”; a parade of racial stereotypes collapses in on 
itself – and at one point the playwright emerges from the darkness screaming.

At only 31, Jacobs-Jenkins’ ambition as a writer has been rewarded with an 
Obie, a Windham-Campbell award and a MacArthur Foundation Genius grant – he is 
one to watch now, if not to stare after into the future.

Is Australian theatre racist?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/australia-culture-blog/2014/jun/12/is-australian-theatre-racist>
The Queensland Theatre production will star Miranda Tapsell and be directed by 
Nakkiah Lui – one of the brains and performers behind the ABC’s cult sketch 
show Black Comedy. It’s Lui’s directorial debut, and she’ll be working with 
Jacobs-Jenkins to adapt his script for an Indigenous Australian context.

“A work based on a terminally dated play from more than 150 years ago may turn 
out to be this decade’s most eloquent theatrical statement on race in America 
today,” declared the New York Times after the play’s recent New York transfer 
season. Whether this theatrical statement will translate to the Australian 
conversation is one of the most intriguing questions posed in the national 
theatre calendar.

Also worth watching: Once in Royal David’s City 
<http://www.queenslandtheatre.com.au/Shows/Once-In-Royal-Davids-City>, a drama 
by former Queensland Theatre artistic director Michael Gow; and Joanna 
Murray-Smith adapts Ingmar Bergman’s brutalScenes from a Marriage 
<http://www.queenslandtheatre.com.au/Shows/Scenes-From-A-Marriage> for 
real-life couple Marta Dusseldorp and Ben Winspear.

Malthouse Theatre – You’re Not Alone 
<http://malthousetheatre.com.au/whats-on/youre-not-alone>, by Kim Noble
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Faustralian-theatre-2017-previewed-the-pick-of-the-seasons-crop%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F491516928900e1b154713511e7c0cb4c1dcc5c64%2F0_0_3517_4530%2F3517.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australian%20theatre%202017%20previewed%3A%20the%20pick%20of%20the%20season's%20crop&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Faustralian-theatre-2017-previewed-the-pick-of-the-seasons-crop%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australian%20theatre%202017%20previewed%3A%20the%20pick%20of%20the%20season%27s%20crop&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Faustralian-theatre-2017-previewed-the-pick-of-the-seasons-crop%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F491516928900e1b154713511e7c0cb4c1dcc5c64%2F0_0_3517_4530%2F3517.jpg>
 Performer Kim Noble, whose show You’re Not Alone is coming to Malthouse 
Theatre in 2017. Photograph: CAMERA PRESS/Rob Greig Time Out 
Down in Melbourne, Australia’s most experimental mainstage company Malthouse 
Theatre is sticking to brand with a brochure promoting “AN ANARCHIC SEASON OF 
THEATRE THAT REVOLTS AGAINST THE ESTABLISHMENT AND SEARCHES FOR RADICAL 
COMPASSION” – yes, all in caps.

The caps are deserved in the case of Kim Noble’s extraordinary You’re Not 
Alone, which premiered atEdinburgh fringe in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/21/edinburgh-festival-2014-review-kim-noble-youre-not-alone>
. It is a desperately shocking meditation on loneliness and the search for 
human connection, performed and narrated by Noble himself. Ostensibly a 
comedian, Noble won the coveted Perrier award for best newcomer at Edinburgh as 
one half of writing and performing duo Noble and Silver in 2000. His work has 
since outgrown the confines of comedy, while somehow remaining hilarious.

In this production, Noble presents video, audio, photography and even internet 
screenshots that record his experimental encounters with strangers – including 
trying to seduce truck drivers with his fake internet persona “Sarah”, 
recording his neighbours having sex, pretending to work at a hardware store, 
and stalking a man called Keith who works at the local grocer. Some of these 
are dangerously unethical engagements, and the show is confronting not only for 
what it exposes about Noble’s lack of restraint, but how his own fierce 
loneliness pervades the communities he visits and inhabits. As tender as his 
consideration turns out to be, this is not a show for the easily troubled; if 
footage of a man shitting on a church floor upsets you, do not go.

Also worth watching: A new Declan Greene play The Homosexuals, or Faggots 
<http://malthousetheatre.com.au/whats-on/the-homosexuals-or-faggots>; the 
second instalment of Tom Waits’s Black Rider cycle,The Casting of the Magic 
Bullets 
<http://malthousetheatre.com.au/whats-on/the-black-rider-the-casting-of-the-magic-bullets>
, boasting a cast including Meow Meow and Paul Capsis; andWild Bore 
<http://malthousetheatre.com.au/whats-on/wild-bore>, a dissection of bad art, 
created and performed by the extraordinary comic trio of Adrienne Truscott, 
Ursula Martinez and Barry-winning Zoe Coombs Marr.

Melbourne Theatre Company – Minnie and Liraz 
<http://www.mtc.com.au/plays-and-tickets/season-2017/minnie-and-liraz/> by 
Lally Katz, director Anne-Louise Sarks
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Faustralian-theatre-2017-previewed-the-pick-of-the-seasons-crop%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e99c0f66af43378abc105ac80f5beecf477a2ae%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australian%20theatre%202017%20previewed%3A%20the%20pick%20of%20the%20season's%20crop&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Faustralian-theatre-2017-previewed-the-pick-of-the-seasons-crop%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australian%20theatre%202017%20previewed%3A%20the%20pick%20of%20the%20season%27s%20crop&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Faustralian-theatre-2017-previewed-the-pick-of-the-seasons-crop%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e99c0f66af43378abc105ac80f5beecf477a2ae%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 The cast of Minnie and Liraz, a new play from Australian playwright Lally 
Katz, premiering at Melbourne Theatre Company in 2017. Photograph: Melbourne 
Theatre Company 
No all-caps in Melbourne Theatre Company’s program; the pick of the season is 
a new play by local playwright Lally Katz, Minnie and Liraz. The dark 
quirkiness of Katz’s earlier works created for Melbourne’s fringe has bloomed 
through her years on the mainstage. She is a bright comic talent, no less 
affecting for being very funny, as plays such as the much-praised Neighbourhood 
Watch and Stories I’d Like to Tell You in Person have shown.

Her 2017 offering is a story about two competitive bridge-playing 
grandmothers. There’s a story going round that the playwright was swamped in 
the MTC foyer after an early reading of the play by a small horde of the 
company’s older patrons, keen to pitch in their bridge insights. Whatever their 
input, it has a cracker of a cast: comic talents Virginia Gay and John Leary 
play foils to the legendary Sue Jones and Nancye Hayes. As a new play, it’s a 
ticket purchased on trust, but this is Katz in her element, writing for a home 
crowd. It’s hard not to believe that the audience who applauded the playwright 
for waltzing with a bear at the Malthouse in 2013 will be anything less than 
engaged with her new material.

I was commissioned to write a play about finance. Then I met Cookie, the 
psychic | Lally Katz
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/03/i-was-commissioned-to-write-a-play-about-finance-then-i-met-cookie-the-psychic>
Also worth watching: The Father 
<http://www.mtc.com.au/plays-and-tickets/season-2017/the-father/>, a vehicle 
for Shakespeare impresario John Bell; Eddie Perfect’s “comedy with songs” about 
Australia’s obsessions with the property market,Vivid White 
<http://www.mtc.com.au/plays-and-tickets/season-2017/vivid-white/>; and a 
revival of Michael Frayn’s much-performed yet still-unbeatable farceNoises Off 
<http://www.mtc.com.au/plays-and-tickets/season-2017/noises-off/>, featuring 
Simon Burke.

Belvoir – Tom Ballard: Boundless Plains to Share 
<http://belvoir.com.au/productions/tom-ballard-boundless-plains-share/> by Tom 
Ballard, director Scott Edgar
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Faustralian-theatre-2017-previewed-the-pick-of-the-seasons-crop%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf54851d6a91652392fc30261c9de0553509775b%2F0_0_8759_5760%2F8759.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australian%20theatre%202017%20previewed%3A%20the%20pick%20of%20the%20season's%20crop&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Faustralian-theatre-2017-previewed-the-pick-of-the-seasons-crop%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australian%20theatre%202017%20previewed%3A%20the%20pick%20of%20the%20season%27s%20crop&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Faustralian-theatre-2017-previewed-the-pick-of-the-seasons-crop%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf54851d6a91652392fc30261c9de0553509775b%2F0_0_8759_5760%2F8759.jpg>
 Tom Ballard’s one-man show Boundless Plains to Share has been picked up by 
Belvoir for its 2017 season. Photograph: Richard Hedger 
Sydney-based Belvoir has a strong season, but this critic’s pick is Boundless 
Plains to Share, in which comedian Tom Ballard presents something like stand-up 
comedy crossed with a slide night as he desperately tries to understand, 
explain and activate an audience against Australia’s punitive refugee policy.

Politicised on the issue since the age of 14, Ballard’s involvement with the 
Welcome to Australia movement brought him into contact with refugees in and out 
of detention. He encountered stories he found both uplifting and heartbreaking, 
and these stories permeate a show that is laugh-out-loud funny and enraging at 
the same time.

Ballard developed Boundless Plains to Share under the guidance and direction 
of Scott Edgar – more commonly known as Scod from Tripod – who had been helping 
the Asylum Seeker Resource Centre for many years. It’s a good theatrical match, 
avoiding both mawkishness and over-earnestness in its presentation of the kinds 
of stories often emotively retold by the well meaning – and sometimes 
compromised as a result.

Ballard’s show was made possible by a Moosehead award 
<http://www.mooseheadawards.com.au/cms-about> – it allowed him to pursue 
something close to his heart without anxiety about commercial returns. 
Belvoir’s selection of Boundless Plains to Share vindicates the professional 
support Ballard received to make it.

Also worth watching: Which Way Home 
<http://belvoir.com.au/productions/which-way-home/> and Barbara and the Camp 
Dogs <http://belvoir.com.au/productions/barbara-and-the-camp-dogs/> sees 
Belvoir maintain its commitment to strong Indigenous content; New Zealand 
children’s puppet showThe Bookbinder 
<http://belvoir.com.au/productions/the-bookbinder/>; Future D. Fidel’s Prize 
Fighter <http://belvoir.com.au/productions/prize-fighter/> has earned nothing 
but rapturous praise since its debut at La Boite; andHir 
<http://belvoir.com.au/productions/hir/> by the brilliant Taylor Mac challenges 
the rigidity of gender roles with the rare combination of insight, empathy and 
a quirkiness that never becomes twee.

Griffin Theatre Company – Diving for Pearls 
<http://www.griffintheatre.com.au/whats-on/diving-for-pearls/> by Katherine 
Thomson, directorDarren Yap
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Faustralian-theatre-2017-previewed-the-pick-of-the-seasons-crop%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f30b62111a5a79d5c236834b85126ae4c7acb8e%2F132_872_2665_1598%2F2665.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australian%20theatre%202017%20previewed%3A%20the%20pick%20of%20the%20season's%20crop&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Faustralian-theatre-2017-previewed-the-pick-of-the-seasons-crop%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australian%20theatre%202017%20previewed%3A%20the%20pick%20of%20the%20season%27s%20crop&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Faustralian-theatre-2017-previewed-the-pick-of-the-seasons-crop%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f30b62111a5a79d5c236834b85126ae4c7acb8e%2F132_872_2665_1598%2F2665.jpg>
 Ursula Yovich will star in Griffin Theatre Company’s 2017 production of Diving 
For Pearls by Katherine Thompson. Photograph: Brett Boardman Photography 
At Griffin, there is a revival of Katherine Thomson’s Diving for Pearls. Set 
in a 1980s Wollongong reeling from industrial devastation, the story follows 
the aspirational Barbara, colour-matching herself into an imagined future as 
she seeks a job at one of the city’s new resorts, and her partner Den, who has 
just lost his blue-collar job and doesn’t know what to do with himself.

This play often finds its way onto high-school reading lists, but hasn’t been 
given a serious revival in over a decade. Griffin’s decision to restage it now 
is a shrewd one, given that its themes of unemployment and uncertain futures in 
regional Australia have re-emerged in the public political conversation. Ursula 
Yovich will play Barbara, with Darren Yap directing.

Also worth watching: Ross Mueller’s A Strategic Plan 
<http://www.griffintheatre.com.au/whats-on/a-strategic-plan/> takes on the 
language of workplace relations; and Morgan Rose’sVirgins and Cowboys 
<http://www.griffintheatre.com.au/whats-on/virgins-cowboys/>, from Griffin’s 
independent season, is vulgar and funny.

State Theatre Company of South Australia – Mr Burns (A Post-Electric Play) 
<http://www.statetheatrecompany.com.au/home/whatson/shows2017/mrburns/> by Anne 
Washburn, director Imara Savage
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Faustralian-theatre-2017-previewed-the-pick-of-the-seasons-crop%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7622cddf140ff881ad763b91e301c8ebc4637f5c%2F0_1209_3840_4170%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australian%20theatre%202017%20previewed%3A%20the%20pick%20of%20the%20season's%20crop&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Faustralian-theatre-2017-previewed-the-pick-of-the-seasons-crop%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australian%20theatre%202017%20previewed%3A%20the%20pick%20of%20the%20season%27s%20crop&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Faustralian-theatre-2017-previewed-the-pick-of-the-seasons-crop%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7622cddf140ff881ad763b91e301c8ebc4637f5c%2F0_1209_3840_4170%2F3840.jpg>
 Mitchell Butel will star in STCSA’s 2017 production of Anne Washburn’s Mr 
Burns (A Post-Electric Play). Photograph: James Hartley 
The most intriguing proposition of the STCSA season is Mr Burns (A 
Post-Electric Play) – a 2012 work by American Anne Washburn that imagines a 
post-apocalyptic future in which plotlines from the Simpsons are retold as folk 
tales over generations of a struggling new society.

Washburn’s fascination with pop culture narratives becoming oral artefacts was 
the reason she gathered a group of actors in a disused bank vault under New 
York’s Wall Street back in 2008 and asked them to see how much of any episode 
of The Simpsons they could remember. Washburn made recordings of these 
sessions, which informed the initial drafts of the play.

A powerful anticapitalist message emerged through this process – a message 
that may have been very different if the playwright had chosen to instead 
pursue her other ideas for narrative exploration: episodes of Friends, M*A*S*H 
or Cheers. Whether the controversial text divides audiences in Australia as 
much as it did in America will be interesting to see (it is a coproduction with 
Belvoir and will travel to Sydney after its Adelaide season). That its 
promotional image is this year’s creepiest, however, is undeniable.

Also worth watching: The extraordinary Sandy Gore plays shadowy novelist 
Patricia Highsmith in Joanna Murray-Smith’sSwitzerland 
<http://www.statetheatrecompany.com.au/home/whatson/shows2017/switzerland/>; 
and local playwright Nicki Bloom has fun with New Year’s Eve inVale 
<http://www.statetheatrecompany.com.au/home/whatson/shows2017/vale/>.

Sydney Theatre Company – Away 
<https://www.sydneytheatre.com.au/whats-on/productions/2017/away> by Michael 
Gow, director Matthew Lutton
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Faustralian-theatre-2017-previewed-the-pick-of-the-seasons-crop%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e628fcc0e600af42b00d2729f827b6b9b5834ed%2F0_0_3543_3614%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australian%20theatre%202017%20previewed%3A%20the%20pick%20of%20the%20season's%20crop&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Faustralian-theatre-2017-previewed-the-pick-of-the-seasons-crop%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australian%20theatre%202017%20previewed%3A%20the%20pick%20of%20the%20season%27s%20crop&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Faustralian-theatre-2017-previewed-the-pick-of-the-seasons-crop%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e628fcc0e600af42b00d2729f827b6b9b5834ed%2F0_0_3543_3614%2F3543.jpg>
 Heather Mitchell will perform in Sydney Theatre Company’s 2017 production of 
Away. Photograph: James Green 
Another revival piques the interest at STC, as the company restages Michael 
Gow’s 1986 play Away – another stock selection for syllabi, one which makes 
frequent appearances on the mainstages, and is similarly beloved of the amateur 
circuit.

It’s endured because it’s good: three Australian families of different classes 
and experiences find themselves grappling with change as Australia grasps at 
mature nationhood amid the social upheavals of the 60s and the shadow of the 
Vietnam war. What distinguishes this STC production from the many others that 
have taken place since the play’s debut is its director, Matthew Lutton, also 
the artistic director of Malthouse Theatre, whose Picnic at Hanging Rock was 
one of the best productions of 2016.

This is a rare chance for an Australian audience to see a familiar local play 
exposed to the rigours of a radical reinterpretation. How will Lutton’s gothic 
sensibilities and directorial palette of darkness treat a text accustomed to 
more summery interpretations? Among seasons heavy with diverse stories, 
performance styles, origins and interpretations, allowing someone like Lutton 
to get his hands on Away may just be the symbolic gesture history requires to 
acknowledge Australian theatre is all grown-up.

Also worth watching: Nakkiah Lui has her own show, Black is the New White 
<https://www.sydneytheatre.com.au/whats-on/productions/2017/black-is-the-new-white>
; Colm Tóibín’sThe Testament of Mary 
<https://www.sydneytheatre.com.au/whats-on/productions/2017/the-testament-of-mary>
 is worth seeing for its star, the ever-electric Alison Whyte; andAustralian 
Graffiti 
<https://www.sydneytheatre.com.au/whats-on/productions/2017/australian-graffiti>
, which considers the contemporary migrant experience, by Disapol Savetsila – 
still merely an undergraduate at the University of Wollongong. Is this the new 
wunderkind of the Australian theatre? Only time, and your eyeballs, will tell.
 