
We’re off to the polls again. Australia has so much in abundance: coal, 
sunshine, iron ore and nine parliaments for 24 million people. There is always 
an election round the corner.

Yet for all this endless political activity, nothing much gets done.


Government should be so easy in this prosperous, orderly country. But it is 
remarkably hard. Parliaments are short. Leaders don’t last. Power is 
fragmented. This is the land of unfinished political business.


Campaign catchup: election 2016 is off with a bang, a bus and a box of melon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/09/australian-election-2016-turnbull-shorten-coalition-greens-labor-briefing>
Each election campaign is much like the last. Only the faces change.


This time Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull>, a former 
barrister and Goldman Sachs banker, faces Bill Shorten, a lawyer who climbed 
swiftly through the ranks of a big trade union to lead the opposition.


Political cartoonists can’t resist the caricature: the hard hat v the top hat.


But when Turnbull returned from Government House on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2016/may/08/malcolm-turnbull-calls-double-dissolution-election-for-2-july-video>
 after the rituals of the dissolution of parliament, he delivered a campaign 
speech that might have been given anytime in the past decade.


The mantra was “jobs and growth”; the mood was upbeat; the only threats 
Turnbull saw on the horizon were refugees (“Australians know that we will keep 
our borders secure”) and theLabor party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/labor-party> “with its higher 
taxing, higher spending, debt and deficit agenda”.


The banality was staggering.


We do executions better than solutions. Turnbull is Australia’s fourth prime 
minister in five years

He had not a word to say about global warming. Yet despite him, that will be 
fought over again in this campaign as it has been – unresolved – in the last 
three national election campaigns in this country.


How could it not be? We’ve had another summer of record heat; half the Great 
Barrier Reef has been severely affected by coral bleaching 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/11/mass-coral-bleaching-now-affecting-half-of-australias-great-barrier-reef>
 and we continue to belch CO2 into the air.


Australians want action. Polls year after year have shown we believe climate 
change is real. We know Australia isn’t doing enough. We are more uneasy than 
ever that it’s Australian coal destroying the atmosphere.


But the political system can’t deliver a solution.


So we head into yet another election campaign – and this the longest anyone 
can remember – arguing over familiar problems with little hope that the next 
election will be any more use than the last in solving them.


Education standards sag; life grows steadily worse in remote Indigenous 
communities; marriage remains beyond the reach of the LGBTI; multinational 
corporations operate largely untaxed; and budget deficits deepen year after 
year.

We do executions better than solutions. Turnbull is Australia’s fourth prime 
minister in five years. Australians want this leadership churn to end. They 
crave continuity. But victory no longer guarantees survival.


Since John Howard <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/john-howard> 
went to his reward in 2007 – losing even his own seat after 11 years in office 
– politics in the antipodes have proved volatile, brutal and repetitive.


Kevin Rudd <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/kevin-rudd> was an 
opposition leader of genius. After the dull and fractious Howard years, he 
seemed to promise the country a more modern, more open future under Labor. 
Australians loved him. He lasted 30 months.


His nemesis, Julia Gillard <https://www.theguardian.com/world/julia-gillard>, 
a politician of amazing resilience, led a mildly reformist minority Labor 
government until Rudd returned to tear her down a few weeks before the 2013 
elections.


Tony Abbott <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tony-abbott> then 
inflicted on Labor the worst defeat the party has suffered in generations. His 
Liberal National party Coalition won 90 of the 150 seats in the House of 
Representatives. The new government seemed set for a long and deeply 
conservative existence.

Abbott lasted two years.

Almost from the moment he was elected, Australia was gripped by what the 
pollster Andrew Catsaras calls “buyers’ remorse”. Opinion polls showed, despite 
the hash Labor had just made of government, that the party would be welcomed 
back with open arms under its new leader,Bill Shorten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bill-shorten>.


Lucky man: has Bill Shorten got what it takes?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/09/bill-shorten-election-2016-labor-alp-essay>
So Turnbull executed Abbott.


The new prime minister’s eight months in office have seen almost nothing done 
in Canberra. Even in a political system where modest achievement might seem the 
norm, the bare record of the Abbott/Turnbull years is embarrassing.


Turnbull can only talk about the future. He wants to harness Australia’s hopes 
for change. Those hopes are strong. That so little happens here is taken by 
many to mean Australians flinch from change. That isn’t so.


The mood of the country is more progressive than its politics.


On his return from Yarralumla on Sunday, Turnbull repeated the message he 
delivered the day he toppled Abbott: he is on the side of the future and 
unafraid of change.


“We live in a time of remarkable opportunity,” he said. “We live in an era 
when the scale and pace of economic change is unprecedented through all of 
human history. The opportunities for Australia have never been greater.


“There are many challenges. But if we embrace this future with confidence and 
with optimism, with self-belief and a clear plan, then we will succeed as we 
have never succeeded before.”


Opinion polls show Australians back equality. They want better protection for 
human rights and a clearer separation of church and state. Euthanasia and 
marriage equality enjoy the support of more than 70% of the community. Backers 
of a republic outnumber monarchists two to one.


Australians want a fairer tax system, a federal anti-corruption agency, better 
regulation of campaign funding, constitutional recognition of its Indigenous 
peoples and, it’s worth repeating, effective action against global warming.


Turnbull once backed nearly all these positions. He poured millions from his 
own fortune into the 1999 referendum on the republic. As leader of the 
opposition under Rudd, he staked his political future on addressing global 
warming.


That a man with such an outlook had become prime minister made him 
extraordinarily popular in his early months. Shorten looked finished. Labor was 
said to have no hope next time at the ballot box.


Then reality bit. Turnbull leads a big mainstream party, the Liberals, with 
little enthusiasm for reform which governs with a little party of farmers and 
miners, the Nationals, that is almost comically hostile to change.


Abbott was their man. Turnbull secured Abbott’s downfall by agreeing to 
continue to back most of his policies – including an expensive plebiscite on 
marriage equality that threatens to open faultlines between old and new 
Australia.


As Turnbull’s entrapment became clearer over the summer, his popularity 
collapsed. He remains the man the country wants as prime minister but half the 
electorate is dissatisfied with his performance and, as the campaign begins, 
support for the government and opposition is running neck and neck.


Though it is eight weeks until we gather in the kindergartens and church halls 
of the nation to vote – and nearly all adult Australians turn out to do their 
duty by democracy – key outcomes are already clear.


Australia will continue to imprison refugees in the Pacific.


Second refugee at Australian detention centre in Nauru sets herself on fire
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/02/second-refugee-sets-themselves-alight-on-nauru>
The camps on Nauru and Papua New Guinea’s Manus Island have seen rape, assault 
and murder over the past three years.Two desperate refugees have set themselves 
alight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/03/asylum-seekers-set-themselves-alight-nauru>
. One died. A Somali woman of 21 is fighting for her life in a Brisbane 
hospital.


Set up to block refugees from reaching Australia by boat, the camps cost a 
billion dollars a year. New Zealand has offered to take hundreds of these 
trapped people but Australia refuses to allow them to go to such a soft 
destination. No other country is offering to take them off our hands.


Yet the government and opposition are in lock step here. The country backs 
them. Only a few brave Labor MPs and the Greens speak for that minority of 
Australians appalled at what is being done in their country’s name.


Not even PNG ordering Australia to close its camp provoked fresh political 
debate in this country. The PNG supreme court had declared that holding 
refugees prisoner there was in breach of the right to liberty guaranteed in the 
country’s constitution. The refugees are still behind the wire on Manus as the
two nations squabble over their fate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/29/papua-new-guinea-australia-loggerheads-905-manus-detainees-remain-in-limbo>
.


Barely contested in the campaign will be the revenue-busting generosity 
Australia shows to its most prosperous citizens

In this campaign there is also no contest between the government and the 
opposition over the forest of security laws that has grown up in the past few 
years, provoking criticism from legal authorities on the threats they pose to 
media freedom and fundamental rights.


Bret Walker, a distinguished barrister and former independent national 
security legislation monitor, told the Press Council last week: “We have a 
national addiction when we see a problem for throwing a law at it, or 53 laws 
at it. We have more anti-terrorism laws than any other country on earth and I 
think I’d win a bet if I said more than every country put together.”

And barely contested in the coming campaign will be the revenue-busting 
generosity Australia shows to its most prosperous citizens.


Australia is not, of course, alone in this. And the damage done doesn’t match 
the budget carnage in Europe and the US: federal government debt is expected to 
peak this year at a modest 18% of GDP.


But so much has been given away for so long – particularly through the great 
mining boom that ran almost uninterrupted from 2003 to late 2011 – that one of 
the most prosperous countries on earth is left scrambling to pay its bills.


How negative gearing replaced the great Australian dream and distorted the 
economy | Greg Jericho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/apr/28/how-negative-gearing-replaced-the-great-australian-dream-and-distorted-the-economy>
We have no death duties. That’s about $10bn forgone each year. Capital gains 
are taxed at half the rate of income. Family homes are exempt entirely. Last 
year, that one concession, according to the leftwing thinktank the Australia 
Institute, cost the revenue $46bn.


Income taxes are among the lowest in the OECD after huge cuts offered by 
Howard – and essentially matched by Rudd – in 2007. Company taxes are a little 
high by world standards but Turnbull is proposing to cut them by billions over 
the next few years.


For decades, landlords have been allowed to write off losses on their 
investments against general income. This negative gearing costs the revenue 
about $8bn a year. And superannuation – though compulsory for wage earners – is 
supported by massive tax breaks that will cost about $47bn next year.


This is unaffordable. We’re not broke. It’s nothing like that. But another 
reason politics is so hard in this prosperous country is that so much energy 
must be devoted, year in and year out, to addressing problems we never needed 
to have. We’ve given away our room to move.


In 2016 the government and opposition will bicker over the revenue, as they 
always do in election campaigns. But neither side of politics will approach the 
underlying problem here. Preserving Australia as a paradise for the prosperous 
is their joint enterprise.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F10%2Faustralians-crave-change-but-this-election-wont-deliver-it-david-marr%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F466ec70ec0575cf2a8d292fc1c6b611dcf98ae29%2F0_229_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australians%20crave%20change.%20But%20this%20election%20won't%20deliver%20it%20%7C%20David%20Marr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F10%2Faustralians-crave-change-but-this-election-wont-deliver-it-david-marr%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australians%20crave%20change.%20But%20this%20election%20won%27t%20deliver%20it%20%7C%20David%20Marr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F10%2Faustralians-crave-change-but-this-election-wont-deliver-it-david-marr%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F466ec70ec0575cf2a8d292fc1c6b611dcf98ae29%2F0_229_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
 ‘Bill Shorten is a man of little magnetism but he’s a professional. He doesn’t 
make mistakes.’ Photograph: Mike Bowers for the Guardian 
Minor adjustments are allowed. In the budget he brought down last week, 
Turnbull proposed to cap superannuation concessions for the rich. Shorten has 
promised to rein in negative gearing if Labor is elected in July. But the few 
billions such measures might collect won’t come near fixing the revenue.


And Turnbull has turned on Shorten’s proposal the formulaic rage that’s been 
used to thwart decades of attempts to address the nation’s generosity problem. 
According to the prime minister, the opposition is bent on destroying the 
property market.


“Labor, claiming to speak for fairness, but in really speaking for nothing 
more than increasing taxes, stands in the way of Australians getting ahead.”


Behind the Lines podcast: how is everyone going to survive an eight-week 
election campaign?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/audio/2016/may/09/how-is-everyone-going-to-survive-an-eight-week-election-campaign>
The shouting has begun.


Australians like their leader to look like a prime minister. Abbott didn’t. 
Turnbull does. Shorten might. He’s a man of little magnetism but he’s a 
professional. He doesn’t make mistakes. He’s as friendly to capitalism as a 
former trade union leader can be.


He has reshaped the political contest by arguing policy. That’s a novel 
approach in Australia. Usually, an opposition would only begin rolling out its 
policies now as the campaign begins. But Labor has been campaigning for a year.


Along the way, Shorten began to earn respect. The easy victory predicted for 
Turnbull has evaporated. Thegovernment is in trouble in Queensland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/29/queensland-up-to-10-lnp-seats-could-change-hands-in-federal-election>
 and New South Wales. Pollsters don’t rule out the possibility of defeat for 
the Coalition.


Party loyalties are dying. More than ever, Australians will take good 
government from wherever it comes. The usual hyperbole is in the air about a 
country at the crossroads and the crucial importance of the choice to be made 
in July.


But it isn’t going to make or break the nation. What lies ahead is a gruelling 
and expensive campaign that will leave Australia much as it was before. Power 
may shift. Leaders may be humiliated. But neither side is offering what both 
know is wanted yet politics finds so difficult to deliver in this country: 
change.
 