
New Zealanders who have lived and worked in Australia for more than five years 
will find it easier to access citizenship under a deal reached by the leaders 
of the two countries.

The Australian prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull>, announced the 
“new pathways to citizenship” after hosting a meeting with his counterpart, 
John Key, in Sydney on Friday.

John Key: New Zealand prime minister's weirdest moments (so far)
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/22/john-key-new-zealand-prime-ministers-weirdest-moments-so-far>
But the Turnbull government has not taken up New Zealand’s offer to resettle 
about 150 refugees a year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/11/new-zealands-offer-to-take-150-offshore-refugees-a-year-never-taken-up>
 from Australia’s offshore detention camps, even as Key said it “still stands”.

The leaders also discussed rising tensions in the South China Sea after Beijing
appeared to install a surface-to-air missile system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/17/china-places-missiles-woody-south-china-sea-islands>
 on Woody Island, and urged all parties from militarising the contested region.

The citizenship deal applies to those who hold a special category visa 
<https://www.border.gov.au/Trav/Visa-1/444->, the one that lets people stay and 
work in Australia for as long as they remain New Zealand citizens.

Turnbull said a special category visa holder who had been earning more than 
$54,000 a year – the current minimum pay for a skilled migrant – could seek to 
become an Australian citizen.

“This will enable a large number of New Zealanders who are here and have been 
working here for five years, to be able to apply for citizenship,” he said.

“They will obviously be subject to the usual health and security checks in the 
normal way. I think this is a very important recognition of the very close ties 
between Australia andNew Zealand <https://www.theguardian.com/world/newzealand>
.”

Turnbull urged to allow New Zealand to resettle refugees held on Nauru
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/19/turnbull-urged-allow-new-zealand-to-resettle-refugees-on-nauru>
Speaking at the same media conference, Key said the deal was in response to 
advocacy “for the plight of New Zealanders living in Australia who have been in 
a particular category that hasn’t allowed them to become Australian citizens”.

“This step today will help tens of thousands of those New Zealanders to one 
day potentially become Australian citizens,” he said.

“I think they are fine Kiwis; they will make fine Australian citizens. They 
will be ones that we’ll both want to claim as great New Zealanders and great 
Australians.”

The Australian government estimates about 60,000 to 70,000 people will be 
eligible for the new pathway,available from July 2017 
<http://www.border.gov.au/Visasupport/Pages/an-additional-pathway.aspx>. It 
applies only to special category visa holders who arrived in the country 
between February 2001 and the day of the announcement.

Australia’s deportation of New Zealand citizens, including some who have lived 
in Australia most of their lives, has beena continuing source of tension in 
trans-Tasman relations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/16/john-key-to-question-malcolm-turnbull-over-deporting-new-zealanders>
.

Australian legislation passed in 2014 allows non-citizens to be deported if 
they have been sentenced to a year or more in prison.

Turnbull defended the migration law again on Friday, saying it was not 
targeted at a particular country and “applies to you whether you are a New 
Zealander or a Brit or Romanian or American or whatever you may be”.

But he said he had made it clear in discussions with Key last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/17/australia-and-new-zealand-are-family-but-deportations-continue-turnbull>
 that deportees could continue their appeals upon return to New Zealand.

“They are not prejudiced in their appeal by being back in New Zealand, and a 
number are doing so, and there has been actually quite a number of these 
appeals, close to 50% of the appeals have been successful, so you can see the 
policy is being administered in a very thoughtful and practical way,” Turnbull 
said.

Key said that while New Zealand continued to have concerns, it appreciated the 
work Australia was doing on the appeal processes.

As for New Zealand’s willingness to take in 150 refugees who the Australian 
government will not resettle, Key said the annual offer remained on the table 
but had not been taken up by Canberra.

“In the future, if the Australian government decided they wanted to, that’s 
definitely a possibility,” he said.

Turnbull signalled that the government was reluctant to take up the 
longstanding proposal because it was “utterly committed to ensuring that we 
give no encouragement, no marketing opportunities to the people smugglers”.

“We take into account what John has proposed, what John has offered, but we do 
so very thoughtfully, recognising that the one thing we must not do is give an 
inch to the people smugglers,” he said, citing the need to deter people from 
risking dangerous boat journeys to Australia.”

The Australian opposition’s immigration spokesman, Richard Marles, welcomed 
the citizenship announcement, saying it followed Labor’s pledge last year to 
consider the NZ residency and citizenship issue.


Marles said the pre-existing special category visa had allowed NZ citizens to 
stay in Australia indefinitely.

“While this visa category has promoted and supported close ties between our 
two countries, it does have the effect of leaving NZ citizens ‘permanently 
temporary’, preventing them from accessing some social services and health 
benefits that come with permanent residency or citizenship,” he said.
 