
Everett True


So Australia’s been given a wild card 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/feb/10/eurovision-song-contest-invites-australia-to-join-worlds-biggest-party>
 into Eurovision? Reunite the dream team ofNick Cave and Kylie Minogue 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2-qqC5cBI6E>, I say! Have them sing a Gareth 
Liddiard-penned 20-verse number about Manus Island.

No public vote on Australia's entry for Eurovision song contest – live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/live/2015/feb/11/australia-to-compete-in-eurovision-song-contest-live-blog>
Gravitas and critical plaudits aside, the mere presence of the Prince of 
Darkness should cow the opposition into a shivering mess of tangled shiny 
leggings and collapsed bird cages. And in a neat reversal of gender 
expectations, Cave can be the one dancing in the V-necked dress as Minogue 
swoops magisterially down from on high, throwing out shredded copies of the 
last Australian Liberal party manifesto.

(Cave has form here. He’ll be up for it.)

Plus, the time-honoured Aus-Brit rivalry will give the European community yet 
another chance to prove how much they hate the British by giving us their vote. 
12 points!

Clem Bastow

Look, I love Bucks Fizz and ABBA as much as the next pop fanatic, but I have 
to admit that in the 21st century I’ve become something of aEurovision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/eurovision> grinch.

The parties, the costumes (disclosure: I did go to a Eurovision party dressed 
as a member of Lordi; I made no friends that night), the drinking games ... 
Australia’s obsession with the event baffles me. And while I did get on board 
in the glory days when Gina G was permitted to perform her masterpiece,Ooh Aah 
Just A Little Bit <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yOqtDtUEpVM>, due to some no 
doubt complex British ancestry loopholes, I fear that our country’s 
geographically anachronistic inclusion into the event is only going to make the 
local culture of Euromadness even more unbearable.

Marcus Teague

In the gruesome shadow of Australia’s ongoing issues with welcoming refugees, 
it’s a little heartbreaking that a representative from our adrift culture would 
be invited to participate in the world’s most visible pantomime. But could a 
dry ice-drenched stage in Vienna be the forum we need to highlight such 
hypocrisy? To cause a scene?

I nominate Kirin J Callinan <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wuQI5FjeuWE> to 
represent us. His credentials check out. The Sydney guitarist scans as a 
perverse Barry Humphries-cum-Nick Cave character, one slid out of a Baz 
Luhrmann production after hours. With a knack for theatre, nudity, comedy and 
violent affront, he’d be a most representative candidate.

And the view from the couch...


Jazz Twemlow, TV critic 

Eurovision encompasses everything I televisually fear. It’s The Voice combined 
with all the scale and bizarre patriotic trimmings of a World Cup. Then there 
are the contestants who’ve emerged straight from a pointless ABC/SBS 
documentary (S&M Vampires Who Date Their Own Fridge ... or something).

Minus the entrants having to sing their way off a tropical island they’ve just 
built, it pretty much ticks every TV ingredient you can imagine. Yet this 
horrific recipe absolutely works, like an arrangement of offal and used nappies 
on the floor which, viewed from above, perfectly recreates the Mona Lisa. It’s 
confusingly spectacular and even more unmissable now we’re actually competing 
in it.

Go #TeamAustr(al)ia!
 