
Malcolm Turnbull sticks to Abbott pledge to raise defence budget
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/24/malcolm-turnbull-sticks-to-abbott-pledge-to-raise-defence-budget>
Australia’s annual defence spending will increase by $26bn over the next 
decade amid concerns about the increasing pace of military modernisation to its 
north, regional tensions and the continuing threat of terrorism.

The Turnbull government’s defence white paper 
<http://www.defence.gov.au/WhitePaper/> raises concerns about “a number of 
points of friction” including differences between China and the United States 
over the South China Sea, and calls on China to be “more transparent” about its 
defence policies.

The document, which spells out Australia’s assessment of global threats and 
outlines its own defence plans, commits the government to buying 12 new 
submarines - at a total design and construction cost of $50bn - and fulfilling 
a pledge to increase defence spending to 2% of gross domestic product.

It says total funding, including operations, will rise from $32.4bn in the 
2016-17 financial year to $58.7bn in 2025-26. The government says the 
cumulative increase in funding, compared with previous spending plans, amounts 
to $29.9bn over the course of the decade.

Malcolm Turnbull, who released the document in Canberra on Thursday, said the 
government was “absolutely committed to ensuring those funds are available” 
because an island nation needed a strong navy.

But when asked about funding sources, the prime minister said he was “not 
going to speculate about a budget that is well over a decade away”.

Apart from the submarine fleet, the government’s plans include nine new 
anti-submarine warfare frigates, 12 new offshore patrol vessels, seven 
additional P-8A Poseidon maritime surveillance aircraft, 72 F-35A Lightning II 
Joint Strike Fighters, and 12 E/A-18G Growler electronic attack aircraft.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Faustralia-to-increase-defence-spending-by-26bn-amid-rising-regional-tensions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd64728a7190c62a6cfc72ef174cfb70ad2ece644%2F0_0_2980_1489%2F2980.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australia%20to%20increase%20defence%20spending%20by%20%2426bn%20amid%20rising%20regional%20tensions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Faustralia-to-increase-defence-spending-by-26bn-amid-rising-regional-tensions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australia%20to%20increase%20defence%20spending%20by%20%2426bn%20amid%20rising%20regional%20tensions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Faustralia-to-increase-defence-spending-by-26bn-amid-rising-regional-tensions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd64728a7190c62a6cfc72ef174cfb70ad2ece644%2F0_0_2980_1489%2F2980.jpg>
 An E/A-18G Growler – the government plans to operate 12 electronic attack and 
support aircraft. Photograph: Australian Department of Defence/AAP 
The white paper sets out six key drivers of Australia’s security environment, 
including the relationship between the US andChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>, challenges to the stability of the 
rules-based global order, the growing threat from terrorism, the fragility of 
some states in the immediate neighbourhood, and increasing cyberspace threats.

The Australian Signals Directorate detected more than 1,200 cyber security 
incidents in 2015, including attacks on government agencies and non-government 
sectors, according to the white paper.

The document also specifically refers to climate change as “a major challenge” 
for Australia’s Pacific neighbours, which would contribute to food shortages 
and extreme weather events to which Australia would be called on to respond.

The white paper says while “there is no more than a remote chance of a 
military attack on Australian territory by another country”, Australia cannot 
be complacent and must be prepared to respond quickly and effectively when its 
interests are threatened, either by countries or non-state actors like 
terrorists.

It says terrorist attacks in Paris and elsewhere show groups continue to have 
the willingness and ability to launch attacks anywhere.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Fwhats-happening-in-the-south-china-sea-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F17%2F1455716556905%2FKP_1796461_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What's%20happening%20in%20the%20South%20China%20Sea%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Fwhats-happening-in-the-south-china-sea-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%27s%20happening%20in%20the%20South%20China%20Sea%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Fwhats-happening-in-the-south-china-sea-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F17%2F1455716556905%2FKP_1796461_crop_640x360.jpg>
What’s happening in the South China Sea? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/feb/17/whats-happening-in-the-south-china-sea-video>
“We can expect greater uncertainty in Australia’s strategic environment over 
the next two decades as a consequence of: the changes in the distribution of 
power in the Indo-Pacific and globally; the continuing threat of terrorism from 
groups like Daesh and from foreign terrorist fighters; the modernisation of 
regional military capabilities; the introduction of new military technologies 
such as cyber systems; and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and 
ballistic missile technology.”

Like previous white papers, the document says the relationship between the US 
and China will be the most strategically important factor in the security and 
economic development of the Indo-Pacific in coming decades.

It notes China’s navy is now the largest in Asia – and is likely to have 70 
submarines by 2020 – while the country also has the largest air force in Asia.

Within two decades, half of the world’s submarines will be operating in the 
Indo-Pacific and at least half of the world’s advanced combat aircraft will be 
operated by countries in the region.

“As China grows, it will continue to seek greater influence within the region. 
As a major power, it will be important for regional stability that China 
provides reassurance to its neighbours by being more transparent about its 
defence policies,” the document says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Faustralia-to-increase-defence-spending-by-26bn-amid-rising-regional-tensions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F017f179f14b516616df61a6c4ef470166bdc9890%2F0_126_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australia%20to%20increase%20defence%20spending%20by%20%2426bn%20amid%20rising%20regional%20tensions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Faustralia-to-increase-defence-spending-by-26bn-amid-rising-regional-tensions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australia%20to%20increase%20defence%20spending%20by%20%2426bn%20amid%20rising%20regional%20tensions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Faustralia-to-increase-defence-spending-by-26bn-amid-rising-regional-tensions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F017f179f14b516616df61a6c4ef470166bdc9890%2F0_126_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
 The defence minister, Marise Payne, and the prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, 
at the launch of the white paper. Photograph: Mike Bowers for the Guardian 
“The relationship between the United States and China is likely to be 
characterised by a mixture of cooperation and competition depending on where 
and how their interests intersect … While major conflict between the United 
States and China is unlikely, there are a number of points of friction in the 
region in which differences between the United States and China could generate 
rising tensions.

“These points of friction include the East China and South China Seas, the 
airspace above those seas, and in the rules that govern international 
behaviour, particularly in the cyber and space domains.”

The US, which is rebalancing its focus towards the region, would “continue to 
be Australia’s most important strategic partner”.

Australia welcomes China’s economic growth, the document says, and the 
government will “seek to deepen and broaden our important defence relationship 
with China while recognising that our strategic interests may differ in 
relation to some regional and global security issues”.

The document says competing claims for territory and natural resources in 
South East Asia will “continue to provide a potential source of tensions that 
could undermine stability”.

“This combination of competing territorial claims and growth in military 
capability has the potential to destabilise the region and threaten Australia’s 
interests,” it says.

Malcolm Turnbull rejects US request for more Australian troops to fight Isis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/13/malcolm-turnbull-rejects-us-request-for-more-australian-troops-to-fight-isis>
“Australia opposes the use of artificial structures in the South China Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-china-sea> for military purposes ... 
Australia is particularly concerned by the unprecedented pace and scale of 
China’s land reclamation activities.”

It calls on Asean countries and China to agree to a code of conduct as soon as 
possible.

Turnbull declined to say whether the Australian defence force might conduct a 
freedom of navigation operation within 12 nautical miles of disputed islands - 
a position advocated by the former prime minister Tony Abbott, the former 
defence minister Kevin Andrews, andLabor’s defence spokesman, Stephen Conroy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/19/coalition-under-renewed-pressure-to-send-australian-military-to-south-china-sea>
.

“We support and practice freedom of navigation in accordance with 
international law, but we are not going to canvass [or] forecast future ADF 
operations,” the prime minister said.

On Thursday, Conroy called on the foreign affairs minister, Julie Bishop, to 
summon China’s ambassador to ask for an explanation on the reported deployment 
of fighter aircraft to Woody Island in the contested Paracel Islands chain.

In a section on North Asia, the white paper raises concern about North Korea’s 
“threatening behaviour”, with frequent cycles of inter-Korean tensions likely 
to continue.


Elsewhere, the India-Pakistan relationship is deemed to be “one of the 
region’s major points of tension”.

Tensions between the countries “potentially fuelled by terrorist activities, 
could have a wider regional and possibly global impact that would affect 
Australia’s security”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Faustralia-to-increase-defence-spending-by-26bn-amid-rising-regional-tensions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5420613a351b644dd962d85b405a75d1fd969208%2F0_0_2124_1275%2F2124.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australia%20to%20increase%20defence%20spending%20by%20%2426bn%20amid%20rising%20regional%20tensions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Faustralia-to-increase-defence-spending-by-26bn-amid-rising-regional-tensions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australia%20to%20increase%20defence%20spending%20by%20%2426bn%20amid%20rising%20regional%20tensions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Faustralia-to-increase-defence-spending-by-26bn-amid-rising-regional-tensions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5420613a351b644dd962d85b405a75d1fd969208%2F0_0_2124_1275%2F2124.jpg>
 A US navy crewman aboard a surveillance aircraft viewing a computer screen 
purportedly showing Chinese construction in the disputed Spratly Islands. 
Photograph: Reuters 
“Turbulence” in the Middle East, including worsening sectarian tensions and 
changes in regional dynamics, have implications for Australia.

The government says it remains committed to supporting the Iraqi government in 
efforts to defeat Daesh. Russia’s involvement in the Syrian conflict “increases 
the complexity” of the US-led coalition’s efforts.

Australia said Iran’s compliance with the recent nuclear deal “could be a 
critical factor in safeguarding long-term non-proliferation regimes and Middle 
East and global security”.

In the remarks on climate change and the South Pacific, the document says: 
“Climate change will see higher temperatures, increased sea-level rise and will 
increase the frequency and intensity of extreme weather events. These events 
will exacerbate the challenges of population growth and environmental 
degradation, and will contribute to food shortages and undermine economic 
development.”

Australia’s proximity to these countries, and the resources it can deploy, 
means there are “high expectations on us to respond to instability or natural 
disasters, and climate change means we will be called on to do so more often”.

The government is yet to announce the winner of its competitive evaluation 
process for the new submarine fleet, but has been looking at proposals from 
Japanese, German and French bidders.

The document says they should be “regionally superior submarines with a high 
degree of interoperability with the United States … to provide Australia with 
an effective deterrent”. The first submarines would be likely to begin entering 
service in the early 2030s, with construction extending into the late 2040s.

While the government estimates the evaluation, design and construction of the 
new submarine fleet will cost at least $50bn, it is not yet sure how much the 
sustainment will cost.

The defence minister, Marise Payne, said the costs would be spread over a long 
period of time, and the government wanted to ensure a “considerable” role for 
Australian industry.

The chief of the defence force, Mark Binskin, said it was a “rough rule of 
thumb” that sustainment would be twice the cost of construction, but the 
competitive evaluation process would establish the figures.

John Berry, the US ambassador to Australia, said the white paper was “a 
well-considered, comprehensive approach to addressing evolving security 
challenges”.
 