
Pakistan finished at 142-4 on a rain-soaked first day of the second Test as 
dismal conditions prevented any play after tea at the MCG. As far as Melbourne 
weather happenings go it was quite typical, coming as it did after the sun had 
shone unstintingly for all of Christmas Day.

The frustration was mostly Australia’s after three-quarters of their bowling 
attack had gained a gradual ascendancy, with only Mitchell Starc missing out on 
a wicket, though he always looked capable. Spinner Nathan Lyon finished with 
one wicket for the day but his strange cult continues to spread throughout the 
land and at times early in the day it appeared as though large portions of the 
crowd had rolled up to see him alone.

The day started in a reverent and celebratory mood when representatives of the 
Mullagh-Wills Foundation <http://mullaghwillsfoundation.org.au/> – so named for 
Australia’s first sporting great Tom Wills and his team-mate Johnny Mullagh – 
gathered at the sacred and rare scarred tree in the MCG’s surrounds, to 
celebrate the 150th anniversary of thegame between a Wills-led Aboriginal XI 
and the Melbourne Cricket Club 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/magazine/content/story/813705.html>. Today’s 
participants were completing a long journey from the Western District, the 
region from which the bulk of that 1866 team was drawn.

Australia v Pakistan: Boxing Day Test, day one – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/dec/26/australia-v-pakistan-boxing-day-test-day-one-live>
In a cricket scene no longer given to wistful strolls through the past, it was 
a welcome reminder of the depth and permanence of Indigenous Australian culture 
but also its fragility; estimates as to the tree’s age vary from 200-800 years 
but its long-term survival, much like that of Test cricket, is not assured. A 
similar tree in Yarra Park has already perished.

Like today’s sides, the 1866 Aboriginals and their opponents weathered a 
stiflingly-hot Christmas Day before their encounter. There the similarities 
ended. Unlike the stroke-per-ball Aboriginals’ first-day collapse 150 years 
ago, Pakistan made steady progress early by virtue of batting abstinence, 
blunting the opening spells of a slightly off-kilter Starc and luckless Josh 
Hazlewood.

That foxing merely set the scene for the introduction of Lyon, who has 
suffered a curious fate in the past few weeks. After the national embarrassment 
of Hobart he kept his place in this side only due to an injury to his NSW 
team-mate Steve O’Keefe. Now, thanks in no small part to the constant verbal 
barrages of wicket-keeper Matthew Wade, the off-spinner is a kind of walking, 
talking internet meme. Grown men at the ground today had their faces painted 
with his nickname. “Nice Garry” said one, in honour of Wade’s war cry.

When Lyon merely began his warm-up routine during the 11th over of the day, 
almost the entire southern side of the ground rose to its feet as one to salute 
its new cult hero. Lyon didn’t disappoint, immediately tempting Sami Aslam 
forward and claiming an edge, which Steve Smith accepted with relish at first 
slip. A great portion of the 63,478 fans in attendance thus reached a state of 
early and uninhibited delirium in honour of a man who felt friendless and 
jilted only weeks ago.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Faustralia-have-the-better-of-pakistan-on-rain-drenched-first-day-in-melbourne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42ee632592cfedc004ef9d10faaeda124df85b2b%2F0_0_2928_1758%2F2928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australia%20have%20the%20better%20of%20Pakistan%20on%20rain-drenched%20first%20day%20in%20Melbourne%20%7C%20Russell%20Jackson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Faustralia-have-the-better-of-pakistan-on-rain-drenched-first-day-in-melbourne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australia%20have%20the%20better%20of%20Pakistan%20on%20rain-drenched%20first%20day%20in%20Melbourne%20%7C%20Russell%20Jackson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Faustralia-have-the-better-of-pakistan-on-rain-drenched-first-day-in-melbourne%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42ee632592cfedc004ef9d10faaeda124df85b2b%2F0_0_2928_1758%2F2928.jpg>
 Spurred on by a Facebook campaign, thousands of Melbourne cricket fans flocked 
to the MCG to cheer on Australian spinner Nathan Lyon. Photograph: 
Ratnayake/REX/Shutterstock 
With diligence and a refusal to be swallowed up by crowd enthusiasm, Azhar Ali 
and Babar Azam made a decent fist of recovering, compiling an industrious 
42-run stand across 14 overs before lunch until Babar was ushered towards quite 
maddening self-destruction by Hazlewood. Facing the final ball of the session, 
Babar nibbled away when his bat should have been half-tucked under his arm for 
the walk off the ground. As it was, he made the journey alone and doubtless 
humbled.

After the resumption a similar pattern emerged – veteran Younus Khan this time 
stewarding the total to 111 with the immovable Azhar before departing in 
similarly momentum-defying fashion as Babar when he was clean bowled by Jackson 
Bird, who finished with 2-53 from 15.5 overs. Hazlewood’s 1-15 from 13 overs 
was less eye-catching but every bit as valuable.

Shaun Marsh dismisses Chappell criticism, targets strong Big Bash return
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/26/marsh-dismisses-chappell-criticism-targets-big-bash>
In a more condensed fashion, the Tasmanian quick followed the zero-to-hero 
path of Lyon; in the first session Bird looked utterly pedestrian, but whatever 
he munched down on in the break gave him some spark. Soon the right-armer was 
cutting the ball back in to the right-handers with venom and had an oddly 
scattered Misbah flicking an inside edge to a diving Nic Maddinson at short 
leg. Unconquered Azhar and Brisbane Test hero Shafiq practically sprinted from 
the ground when the umpires called for the covers 10 minutes before tea.

Melbourne is nothing if not diverse in its cultural leanings, and often fond 
of inventing traditions of its own. Despite warnings of a heavy fine for 
disorderly conduct – an appropriately bizarre and seemingly arbitrary $1,138, 
as advertised on the ground’s giant screens – one among a large group of men 
dressed as Oompa Loompas was seen skolling beer from his shoe soon after lunch.

Rain dampened such exuberant spirits in the end and not every bit of cricket 
bristled with invention, but history was everywhere to see in Melbourne on 
Monday if you looked hard enough. At the toss of the coin Faith Thomas – the 
first Aboriginal woman to represent any national sporting team when she played 
Test cricket for Australia in 1958 – provided a vital link to the untold story 
of Indigenous cricket, but also gave pause for sombre reflection that so few 
others followed in her footsteps.

Thomas, we discovered this week, learned to bowl fast as a young girl by 
“chuckin’ rocks at galahs” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/23/aboriginal-cricket-pioneer-faith-thomas-im-still-the-fastest-woman-bowler-ever>
, and it was easy to think of cricket’s earthy charms when a player as 
experienced and wise as Pakistan’s veteran Younus was castled so effortlessly 
as he was by Bird. One thing that hasn’t changed in 150 years is the way this 
game can make you look a mug.
 