
Australia first introduced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/01/cabinet-papers-1990-91-labor-wrestled-with-rising-asylum-claims>
 onshore detention facilities in 1991 at Villawood in Sydney and Port Hedland 
in Western Australia. Mandatory detention came in 1992. Bob Hawke’s government 
announced it was because “Australia could be on the threshold of a major wave 
of unauthorised boat arrivals from south-east Asia, which will severely test 
both our resolve and our capacity to ensure that immigration in this country is 
conducted within a planned and controlled framework”.


More than 20 years later, the rhetoric has only worsened against the most 
vulnerable arriving from Syria, Afghanistan, Iraq and Sri Lanka. Policies that 
years ago seemedunimaginable 
<https://newmatilda.com/2016/01/12/the-long-journey-to-nauru/>, such as 
imprisoning refugees on remote Pacific islands, are the norm and blessed with
bipartisan support 
<https://overland.org.au/2015/08/all-aboard-the-bipartisan-ship/>. 

The sad reality is Australia’s refugee policies are envied and copied around 
the world, especially in Europe, now struggling to cope with a huge influx of 
refugees from the Middle East and Africa. Walls and fences arebeing built 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/31/austria-fence-slovenia-wire-europe-refugees>
 across the continent in futile attempts to keep out the unwanted. Aprivatised 
security 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/10/refugees-europe-european-commission-migration-crisis>
 apparatus is working to complement the real agenda. Australia is an island but 
it has long implementedremote 
<http://rightnow.org.au/topics/asylum-seekers/politicised-privatised-and-silenced-by-bureaucracy/>
 detention camps with high fences and isolation for its inhabitants.

Cabinet papers 1990-91: Labor wrestled with rising asylum claims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/01/cabinet-papers-1990-91-labor-wrestled-with-rising-asylum-claims>
As a journalist and activist who has publicly campaigned against Canberra’s 
asylum policies for over a decade, this brutal reality is a bitter pill. In 
early 2014 I called forUN sanctions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jan/20/its-time-for-un-sanctions-on-australia-our-government-deserves-nothing-less>
 against Australia for ignoring humanitarian law and willfully abusing refugees 
in its case both on the mainland and Nauru and Manus Island. I still hold this 
view but must recognise facts; the international mood in 2016 for asylum 
seekers is hostile. As much as I’d like to say that my homeland is a pariah on 
the international stage, it’s simply not the case.

When Denmark recently introduced a bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/12/denmark-to-force-refugees-to-give-up-valuables-under-proposed-asylum-law>
 to take refugees’ valuable belongings in order to pay for their time in 
detention camps, this was remarkably similar to Australiacharging 
<http://www.theage.com.au/articles/2002/08/26/1030053033986.html> asylum 
seekers for their stay behind bars. Either directly or indirectly, Europe is 
following Australia’s draconian lead.

Consider the facts in Europe: after Sweden and Denmark reintroduced border 
controls, a borderless continent is now in serious jeopardy. TheSchengen 
agreement <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Schengen_Agreement> – introduced in 
1985 to support free movement between EEC countries – is on theverge of collapse
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/05/is-the-schengen-dream-of-europe-without-borders-becoming-a-thing-of-the-past?CMP=share_btn_tw>
. In early January, the European Unionadmitted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/05/refugees-eu-resettles-tiny-number-pledged-target-four-months?CMP=twt_a-world_b-gdnafrica>
 it had relocated just 0.17% of the refugees it pledged to help four months 
earlier. In 2015 more than 1 million people arrived by boat in Europe.

This mirrors Australia’s lacklustre efforts 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/asylum-seeker-detention-times-blow-out-to-record-levels-under-malcolm-turnbull-20160112-gm41v7.html>
 to resettle refugees in its onshore detention camps. Figures released by the 
Department of Immigration and Border Protection in December found that asylum 
seekers had spent an average of445 days behind barbed wire 
<https://www.border.gov.au/ReportsandPublications/Documents/statistics/immigration-detention-statistics-30-dec-2015.pdf>
. In both Australia and Europe there’s general acceptance of these situations 
because those seeking asylum have been so successfully demonised as potential 
terrorists, suspiciously Muslim and threatening a comfortably western way of 
life.

Is the Schengen dream of Europe without borders becoming a thing of the past?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/05/is-the-schengen-dream-of-europe-without-borders-becoming-a-thing-of-the-past>
Germany, a nation that took in more than 1 million refugees in 2015 despite 
being unprepared for the large numbers, is now facing apublic backlash 
<http://america.aljazeera.com/opinions/2016/1/u-turn-on-asylum-seekers-may-spell-merkels-downfall.html>
 against Chancellor Angela Merkel’s welcoming stance, leading to fear and 
rising far-right support. Australia has taken far fewer people with little 
social unrest and yet still unleashed over two decades a highly successful, 
though dishonest, campaign tostigmatise 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/03/opinion/australias-brutal-treatment-of-migrants.html?_r=0>
 boat arrivals. The result is the ability of successive Australian governments 
to create an environment wheresexual abuse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/06/six-year-old-refugee-allegedly-sexually-assaulted-on-nauru>
 against refugees is tolerated andcovered up 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/nauru-assaults-and-illness-covered-up-by-government-lawyers-group-says-20150826-gj8q56.html>
. A politician is unlikely tolose his job 
<http://www.crikey.com.au/2016/01/11/time-for-dutton-to-go/> over it.

Europe and Australia promote themselves as regions of openness. It’s an 
illusion when it comes to refugee policy. Hungary’s prime minister, Viktor 
Orban, despite his bombastic and discriminatory attitude towards refugees and 
Jews, is increasingly viewed across Europe as providingnecessary warnings 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/21/world/europe/hungary-viktor-orban-migrant-crisis.html?_r=0>
 of the continent’s struggles. EU officials in Brussels told the New York Times 
that Orban was often right but wished he hadn’t couched his comments in 
conspiracy theories. Too few in Hungary arepublicly resisting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/06/hungary-two-tailed-dog-viktor-orban>
 this wave of racism.

“Whenever Hungary made an argument the response was always: ‘They are stupid 
Hungarians. They are xenophobes and Nazis,’” Zoltan Kovacs, a government 
spokesman, told the Times. “Suddenly, it turns out that what we said was true. 
The naivete ofEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> is really 
quite stunning.”

Brussels has proposed an Australian-style border force to monitor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/dec/11/brussels-plans-to-strip-schengen-nations-of-authority-over-borders-europe>
 the EU’s borders and deport asylum seekers. Germany and France support the 
move. This proves that the most powerful nations have little interest in 
resolving the reasons so many people are streaming into Europe (such as war and 
climate change) and prefer to pull up the drawbridge. Former Australian prime 
minister Tony Abbott encouraged Europe toturn back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/28/tony-abbott-urges-europe-to-adopt-australian-border-policies>
 the refugee boats and it seems Brussels is listening. Europe is also copying 
Australia’s stance ofprivatising 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/how-companies-have-been-exploiting-the-refugee-crisis-for-profit-a6706587.html>
 the detention centres for refugees.

Tony Abbott urges Europe to adopt Australian policies in refugee crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/28/tony-abbott-urges-europe-to-adopt-australian-border-policies>
None of this worries Rupert Murdoch’s Australian. In light of the New Year’s 
Evesex attacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/05/germany-crisis-cologne-new-years-eve-sex-attacks>
 in Cologne, the papereditorialised 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/opinion/editorials/new-threat-to-the-open-society/news-story/fb1d96d37f2adda2d6c7110e9ac40c1d>
 in early 2016 that Europe must avoid “reckless idealism” and embrace an 
“enlightened world” where gender equality is accepted by all. The outlet has 
not expressed similar outrage with the immigration department’sblatant disregard
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/21/how-australias-immigration-detention-regime-crushed-fazel-chegeni>
 for refugee lives. It’s also unclear how pushing for military action in Iraq, 
Syria, Libya, Afghanistan and other Muslim nations, pushed by the paper for 
years, contributes to an “enlightened world”.

It’s comforting to think of Australia as a global pariah on the world stage, 
pursuingracist policies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/apr/20/tiny-hearts-and-balls-of-steel-this-is-what-the-world-thinks-of-australia>
 against asylum seekers from war-torn nations. But it’s untrue. Canberra’s 
militarised “solution” to refugees is admired in many parts of Europe because 
it represents an ideology far easier to process and sell than identifying and 
adapting to changing global migration patterns.

None of this should stop activists fighting for a more just outcome, in both 
Australia and Europe, but today it’s more likely European officials will ask 
Australian officials for advice on how to “stop the boats” than chastise it for
mistreating 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-01-02/pregnant-asylum-seeker-wanted-an-abortion-foi-documents-say/7064038>
 a raped refugee.

Australia has become an inspiration for all the wrong reasons.

 