
Freedom is difficult to resuscitate once extinguished. Australian 
attorney-general George Brandis recentlychastised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2014/oct/14/george-brandis-takes-on-journalist-critics-in-defence-of-security-laws>
 journalists for criticising his government’s new laws aimed at preventing 
reporting about “special intelligence operations”. Because he’s a culture 
warrior brawler, Brandis damned the “usual suspects of the paranoid, fantasist 
left” but also “reputable conservative commentators” for questioning his 
judgment over what citizens should and should not learn through the media.

It’s a tragic irony that the loudest voices backing the current war on 
whistle-blowers are the very politicians who are theoretically elected to 
protect and enhance free speech and disclosure.

“Never believe anything until it’s officially denied” was a favourite 
expression of the Irish journalist Claud Cockburn, father of the British 
reporterPatrick Cockburn 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/biography/patrick-cockburn>. It’s a motto worth 
remembering as we’re faced with a barrage of state-led and private interest 
attacks on leaks and leakers.

The examples are many, but what occurred on Thursday raises grave concerns for 
whistleblowers in Australia. Take the case of Freya Newman, a young and 
part-time librarian at Whitehouse School of Design in Sydney. She accessed 
information on the institute’s computer system that showed prime minister Tony 
Abbott’s daughter, Frances Abbott, received a “chairman’s scholarship” worth 
$60,000.

Newman has pleaded guilty to the offence of unauthorised access to a computer 
system, and on Thursday appeared in court. The prosecution appeared not to be 
pushing for a jail sentence but a record of the crime. The fact remains that 
Newman has been aggressively pursued for a noble example of exposing a matter 
of public interest.

Newman’s whistleblowing was defended 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/sep/22/freya-newman-the-whistleblower-behind-frances-abbotts-scholarship-should-be-thanked-not-punished>
 by lawyer Julian Burnside as vital insights into secret access and clearly 
should be designated as in the public interest. Crucially, he notes that she 
would have been likely protected by whistleblower protection if working for a 
government organisation but she was exposed to legal censure because she was 
employed by a private organisation.

Independent news website New Matilda <https://newmatilda.com/> has released a 
slew of leaks this year and faced heavy, but predictable criticism. New Matilda 
operates differently, aiming to piss off the pompously positioned. The current 
controversy over Sydney University’s Barry Spurr, a consultant to the Abbott 
government’s review of the national curriculum, is yet another case of smearing 
a whistle-blower whoreleased 
<https://newmatilda.com/2014/10/19/professor-barry-spurr-smoking-gun-institutional-racism>
 a slew of racist and sexist emails to New Matilda.

In an outrageous attack on press freedom, Spurr has tried to legally force New 
Matilda to reveal its sources 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2014/oct/21/barry-spurr-takes-legal-action-to-compel-new-matilda-to-reveal-source-of-emails>
 and prevent them publishing anything else related to the story. It’s a case of 
attempted intimidation that New Matilda has happily challenged, and later on 
ThursdaySpurr dropped his bid to expose the source 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2014/oct/23/barry-spurr-drops-legal-action-to-force-new-matilda-to-reveal-source-of-emails>
, although the case is still continuing. I’m yet to read other media outlets 
offering support for the small publisher.

Rather than address the issues raised by Spurr’s compromised position as a man 
who longs for colonial times, The Australian’s Sharri Marksonreported 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/media/sydney-university-professor-barry-spurr-claims-racist-emails-were-hacked/story-e6frg996-1227094290191>
 that the emails may have been obtained by hacking, allegationsslammed 
<https://newmatilda.com/2014/10/19/professor-barry-spurr-smoking-gun-institutional-racism>
 by editor Chris Graham.

The source of the leak is again questioned 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/opinion/editorials/spurr-of-the-moment-damage/story-e6frg71x-1227096650332>
 in an Australian editorial: “the [New Matilda] website maintains [the story] 
is based on leaks from a source, rather than hacking, as Professor Spurr 
alleges”. Even entertainer Barry Humphrieshas damned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/oct/21/barry-humphries-barry-spurr-email-row>
 the release of the emails, wilfully ignoring the political significance of 
such a man with vile views toperpetuate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/oct/21/literary-values-and-appaling-opinions-co-exist>
 white Australia in the education system of the 21st century.

There are many other examples of this war on whistleblowers in Australia. 
Immigration minister Scott Morrison has maintained amedieval seal on details 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/11/operation-sovereign-borders-chief-unable-to-answer-asylum-questions>
 over his border security policy and yet has been happy to find friendly, News 
Corp Australia reporters to smear critics of his policy. The government has now 
referred Save the Children workers 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/afp-asked-to-investigate-immigration-minister-scott-morrison-over-alleged-leak-20141007-10rhtu.html>
 to be investigated by the Australian Federal Police over “unauthorised” 
disclosures of information. It was clear intimidation, designed to make 
employees shut up.


In a haze of claims and counter-claims, with Operation Sovereign Borders 
celebrated 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/immigration/lack-of-asylumseeker-boats-to-save-25bn/story-fn9hm1gu-1227096593302>
 as saving taxpayer dollars, the detail of a breach of security within the 
department is ignored or dismissed as insignificant. The source of these 
allegations against Save the Children was first reportedin a Daily Telegraph 
story 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/news/nsw/truth-overboard-claims-of-asylum-seeker-abuse-on-nauru-were-fabricated/story-fni0cx12-1227078372834>
 as being from an intelligence report that they also appear to have been 
leaked, and which was published on the day of Morrison’s announcement about the 
investigation. Leaking to obedient journalists doesn’t indicate a healthy 
whistle-blower culture but rather a docile political environment that rewards 
favouritism. It reduces democracy to sanctioned drops into reporter’s in-boxes.

Amidst all the fury over angry ideologues concerned that their bigoted 
conservative values are under attack lie the importance of whistle-blowing 
without fear or favour. It’s a global problem that’s being led by Nobel Peace 
Prize winner himself, US president Barack Obama. His administration is publicly 
supportive of disclosure while prosecuting countless people including the New 
York Times’James Risen 
<http://www.democracynow.org/2014/10/14/james_risen_prepared_to_pay_any> and 
perfecting theselective 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/aug/23/bin-laden-raid-exposes-obama-administration-selective-secrecy>
 leak to cosy reporters. It’s a particular problem with national security 
journalism, where the vast bulk of writing is left tostenographers 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/news/world/cias-new-generation-of-killer-queens-comes-to-the-fore/story-fnb64oi6-1227095417219>
 of the bloated intelligence and military apparatus.

Effective whistleblower legislation in democracies isn’t enough because 
governments have proven their willingness to protect anything that embarrasses 
or shames them. The persecution of Julian Assange,Edward Snowden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/edward-snowden>, Chelsea Manning and 
Thomas Drake, amongst others, is about saving face and not lives. Journalists, 
aggressive media companies and citizens must revolt and challenge the very 
fundamentals of our secretive age. This means publishing state and business 
secrets and widening the overly narrow definition of what constitutes being in 
the public interest.

Rejecting the criminalising of journalism should be in every reporter’s DNA. 
The Snowden releases have fundamentallyaltered 
<http://www.newyorker.com/news/daily-comment/snowden-changed-journalism> the 
ways in which we understand digital journalism and how we must protect sources 
away from prying private and government eyes.

Over a year ago I wrote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/aug/22/australia-surveillance-documents-whistleblowing>
 an article outlining the range of documents and stories that need to be told 
by the invaluable work of whistle-blowers. Today I’m calling for all documents 
that reveal the operational details of Operation Sovereign Borders, the legal 
justification for providing Iraqi immunity for Australian special forces in 
Iraq and the evidence of Australian acquiescence in abandoning citizen Julian 
Assange at London’s Ecuadorian embassy.
 