
The country has survived the Abbott years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/18/vale-tony-abbott-both-a-unique-man-and-a-unique-failure>
 bruised but with its best instincts intact. Despite the fear campaigns of the 
last few years, Australians remain tolerant, proud, resilient and 
overwhelmingly optimistic.

That’s the message of the eighth survey of social cohesion by Andrew Markus 
for theScanlon Foundation <http://scanlonfoundation.org.au/>. “What makes 
Australia unique,” says Markus, “is its acceptance of immigration and cultural 
diversity. And it’s strengthening.”

The mission of the Scanlon Foundation is to measure how this migrant nation 
hangs together. The figures are subtle. Old White Australia is not yet a corpse 
but Markus found in 2015, “lowered experience of discrimination, heightened 
acceptance of immigration and cultural diversity, and more positive future 
expectations”.

Markus, a professor at Monash University and veteran of these surveys, 
contrasts the mood in Australia with the growing hostility to immigration in 
Europe. In the last fortnight, elections have seen one far right 
anti-immigration party surging in popularity in Switzerland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/18/swiss-elections-anti-immigration-svp-party-heading-for-record-victory>
 and anothertaking power in Poland. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/27/poland-law-justice-party-wins-235-seats-can-govern-alone>

Vale, Tony Abbott – both a unique man and a unique failure | David Marr
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/18/vale-tony-abbott-both-a-unique-man-and-a-unique-failure>
Soundings taken in Tony Abbott’s last months found the country uneasy about 
social justice, particularly the gap between rich and poor. In Julia Gillard’s 
last year, 34% of us thought the gap was growing “too large”. But in the weeks 
before Abbott fell, that figure had risen dramatically to 44%.

We aren’t gloomy about the economy. Despite the end of the mining boom and 
endless warnings in the press about hard times ahead, the Scanlon figures show 
us to be ceaselessly confident about our own and the country’s prosperity. 
Markus reports 71% of us are satisfied or very satisfied with our present 
financial situation.

But, again, we’re not so sure the future looks fair. Under Gillard, 82% of us 
thought Australia a country where hard work guaranteed a better life. That’s 
slipped a few points under Abbott with a marked drop of 5% in those who 
strongly agree with the proposition that work wins opportunity.

Abbott did nothing to restore Australia’s lost trust in government. Before 
Kevin Rudd <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/kevin-rudd> turned his 
back on the greatest moral challenge of our time, 48% of us trusted Canberra to 
do the right thing by the country almost always or most of the time. Since 
Rudd’s collapse, that has flatlined at 30%.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F28%2Fsocial-cohesion-scanlon-survey-binds-australia-stronger-than-ever-even-as-tony-abbott-came-unstuck%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b487262bd4a7187939019e8a63536855280a243%2F0_0_1920_1152%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Social%20cohesion%20binds%20Australia%20stronger%20than%20ever%20even%20as%20Tony%20Abbott%20came%20unstuck%20%7C%20David%20Marr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F28%2Fsocial-cohesion-scanlon-survey-binds-australia-stronger-than-ever-even-as-tony-abbott-came-unstuck%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Social%20cohesion%20binds%20Australia%20stronger%20than%20ever%20even%20as%20Tony%20Abbott%20came%20unstuck%20%7C%20David%20Marr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F28%2Fsocial-cohesion-scanlon-survey-binds-australia-stronger-than-ever-even-as-tony-abbott-came-unstuck%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b487262bd4a7187939019e8a63536855280a243%2F0_0_1920_1152%2F1920.jpg>
 Abbott at a press conference in 2015 backed by eight Australian flags. Despite 
his campaign against the ‘death cult’ it ‘never actually translated into some 
long-term basis for support of government’, Markus says. Photograph: Mike 
Bowers for the Guardian 
For a few months, Abbott’s campaign against the death cult 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/30/tony-abbott-intensifies-rhetoric-about-isis-calling-it-an-apocalyptic-death-cult>
 last year resulted in a flowering of confidence in Canberra. But that didn’t 
last. Markus says: “Whipping upconcern about terrorism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2014/sep/02/tony-abbott-isis-death-cult-iraq-australia>
 and national security never actually translated into some long-term basis for 
support of government.”

Abbott, it seems, was not even much good at driving panic politics. 

That Labor voters and Greens are especially sceptical of Canberra these days 
is to be expected. Their opponents are in power. One of the most remarkable 
findings in the survey is the verdict of Liberal and National party voters on 
their own government: only 50% of them thought Canberra under Abbott could be 
trusted to do the right thing by Australia.

But we love authority. Once again, the Scanlon survey shows Australia’s 
profound faith in the police: 88% of us have “some” or “a lot” of trust in the 
officers of the law. We trust bosses far more than unions (72% to 41%), and 
police far more than lawyers and the courts.

Markus wonders if the figures for trust in politics and government might 
improve under Turnbull.

To the distress of judges who have been through these figures with Markus, the 
legal system comes out rather poorly: only 73% of us trust the bench, bar and 
magistrates. But judges can take comfort from the national verdict on political 
parties: only 38% of us trust them.

Markus wonders if the figures for trust in politics and government might 
improve under Turnbull. It’s too soon to tell. We will know next year when his 
teams are back in the field. But he’s absolutely confident the core finding of 
this year’s survey – the continuing solid support for multi-racial, multi-faith 
immigration on a large scale – will not falter because of changes of leadership.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F28%2Fsocial-cohesion-scanlon-survey-binds-australia-stronger-than-ever-even-as-tony-abbott-came-unstuck%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac2752d21838c1dc029bf0a6956cb5869f4483cb%2F0_271_5184_3112%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Social%20cohesion%20binds%20Australia%20stronger%20than%20ever%20even%20as%20Tony%20Abbott%20came%20unstuck%20%7C%20David%20Marr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F28%2Fsocial-cohesion-scanlon-survey-binds-australia-stronger-than-ever-even-as-tony-abbott-came-unstuck%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Social%20cohesion%20binds%20Australia%20stronger%20than%20ever%20even%20as%20Tony%20Abbott%20came%20unstuck%20%7C%20David%20Marr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F28%2Fsocial-cohesion-scanlon-survey-binds-australia-stronger-than-ever-even-as-tony-abbott-came-unstuck%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac2752d21838c1dc029bf0a6956cb5869f4483cb%2F0_271_5184_3112%2F5184.jpg>
 Families and friends gather at a house near the Lakemba mosque in Sydney where 
thousands of Muslims line the streets to mark the end of the holy month of 
Ramadan. About 76% of Australians say race or religion should have not be taken 
into account in accepting migrants. Photograph: Jane Dempster/AAP 
He argues there are few countries that come close to matching Australia’s 
enthusiasm for opening its doors – in a carefully controlled manner – to the 
people of the world. “Australia and Canada and forget the rest. Maybe NZ.”

Even the current dip in the economy has not given Australians pause. “I 
suspect people don’t know the numbers and don’t understand the numbers,” says 
Markus. “But they now associate immigration with growth and prosperity.”

Multiculturalism means different things to different people, but its triumph 
now seems complete. More strongly than ever, 86% of Australians believe 
“multiculturalism has been good for Australia”. Ask Australians if we should 
choose migrants on the basis of race or religion and 76% say no.

We now associate immigration with growth and prosperity
Andrew Markus, Scanlon Foundation 
In world terms, Markus argues, that’s an emphatic endorsement. “They aren’t 
saying that in France and Germany.” More than 60% of us believe Australians 
should do more to learn about the customs and heritage of those who settle 
here. The old assimilationist position – that immigrants must adapt and become 
like Australians – is held by a mere 23% of us.

Those figures are not, perhaps, as splendid as they may seem. We are a half 
and half nation of old hands and newcomers. That so many of us were born abroad 
(27%) or are the children of at least one parent born abroad (21%) is yet 
another measure that makes Australia unique.

But it also suggests that resentment to other races settling here remains 
strong among white or – to use the Scanlon language – third-generation 
Australians.

What do Australians think of Muslims? This year, 22% of us admitted negative 
or strongly negative feelings towards them. That’s high. Hostility to 
Christians runs at 4% and to Buddhists a little less than 5%.

But an exercise conducted last year by Marcus showed 28% of third-generation 
Australians, when quizzed on the phone, admitted negative feelings to Muslims. 
Put the same question to the same Australians online – where they might answer 
more freely - and the figure rises to 44%.

Australia in 2014: 'stop the boats' helps nation feel warmer to immigrants
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2014/oct/28/-sp-australians-in-2014-a-happy-people-with-a-deep-attachment-to-country-and-culture>
Markus was pleased to report in 2015 a significant fall in the numbers of 
Australians experiencing discrimination because of their colour, race or 
religion. Overall, the figures are down from 19% in 2013 to 14.5% this year. 
But broken down by race, the numbers are still challenging.

He found 28% of Australians born in India and 25% of those born in China 
experienced discrimination of some kind in the previous 12 months. Little of it 
is physical abuse. Much of it happens at work and not only from fellow workers. 
“It could be bosses.”

Neighbourhoods seem more welcoming. “The data indicates neighbourhoods in 
general are functioning well,” says Markus. “It indicates people who are not 
happy with their neighbourhoods have probably moved away and the ones who stay 
are in large measure reasonably happy with the way things are going.”

Ask Australians if we should choose migrants on the basis of race or religion 
and 76% say no

The Scanlon figures do not suggest tough times are alienating new settlers. 
Just about all of us – in 2015 it was 93% – feel a sense of belonging in this 
country and 89% of us also feel pride in the Australian way of life. While we 
may not be as ecstatically happy as we once were, 89% of us report being happy 
or very happy in 2015.

That sunny mood is not disturbed by any worries we might have about the fate 
of refugees trying to make their way here under their own steam. Asked to 
nominate the most important problem facing Australia today, 2% of us nominated 
concern over the poortreatment of asylum seekers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/28/abyan-pregnant-refugee-on-nauru-will-return-to-australia-for-medical-treatment>
.

The boats have stopped but Australia remains deeply divided on the issue. The 
figures have barely budged in three years. Only among Greens voters is there a 
majority – 64% – for allowing boat people a permanent home in this country. 
After that, support falls off a cliff: only 11% of Liberal and National party 
voters can countenance the idea of letting boat people land here and stay.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F28%2Fsocial-cohesion-scanlon-survey-binds-australia-stronger-than-ever-even-as-tony-abbott-came-unstuck%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48a41aa155a39a9e5eb96eb1b592d5c55e547cb7%2F0_0_1920_1152%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Social%20cohesion%20binds%20Australia%20stronger%20than%20ever%20even%20as%20Tony%20Abbott%20came%20unstuck%20%7C%20David%20Marr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F28%2Fsocial-cohesion-scanlon-survey-binds-australia-stronger-than-ever-even-as-tony-abbott-came-unstuck%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Social%20cohesion%20binds%20Australia%20stronger%20than%20ever%20even%20as%20Tony%20Abbott%20came%20unstuck%20%7C%20David%20Marr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F28%2Fsocial-cohesion-scanlon-survey-binds-australia-stronger-than-ever-even-as-tony-abbott-came-unstuck%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48a41aa155a39a9e5eb96eb1b592d5c55e547cb7%2F0_0_1920_1152%2F1920.jpg>
 A growing number of Australians are worried about the gap between rich and 
poor. In the last week of Tony Abbott’s prime ministership 44% listed it as a 
concern, compared with 34% under Julia Gillard. Photograph: Christopher Thomond 
for the Guardian 
The figures show how potently damaging this is for Labor where 26% of party 
supporters would let boat people live here and 22% want to see their boats 
forced back to Indonesia. Into that split, the government drives a great wedge 
again and again. Labor is left permanently uneasy and discredited in the eyes 
of its allies among the well educated, the well off and the young.

The young – those 18 to 29 years old – are shown by Markus to have slightly 
different political priorities to their elders. More are concerned about the 
environment and far more about the poor treatment of asylum seekers.

But what sets them apart is rather muted pride in their country and their 
openness to the world. They are far happier even than the rest of us about the 
level of migration to Australia; they more emphatically disagree that migrants 
should be chosen on the basis of race and religion; they are far more 
enthusiastic about learning from those who come here to live; and they are 
twice as keen to see governments help minorities preserve their customs and 
traditions.

On the evidence of the latest Scanlon survey in a series that goes all the way 
back to early Rudd, the young are fond enough of Turnbull’s Australia, but they 
have something more exciting in mind.
 