
A top Australian police officer, Nick Kaldas, is joining an investigation into 
the alleged murders of IRA members by a British spy codenamed Stakeknife during 
the Troubles inNorthern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>
.

The former New South Wales deputy police commissioner who resigned abruptly 
earlier this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/25/nick-kaldas-should-be-next-nsw-police-commissioner-mps-tell-mike-baird>
 has been asked to join the six-person steering committee leadingthe 
investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/oct/21/northern-ireland-police-stakeknife-investigate-murder-freddie-scappaticci>
.

Was an IRA informer so valuable that murder was committed to protect him?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2000/sep/25/northernireland.johnmullin> 
Stakeknife was a British double agent for about 20 years. He infiltrated the 
top ranks of the IRA and has been connected to the murders ofIRA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ira> men.

“It’s a complex investigation by any measure and it spans a number of years – 
the investigations team has already hit the ground running,” Kaldas told Radio 
National. “I understand they have already undertaken many steps in interviewing 
witnesses and victims’ families.

“I am humbled and quite honoured for an Australian to be asked to be part of 
this, and I saw it as really important in getting the truth and getting justice 
and closure for the families of the victims.”

Kaldas said he had been approached because of his work investigating the 
assassinations of 21 people in Lebanon and his extensive homicide investigation 
experience in Australia.

He acknowledged the political sensitivity of investigating the British army 
for crimes against Irish Catholics during the Troubles but referenced public 
pressure as one of the main factors behind the investigation.

Police bugging inquiry calls on NSW government to apologise to Nick Kaldas
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/feb/25/police-bugging-inquiry-calls-on-nsw-government-to-apologise-to-nick-kaldas>
“I think the pain being felt by the victims’ families, the voices reached an 
crescendo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jun/01/families-justice-ira-victims-executed-as-informers-british-army-agent-stakeknife>
 and they decided to lance the boil, have an inquiry and hopefully that will 
get everyone closure,” he said.

Kaldas will travel to the UK in December. He said the job would be a part-time 
role.

When asked if there had been any restrictions put on him, he responded: “None 
at all, they want frank and fearless advice and that’s what they are going to 
get.”

Before he resigned from NSW police he signalled an interest in becoming police 
commissioner. “I’ve always had a passion for serving New South Wales and I 
absolutely have a passion for serving the men and women inNew South Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales> police, if called 
on I would have to seriously consider it, but I am doing other things now and 
heading in a different direction,” Kaldas said.

“I’m in a different space at the moment, I don’t really see that happening in 
the current environment.”
 