
It’s the swaggering and unthinking bravado that hits you. Australian prime 
minister Tony Abbott threatens to “shirtfront 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-10-13/abbott-to-shirtfront-vladimir-putin-at-brisbane-g20/5810002>
” Russian leader Vladimir Putin when he arrives in Australia for the G20. 
Moscow responds via Pravda bycomparing 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-10-15/moscow-responds-to-abbott-shirtfront-comment/5814258>
 Abbott to Pol Pot and Hitler. Australian senator Jacqui Lambie thenpraises 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2014/oct/14/jacqui-lambie-vladimir-putin-great-values-g20-video>
 Putin as a “strong leader” with “great values”.

This is what passes for mainstream political dialogue in 2014. It’s 
unsurprising that a recent Griffith University studyfound 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/dysfunction-strips-faith-in-politics/story-fn59niix-1227085758676>
 Australians are deeply disenchanted with the political process.

“We are no longer citizens, we no longer have leaders”, NSA whistleblower 
Edward Snowden <http://rt.com/news/195244-snowden-rid-dropbox-privacy/> told 
The New Yorker last week: “We’re subjects, and we have rulers.”

He articulates a feeling many of us have about the modern world, of the 
political and media elites merely shifting deck chairs on the Titanic while 
powerful interests consolidate power and reduce our privacy. It’s inconceivable 
today that a leading Australian politician would publicly condemn ubiquitous, 
global spying undertaken by the US through the Five Eyes intelligence sharing 
alliance. Apart from showing theeffectiveness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/sep/23/of-course-australia-is-going-back-to-iraq-thats-how-a-us-client-is-expected-to-behave>
 of the US lobby, it’s a sad reflection on our unquestioning subservience to US 
military and commercial interests.

Daily politics is often little more than theatre designed to distract us from 
the real issues of the day. Because parochial politicians have little power or 
willingness to challenge the fundamentals of our world - mass surveillance, 
vulture capitalism and endless war against ever-changing enemies - they prefer 
playing verbal games in futile attempts to protect us from the vagaries and 
unpredictability of the outside world. They fail because they benefit too much 
by maintaining the existing,unequal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jul/17/capital-twenty-first-century-thomas-piketty-review>
 economic order.

Too many reporters are happy to play along, endlessly debating whether 
“shirtfronting” is appropriate language for a prime minister to articulate. 
It’s not, but what matters is how Australia celebrates ignorance on issues of 
truly great importance.

Take the recent discussion around the Abbott government’s changes to terrorism 
andsurveillance 
<http://www.smh.com.au/digital-life/consumer-security/terror-laws-clear-senate-enabling-entire-australian-web-to-be-monitored-and-whistleblowers-to-be-jailed-20140926-10m8ih.html>
 laws. Apart from being supported by the Labor opposition – frontbencher 
Anthony Albanese’s belated and pointless disquiet over the laws was political
posturing 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/anthony-albanese-breaks-ranks-on-labors-support-for-terror-laws-20141012-114wce.html>
 of the most transparent kind since his party had already acquiesced with them 
– it appeared that most politicians who heard the words terrorism and ISIS just 
waved the legislation through.

This week’s ABC Q&A featured <http://www.abc.net.au/tv/qanda/txt/s4083189.htm> 
Labor MP Kate Ellis and Liberal MP Kelly O’Dwyer and neither woman could 
adequately explain it. Co-panellist Julian Burnsidetweeted 
<https://twitter.com/JulianBurnside/status/521641283022909441>: “Tonight’s 
#Qanda <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Qanda?src=hash> showed that at least two 
MPs had not actually read or understood the national security legislation they 
supported.”

 In a healthy political culture, unlike ours, O’Dwyer and Ellis would be 
slammed for giving away our freedoms so casually. But this won’t happen because 
shows like Q&A elevate the art of banal conversations to an artform by 
expecting all guests to have opinions on issues over which they have no clue. 
That’s “democracy in action”.

This is not an argument for only “experts” to be heard in our media, far too 
often these are the same people whoadvocate war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/oct/02/instant-islamists-instant-threats-and-instant-experts-were-caught-in-a-sudden-terror-panic>
 against any Muslim entity, but a call for public accountability of elected 
officials and journalists. Instead, we’re expected to believe that News 
Corporation’s Daily Telegraph tabloid, in a new TV adfeaturing 
<http://junkee.com/looking-for-some-media-bias-heres-the-premier-of-new-south-wales-starring-in-an-ad-for-the-daily-telegraph/43132>
 Liberal premier Mike Baird, isn’t a shameless attempt to proudly claim that 
Murdoch’s journalists aren’t insiders.

After all, Rupert’s great vision, expressed 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/newsbysector/mediatechnologyandtelecoms/media/11156095/How-Mr-Murdoch-nearly-missed-his-appointment-with-destiny.html>
 again recently to G20 finance ministers, is damning socialism, praising 
deregulation, small government and unfettered capitalism. Such thinking has 
helped him and his mateshandsomely 
<http://online.wsj.com/articles/americans-wealth-hits-new-record-in-1st-quarter-1401985427>
.

Australia is undergoing a Tea party revolution without the colourful 
Confederate flags. Apparently a t-shirt that reads, “if you don’t love it, 
leave” is a stirring paean to patriotism. Thanks,Miranda Devine 
<http://blogs.news.com.au/dailytelegraph/mirandadevine/index.php/dailytelegraph/comments/the_lefts_race_to_call_us_all_bigots/>
. Liberal backbencher Cory Bernardi, here seen suspiciously smiling whilesitting
 <https://twitter.com/corybernardi/status/521304371368562689> alongside 
real-life Muslims, is one of the most effective spear-carriers for the local 
movement. Like its American cousins, supporters talk of small government 
(except when it comes to finding money for defence and bombing Islamic 
nations), endorse hyper partisanship, oppose action on climate change, distrust 
non-Christians and non-Zionists and embrace insularity.

The past is celebrated, the future is feared and the present is up for grabs. 
Bernardi’s recent statements about his fear of Muslims and the supposed 
security threats of the niqab or burqa were aperfect 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-09-18/cory-bernardi-renews-call-for-burqa-ban/5752784>
 Tea party tactic, allowing xenophobia out of the bottle with its message 
spread by reliable media courtiers. Abbott then rushed in to restore order and 
condemn the move while still expressing unease with the head-wear.

While some dissenters vehemently oppose Abbott’s worldview and his willingness 
to utilise stereotypical macho imagery, in reality this problem is bipartisan. 
Getting past the inconsequential rhetoric flourishes, Labor and its 
journalistic supporters offer a remarkably similar vision of fealty to 
Washington’s dictates. One of the central ways to break this predictable cycle 
is resisting the dishonest and incendiary Murdoch agenda that rewards mates and 
celebrates a blokey, Anglosphere myopia. It’s no wonder his publications are so 
keen to dutifully join any conflict with a new Muslim foe.
 