
Barnaby Joyce calls for more Syrian refugees to be resettled in Australia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/04/barnaby-joyce-calls-for-more-syrian-refugees-to-be-resettled-in-australia>
Aylan Kurdi, the three-year old refugee whose death at sea has become the 
central image of the ongoing Syrian refugee crisis, should have been safely 
living in Vancouver, Canada, author and activistNaomi Klein 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/naomi-klein> said.

In an emotional introduction to her talk on climate and capitalism at Sydney’s 
Festival of Dangerous Ideas (Fodi), the Canadian writer said the “hostile 
bureaucratic processes” of Canadian immigration were to blame for the rejection 
of a refugee application by Teema Kurdi, Aylan’s aunt, who is living in Canada.

Family of Syrian boy washed up on beach were trying to reach Canada
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/03/refugee-crisis-syrian-boy-washed-up-on-beach-turkey-trying-to-reach-canada>

The photo was a “harrowing image of abandonment and neglect”, Klein said. 
“I have found these past days very difficult. Let’s also recall there have 
been other [positive] images and stories too.”

Klein said western politicians are “hiding the human costs” of the refugee 
crisis “simply because their need is inconvenient”, and referred to Australia’s 
offshore immigration detention centres as “black sites”.

Dangerous Ideas speakers: Australia's asylum seeker policies are cruel and 
unacceptable
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/02/dangerous-ideas-speakers-australias-asylum-seeker-policies-are-cruel-and-unacceptable>
“Tony Abbott has been in the news this week marketing his black sites [as a 
solution]”, Klein said. “‘Prison camps for safety’, from the man who brought 
you ‘coal is good for humanity’.”

Earlier this week Klein issued a statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/02/dangerous-ideas-speakers-australias-asylum-seeker-policies-are-cruel-and-unacceptable>
 with other Fodi speakers distancing herself from retired Major General Jim 
Molan, a board member of festival co-curator the Ethics Centre and one of the 
architects of Operation Sovereign Borders, Australia’s border control regime.

 The Australian government is standing firm in the face of growing pressure to 
help more Syrian refugees flee the war-torn country.

As the crisis in Europe escalates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/05/refugees-travelling-from-hungary-can-enter-germany-and-austria>
 with thousands crossing the Mediterranean to escape the conflict, church 
groups and the Australian Greens are pressing the government to open its doors.


The Greens are calling for an emergency intake of 20,000 Syrian refugees and 
$150m funding for the UN high commissioner for refugees.


The Greens leader, Richard Di Natale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/richard-di-natale>, said more than 
250,000 men, women and children had already died and it was time for 
Australians to lend a helping hand.


He said attitudes towards refugees had reached a turning point following 
distressing images of young children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/03/refugee-crisis-syrian-boy-washed-up-on-beach-turkey-trying-to-reach-canada>
 trying to escape the war being washed up on beaches in Europe.


“I just say to Tony Abbott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tony-abbott>, if you have a 
skerrick of compassion, of decency, of humanity – you would support the Greens’ 
call and immediately welcome 20,000 Syrian refugees who desperately need our 
help,” Di Natale told reporters in Melbourne on Saturday.


“We are a lucky country and strong enough to offer people safety and respite 
from war.”


But the prime minister says he will not bow to the calls made by the Greens.


The Coalition agreed to take 4,400 people from northern Iraq and east Syria in 
2014 as it carefully considered the impact ofIslamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> through those areas, Abbott said.


He did, however, suggest that Australia may have scope to accept more refugees 
in the future because of his government’s controversial Operation Sovereign 
Borders.


“One of the good things about stopping the boats is that we are now in a much 
better position to increase our refugee and humanitarian intake,” Abbott told 
reporters in Hobart.


Australia reserves 2,200 places for Syrian refugees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/17/australia-reserves-2200-places-for-syrian-refugees>
Joyce Chia, senior adviser and spokeswoman for the Refugee Council of 
Australia, joined the Greens at a news conference calling on the government to 
offer asylum to Syrian refugees.


“The situation in Syria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> is one of 
the world’s most urgent and increasing crisis,” she said. “It is a crisis we 
can do something about.”

Australia has previously provided refuge to 40,000 Chinese people following 
the Tiananmen Square Massacre in 1989 and also issued temporary visas to 4,000 
Kosovo refugees in 1999.

Australian Associated Press contributed to this report
 