
A baby has died and another is in a critical condition after they were given 
nitrous oxide instead of oxygen at aSydney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney> hospital.

The New South Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales> health minister, 
Jillian Skinner, said she was “profoundly sorry” for the families and it was an 
installation error by BOC Limited that led to the wrong gas being emitted.

The babies who were given nitrous oxide – also known as laughing gas – were 
born in June and July this year but the wrong gas had been installed last year 
and not picked up by staff.

Health inequality: report finds 'unacceptable' variation in hospital admissions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/25/parts-of-queensland-and-melbourne-health-inequality-hotspots-says-report>
One of the babies died on Friday, while the other is still fighting for life 
in hospital.

“I am profoundly sorry for the families of a newborn baby who died and another 
who was severely affected after the wrong gas was dispensed through a neonatal 
resuscitation outlet at Bankstown-Lidcombe hospital,” Skinner said on Monday 
night.

“I deeply regret these families have suffered through such a devastating 
error. NSWHealth <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/health> will do 
all it can to support them.”

The families were told of the wrongly installed gas outlet in discussions over 
the weekend that Skinner referred to as “open disclosure of the facts around 
the births”.

The oxygen outlet was incorrectly installed and certified by BOC Limited in 
July 2015, according to Skinner.

“The error was discovered after a pediatrician raised concerns about the 
unexpected death of the second baby,” she said. “Testing of the gas outlets 
found one oxygen outlet was emitting nitrous oxide instead of oxygen.”

No other baby received gas from the affected outlet.

Grattan Institute: ageing population 'will not cause collapse of health system'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/21/grattan-institute-ageing-population-will-not-cause-collapse-of-health-system>
The legal general council for NSW Health has written to BOC Limited demanding 
urgent advice on how the error occurred and if there are systemic issues at 
other hospital sites serviced by BOC.

There will also be a formal investigation into whether the hospital staff 
followed protocols that may have the detected the installation error last year.

Bankstown-Lidcombe hospital has checked all eight theatres and found no 
further faults.

Every medical gas outlet installed in a NSW Health facility commissioned under 
the current government is being checked.

• This article was amended on 28 July 2016. An earlier version referred to 
“nitrogen gas” in the third paragraph, where “nitrous oxide” was meant.
 