
Malcolm Turnbull has weighed into the case of a Brisbane hospital that is 
refusing to discharge a baby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/12/doctors-refuse-to-discharge-baby-asha-because-of-fears-for-safety-on-nauru>
 facing removal to Nauru, saying the government would not “imperil the health 
or security of any individual”, as Australia came under further international 
pressure over its asylum policies.

The Lancet, one of the world’s leading medical journals, condemned Australia’s 
immigration detention policies 
<http://www.thelancet.com/pdfs/journals/lancet/PIIS0140-6736(16)00317-2.pdf> as 
“scandalously objectionable” and said it needed to develop a humane response, 
“starting with an end to the detention of children and their families”.

Speaking in Townsville, the prime minister stressed the need for compassion, 
but reaffirmed hisdetermination to maintain a hardline policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/03/coalition-faces-calls-to-spare-267-asylum-seekers-from-deportation-to-nauru>
 towards asylum-seeker arrivals because the “ruthless” people smugglers should 
not be given “one inch of encouragement”.

Doctors refuse to discharge 'Baby Asha' because of fears for safety on Nauru
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/12/doctors-refuse-to-discharge-baby-asha-because-of-fears-for-safety-on-nauru>
The child, known as Baby Asha, was born in Australia to asylum-seeker parents 
and removed toNauru <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nauru> in June at the 
age of five months. She is now 12 months old and has been in Brisbane for 
several weeks receiving treatment for burns at the Lady Cilento hospital.

Doctors have refused to discharge Asha because they believe the island’s 
detention centre is not safe. The hospital said the patient would “only be 
discharged once a suitable home environment is identified”.

Turnbull was asked about the case during a media conference on Monday. “We are 
assessing all of these cases carefully on a case by case basis,” the prime 
minister said.

“No decisions would be taken which would imperil the health or security of any 
individual. We’re managing this policy with great care and with great 
compassion, and at the same time doing everything we can to ensure that we do 
not do anything or say anything which will be used by the people smugglers to 
get more vulnerable people onto those boats.”


Turnbull said the government wanted to reduce the number of children in 
detention “but it is a difficult job, because we have to do it in a way that 
gives no incentive to the people smugglers, who are ruthless”.

“We give them one inch of encouragement and there will be more people on boats 
and we’ll be back to what we had with the Labor party, I regret to say, which 
will be thousands of unauthorised arrivals and hundreds of people drowned at 
sea,” he said.





#LetThemStay protest takes to Sydney harbour in fight for 267 asylum seekers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/14/letthemstay-protest-takes-to-sydney-harbour-in-fight-for-267-asylum-seekers>
Baby Asha’s Nepalese Christian parents arrived in Australia by boat seeking 
asylum. The family was removed to Nauru over the objections of child welfare 
agency Save the Children who argued the leaking tents, and rat infestation in 
the section of the camp she was sent to be sent to would be “potentially 
catastrophic” for her well-being.

Asha almost immediately fell ill on Nauru, and her mother’s breastmilk failed, 
reportedly because of the stress of detention.

Asha was returned to Australia several weeks ago after boiling water was 
accidentally spilled on her.

She has been treated, but doctors have refused to discharge her. A spokeswoman 
for Lady Cilento hospital said the baby would not be discharged until “a 
suitable home environment is identified”.

Demonstrators campaigning to keep the family in Australia have camped outside 
the hospital, sustained by food served by hospital staff. Rallies were held on 
Saturday and Sunday, and another was planned for Monday afternoon.

Australia’s medical fraternity continues to protest against immigration 
detention policies, in defiance of the Border Force Act, which carries a 
potential two-year jail term for “entrusted persons” who speak out about 
conditions in detention.

Australasia Psychiatry’s February issue published five papers dedicated to the 
mental health impacts of immigration detention.

Dr Robert Adler 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1455494518854/Adler---Australasian-Psychi.pdf>, a 
psychiatrist who worked on Nauru, and a former refugee himself, wrote that 
having seen the despair and helplessness of asylum seekers on Nauru, he felt 
compelled to speak out.

“I am appalled by the policies of both major political parties which support 
mandatory detention and offshore processing. They appear to think it is 
acceptable to pay, or bribe, some of the poorest countries in our region to 
take people we do not want, to ‘Stop the boats’.

“I accept that we need to do what we can to dissuade people from getting on 
leaky, dangerous boats but I am cynical enough to believe that ‘offshore 
processing’ is at least in part a case of out of sight and out of mind.”

Dr Peter Young, formerly the director of mental health for International 
Health and Medical Services <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/ihms>, 
and Dr Michael Gordon of Monash University,examined mental health data of 
asylum seekers in detention 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1455496497792/YoungGordon-Australasia-Psy.pdf>, 
finding that those in detention had significantly higher rates of mental 
illness, and that the longer people were held in detention, the more unwell 
they became.

“Approximately one-half of the refugee group... had PTSD symptoms, and 
one-third of the children, adolescents and adults had clinical symptoms 
requiring tertiary outpatient assessment.”

Louise Newman 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1455496678319/Newman-Australasia-Psychiat.pdf>, 
Michael Dudley 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1455496605508/Dudley-Australasia-Psychiat.pdf>, and
Sarah Mares 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1455496848705/Mares-Australasia-Psychiatr.pdf> 
examined the role of doctors in the immigration detention system, the 
impediments to clinical autonomy caused by the regime and the legal 
restrictions to publicly raising concerns.



 