
In the digital age, offshore secrets are hard to keep. In its latest 
revelations, the Guardian is publishing investigations based on the leak of 
1.3m internal files from the company register of theBahamas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bahamas>, one of the world’s most notorious 
tax havens.

The data has brought to light details of the financial interests of 
politicians, entrepreneurs, financiers – and fraudsters.

Five months after the release of the Panama Papers, this new cache of 
information from the world of offshore tax havens contains the names of 
directors and some shareholders at nearly 176,000 shell companies, trusts and 
foundations.

Leaks reveal Amber Rudd's involvement in Bahamas offshore firms
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/21/bahamas-leaks-reveal-amber-rudd-involvement-offshore-firms>
It was received by the German newspaper Süddeutsche Zeitung 
<http://www.sueddeutsche.de/>, and will be shared with the public in a Bahamas 
leaks database, built by theInternational Consortium of Investigative 
Journalists <https://www.icij.org/> (ICIJ) in Washington and also launched on 
Wednesday.

Among the revelations are the offshore business dealings of the home 
secretary, Amber Rudd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/21/bahamas-leaks-reveal-amber-rudd-involvement-offshore-firms>
, along with her involvement in a fund where a fellow director was jailed for 
making misleading statements to investors. 


The former EU competition commissioner Neelie Kroes has been forced to admit 
she breached the European commission’s code of conduct 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/21/ex-eu-commissioner-neelie-kroes-failed-to-declare-directorship-of-offshore-firm>
 by failing to declare her directorship of an offshore company while she was 
actively policing multinationals.


The data also contains trails left by Cem Kinay (German) 
<http://www.sz.de/1.3172913>, a property developer wanted by Interpol for 
bribery, and accused of making a possibly corrupt payment to Michael Misick, 
the former premier of the Turks and Caicos islands, a British overseas 
territory.


As previous reports have revealed, and the latest leak confirms, David 
Cameron’s father used the Bahamas as a base from which his Blairmore investment 
fund avoided tax for three decades.


It was also the offshore address of a Mongolian goldmining company whose 
directors included Sukhbaatar Batbold, an entrepreneur who would go on to 
become Mongolia’s prime minister.

Ex-EU commissioner Neelie Kroes failed to declare directorship of offshore firm
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/21/ex-eu-commissioner-neelie-kroes-failed-to-declare-directorship-of-offshore-firm>
There are many legal reasons for choosing a Bahamas letterbox, chief among 
them the absence of taxes on company profits, capital gains, income and 
inheritance.

Another reason is anonymity. The Bahamas claims to be a transparent 
jurisdiction with a public register of companies, but the information shared 
from the seat of government in Nassau is limited.

The corporate registry is supposed to contain the names and addresses of all 
directors and officers and can in theory be consulted online, but there is no 
requirement to register the owners of a company with the authorities. Unlike 
the Cayman Islands and Jersey, the Bahamas has not responded to public pressure 
to introduce government-held registers of beneficial owners.

The Bahamas registry website is often unavailable and the information it 
contains is patchy.Neelie Kroes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/neelie-kroes>, for example, does not 
appear in the online entry for the company of which she was a director. 
Complete information can often only be obtained by phone and fax or a visit in 
person.

Importantly, it is not possible to search for names of individual directors, 
but only by company name, which can make wrongdoing hard to track.

Amber Rudd and Monticello: an ill-fated step in a complicated career
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/21/amber-rudd-monticello-ill-fated-step-complicated-career-bahamas-leaks>
The Bahamas has bilateral information-sharing agreements with 32 countries, 
including the UK, Germany, France and the US, but has completed no new deals 
since 2013. Many of these agreements are of limited use because they are with 
other tax havens, such as Guernsey and Malta, or with tiny economies such as 
Greenland.

Even with a bilateral agreement, investigators cannot ask the Bahamas for all 
of the information it may have on an individual. They must first have the name 
of their bank or offshore company.

“We believe this kind of basic information, the names of people who are linked 
to what companies, is something that should be openly available – just as the 
former prime minister David Cameron himself once indicated,” the ICIJ’s 
director, Gerard Ryle, said. “We are publishing this information as a public 
service.”

With $223bn (£172bn) stashed in the small Caribbean nation’s banks, 26 times 
its GDP, the former British colony is increasingly seen as clinging to the 
secrecy that has allowed it to attract such money. Representatives from the 
Bahamas have been touring the conference circuit.


Offshore service providers will gather in Panama City next week for a 
conference <http://www.steplatamconference.com/index.html>about marketing their 
services to Latin American clients. Among the banks and law firms sponsoring 
the event, one of the logos on the promotional website stands out: the official 
seal of the of the Commonwealth of the Bahamas.

“What do you think they are there for, to push the beaches?” asked Mark 
Morris, an adviser to the European parliament and the Tax Justice Network. 
“They are going round the world saying ‘bring your untaxed money to us’. People 
send money to Nassau by the billions because they know it’s safe. Even compared 
to Switzerland, the Bahamas is now the number one tax haven.”

Responding to queries about its record of cooperation in fighting tax evasion 
and money laundering, the Bahamas financial services ministry said it was 
committed to transparency.


“The Bahamas does not tolerate ‘dirty money’,” it said. “The Bahamas has a 
long history of honouring its international obligations including cooperating 
with international authorities with respect to legally conducted investigations 
and/or asset recovery initiatives when received through the proper channels.”
 