
Zainab al-Khawaja, the Bahraini political activist, is still languishing in 
gaol a month after a promise - made under rare international pressure - that 
she be freed. The Gulf state, a close military and economic partner of western 
governments, is ignoring a direct appeal by the US to release her.

Khawaja, convicted of insulting an official and tearing up a picture of King 
Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa, is in cell 19, Issa Town Women’s Prison, with her 
baby son. Her case has attracted global attention because of her own reputation 
and that of her father,Abdel-Hadi 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-middle-east-17793857>, serving a life sentence 
for calling for the overthrow of the Sunni monarchy.

Amnesty International has adopted her as a “prisoner of conscience.” Thousands 
of supporters agree. “My cause is the cause of my people,” Khawaja wrote in a 
letter smuggled out of prison recently. “If nothing changes for the people of
Bahrain <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bahrain>, then my staying in jail or 
release is not of great consequence.”

Khawaja is no stranger to trouble. She was last detained 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/14/bahrain-detains-activist-zainab-al-khawaja-and-one-year-old-son>
 in February on the fifth anniversary of the 2011 crackdown on the protests of 
the “Pearl Revolution.” That early chapter of the Arab spring triggered a 
Saudi-led military intervention and left Bahrain in a state of political 
paralysis.


Bahrain’s opposition is well represented abroad - partly because some 
activists have been stripped of their citizenship. Supporters are adept at 
campaigning in the US, Britain and other countries which view the island state 
as a strategic ally and lucrative market for business and investment.


Washington and London also care about the headquarters of the US Fifth Fleet, 
anda new base 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/dec/06/britain-first-middle-eastern-military-base-bahrain>
 being built for the Royal Navy. And they struggle to address accusations of 
discrimination against Bahrain’s Shia-majority population. The British 
government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/05/human-rights-work-has-been-downgraded-by-foreign-office-say-mps>
, MPs and activists complain, has all but fallen silent.

“The Foreign Office say they support human rights defenders,” said Sayed 
Alwadaei of the Bahrain Institute for Rights and Democracy, “but they have 
failed the defenders in Bahrain. We want to see them start by calling for 
Zainab’s release.”

So it was a big deal when Khawaja - Twitter handle @AngryArabiya - had her 
case raised by John Kerry, the US secretary of state, visiting Manama last 
month on the eve of a Gulf summit Barack Obama was attending. Bahrain’s foreign 
minister Khaled bin Ahmed Al Khalifasaid she would be freed 
<http://www.state.gov/secretary/remarks/2016/04/255568.htm>, though the case 
would continue to be pursued.


Kerry’s reference to “respect for human rights and an inclusive political 
system” 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-mideast-crisis-gulf-bahrain-idUKKCN0X40YM>was 
criticised by some as “tepid.” But it did not go unnoticed in a small country 
where at least 3000 people are in prison for taking part in protests and are 
often labelled “terrorists.”

And his intervention followed a unprecedented meeting with five senior 
opposition figures - “a huge event,” in the words of one Manama observer. The 
US sent another unmistakeable signal this week when the state department 
publicly “urged” Bahrain to keep its promise and free Khawaja.


Khawaja is not alone. Sheikh Ali Salman of al-Wefaq, the largest Shia 
opposition movement, is behind bars. So is the (Sunni) Ibrahim Sharif of the 
leftwing Waad party. Nabeel Rajab, the human rights activist, has been 
effectively silenced by a travel ban and laws that criminalise political 
comments on social media.


The Bahraini government has been trying to improve its image by pointing the 
finger at Iran. There’s no question that the Islamic Republic is hostile, 
bracketing the Al Khalifa with their Saudi allies. Its propaganda is relentless 
and crude. Hamad has spoken of “compelling evidence of flagrant (Iranian) 
interference” in his country’s internal affairs. But it has never been publicly 
spelled put.

Nightly clashes in the Shia villages around Manama, where masked youngsters 
burn tyres, build barricades and throw rocks at police vehicles, do not require 
sophisticated foreign support. “Blaming Iran is something the government says 
to foreigners,” scoffs an independent Bahraini. “No-one here believes it.”


Bahraini officials and commentators radiate hostility to the US in the same 
way Saudis do – seeing in Obama a president who has “tilted” to an aggressive 
Tehran over its nuclear programme and failed to intervene decisively in the 
Syrian crisis. Instability in Iraq and war in Yemen, much closer to home, have 
also sharpened regional sectarian tensions.

Manama loyally followed Riyadh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/04/sunni-allies-join-saudi-arabia-in-ceasing-diplomatic-ties-with-iran>
 and severed its diplomatic links with Iran following attacks on Saudi 
diplomatic premises after the execution of the Shia cleric Nimr al-Nimr in 
January.

“Bahrain is trying to play for time,” argues Ali al-Aswad, a former Wefaq MP. 
“They don’t want to upset the loyalists. I am not optimistic that they will 
release Zainab soon. She is really putting pressure on the government. I am not 
sure they will do what Kerry said.”

So Khawaja’s fate is being carefully watched - as a small sign, perhaps, of 
the way the Gulf winds are blowing.

 