
World leaders must ditch narrow political concerns and commit to ending 
conflict, the head of the UN says. Decrying the “harrowing familiarity” of 
brutal scenes,Ban Ki-moon <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ban-ki-moon>, the 
UN secretary general, said the aid industry and his own organisation must 
urgently reform to react more effectively to today’s many crises.

In a report <https://www.worldhumanitariansummit.org/whs_sgreport> setting out 
his vision for theworld humanitarian summit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/17/fix-the-aid-system-or-you-will-fail-the-poor-experts-warn-world-leaders>
 in May, Ban outlines five core responsibilities for the international 
community. As well as better political leadership, he demands protection for 
civilians, respect for humanitarian law, inclusive policies to make sure no one 
is left out, and more flexibility and joined-up thinking from the aid community.


Ban Ki-moon says woman at helm of UN would be ‘a great idea’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/06/ban-ki-moon-woman-un-secretary-general>
Ban, who was forced to flee war as a child and is expected to end his term 
this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/06/ban-ki-moon-woman-un-secretary-general>
, has sharp words for those who deprive humanity of dignity by trafficking 
people, bombing homes and schools, and privileging political aims over the 
greater good. He says the world risks returning to an era of war with no limits.

“Xenophobia, nationalism, exclusion and bigotry must not be the hallmarks of 
our time. Making humanity the central driver of our decision-making and action 
can be done. We can close the gap between the world that is and the world that 
should be,” he writes.

The report is an impassioned plea to world leaders, donors, aid agencies, 
citizens and businesses to use the May summit – the first of its kind – to 
recognise a shared responsibility to humanity, and commit to positive action to 
end suffering and mitigate the risk of man-made and natural disasters.

Ban says leaders at the summit in Istanbul should commit to a minimum support 
package for Syria for implementation by 2018. UN appeals for funding, on 
average, receive 60% of their target. Ban wants theseinter-agency humanitarian 
appeals <https://fts.unocha.org/> to receive a minimum of 75% of desired funds, 
before eventually being fully funded.


Drawing parallels with a 1941 London meeting of allied governments 
<http://www.un.org/en/sections/history-united-nations-charter/1941-declaration-st-james-palace/index.html>
, whose declaration in support of diplomacy and peace was an early precursor of 
the UN charter, Ban says the world is approaching a similar point in history 
and needs to reaffirm its commitment to humanity. “We must remember the 
promises we made and respect the rules that we have agreed to. We need to 
restore trust in our global order and show those millions left behind in 
conflicts, in chronic need and in constant fear the solidarity they deserve and 
expect from us,” Ban writes.

Millions could die as world unprepared for pandemics, says UN
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/08/millions-could-die-as-world-unprepared-for-pandemics-says-un>
Violent extremism, growing economic inequality, transnational crime, climate 
change, rapid unplanned urbanisation and pandemics of “worrying levels and 
frequency” are among the global threats he lists, noting that the international 
aid system has failed to keep pace with the challenges.

Echoing criticism from activists over counter-terrorism measures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/28/impunity-conflict-cast-dark-shadow-over-aid-humanitarian-work-in-2015>
, Ban says: “Counter-terrorism efforts, asymmetric warfare, and the emergence 
of new threats and enemies cannot legitimise the loosening, or the outright 
dismissal, of rules that aim to spare civilians and limit harm to what is 
necessary to weaken the enemy.”

The secretary general said arms exporters must ensure weapons are not used to 
commit violations against civilians. Last week, he saidBritain and other arms 
exporters had a duty to stop the flow of weapons to Saudi Arabia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/05/ban-ki-moon-yemen-war-uk-arms-sales-saudi-arabia>
, which he accused ofindiscriminate bombing in Yemen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/27/un-report-into-saudi-led-strikes-in-yemen-raises-questions-over-uk-role>
.

Since Ban first called for a humanitarian summit in 2012, more than 23,000 
people in 153 countrieshave been 
<http://synthesisreport.worldhumanitariansummit.org/> consulted on priorities. 

“There was outrage that national sovereignty and security are placed above 
people’s rights to protection and assistance, and that the most basic tenets of 
international humanitarian and human rights law are violated every day without 
accountability,” Ban writes, adding that there is frustration from local groups 
who feel shut out.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fban-ki-moon-world-un-humanitarian-summit-conflict-leadership%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ef6641d26f37100bdee1a0e1f3c6dbaa97ae826%2F0_0_3000_2001%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ban%20Ki-moon%3A%20%E2%80%98Close%20the%20gap%20between%20the%20world%20that%20is%20and%20the%20world%20that%20should%20be%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fban-ki-moon-world-un-humanitarian-summit-conflict-leadership%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ban%20Ki-moon%3A%20%E2%80%98Close%20the%20gap%20between%20the%20world%20that%20is%20and%20the%20world%20that%20should%20be%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fban-ki-moon-world-un-humanitarian-summit-conflict-leadership%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ef6641d26f37100bdee1a0e1f3c6dbaa97ae826%2F0_0_3000_2001%2F3000.jpg>
 A woman washes pots with her daughter in a camp in Dunkirk, France. 
Photograph: Carl Court/Getty Images 
Calling for an end to “fear-driven rhetoric”, he notes that the number of 
major civil warsincreased from four in 2007 to 11 in 2014 
<http://aix1.uottawa.ca/~rparis/Einsiedel.pdf> (pdf), with a third involving 
external parties. In 2014, conflict and violence costan estimated $14.3tn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jun/16/global-cost-conflict-reaches-14tn-says-report>
 – 13% of the global economy.

Ban calls on world authorities to show courageous leadership, act early, 
invest in stability and include those affected by conflict in drafting 
policies. He says a global campaign should be launched to reinforce 
humanitarian and human rights law.

With European leaders closing borders and imposing restrictions on refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/30/greece-threatened-closure-eu-border-dystopia>
 from Syria, Ban calls for compassion and coordinated leadership. He proposes 
reducing internal displacement by at least half by 2030.

Ban advocates a stronger role for business, writing: “I call upon the leaders 
of businesses and enterprises to invest in humanity … Invest in and create new 
markets and infrastructure that connect us even further. We cannot confront the 
challenges of our time successfully, delivering better for humanity and 
achievingthe 2030 agenda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive>
, without you.”

UN launches initiative for women’s economic empowerment at Davos
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/21/un-global-womens-economic-empowerment-initiative-davos>
Ban backs a recent report 
<https://www.worldhumanitariansummit.org/whs_finance/hlphumanitarianfinancing> 
on humanitarian financing that calls for substantial reform of the aid system 
and advocates new sources of funding, including micro-levies on corporations, a 
voluntary solidarity tax and increased use of Islamic funding.

The May summit should mark an “Istanbul moment”, Ban says, when world leaders 
accept their responsibility to prevent and end suffering. It should also allow 
the UN to strengthen its role as a “global moral compass”.

“To make the United Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> 
fit for the future, the summit must spark a process of renewal in the way the 
organisation works across mandates and responsibilities,” Ban says. “2016 must 
become the year of transformation so that together we can deliver on the 
achievements we made in 2015.”
 