
The new deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/barnaby-joyce>, believes he can 
prevail over cabinet colleagues as the Nationals renew their push to strengthen 
Australia’s competition laws.

Joyce made the prediction on the eve of a new parliamentary sitting fortnight 
while also warning the Senate against obstructing the Turnbull government’s 
agenda.

Double dissolution is a 'live option' as Morrison rules out 'pixie horse' tax 
cuts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/19/double-dissolution-is-a-live-option-as-morrison-rules-out-pixie-horse-tax-cuts>
The Coalition <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> 
government kept the option of calling a double-dissolution election up its 
sleeve, he said, and could pull the trigger if the Senate “becomes inoperable”.

The tough talking from the new leader of the Nationals comes as the government 
struggles to spell out a clear direction on tax policy butedges closer to 
amending Senate voting laws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/19/senate-voting-reform-stirs-up-hornets-nest-between-likely-winners-and-losers>
 to curb the influence of “micro-parties”.

Joyce used a wide-ranging interview with Sky News to signal that the Nationals 
would not drop their push for action on the so-called effects test, a provision 
aimed at better protecting small businesses from the misuse of market power.

Section 46 
<http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consol_act/caca2010265/s46.html> of the 
Competition and Consumer Act prohibits big corporations, such as Coles and 
Woolworths, from taking advantage of substantial market power “for the purpose” 
of eliminating competitors.

A review of competition laws, headed by Prof Ian Harper, called for the 
prohibition to be expanded to include actions that would be likely to “have the 
effect” of substantially lessening competition. This is seen as an easier 
threshold to prove in court.

The Abbott and Turnbull governments both delayed decisions on the proposed 
change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/01/coalition-selling-out-small-business-to-big-end-of-town-say-lobbyists>
 amidheavy lobbying by big business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/07/small-business-flags-anti-coalition-campaign-in-key-marginal-seats>
, which argued the move could harm price competition and create uncertainty. 
Ministers weredeeply divided 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/01/bruce-billson-says-big-business-could-be-appeased-by-tougher-competition-laws>
.

But the issue is set to be revisited soon with the treasurer, Scott Morrison, 
having set a March deadline for the government to make a final decision on 
section 46.


Joyce called on the government to protect small business, which he described 
as a “core constituency” of the Liberal and National parties.

He said he was concerned about small businesses being “pushed around by people 
who are not beating them by reason of competition, who are beating them just 
because they’re bigger and knocking them out just to get rid of them”.

“We want to always make sure that that constituency clearly sees us as 
fighting on their behalf,” he told the Australian Agenda program on Sunday. 
“Our goal remains the same that we will try and we will deliver some form of 
betterment so that people who are in business, small business, can be treated 
in a fairer way.”

Pressed on whether he believed he could prevail on this issue, Joyce said: 
“Yeah, I do. I do.”


The resumption of parliament on Monday marks the first test of Turnbull’s new 
ministerial line-up after changes triggered by theleadership change at the top 
of the Nationals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/11/barnaby-joyce-to-be-sworn-in-as-deputy-prime-minister-after-nationals-meeting>
 andscandals involving several Liberals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/12/stuart-robert-loses-job-as-minister-following-china-trip-furore>
.

Barnaby Joyce, the man who threatened Johnny Depp's dogs, voted deputy PM
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/11/barnaby-joyce-the-man-who-threatened-johnny-depps-dogs-voted-deputy-pm>
Joyce, who replaced the retiring Warren Truss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/11/cabinet-reshuffle-nationals-to-vote-for-new-leader-on-thursday-evening>
 as leader of the Nationals and was sworn in as deputy prime minister on 
Thursday, added weight tospeculation about a possible double-dissolution 
election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/19/double-dissolution-is-a-live-option-as-morrison-rules-out-pixie-horse-tax-cuts>
 in July.

“What I can say is any time after July there’s the possibility [of an 
election] and it really is up to the Senate as to whether we have a progression 
of policy through, whether we have the capacity to get on with the job of 
turning the nation around and putting ourselves in a strong financial position 
for the future,” he said.

“But if it becomes inoperable, then we have, we have a right, a constitutional 
right, to go to a double dissolution and we’ll always keep that option up our 
sleeve.”

The leader of the house, Christopher Pyne, said last week that a double 
dissolution triggered by the Coalition’s stalled workplace relations 
legislation was a “live option” while Turnbull said the mechanism was 
“available”.

The earliest date for a normal general election for the House of 
Representatives and half of the Senate is 6 August but the constitution gives 
the government the option ofdissolving both houses to resolve legislative 
deadlocks 
<http://www.aph.gov.au/about_parliament/house_of_representatives/powers_practice_and_procedure/00_-_infosheets/infosheet_18_-_double_dissolution>
.

This would be a high-stakes decision and the timetable is difficult.

The government has indicated its tax reform plans will be spelled out in the 
budget, due on 10 May, but the latest possible day to invoke a double 
dissolution would be 11 May. This is because the dissolution of both houses 
cannot be requested in the last six months of a parliament.

If Turnbull pulls the trigger straight after the budget, he could opt for an 
unusually long election campaign with polling day deferred to Julyprevent the 
Senate and House of Representatives terms from getting out of alignment 
<http://blogs.abc.net.au/antonygreen/2015/12/the-turnbull-governments-options-for-a-2016-election.html>
.

The government is working with the Greens and the independent senator Nick 
Xenophon onlegislation to change Senate voting rules 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/12/senate-voting-changes-coalition-wins-over-nick-xenophon-and-greens>
 to counter secretive preference deals, which, if passed, would increase the 
appeal of dissolving both houses because it would force all of the crossbench 
senators to face the people.

The Coalition’s attempt to create a registered organisations commission to 
crack down on unions already provides the government with a trigger, because 
the same bill has been rejected in two Senate votes held more than three months 
apart.

The government is also preparing to try again to get Senate support to 
reintroduce the Howard-era Australian Building and Construction Commission, 
which if blocked would create another trigger. ASenate inquiry report 
<http://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Committees/Senate/Education_and_Employment/Building_and_Construction>
 on this legislation is due on 15 March.

Labor accused the government of being “all waffle and no action” after 
Morrison told the National Press Club people should expect only “modest” tax 
reform in the budget.

Scott Morrison says Labor 'selling a unicorn' with negative gearing savings
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/18/scott-morrison-says-labor-selling-a-unicorn-with-negative-gearing-savings>
The opposition, which has spent the past week campaigning for its plan to 
restrict negative gearing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/13/labor-promises-to-cut-negative-gearing-and-capital-gains-tax-concessions>
 to newly constructed homes, is likely to use parliamentary question time to 
pursue the inaction theme.

News Corp’s Sunday tabloids reported 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/news/negative-gearing-prime-minister-turnbull-works-on-option-to-exempt-mum-and-dad-investors/news-story/a804309e9bd56c438c990dedb9e0ff46>
 the government was looking at a less ambitious plan to cap a person’s negative 
gearing deductions at $20,000 a year, in a bid to spare “mum and dad property 
investors” from the impact.

Such a cap would affect about 10% of negatively geared investors and increase 
tax revenue by about $1bn a year, according tomodelling by the Australian 
National University associate professor Ben Phillips 
<http://rsss.anu.edu.au/sites/default/files/Distributional_Modelling%20_Negative_Gearing_and_Capital_Gains.pdf>
.

The same modelling paper showed Labor’s plan would increase taxation revenue 
in the long run between $3.4bn and $3.9bn a year.

“Our modelling shows that negative gearing benefits high income families with 
52.6% of the benefit going to the top 20% of incomes,” Phillips wrote. “Only 
5.2% of benefits go to the bottom 20% of incomes.”
 