
BBC Radio 4 Extra is to bring Serial <http://serialpodcast.org>, the 
critically lauded US podcastthat already has a dedicated UK fanbase hooked via 
the internet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/nov/08/serial-review-greatest-murder-mystery-ever-hear>
, to a wider British audience.

The BBC digital station will begin airing the weekly podcast 
<http://serialpodcast.org>, in which journalist Sarah Koenig re-investigates 
the 1999 murder of the high-school student Hae Min Lee in Baltimore, from 
Sunday.

Radio 4 Extra <https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-4-extra> will air 
Serial daily at 9pm until it catches up with the podcasts already available 
online, at the final stage of Koenig’s cold case investigation.

Hae’s 17-year-old ex-boyfriend, Adnan Syed, was sentenced to spend the rest of 
his life in prison. The case against him was largely based on the story of one 
witness, Syed’s friend Jay, who testified that he helped to bury Hae’s body.

Syed has always maintained he had nothing to do with the murder. Koenig 
learned about Syed’s case more than a year ago and started to go through the 
legal documents and investigator’s notes, listening to trial testimony and 
police interrogations.

In the podcast, Koenig takes listeners on a personal journey looking into the 
15-year-old case for new evidence and the story behind what happened on the day 
of the crime.

Ira Glass, editorial adviser for Serial said: “We know we already have tons of 
Serial <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/serial> listeners in the UK, 
but we love that the BBC will help us reach many, many more than we ever could 
with podcast alone.”

Gwyneth Williams, controller, Radio 4 and Radio 4 Extra says: “We are thrilled 
to be sharing Serial’s innovative journalism and storytelling with our 
audiences onRadio 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio4> Extra.”

Serial will be returning for a second series, after raising money from 
sponsorship and donations from fans 
<http://variety.com/2014/digital/news/serial-to-return-for-season-two-1201365889/>
. The podcast is produced by public service radio station WBEZ Chicago.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly “for publication”.

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 