
Stories about the declining bee population and its effects on the environment 
trickle through the news cycle nearly every day. To keep track of the latest 
bee news and make sense of the issues,we're highlighting the major bee stories 
each week, with analysis from the Guardian's Alison Benjamin, co-author of A 
World Without Bees 
<http://www.amazon.com/World-Without-Bees-Allison-Benjamin/dp/B006CDGQKW>, Bees 
in the City: The Urban Beekeepers' Handbook 
<http://www.amazon.com/Bees-City-Urban-Beekeepers-Handbook/dp/0852652313> and 
Keeping Bees and Making Honey 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Keeping-Bees-Making-Honey-2nd/dp/1446303551/ref=sr_1_2?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1375193993&sr=1-2>
.

New medicine could save dwindling global bee population  
<http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.foxnews.com%2Fscience%2F2013%2F09%2F29%2Fswedish-researchers-develop-medicine-to-protect-bees-from-deadly-diseases%2F&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNET3YPY7EB7-70q8DHCxKrJ3yA-eQ>

What happened: Researchers in Sweden said Friday they had developed a new 
medicine to protect bees from diseases that kill entire populations of the 
insect in the US and Europe.

Key quote: 

In a statement from the university, co-researcher Dr Tobias Olofsson said it 
was 'the only existing product that boosts bees' natural immune system, as 
resistance to antibiotics grows.'

Why it matters:  This new medicine made from the bacteria in the gut of 
healthy bees is designed to protect honeybees against bacterial diseases that 
affect the bees' brood (the eggs and larvae). If successful, this medicine 
could prevent honeybee colonies from getting the diseases. But it is a sticking 
plaster approach. We still need to address the exposure to pesticides, 
parasites, stress and poor nutrition due to lack of forage that weaken 
honeybees' immune systems, making them more susceptible to viruses and disease.

US scientists work to save the bee population and America's food 
<http://america.aljazeera.com/watch/shows/techknow/blog/2013/9/29/u-s-scientists-worktosavethebeepopulationandamericasfood.html>

What happened: A team of researchers in Washington state are experimenting 
with artificial insemination of female bees, in an attempt to create a 
stronger, healthier bee that can fight off colony collapse.

Key quote: 

With instrumental insemination, I can do things that don't happen in nature. 
I'm trying to enhance what Mother Nature does. The more drones [the queen] 
mates with, the more diversity and the better fitness you have. The goal now is 
to have gentle, productive bees, but now I also want bees that are resistant to 
all these pests and problems we have, which is a tall order. I will spend 
probably the rest of my life trying to do that.

Why it matters:  At the beginning of the 20th century, Brother Adam at 
Buckfast Abbey in Devon crossed various races of honeybee in the UK with the 
intention of creating a gentle-natured, productive bee with low swarming 
tendencies and able to survive long, cold winters. He created the Buckfast bee, 
which is popular today on the US east coast and northern states. Ever since, 
western honeybees have been bred all over the world to be docile and prolific 
honey makers.

The most popular breeds are the golden-coloured Italian honeybee and slightly 
darker breeds from the Balkans. This has unavoidably led to a decrease in 
genetic diversity. In 1993, DNA analysis of honeybees in the US showed that 96% 
could trace their roots back to Italy and the Balkans where bees were imported 
from in the 19th century. Only 4% were found to be descendents of the northern 
European honeybee, known as the 'black bee' first taken to the US by the 
settlers. The same research also found that a sixth of all colonies in the US 
came from just 308 queens reared by commercial queen breeders, which creates a 
massive reduction in genetic variability.

Just as cows are bred to maximise milk yields, bees have been bred 
commercially for honey production or to pollinate very early in the year, with 
no consideration for the long-term impact this lack of genetic diversity would 
have on the species. The reason the Irish potato famine totally wiped out the 
country's potato crop was that the same potato was planted everywhere. There 
was no genetic diversity, so they all succumbed to the same disease. Likewise 
our honeybees are all affected by the varroa mite and other parasites and 
disease.

Breeding bees that have different genetics could make the species more varroa 
resistant, so could be the key to the honeybees survival. If we let nature take 
its course, small studies have show that 90% of honeybees die in the wild, but 
the 10% that survive do develop varroa resistance.

Honey trap: imported queen bees bring risks and rewards with them 
<http://www.smh.com.au/national/honey-trap-imported-queen-bees-bring-risks-and-rewards-with-them-20130925-2uels.html>

What happened: Ten queen bees are in a complicated transportation process from 
Canada to Australia, in the hopes of improving hive production and building 
resistance against disease.

Australia is accepting bee imports for the first time since it suspended 
importing bees from all countries in 2008 because of concerns about colony 
collapse disorder.

Key quote: 

Importing bees legally was a good way to discourage illegal imports, which are 
more likely to breach biosecurity.

'You can always manage the risk,' Mr Cupit said. 'This is what we do, manage 
it to an acceptable level, we do this for all commodities. Even for Australian 
bees going elsewhere, the Canadians will do their own risk assessment.'

Why it matters:  The Australians say they want to introduce new bee genetics 
to improve production of hives and build resistance against pests and diseases. 
Yet Australia is the one place where there is no varroa mite, and they have 
banned imports from north America for many years, so there is a risk that by 
importing queen bees from Canada they could introduce the mite. Yet the 
Australians have very strict quarantine procedures which they believe will 
prevent this from happening. It shows how important they believe genetic 
diversity is for the long-term health of their honeybees
 