
China has deployed surface-to-air missile launchers on an island in the South 
China Sea <https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-china-sea>, satellite images 
appear to show, dramatically upping the stakes in a territorial dispute 
involving the US and its regional allies.

Tensions in the South China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> Sea, a 
vital shipping route, could rise after two batteries of eight missile launchers 
and a radar system were deployed to Woody Island in the past week, according to 
images taken by the private company ImageSat International.


The images were first published by Fox News 
<http://www.foxnews.com/world/2016/02/16/exclusive-china-sends-suface-to-air-missiles-to-contested-island-in-provocative-move.html>
. The Chinese foreign minister, Wang Yi, did not deny that missile launchers 
had been installed but said the reports were an attempt by certain western 
media to create news stories.

“As for the limited and necessary self-defence facilities China has built on 
islands and reefs stationed by Chinese personnel, that is consistent with the 
self-defence and self-preservation China is entitled to under international 
law,” he said.

A foreign ministry spokesman also sidestepped confirming the deployment, but 
did say: “Whether or not to deploy defence facilities on islands is totally 
within China’s sovereignty. It has nothing to do with militarisation.”

South China Sea: US bomber angers Beijing with Spratly islands flypast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/19/south-china-sea-us-bomber-angers-beijing-with-spratly-islands-flypast>
The development, later confirmed by the Taiwanese defence ministry, 
reverberated through an Asean (Association of South-East Asian Nations) 
leaders’ meeting in California, hosted by Barack Obama. Several Asean countries 
have overlapping claims to islands and surrounding waters in the South China 
Sea, including Malaysia, Brunei, Vietnam andthe Philippines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/philippines>. China claims most of the area, 
which is thought to have significant oil and gas reserves and is a route for 
roughly £3.17tn in trade.

At Tuesday’s meeting Obama said freedom of navigation must be upheld and 
lawful commerce should not be impeded. “The US will continue to fly, sail and 
operate wherever international law allows,” he said. “We will support the right 
of other countries to do the same.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Fchina-places-missiles-woody-south-china-sea-islands%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F55f1e39cb450494125229f0f548ea9e9c9f6f218%2F0_0_1433_783%2F1433.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beijing%20places%20missile%20launchers%20on%20disputed%20South%20China%20Sea%20island&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Fchina-places-missiles-woody-south-china-sea-islands%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beijing%20places%20missile%20launchers%20on%20disputed%20South%20China%20Sea%20island&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Fchina-places-missiles-woody-south-china-sea-islands%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F55f1e39cb450494125229f0f548ea9e9c9f6f218%2F0_0_1433_783%2F1433.jpg>
 Satellite images of the beach.ImageSat <http://www.imagesatintl.com> said that 
while the setup appears temporary, ‘we expect to see construction of a suitable 
complex in the near future’. Photograph: Copyrights by ImageSat International 
N.V. © 2016 
The Vietnamese premier, Nguyen Tan Dung, on Monday called for the US to play a 
larger role in demilitarisation of theSouth China Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-china-sea> and have a “stronger voice”.

Beijing’s reported ability to shoot down planes with anti-aircraft missiles is 
likely to alarm Asean members, who might add further pressure on the US to 
attempt to halt China’s military expansion.

Woody Island is claimed by China, Taiwan and Vietnam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vietnam>, which calls it Phú Lâm Island. The 
island has been under Chinese control since 1974, according to the US national 
security thinktank, the Center for a New American Security.

Taiwanese general David Lo told Reuters that Taiwan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/taiwan> would closely watch subsequent 
developments. “Interested parties should work together to maintain peace and 
stability in the South China Sea region and refrain from taking any unilateral 
measures that would increase tensions,” he said.

An image dated 14 February showed the presence of the equipment, whereas the 
same area looked to be empty in an image dated 3 February. Fox News cited a US 
official as saying the images appeared to show the HQ-9 air defence system, 
which had a range of about 125 miles and could therefore threaten any nearby 
planes.

The Vietnamese foreign ministry did not immediately reply to a request for 
comment..

Asked about the missile move, a US state department spokesman said: “While I 
cannot comment on matters related to intelligence, we do watch these matters 
very closely. The United Sates continues to call on all claimants to halt land 
reclamation, construction, and militarisation of features in the South China 
Sea.”
South China Sea map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/02/woody-island/giv-27167ieIfiUvUl2o4/>
A US navy destroyer sailed close to the disputed Paracel Island chain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/30/south-china-sea-us-warship-triton-paracel-island>
, which includes Woody Island, in a “freedom of navigation” exercise late last 
month. China branded that action as “highly dangerous and irresponsible” and 
accused the US of being the biggest cause of militarisation in the South China 
Sea.

Wang was asked about the deployment reports at a joint press conference that 
he was holding alongside his Australian counterpart, Julie Bishop, who was in 
Beijing for annual strategic talks. Wang said he was only told of the reports 
several minutes beforehand. He said: “I also hope the media everywhere … will 
turn your attention more to the lighthouse we have built on some of the islands 
... which are in operation now and have been very useful in assuring the safety 
of passing ships.”

South China Sea dispute: British ambassador steps into row over pilot 
'intimidation'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/19/south-china-sea-dispute-british-ambassador-steps-into-row-over-pilot-intimidation>
Bishop had said before the trip that she intended to question China about its 
activities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/17/australia-to-challenge-china-over-south-china-sea-activities>
 in the South China Sea. “We had a candid exchange of views on these issues. 
China and Australia share a common interest in the maintenance of peace and 
security in our region,” Bishop said on Wednesday after the meeting.

Japan, which is embroiled in its own territorial dispute with Beijing over the 
Senkaku/Diaoyu <https://www.theguardian.com/world/senkaku-islands> islands in 
the East China Sea, said it was deeply concerned by the missile launcher 
reports.

“The ongoing situation in the South China Sea, where unilateral actions, 
including large-scale land reclamation and building of outposts and their use 
for military purposes, change the status quo and raise tensions in the region, 
is an issue of common concern to the international community,” a spokesman for 
Japan’s foreign ministry told the Guardian.

“Japan has serious concerns over such actions and would like to reiterate that 
such unilateral actions to create a fait accompli cannot be accepted.”

Tokyo recently announced plans to deploy thousands of troops and build missile 
batteries on tiny islands in the East China Sea, with officials confirming for 
the first time that the defences were designed to check Chinese military 
influence in the region.

The spokesman said Japan and Australia were in a “special relationship” and 
had been conducting close consultations on a wide range of issues affecting the 
region.

China has reclaimed islands artificially for decades, building runways and 
military installations on once-isolated coral reefs. In May, Chinese and 
Vietnamese ships collided as Beijing tried to set up an oil rig. Vietnam 
released footage of a Chinese ship ramming and sinking a Vietnamese fishing 
boat.

Additional reporting by Calvin Godfrey in Ho Chi Minh City
 