
In Liverpool, 840 families risk losing their homes because of benefits cuts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/oct/03/liverpool-840-families-risk-losing-homes-benefits-cuts>
More than 116,000 of the poorest households in the UK will be hit by the 
extended benefit cap, putting manyat risk of homelessness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/24/poor-uk-private-rent-homelessness-risk-housing-benefit-shortfall-2020>
, housing experts have predicted.


Nearly 320,000 children live in households likely to be affected by the cap 
introduced from 7 November. In some cases families will lose up to £115 a week, 
pushing them into deeper poverty.

The cap rollout, which will be completed by the end of January 2017, limits 
total household benefits to £23,000 (£442 a week) in London and £20,000 outside 
the capital (£385 a week).


Terrie Alafat, chief executive of the Chartered Institute of Housing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/housing> (CIH), said: “We are seriously 
concerned that this could have a severe impact on these families, make housing 
in large sections of the country unaffordable, and risk worsening what is 
already a growing homelessness problem.”

The lowering of the cap from the previous £26,000 level will mean a big rise 
in both the number of households hit by the cap penalty, as well as an increase 
in the types and locations of those affected, according to the CIH.

Unlike the benefit cap introduced in 2013, which mainly hit households in 
high-rent areas such as London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/mar/05/families-priced-out-london-homes-benefit-cap>
 and the handful of families with five or more children, the extended cap will 
have an impact on families in all areas of the country.


The cap will see “average” sized families affected in even those parts of the 
country with the cheapest housing, such as Wales and north-east England. For 
example, a couple with three children outside London will have £50.80 a week 
left for housing costs after out-of-work benefits are taken into account. In 
Leeds, where a three-bedroom property at local allowance rates costs £151.50, 
this would leave them with a shortfall of £100.70. In Northampton a similar 
family would face a shortfall of £89.04 a week, and £75.78 in Leicester.

A couple outside London with two children would have £117.92 a week for 
housing costs. In Reading, however, a two-bedroom property would cost £188.33 
per week. leaving a shortfall of £70.41. The same family would face a shortfall 
of £38.46 in Southampton and £33.58 in both Bristol and Milton Keynes.
Regional impact of lower benefit cap 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/oct/2016-10-31T15:59:16/embed.html>
The Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) has argued that the benefit cap 
acts asan incentive to get people into work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/patrick-butler-cuts-blog/2014/jan/28/benefit-cap-iain-duncan-smith-still-no-proof-it-works>
 because moving on to working tax credits gains an exemption from the cap.

Benefit cap will pitch thousands more British children into poverty | Patrick 
Butler
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jul/07/benefit-cap-pitch-children-poverty-12bn-cuts-tory-budget>
“We are committed to helping people who are able to work into jobs and the 
benefit cap provides a clear incentive to move into employment for those who 
can. Anyone eligible for working tax credits, carer’s allowance and most 
disability benefits are exempt from the cap.


“The benefit cap restores fairness to the system and the new limit will ensure 
that the amount that people on out-of-work benefits can claim better reflects 
the circumstances of many working families in the country.”

However, a DWP-backed study in Oxford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jun/05/docking-welfare-payments-is-not-incentive-to-work-report-claims>
 published in June found that cutting benefit entitlements made it less likely 
that unemployed people would get a job. The CIH study, using official DWP data, 
provides a higher estimate of total numbers of children affected than the 
official impact assessment in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/26/lower-benefit-cap-to-hit-quarter-of-a-million-poor-children>
, which identified 244,000. The DWP said it did not recognise the CIH figure, 
although it is closer to the DWP’soriginal estimates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jul/20/benefit-cuts-to-hit-huge-number-of-children-government-figures-show>
 from 2015.
Impact of lower benefit cap by family size 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/oct/2016-10-31T15:59:48/embed.html>
Alafat said the new cap could put many families at serious risk of losing 
their homes and would make housing in significant parts of the country 
unaffordable for those affected. “The results of our research are extremely 
worrying,” she said. “It shows that the reduction in total benefits is going to 
hit some of the most vulnerable families of all sizes across England, Scotland 
and Wales.

 “These families will lose out when the cap comes into effect from 7 November 
and in many cases will straight away face a substantial gap between their rent 
and the help they receive to pay for their housing.

Capping benefits will hit those already most at risk of homelessness
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/nov/01/housing-benefit-cap-homelessness-children-government-plans>
 “Worryingly, our analysis shows many families could be one redundancy or a 
period of ill health away from being in this situation. We are seriously 
concerned that this could have a severe impact on these families, make housing 
in large sections of the country unaffordable and risk worsening what is 
already a growing homelessness problem.

 “This is a measure which seriously risks undermining the government’s 
commitment to making society fairer for families in Great Britain and we 
suggest that they look at this urgently.”
 